Control of morphology and function of low band gap polymer–bis-fullerene mixed heterojunctions in organic photovoltaics with selective solvent vapor a ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA01436G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA01436G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9883-9890Control of morphology and function of low band gap polymer–bis-fullerene mixed heterojunctions in organic photovoltaics with selective solvent vapor annealing†

        
          
            Huipeng 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Che 
            Hsiao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Hu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mark 
            Dadmun
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. E-mail: dad@utk.edu
bDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
cChemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Received 
      26th March 2014
    , Accepted 2nd May 2014First published on 7th May 2014AbstractReplacing PCBM with a bis-adduct fullerene (i.e. ICBA) has been reported to significantly improve the open circuit voltage (VOC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) in P3HT bulk heterojunctions. However, for the most promising low band-gap polymer (LBP) systems, replacing PCBM with ICBA results in very poor short-circuit current (JSC) and PCE although the VOC is significantly improved. Therefore, in this work, we have completed small angle neutron scattering and neutron reflectometry experiments to study the impact of post-deposition solvent annealing (SA) with control of solvent quality on the morphology and performance of LBP–bis-fullerene BHJ photovoltaics. The results show that SA in a solvent that is selective for the LBP results in a depletion of bis-fullerene near the air surface, which limits device performance. SA in a solvent vapor which has similar solubility for polymer and bis-fullerene results in a higher degree of polymer ordering, bis-fullerene phase separation, and segregation of the bis-fullerene to the air surface, which facilitates charge transport and increases power conversion efficiency (PCE) by 100%. The highest degree of polymer ordering combined with significant bis-fullerene phase separation and segregation of bis-fullerene to the air surface is obtained by SA in a solvent vapor that is selective for the bis-fullerene. The resultant morphology increases PCE by 190%. These results indicate that solvent annealing with judicious solvent choice provides a unique tool to tune the morphology of LBP–bis-fullerene BHJ system, providing sufficient polymer ordering, formation of a bis-fullerene pure phase, and segregation of bis-fullerene to the air surface to optimize the morphology of the active layer. Moreover, this process is broadly applicable to improving current “disappointing” LBP–bis-fullerene systems to optimize their morphology and OPV performance post-deposition, including higher VOC and power conversion efficiency.
Introduction
Polymer based bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) photovoltaic cells, based on blends of conjugated polymers and fullerenes, are an economically viable option for low cost renewable power generation due to low-cost, lightweight, flexible and ease of processing.1–5 A major challenge facing developers of polymer-based solar cells is to improve their power conversion efficiency. For the most studied poly(3-hexylthiophene)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT–PCBM) system, improvement of the open circuit voltage (VOC) is limited by the energy gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital of P3HT and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PCBM. Therefore, one of the approaches to further improve the solar cell performance of polymer–fullerene BHJs is to increase VOC by raising the LUMO of the fullerene acceptors. Because of relatively high LUMO energy levels, fullerene bis-adducts (bis-fullerene) have attracted attention as promising electron-accepting materials. For instance, indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA) has improved the efficiency of P3HT based solar cells from ∼4% to 6.5%, which is partially due to an increase in the VOC when it replaces PCBM.6,7 Now, the most promising conjugated polymer–fullerene systems for organic photovoltaics (OPV) utilize low band-gap polymers and therefore, a combination of LBP and bis-fullerene must naturally be considered due to the resultant large VOC. Surprising, when blended with most LBP, ICBA gives very poor OPV performance due to a very low short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF), which is associated with either poor morphology or charge transport in the active layer.8–13 For instance, PBDTTPD/PCBM devices provides a PCE of 7.3%; while replacing PCBM with ICBA, PCE drops significantly to 2.7%.10 This poor performance is disappointing as the LBP–ICBA BHJ mixture has a desired high VOC. However, this high VOC might translate into dramatic improvements in power conversion efficiencies if the morphology of the polymer–bis-fullerene mixture can be rationally controlled. Unfortunately, most research in this system focuses on understanding the origins for the poor performance of the as cast sample, and little work has been done to optimize the morphology of the system. Therefore, methods to guide and control the morphology in order to optimize the performance of these systems are needed to provide fundamental insight into the morphology–performance relationship in these “promising” LBP–fullerene bis-adduct systems.
The failure of thermal annealing to improve device performance in LBP–fullerene systems has been widely reported.14–16 Unlike P3HT, whose crystallinity and ordering increases with thermal annealing, a less ordered polymer structure is often found in LBP–fullerene system after thermal annealing.14 Therefore, alternative methods are needed to control and optimize the morphology of LBP–bis-fullerene photovoltaics. The addition of solvent additives prior to deposition has shown some performance improvement of LBP–PCBM based devices, although the impact of solvent additive on the morphology and device performance of LBP–ICBA based photovoltaic is not clear.14 Solvent annealing (SA) is a promising post-deposition approach to control and optimize the morphology of LBP–bis-fullerene mixtures to guide the assembly of the BHJ to a more stable active layer. SA is a versatile method where a thin film is exposed to an atmosphere of solvent vapors that diffuse into the deposited layer, which increases molecular mobility of the components in the active layer, allowing the efficient control of the morphology of the system. Moreover, SA is performed at room temperature which is very suitable for LBP, which usually have high glass transition temperatures (Tg) or no observable Tg,17,18 and are therefore difficult to modify by temperature. Furthermore, compared to thermal annealing, where structure develops in seconds, SA provides more precise morphological control.19 Most importantly, it is often overlooked that SA could provide a versatile method to control morphology by annealing in selective solvent vapor where the solvent selectively solvates either the polymer or fullerene, which provides a mechanism to orthogonally control the mobility and assembly of the components.
Focusing on “promising” LBP–bis-fullerene based OPV devices, in this work, we use neutron scattering to examine the structural evolution of poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT)–ICBA mixtures during SA, focusing on the effect of solvent quality on structural evolution and device performance. Neutron scattering is a powerful technique to monitor the morphology of polymer–fullerene systems, as it provides sufficient contrast to unequivocally determine the structure of fullerenes in an organic medium, due to the fact that the neutron scattering length density of a protonated polymer matrix differs significantly from that of the fullerene, which is very similar to that of deuterated organic compounds.20–22 Small angle neutron scattering provides detailed information about the morphology of the sample in the plane of the thin film, while neutron reflectometry probes its vertical morphology. The degree of polymer ordering is examined by UV-vis. Three solvents with varying PCPDTBT and ICBA solubility are selected as the annealing solvent vapor: one in which ICBA is selectively soluble, 2-chlorophenol (CP); a solvent in which PCPDTBT is selectively soluble, bromobenzene (BB); and a third solvent in which ICBA and PCPDTBT have similar solubility, 1,2-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) (Table 1). The results provide the crucial relationship between solvent quality, morphology, and performance for LBP–bis-fullerene mixtures with solvent annealing, which offers a method to tune the polymer ordering and fullerene phase separation separately. This offers pathways to exquisitely define the importance of each of these parameters on OPV performance, and direct the assembly of LBG polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunctions towards targeted morphologies. Additionally, This method will be broadly applicable to developing high performance LBP–bis-fullerene based OPV device by maximizing the translation of large VOC to power conversion efficiency.
Table 1 Solubility of PCPDTBT and ICBA in the solvents of interest




Solvent
Solubility (mg ml−1)


PCPDTBT
ICBA




Bromobenzene (BB)
89
36


1,2-Dichlorobenzene (ODCB)
21
20


2-Chlorophenol (CP)
0.2
117




Experiments
ICBA was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, and PCPDTBT (Mw = 41 K, PDI = 2.3) was purchased from 1-Materials. To fabricate the PCPDTBT–ICBA films, PCPDTBT (7 mg ml−1) and ICBA (14 mg ml−1) were dissolved in o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB). The active layer was obtained by spin casting a thin film from the PCPDTBT–ICBA solution at 800 rpm for 180 seconds. Prior to spin-coating, the silicon wafers are cleaned by immersion in a 3:1 (v/v) mixture of concentrated sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide, heated to ∼70 °C for 15 min, and rinsed with copious amounts of high purity water and dried under a stream of nitrogen.
Controlled solvent annealing of the mixture layer is executed in a 100 cm long vertical column. In this process, solvent is added to the bottom of the column and a linear vapor pressure gradient is formed along the length of the column after 6 hours. In this column, the solvent vapor pressure is zero at the top of the column and the vapor pressure of the solvent at the solvent surface. The extent of solvent annealing is then controlled by the amount of time that the sample is in the column as well as the height at which it resides. Three solvents bromobenzene (BB), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), and 2-chlorophenol (CP) were used as solvent vapor in this work. The samples in this study are all left at a height that is 90% down the column for 4 hours.
Small angle neutron scattering
The small angle neutron scattering experiments (SANS) experiments were completed on the General Purpose SANS instrument at the High Flux Isotope Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and NG3 SANS instrument at the National Institute for Standards and Technology. The raw data were corrected for scattering from the empty cell, detector dark current, and detector sensitivity. The corrected data were then normalized to an absolute scale using a Porasil-A standard. A stack of 12 or more spin-coated layers was used for each SANS experiment. The scattering length density (SLD) of PCPDTBT is 1.1 × 10−6 Å−2.23 The SLD of ICBA is 4.17 × 10−6 Å−2, which is determined by the measurement of the neutron reflectivity of an ICBA thin film and verified by calculating the SLD based on the mass density of ICBA and its atomic composition.
Neutron reflectometry
All reflectivity measurements on the thin films were completed on the Liquids Reflectometer at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The measured reflectivity curves of the samples are fitted with the calculated reflectivity of the model scattering length density profiles using Layers24 and Motofit Software25 to determine the structure of the thin films. In the fitting procedure, the scattering length density, thickness, and roughness of each layer are freely varied. A model is assumed to accurately reflect the structure of the sample when the model reflectivity profile converges with the experimental profile, where the quality of fit is gauged using χ2 statistics, and the mass balance of the model system is within 5% of the mass balance of the sample.
The SLD profile is then analyzed to obtain the concentration depth profile of each component in the system. For instance, the ICBA concentration depth profile is determined using eqn (1), (1)where ϕ(z)ICBA is the volume fraction of ICBA at depth z, ρ(z) is the experimental scattering length density at depth z, and ρPCPDTBT and ρICBA are the SLD of PCPDTBT and ICBA, respectively.
UV-vis spectra were recorded with a Thermo Scientific Evolution 600 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The solubility of ICBA and PCPDTBT in different solvents was determined by UV-vis combined with the Beer–Lambert law: D = cεL, where D is the measured optical density, c is the concentration of solution, ε is the extinction coefficient, and L is the path-length. The extinction coefficient is determined by measuring the optical densities at 600 nm of ICBA solutions in each solvent at known concentration, which are plotted as a function of ICBA concentration, and fit to a line. To obtain the ICBA solubility limit, a saturated solution is filtered and serially diluted (e.g. 35×). The dilution is necessary because the saturated solution is too dark for the UV-vis instrument. The ICBA concentration of the diluted solution is determined based on the optical density of this diluted solution, the previously determined extinction coefficient, and Beers law. Finally, the ICBA solubility limit is obtained by multiplying this concentration by the dilution factor (e.g. 35). The solubility of PCPDTBT is determined by a similar procedure.
Photovoltaic device fabrication and characterization
Indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates were first washed with detergent and then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using DI water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA), which was followed by the UV Ozone treatment for 20 minutes. The devices were fabricated with a standard architecture ITO/PEDOT–PSS/BHJ/Ca/Al. A PEDOT–PSS film was then fabricated by spin coating PEDOT–PSS (Baytron P 4083) on the UV-treated ITO glass at 4000 rpm for 40 s and subsequently annealed in air at 140 °C for 20 minutes. The active layer was spin cast at the same condition as above. Solvent annealing of the active layers were carried out at the same conditions as described above. Finally, to create the OPV device, 40 nm of Ca and 60 nm of Al were thermally deposited on the film through a shadow mask. Current–voltage (I–V) measurements of the polymer photovoltaic cells were conducted using a Thermal Oriel 96000 300-W solar simulator under the lumination of AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2.
Results
Small angle neutron scattering was employed to provide information on the evolution of the in-plane structure of the samples with solvent annealing. The SANS curves of all of the samples are presented in Fig. 1. The scattering of the as-cast (AC) sample is very weak, which is consistent with previous reports that the as-cast PCPDTBT–PCBM film consists of a fairly homogeneous distribution of the fullerene and polymer in this film.14 A slight decrease of scattering intensity is observed for the sample that is annealed in BB, which indicates a slightly more homogeneous distribution of ICBA in the polymer matrix after this solvent annealing. The scattering intensity increases for the samples that are annealed in ODCB and dramatically increases for the sample that is exposed to chlorophenol. This increase in scattering intensity is usually associated with phase separation in these thin films, because the scattering intensity is proportional to the square of the difference of the scattering length density of the scattering object and its surroundings (b1 − b2). For instance, previous work18 shows that the scattering intensity of P3HT–PCBM thin films dramatically increases with solvent annealing, and is associated with the agglomeration of PCBM and the formation of PCBM domains.
 Fig. 1  The absolute small angle neutron scattering intensity of the as-cast and solvent annealed samples. 
To analyze the scattering patterns and obtain quantitative structural information from the SANS curves, a detailed analysis of SANS curves is needed. In neutron scattering, the scattering intensity is proportional to (b1 − b2)2 and the form factor (P(Q)) of the scattering object, I(Q) ∼ (b1 − b2)2P(Q). P(Q) is usually associated with the shape and size of domains. The scattering curves of the samples that have been solvent annealed in CP and ODCB were fit with the assumption that the form factor is modeled by the Schulz sphere model, shown in Fig. 2, which describes a two-phase system that consists of spherical domains with a Schulz size distribution dispersed a surrounding matrix.26 The Schulz sphere model has been successfully used to describe the dispersion of PCBM aggregates in P3HT–PCBM samples.19,22
 Fig. 2  Fit of the structure factor of the samples that are solvent annealed in ODCB and CP vapor to the scattering of a Schulz sphere. Parameters extracted from these fits are given in Tables 2 and 3. 
In the samples that are annealed in ODCB or CP, the only thing that is known is that these two phases correspond to a dispersed aggregate surrounded by a mixture of PCPDTBT and ICBA. Whether the dispersed aggregate is fullerene or polymer is not known. Fortunately, a more careful analysis allows us to unequivocally identify the identity of this aggregate. From the fitting, the domain size of spherical aggregates, the vol% of aggregates in the whole sample, and the scattering length density contrast between the aggregates and its surrounding phase, b1 − b2, are determined and shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Structure parameters obtained from Schulz sphere model and calculation with the assumption that the aggregates are ICBA




Solvent

w
fitagg,ICBA

SLD contrast (×10−6 Å−2)
Aggregate SLD (×10−6 Å−2)
Matrix SLD (×10−6 Å−2)

ϕ
ICBA,m


w
ICBA,m


w
calagg,ICBA





CP
0.225
1.59
4.17
2.58
0.48
0.37
0.23


ODCB
0.075
1.32
4.17
2.85
0.57
0.53
0.07




There are two possibilities for the identity of the aggregates: ICBA or PCPDTBT. Assuming that the spherical domains consist of ICBA, which has an SLD (b1) of 4.17 × 10−6 Å−2, the dispersed domain radius, the volume fraction of the dispersed domain in the whole sample (wfitagg,ICBA), and the SLD of the surrounding matrix (b2) are readily determined from the fit and are listed in Table 2 for both annealing solvents.
The volume fraction of the dispersed phase in the whole sample (wcalagg,ICBA) then can also be calculated by the procedure described below with the knowledge of the scattering length density of the surrounding matrix (b2) based on the composition of the film. This provides a self-consistent check to the assumption that the dispersed domains consist of ICBA; wfitagg,ICBA = wcalagg,ICBA if the dispersed domains are ICBA and wfitagg,ICBA ≠ wcalagg,ICBA if they are not.
To determine wcalagg,ICBA, the volume fraction of ICBA in the surrounding mixed phase (ϕICBA,m) is calculated by eqn (2): (2)where SLDICBA and SLDPCPDTBT are scattering length densities of ICBA and PCPDTBT, respectively, and SLDm is the SLD of the surrounding matrix (b2). In this case, all of the PCPDTBT is in the surrounding matrix, so the volume fraction of ICBA in the surrounding phase (wICBA,m) is found by eqn (3). (3)
Finally, the volume fraction of the dispersed phase in the whole sample (wcalagg,ICBA) is calculated by eqn (4): (4)where wICBA and wP are the volume fraction of ICBA and PCPDTBT in the whole sample, which are 0.6 and 0.4 respectively. The results of this analysis when assuming the aggregates are ICBA are shown in Table 2, where brief inspection clearly shows that wfitagg,ICBA = wcalagg,ICBA, and thus, the aggregates are ICBA.
To verify the identity of the aggregates, the identical analysis was completed on the Schulz sphere model fits but assuming that the aggregates are PCPDTBT, which has an SLD (b2) of 1.1 × 10−6 Å−2. From these fits, the dispersed domain radius, dispersed domain vol% in the whole sample (wfitagg,P) and SLD of the surrounding matrix (b1) are obtained and listed in Table 3. In this case, all of the ICBA is in surrounding matrix. In a similar manner to the analysis described above, this analysis shows that wfitagg,P ≠ wcalagg,P, and thus, the aggregates cannot be PCPDTBT. The results are shown in Table 3, with the details of this analysis provided in the ESI.†
Table 3 Structure parameters obtained from Schulz sphere model and calculation with the assumption that the aggregates are PCPDTBT




Solvent

w
fitagg,P

SLD contrast (×10−6 Å−2)
Aggregate SLD (×10−6 Å−2)
Matrix SLD (×10−6 Å−2)

ϕ
P,m


w
P,m


w
calagg,P





CP
0.225
1.59
1.10
2.69
0.48
0.56
−0.16


ODCB
0.075
1.32
1.10
2.42
0.57
0.80
−0.40




Thus, this careful quantitative analysis of the SANS data shows that the sample that is annealed in the vapor of a solvent that is a mutual solvent for ICBA and PCPDTBT (ODCB) forms a film with ICBA aggregates that constitute 8 volume percent of the sample and with a mean radius of 63 Å; while a film with phase separated ICBA domains that constitute 22.5 vol% of the sample and a mean radius of 70 Å is formed after annealing the as cast film in a solvent that is preferable to ICBA (CP). The size distributions of the ICBA domains, based on the Schulz distribution are presented in Fig. 3, which shows that the sample that is annealed in CP vapor has a narrower size distribution of the ICBA aggregates.
 Fig. 3  Size distribution of ICBA aggregates in the samples that are solvent annealed in ODCB and CP vapor. 
SANS, however, only provides information on the in-plane structure of ICBA in these samples, but does not provide information on the evolution of the vertical morphology of the sample with solvent annealing. An acceptor rich layer located at the air surface (near the cathode) and a donor rich layer located at the substrate (near the anode) is often suggested to improve charge collection for a regular device.27 To garner that information, neutron reflectomery is required. Thus, neutron reflectometry was employed to probe the vertical morphology of all the samples. Fig. 4 shows the experimentally determined specular neutron reflectivity, as well as that of the fitted model for the as-cast and solvent annealed thin films. The high quality of model fit can be seen more clearly when the reflectometry curves are plotted Rq4 as a function of q. As shown in Fig. 4, the reflectometry curves change with SA condition, where a significant change in the reflectivity is observed in the sample that is solvent annealed in BB. The resultant ICBA depth profiles are shown in Fig. 5. This figure further verifies how the depth profile of an as-cast film changes with solvent annealing. In this figure, z = 0 corresponds to the air-film interface while z = ∼440 Å corresponds to the film–silicon interface. Inspection of this depth profile shows that a plateau region with constant ICBA concentration exists at z ≈ 200–310 Å in the as cast sample. This portion of the film is not impacted by the air interface or silicon surface. The ICBA selectively segregates to the air and silicon surfaces in this thin film, which is consistent with previously reported results in P3HT–PCBM mixtures.27–30 Enhanced segregation of ICBA to the air surface and a depletion of ICBA at the silicon surface are found for the samples that are solvent annealed in ODCB and CP, whereas a larger excess of ICBA at the air surface is found in the thin film which is solvent annealed in CP. A significant change of the shape of the depth profile is found in the thin film which is solvent annealed in BB, whose depth profiles shows a non-uniform distribution of ICBA through the whole depth of the film, with a significant depletion of ICBA at the air surface.
 Fig. 4  Reflectivity curves of as-cast and solvent annealed samples. The lines are fits to model scattering density profiles. 
 Fig. 5  ICBA depth profile of as cast (AC) and solvent annealed samples as determined from the reflectivity curves shown in Fig. 4. 
Besides the morphology of the PCPDTBT–ICBA mixtures, the orientational order of the polymer in the samples is another key factor that impacts device performance.14,31 Thus UV-vis spectroscopy was used to monitor how solvent annealing alters the local order of the PCPDTBT in these samples. The UV-vis spectra of the as-cast and solvent annealed samples are shown in Fig. 6. The as-cast sample exhibits a maximum in absorption at 750 nm. A red shift in this maximum to 765 nm is observed after the film is solvent annealed in ODCB, a sample that neutron scattering indicates contains 7.5% ICBA aggregates. This shift indicates that solvent annealing in ODCB also increases the order of the polymer, as this red shift is associated with either an interchain-delocalization or a planarization of the polymer backbone. This change in polymer conformation results in an increased π–π conjugation length and a higher degree of ordering, which facilitates hole transport.14,31–33 The highest degree of polymer ordering is found in the sample that is annealed in chlorophenol vapor, which consists of 22.5% ICBA aggregates, as a red shift in this maximum to 785 nm is observed for this sample. The sample that is annealed in BB, which has a more homogeneous dispersion of ICBA, exhibits a slightly broader absorption peak, which indicates a modest change in the degree of polymer ordering in this sample.
 Fig. 6  UV-vis spectra for the as-cast and solvent annealed samples. 
Hence, the results reported above clearly document the evolution of structure that occurs during solvent annealing and this structural change is impacted by solvent quality. The sample that is annealed in chlorophenol vapor (a solvent that is selective for ICBA) exhibits an increase in the degree of polymer ordering, a presence of 22.5% ICBA aggregates, and the segregation of ICBA to the air surface. The sample that is annealed in ODCB vapor also exhibits an increase in the order of polymer, the presence of ICBA aggregates, and segregation of ICBA to the air surface, but all to a lesser extent than the CP sample. Annealing in bromobenzene vapor (a solvent that is selective for the polymer) results in a slight change of polymer ordering, a better dispersion of ICBA, and a depletion of ICBA to the air surface.
In order for this information to be most useful, these structural changes must be correlated to OPV function. With this in mind, the photovoltaic properties of the as cast and solvent annealed samples were determined, as shown in Table 4. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the as-cast sample is only 1.22% and a significant decrease of PCE was found in the sample that is annealed in bromobenzene. An increase of short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) was found in the samples that are annealed in ODCB and CP, where the PCE increases to 3.55% after annealing in CP vapor, which is comparable to the PCE of a PCPDTBT–PCBM device that is processed with solvent additives.14
Table 4 Device performance at standard AM-1.5 illumination







J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




AC
2.59
0.84
56%
1.22%


BB
0.80
0.83
35%
0.23%


ODCB
4.50
0.83
65%
2.45%


CP
6.43
0.84
65%
3.55%




Discussion
The morphology of the active layer in an OPV device dramatically impacts its photovoltaic performance. Moreover, low band gap polymer (LBG)–fullerene mixtures are some of the most promising organic photovoltaic active layers. Unfortunately, there are no post-deposition treatments available to rationally improve the morphology and performance of as-cast LBG–fullerene OPV active layers, where thermal annealing usually fails to improve their performance. While the addition of solvent additives has shown some performance improvement of LBG based organic photovoltaic, the morphology of the as-cast LBG–fullerene film, with or without solvent additives, is locked in from the non-equilibrium deposition process.
Therefore, there remains a glaring need to develop post-deposition methods to guide the morphology of LBG–fullerene bulk heterojunctions towards targeted structures and performance. The results above clearly demonstrate that the exposure of an LBP–bis-fullerene mixture to solvent vapor clearly alters the in-plane morphology and depth profile of the active layer, which in turn impacts its ability to act as an active layer in an organic photovoltaic device. With solvent vapor annealing, the LBP and ICBA molecules become more mobile, resulting in a reorganization of the morphology of the active layer. Moreover, the result shows that a judicious choice of solvent quality of the annealing vapor can also dramatically alter the morphology of the active layer. Exposure to a solvent that is selective to the bis-fullerene relatively increases the mobility of the bis-fullerene molecules, while exposure to a solvent that is preferable to the polymer relatively increases the mobility of polymer molecules. Surprisingly, a precipitation of the ICBA fullerene is observed in the sample that is annealed in a solvent that is selective to the ICBA (CP). One would predict an initial precipitation of the polymer when annealing in CP if the solute–solvent interactions dominate the morphology development, because the polymer is less soluble in CP than the fullerene. Thus, this result indicates that there are significant interactions between polymer and bis-fullerene, which in turn dominate the deposition and morphology development. Moreover, the choice of annealing solvent vapor can also mitigate these interactions and thus directs the morphology development.
In the as-cast sample, the morphology of the thin film is dominated by the deposition process, resulting in the relatively homogeneous distribution of ICBA throughout the sample, as verified by SANS. Solvent annealing in bromobenzene, in which PCPDTBT is selectively soluble, results in a slightly better dispersion of ICBA throughout the sample, a slight change of polymer ordering, and a dramatically change of ICBA depth profiles. The preference of the polymer to the BB vapor causes the migration of polymer and a depletion of ICBA to the air surface.
With solvent annealing in the ODCB vapor, in which ICBA and PCPDTBT are similarly soluble, the PCPDTBT matrix is swollen with the solvent. The increased molecular mobility with exposure to vapor guides the PCPDTBT chains to form a more ordered structure, as indicated by UV-vis. Moreover, the higher degree of PCPDTBT ordering appears to facilitate the phase separation of ICBA from PCPDTBT. The similar solubility of PCPDTBT and ICBA offers sufficient mobility to the ICBA molecule for it to evolve towards thermodynamically favorable larger aggregates and phase separation. This is consistent with our previous work in which enhanced P3HT crystallization and PCBM phase separation occurs after 90 minutes of solvent annealing in ODCB, in which P3HT and PCBM also have similar solubility.19 Also similar to this work, the segregation of ICBA to the air surface is also found after solvent annealing in ODCB.
With solvent annealing in chlorophenol vapor, in which ICBA is selectively soluble, the incursion of solvent appears to extract ICBA from the homogeneous as-cast PCPDTBT–ICBA mixture due to the high solubility of ICBA in CP. This then evolves to form a film with 22.5 vol% ICBA aggregates, as verified by SANS. This phase segregation is accompanied by an increase in the ordering of the PCPDTBT molecules, as demonstrated by UV-vis. Due to the preference of ICBA to chlorophenol, segregation of ICBA to the air surface is found in this sample to a greater extent than the ODCB sample.
Those morphology changes, in turn, impact its ability to act as an active layer in an organic photovoltaic device. Solvent annealing in bromobenzene results in a significant decrease of PCE, which is certainly associated with the change of depth profile. A bis-fullerene acceptor rich layer located at the air surface (near the cathode) and a polymer donor rich layer located at the substrate (near the anode) is often suggested to improve charge collection for a regular device. However, this annealing process creates a depletion of bis-fullerene near the air surface, which inhibits electron extraction, resulting in a decrease of PCE.
The morphologies that are formed by solvent annealing in ODCB or CP, however, do improve device performance. SA in ODCB vapor, in which PCPDTBT and ICBA have similar solubility, forms a morphology with increased PCPDTBT ordering, 7.5 vol% ICBA aggregates and segregation of ICBA to the air surface. The enhanced PCPDTBT ordering facilitates hole transport, the presence of the pure ICBA phase facilitates electron transport, and segregation of ICBA to the air surface improves electron extraction, which increases PCE by 100%. The highest degree of PCPDTBT ordering is obtained after SA the film in CP, in which ICBA is selectively soluble. This film also contains 22.5 vol% ICBA aggregates and segregation of ICBA to the cathode. This morphology increases the PCE by 190% relative to the as-cast film. These results therefore, clearly indicate that sufficient PCPDTBT ordering, the formation of a ICBA pure phase, and segregation of ICBA to the air surface are crucial in the optimization of the morphology of the PCPDTBT–ICBA active layer.
A crucial implication of these results is that the solvent quality in the solvent annealing process provides a controllable and versatile method to direct the morphology of conjugated polymer–bis-fullerene blends, enabling a post-deposition process to optimize the morphology of the “disappointing” LBP–ICBA active layer. This is particularly important as thermal annealing usually fails to improve the performance of LBP–bis-fullerene systems. Moreover, this procedure will be broadly applicable to controlling the morphology of a broad range of LBP–bis-fullerene systems to realize the translation of an improved VOC to enhanced power conversion efficiencies.
Conclusion
This study shows that the morphology and performance of LBP–bis-fullerene OPV active layers can be efficiently controlled by solvent vapor annealing, presumably by inducing mobility of the components as the solvent plasticizes the mixture. Exposure to a solvent in which the bis-fullerene is selectively soluble causes the phase separation of the bis-fullerene, segregation of the bis-fullerene to the air surface, and improvement of the degree of PCPDTBT ordering, all of which are crucial for the optimization of an LBP–bis-fullerene system. Moreover, unexpectedly, annealing in a solvent in which the bis-fullerene is selectively soluble results in the phase separation of the bis-fullerene, indicating that the interactions between the bis-fullerene and polymer dominate the morphology development. More importantly, with a judicious choice of solvent vapor, the morphology and performance of the ‘disappointing’ LBP–bis-fullerene OPV active layer is significantly improved. This novel process provides a method to precisely control the morphology of LBP–ICBA systems, which could become a universal method for the optimization of LBP–bis-fullerene systems to maximize the translation of high VOC to improved power conversion efficiencies, and provide guidelines to rationally develop LBP–bis-fullerene OPV devices with improved performance.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the Sustainable Energy Education Research Center and the Joint Institute for Neutron Sciences at the University of Tennessee, as well as the National Science Foundation (DMR-1005987) for support of this project. MDD also acknowledges the support of the Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. The support of the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy, who sponsors the Oak Ridge National Laboratory High Flux Isotope Reactor and Spallation Neutron Source is gratefully acknowledged. We also acknowledge the support of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, in providing the neutron research facilities used in this work, where the work utilized facilities supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Agreement no. DMR-0944772.
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao, J. S. Huang and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3126 RSC .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, Y. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, H. Y. Chen, Y. Hou and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Miller, S. Sweetnam, E. R. Hoke, G. Roman, C. E. Miller, J. A. Bartelt, X. X. Xie, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Azimi, D. Fournier, M. Wirix, E. Dobrocka, T. Ameri, F. Machui, S. Rodman, G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, K. Hingerl, J. Loos, C. J. Brabec and M. Morana, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, K. Vandewal, J. A. Bartelt, W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, R. Noriega, K. R. Graham, J. M. J. Frechet, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 220 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Ren, C. W. Schlenker, E. Ahmed, S. Subramaniyan, S. Olthof, A. Kahn, D. S. Ginger and A. Jenekhe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1238 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Faist, S. Shoaee, S. Tuladhar, G. F. A. Dibb, S. Foster, W. Gong, T. Kirchartz, S. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 744 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamoto, A. Orimo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, C. Wang and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 683 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, A. J. Pearson, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. A. Staniec, D. C. Watters, H. Yi, A. J. Ryan, R. A. J. Jones, A. Iraqi and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Beiley, E. T. Hoke, R. Noriega, J. Dacuna, G. F. Burkhard, J. A. Bartelt, A. Salleo, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 954 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud, D. Gendron, S. Wakim, E. Blair, R. Neagu-Plesu, M. Belletete, G. Durocher, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Lu, B. Akgun and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 870 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Chen, S. Hu, H. D. Zang, B. Hu and M. Dadmun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1701 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Chen, J. H. Chen, W. Yin, X. Yu, M. Shao, K. Xiao, K. L. Hong, D. L. Pickel, W. M. Kochemba, S. M. Kilbey, II and M. Dadmun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5309 CAS .
W. Yin and M. Dadmun, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kiel, A. P. R. Eberle and M. E. Mackay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 168701 CrossRef .
H. P. Chen, J. Peet, S. Hu, J. Azoulay, G. Bazan and M. D. Dadmun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 140 CrossRef CAS .
Layers is an Excel spreadsheet for modeling NR data developed by John Ankner at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
A. Nelson, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2006, 39, 273 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Schulz, Z. Phys. Chem., Abt. B, 1939, 43, 25 Search PubMed .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Chen, R. Hegde, J. Browning and M. D. Dadmun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5635 RSC .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641 RSC .
R. Hegde, N. Henry, B. Whittle, H. Zang, B. Hu, J. Chen, K. Xiao and M. Dadmun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peet, N. S. Cho, S. K. Lee and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. H. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, H. Yang, G. Yang, S. Sista, R. Zadoyan, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7946 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta01436gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:


Bromobenzene (BB)	89	36
1,2-Dichlorobenzene (ODCB)	21	20
2-Chlorophenol (CP)	0.2	117
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  The absolute small angle neutron scattering intensity of the as-cast and solvent annealed samples.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fit of the structure factor of the samples that are solvent annealed in ODCB and CP vapor to the scattering of a Schulz sphere. Parameters extracted from these fits are given in Tables 2 and 3.	 

CP	0.225	1.59	4.17	2.58	0.48	0.37	0.23
ODCB	0.075	1.32	4.17	2.85	0.57	0.53	0.07
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

CP	0.225	1.59	1.10	2.69	0.48	0.56	−0.16
ODCB	0.075	1.32	1.10	2.42	0.57	0.80	−0.40

 	Fig. 3  Size distribution of ICBA aggregates in the samples that are solvent annealed in ODCB and CP vapor.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reflectivity curves of as-cast and solvent annealed samples. The lines are fits to model scattering density profiles.	 

 	Fig. 5  ICBA depth profile of as cast (AC) and solvent annealed samples as determined from the reflectivity curves shown in Fig. 4.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV-vis spectra for the as-cast and solvent annealed samples.	 

AC	2.59	0.84	56%	1.22%
BB	0.80	0.83	35%	0.23%
ODCB	4.50	0.83	65%	2.45%
CP	6.43	0.84	65%	3.55%
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta01436g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
