Research progress of perovskite materials in photocatalysis- and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00113G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00113G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371-5408Research progress of perovskite materials in photocatalysis- and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment

        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Moses O. 
            Tadé
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
bState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 210009, China. E-mail: shaozp@njtech.edu.cn
Received 
      5th February 2015
    First published on 15th May 2015AbstractMeeting the growing global energy demand is one of the important challenges of the 21st century. Currently over 80% of the world's energy requirements are supplied by the combustion of fossil fuels, which promotes global warming and has deleterious effects on our environment. Moreover, fossil fuels are non-renewable energy and will eventually be exhausted due to the high consumption rate. A new type of alternative energy that is clean, renewable and inexpensive is urgently needed. Several candidates are currently available such as hydraulic power, wind force and nuclear power. Solar energy is particularly attractive because it is essentially clean and inexhaustible. A year's worth of sunlight would provide more than 100 times the energy of the world's entire known fossil fuel reserves. Photocatalysis and photovoltaics are two of the most important routes for the utilization of solar energy. However, environmental protection is also critical to realize a sustainable future, and water pollution is a serious problem of current society. Photocatalysis is also an essential route for the degradation of organic dyes in wastewater. A type of compound with the defined structure of perovskite (ABX3) was observed to play important roles in photocatalysis and photovoltaics. These materials can be used as photocatalysts for water splitting reaction for hydrogen production and photo-degradation of organic dyes in wastewater as well as for photoanodes in dye-sensitized solar cells and light absorbers in perovskite-based solar cells for electricity generation. In this review paper, the recent progress of perovskites for applications in these fields is comprehensively summarized. A description of the basic principles of the water splitting reaction, photo-degradation of organic dyes and solar cells as well as the requirements for efficient photocatalysts is first provided. Then, emphasis is placed on the designation and strategies for perovskite catalysts to improve their photocatalytic activity and/or light adsorption capability. Comments on current and future challenges are also provided. The main purpose of this review paper is to provide a current summary of recent progress in perovskite materials for use in these important areas and to provide some useful guidelines for future development in these hot research areas.
Wei Wang
Wei Wang completed his PhD in Chemical Engineering at the Nanjing University of Technology in June, 2013. He has a postdoctoral fellow in Curtin University (Australia) working with Professor Zongping Shao since December, 2013. His research interests include anode materials and anode catalyst layers for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) operating on hydrocarbons, fuel selection and application for SOFCs, coke formation mechanism of the anode materials for hydrocarbon fuelled SOFCs, photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes, photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells and light absorbers for perovskite-based solar cells.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 to 2005. His research interests include solid-oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes and solar cells. He has published more than 300 papers with more than 8000 citations. He was selected by Thomson Reuters as one of the Highly Cited Researchers 2014 (Engineering Section).
1. Introduction
A sustainable energy supply and environmental protection are two of the most important issues in the development of our future world. Our current society relies too heavily on fossil fuels for its energy supply, and the low-efficiency power generation from burning fossil fuels produces a large amount of carbon dioxide, which causes a significant greenhouse effect. In addition, the sulfur and nitrogen impurities in fossil fuels will eventually be converted into SOx and NOx during combustion, which is released into the atmosphere and causes significant environmental problems. As non-renewable natural resources, fossil fuels will not be sustainable by the next century due to the high consumption rate. To achieve the sustainability of our society, the development of alternative renewable energies to replace fossil fuels is of great importance. Among these alternative energy sources, solar energy is particularly attractive owing to its abundance, easy accessibility and cleanliness. In fact, there are approximately 3850000 exajoules (EJ) of solar power irradiating the Earth each year. If only 1% of the solar energy can be utilized, it would meet the energy demand of human beings at the current consumption rate of energy. The widespread utilization of solar energy may then increase the world's energy security by enhancing sustainability, reducing pollution, lowering the costs of mitigating climate change and reducing the dependence on fossil fuels. Recently, the direct utilization of solar energy, such as solar heating, solar photovoltaics, photocatalysis, and solar thermal electricity, has attracted considerable and increasing attention.1–5 However, to date, humans consume only 539 EJ globally per year, which is only approximately 0.014% of the total solar energy reaching the Earth. It is thus necessary to develop new approaches that can utilize solar energy directly with improved efficiency. However, organic waste pollution has become a serious problem because many organic wastes are toxic and have a deleterious effect on the ecological environment. The conversion of wastewater to harmless and readily disposable water is of significant importance for a sustainable future.
Photocatalysis and photovoltaics are two of the most important routes for the utilization of solar energy, and photocatalysis is also an important route for the degradation of organic waste in water into harmless substances. The photocatalytic activity depends on the ability of the catalyst to create electron–hole pairs, which generate free radicals capable of undergoing secondary reactions. The discovery of water electrolysis by TiO2 resulted in several potential practical applications using photocatalysis, such as the conversion of water to hydrogen by photocatalytic water splitting and the decontamination of water using photocatalysis.6–9 The efficiency of photocatalysis for both hydrogen production from water electrolysis and organic degradation strongly relies on the catalyst itself. Recently, excellent catalysts were developed to increase the efficiency of organic reduction through photocatalysis and hydrogen production from water electrolysis.10–13 Some perovskites were observed to exhibit high activity for photocatalysis, both in wastewater treatment and water electrolysis.14–17
Photovoltaic is a method for converting solar radiation into electricity using semiconductors with a photovoltaic effect. The first solar cell was constructed in 1883, and the silicon solar cell was created in 1954 with efficiencies of 4.5–6%. The field of solar cells can be divided into three generations. The first generation of solar cells was based on a single p–n junction of crystalline Si with a maximum conversion efficiency of 25% in the lab, but the theoretical limit of the energy conversion efficiency (η) is 31% for single-crystalline Si cells, as predicted by a thermodynamic calculation performed by Shockley and Queisser (S–Q).18 Although exhibiting a relatively high efficiency, these materials suffer from high manufacturing and installation costs. The second generation of solar cells included the use of amorphous silicon, polycrystalline silicon or microcrystalline silicon, cadmium telluride or copper (gallium) indium selenide/sulfide. These solar cells were significantly less expensive than single-crystalline solar cells due to the reduced materials and processing costs and increased manufacturing throughput. The efficiencies of these cells were generally lower than those of the first-generation solar cells.2,19 The third generation of solar cells, developed over the last decade, aim at conversion efficiencies beyond the S–Q limit of 31%.20–23 The third-generation solar cells are broadly defined as semiconductor devices, which could be configured as thin films deposited on supporting substrates or as nanocrystal quantum dots. The third-generation solar cells aim to maintain high solar energy conversion efficiencies at lower costs using cost-effective fabrication techniques, such as spin coating, spray deposition and printing because manufacturing solar cells using conventional semiconductors, such as single-crystal silicon is expensive and energy consuming. In the third-generation solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have recently attracted increasing attention; these solar cells achieve optical absorption and the charge separation processes through the association of a sensitizer as a light-absorbing material with a wide band gap (BG) semiconductor of nanocrystalline morphology. Compared to a silicon-based solar cell, the price could be reduced significantly. In DSSCs, the photoanode is highly important, which is determined by the band gap energy (Ebg) of the semiconductors, placing a fundamental upper limit on the solar energy conversion efficiency. Recently, a type of compound with the defined structure of perovskite, which was initially named for the mineral CaTiO3, was observed to play important roles in photocatalysis and photovoltaics. These materials can be used as photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction to produce hydrogen and the photo-degradation of organic dyes in wastewater, as well as for photoanodes in DSSCs and light absorbers with the development of a certain type of solar cell, called a perovskite-based solar cell.
In this review paper, the recent progress in perovskites for applications in photocatalysis and photovoltaics reactions is comprehensively summarized. Emphasis is placed on the designation and strategies of the perovskite materials to improve the photocatalytic activity and/or light adsorption capability. In Section 1, a brief introduction of photocatalysis and photovoltaics reactions is presented. In Section 2, the operation principles and mechanism of the water splitting reaction, the degradation of organic dyes and perovskite-based solar cells as well as the origin and structural properties of the perovskite materials is presented. In Section 3, the recent developments and strategies regarding the design of perovskite catalysts for photocatalysis reactions, such as the water splitting reaction and degradation of organic dyes under visible light, is extensively reviewed. In Section 4, the application of perovskites in photovoltaics devices, mainly as light absorbers and photoanodes in solar cells, is described. We focus not only on the design of the perovskites that have recently been studied in depth, but also on the relationship between the photoactivity and the solid-state properties. The methodologies used to improve the photoactivity and light-adsorption capability of the perovskites, such as A-site and/or B, X-site doping and composite catalysts, are extensively reviewed. Finally, in Section 5, some conclusions are derived and perspectives for research in perovskite materials in photocatalytic and photovoltaic reactions are suggested. This review aims to provide some useful guidelines for the further development of highly active and visible-light sensitive perovskite materials for various photocatalysis and photovoltaics reactions by directly utilizing solar energy.
2. Fundamental understanding
2.1 Photophysics and photochemistry in environmental treatment and energy conversion

2.1.1 Water splitting reactions. 
Hydrogen is believed to be one of the most important clean fuels for the future. The success of a so-called hydrogen economy relies heavily on finding an effective route for the mass production of hydrogen with practical importance. The photocatalytic water splitting reaction using sunlight has been extensively exploited as a potential route for the mass production of hydrogen from renewable sources (solar energy and water) over recent decades,24–26 as stimulated by the first discovery in 1967 of Honda and Fujishima, who demonstrated that overall water splitting can be achieved using a photoelectrochemical cell consisting of a single-crystalline TiO2 (rutile) anode and a Pt cathode under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation and an external bias. To date, many metal oxide photocatalysts capable of splitting water under UV light irradiation have been discovered.27–30 In the earlier reviews of the water splitting reaction using semiconductor catalysts, some basic principles were demonstrated.3,31,32Fig. 1 presents a schematic illustration of the basic principle of the water splitting reaction on a heterogeneous photocatalyst.31 In these photocatalytic materials, electrons in the valence band (VB) are excited to the conduction band (CB) by irradiating light with energy equivalent to or larger than the BG; subsequently, electron–hole pairs are formed. These photo-generated electrons and holes could contribute directly to the reactions of reducing protons to generate H2 and oxidize H2O to produce O2, respectively.3,31,32
 Fig. 1  Basic principle of the overall water splitting on a heterogeneous photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
To facilitate the water splitting reaction, the bottom of the CB and the top of the VB must be lower and higher than the oxidation–reduction potentials (ORPs) of H+/H2 (0 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)) and O2/H2O (+1.23 V vs. NHE), respectively. Therefore, the minimum photon energy thermodynamically required to drive the reaction is 1.23 eV, which corresponds to a wavelength of approximately 1000 nm in the near-infrared region (λ = 1240/Ebg). However, in experiments for many metal oxides, where the VB is mainly composed of O 2p orbitals, the top of the VB takes its position at a potential much higher than +1.23 V vs. NHE. Therefore, the ORPs of H+/H2 and O2/H2O are likely to be sandwiched between the top of the VB and the bottom of the CB, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The requirement for the much greater photon energy than the BG of the photocatalyst is due to the existence of an activation barrier in the charge-transfer process between the photocatalyst and water molecules. In addition, these materials can respond only to UV light because of the much wider BG. As the main component of the solar spectrum (approximately 50%) consists of visible photons (400 < λ < 800 nm), a primary goal of the photocatalytic water splitting reaction is to efficiently utilize visible light.
The photocatalytic water splitting can be morphologically divided into two types, i.e., using particulate photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical cells with photocatalytic electrodes. Since the development of the first photoelectrochemical cell by Honda and Fujishima, which was comprised of TiO2 and Pt electrodes, numerous photoelectrochemical cells have been designed specifically for the efficient utilization of solar energy. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, electrons and holes are generated by irradiating a TiO2 electrode with UV light;33 the photogenerated electrons then reduce water to form H2 on a Pt counter electrode while holes oxidize water to form O2 on the TiO2 electrode with some external bias by a power supply or pH difference between the electrolyte region near the cathode and anode. In another study, Anpo and co-workers succeeded in the separative evolution of H2 and O2 using a two-compartment cell (Fig. 2b) under light irradiation using a TiO2 thin-film photocatalyst to avoid the possible explosion of the generated H2 and O2 in the same chamber.34 However, due to the lack of suitable photoelectrode materials with appropriate BG and stability, the systems proposed to date have been developed into complicated integrated multilayer and tandem systems, which could increase the overall cost of the water splitting system.35
 Fig. 2  (a) Honda–Fujishima effect-water splitting using a TiO2 photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) H-type glass container for the separate evolution of H2 and O2 using a TiO2 thin film photocatalyst device (TiO2 side, 1.0 M NaOH aq.; Pt side, 0.5 M H2SO4 aq.). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2007, Elsevier Inc. 
In addition, many solid materials have also been developed as photocatalysts for water splitting. Exposing photocatalyst powders dispersed in a water pool to sunlight leads to the cogeneration of hydrogen and oxygen. Compared to the photoelectrochemical cell configuration, the pulverized photocatalyst systems are advantageous for the large-scale application of solar water splitting because of their simplicity. Thus, the design of pulverized photocatalysts is of great importance for achieving the water splitting reaction for near-future practical applications.
To develop suitable catalysts for the water splitting reaction, the steps involved in the water splitting reaction with the semiconductor photocatalysts should be well understood. It is generally accepted that there are three steps in the reactions, which have been well described in some excellent reviews.3,31,32 As illustrated in Fig. 3, the three steps are as follows: (1) the photocatalyst absorbs photon energy equal or greater than the Ebg of the catalyst and generates photoexcited electron–hole pairs in the bulk; (2) the photo-excited carriers separate and migrate to the surface without recombination; and (3) the adsorbed species are reduced and oxidized by the photogenerated electrons and holes to produce H2 and O2, respectively. The first two steps are strongly dependent on the structural and electronic properties of the photocatalyst.31 In general, high crystallinity has a positive effect on activity because the density of defects, which act as recombination centers between the photogenerated carriers, decreases with increasing crystallinity. The third step is affected by the number of active sites and the activation energy for gas evolution. Sometimes, this step is promoted by the presence of a solid co-catalyst, which is typically a noble metal or metal oxide deposited onto the photocatalyst surface as a dispersion of nanoparticles. It is thus important to carefully design both the bulk and surface properties of the material to obtain high photocatalytic activity for this reaction.
 Fig. 3  Processes involved in overall photocatalytic water splitting on a heterogeneous photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 


2.1.2 Degradation of organic dyes in wastewater treatment. 
The increasing demand and shortage of clean water sources due to the rapid development of industrialization, rapid population growth and long-term droughts have become important issues worldwide. Various practical strategies and solutions have been adopted to yield more viable water resources. The recycling of wastewater is considered as a key to solving the problem of water shortage. However, the presence of toxic organic compounds, such as organic dyes, phenols and pesticides, in wastewater and the associated environmental hazards have recently raised numerous concern.36–38 In this review paper, we will focus only on the degradation reactions of different dyes in the wastewaters because organic dyes are one of the largest groups of pollutants released into wastewaters from textile and other industrial processes. The removal and degradation of organic dyes has been a matter of considerable interest, and some purification methods have been developed. Traditional physical techniques, such as adsorption on activated carbon, ultrafiltration, coagulation by chemical agents and ion exchange on adsorbents, have been used widely for the removal of dye pollutants.39,40 However, these methods succeed only in transferring organic compounds from water to another phase, creating secondary pollution. Additional steps, such as a further treatment of solid wastes and regeneration of the adsorbent, are required, which will add further cost to the purification process. Moreover, Forgacs et al. noted that traditional wastewater treatment technologies are ineffective for handling dye wastewater because of the chemical stability of these pollutants.41 The heterogeneous photocatalytic oxidation process, using semiconductor catalysts, such as TiO2 and UV or visible light, has demonstrated promising results for the degradation of organic dyes and produces more biologically degradable and less toxic substances. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to the use of photocatalysis in the removal of dyes from wastewaters.42–46
The photocatalytic oxidation process is activated by the absorption of a photon with sufficient energy (equal or greater to Ebg of the semiconductor catalyst), and charge separation then occurs due to the promotion of an electron (e−) from the VB of the semiconductor catalyst to the CB. Thus, a hole (h+) in the VB is generated.4 In this reaction, h+ and e− are powerful oxidizing and reducing agents, respectively. The positive hole oxidizes either the pollutant directly or water to produce OH˙ radicals and the electron in the CB reduces the oxygen adsorbed on the photocatalyst.4 The activation of a semiconductor by light can be represented in the following steps, as proposed by Chong et al.:4
Photoexcitation: photocatalyst + hν → e−+h+(1) Charge-carrier trapping of e−: eCB− → eTR−(2) Charge-carrier trapping of h+: hVB+ → hTR+(3) Electron–hole recombination: eTR− + hVB+(hTR+) → eCB− + heat(4) Photoexcited e− scavenging: (O2)ads + e− → O2˙−(5) Oxidation of hydroxyls: OH− + h+ → OH˙(6) Photodegradation of organic by OH˙: organic + OH˙ → CO2 + H2O(7) Direct photoholes: organic + h+ → Intermediates/CO2 + H2O(8) Protonation of superoxides: O2˙− + OH˙ → HOO˙(9) Co-scavenging of e−: HOO˙ + e− → HO2−(10) Formation of H2O2: HO2− + H+ → H2O2(11) The illumination of the photocatalytic surface with sufficient energy leads to the formation of a positive hole (h+) in the VB and an electron (e−) in the CB, as demonstrated in eqn (1).4 The eTR− and hTR+ in eqn (4) represent the surface-trapped VB electron and CB hole, respectively, as described in eqn (2) and (3).4 In the absence of electron scavengers, the photoexcited electron recombines with the VB hole in nanoseconds (ns) with the simultaneous dissipation of heat energy, as shown in eqn (4).4 The recombination of the electron and hole must be prevented as much as possible for a photocatalyzed reaction to be favored. The ultimate goal of the process is to have a reaction between the activated electrons with an oxidant to produce a reduced product and a reaction between the generated holes with a reductant to produce an oxidized product. Thus, the presence of electron scavengers is vital for prolonging the recombination and successful functioning of photocatalysis. In the degradation of organic pollutants, the hydroxyl radical, which is generated from the oxidation of adsorbed water, where it is adsorbed as OH−, is the primary oxidant; the presence of oxygen can prevent the recombination of an electron–hole pair while allowing the formation of a superoxide radical (O2˙−), as indicated in eqn (5).4 This O2˙− radical can be further protonated to form the hydroperoxyl radical (HO2˙), and subsequently H2O2, as shown in eqn (9) and (10), respectively.4 The HO2˙ radical formed was also reported to exhibit scavenging properties. Thus, the co-existence of these radical species can doubly prolong the recombination time of the hTR+ in the entire photocatalysis reaction.4 Although the hTR+ has been widely studied for its ability to oxidize organic species directly, this possibility has remained inconclusive. In the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, when the reduction process of oxygen and the oxidation of pollutants do not advance simultaneously, an electron would accumulate in the CB, which causes an increase in the rate of recombination of e− and h+. Thus, to obtain the photo-catalyzed reaction, the e−–h+ recombination must be prevented as much as possible.


2.1.3 Solar cells. 
Photovoltaics or solar cells are devices that directly convert the solar energy into electric power. Efficient solar devices rely on matching their light absorption spectrum to the AM 1.5G spectrum irradiated on the earth surface. AM 1.5G is defined by a broadband solar spectrum, spanning from 280 nm in the UV region to 2500 nm in the mid-infrared region. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) η of these devices can be given by (12)where Pinc is the incident solar power on the device, Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Jsc is the short-circuit current density, and FF is the fill factor. The short-circuit current density Jsc is the current density derived at zero voltage, whereas the open circuit voltage Voc is the maximum voltage that a solar cell can generate.
The invention of DSSCs with a PCE of approximately 7% in 1991 triggered studies on the physics and device technologies of DSSCs.20 A PCE as high as 12% has been achieved using a porphyrin-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 photoanode and cobalt redox electrolyte.47 However, the commercialization of electrolyte-containing DSSCs has been hindered by leakage of the liquid electrolyte. Substitution of the liquid electrolytes with solid hole transporting materials (HTMs) leads to a solvent-free solid-state sensitized heterojunction solar cell. This device is usually fabricated using a dye-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 film as an electron transporting layer and a HTM as a hole-transporting layer. The PCEs of inorganic chalcogenide- or organic dye-based solid-state DSSCs are approximately 6–7%;48,49 whereas, some reports on solid-state DSSCs based on perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (x = 0 or 1) sensitizers have high PCEs greater than 11%, promising further breakthroughs in this field.50,51 The different structures of perovskite-based solar cells are displayed in Fig. 4.52 The first version of the perovskite solar cell is sensitized solar cells based on the nanodot morphology, which is the same mechanism as DSSCs (Fig. 4a). All-solid-state perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 sensitized solar cells with 2,2′-7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) as HTMs have achieved a PCE of up to 9.7%. In this configuration, the concentration of the deposited perovskite is relatively low, and the HTM should be infiltrated into the pores of the TiO2 film. The second version is p–n junction solar cells, which were reported by Snaith and co-workers.51 These researchers employed Al2O3 as a scaffold to support the perovskites and spiro-MeOTAD. A thin layer of perovskite was formed on the surface, and the HTM infiltrated into the pores of the Al2O3 film (Fig. 4b). However, the above two configurations suffer from the pore filling of the HTM. A more advanced configuration has been proposed, where the pores of the mesoporous oxide film are filled with perovskite instead of HTM (Fig. 4c). In this configuration, a thin capping layer (over layer) of perovskite is recommended to contact the HTM. A mesoporous oxide film-free structure, or planar p–n junction, is proposed because perovskite is capable of transporting electrons and holes (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  Structural progress in the perovksite-based solid-state solar cell from a perovskite dot deposited on TiO2 with a PCE of 9.7% to a planar p–n junction with PCE of 15.4%, via the meso-superstructured scaffold Al2O3 concept with a PCE 10.9% and perovskite-infiltrated nanocomposite with PCE of 15%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Organometallic perovskite solar cells have developed rapidly in the past two years. However, the understanding of the working principles and mechanisms has not grown at the same pace. It is necessary to understand the mechanisms that govern the carrier separation, transport, extraction and their recombination. To have a clear understanding of the working principles and mechanism of charge accumulation in these devices, impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed. In DSSCs, no charge accumulation in the dye (absorber) was detected. Charge accumulation in the high density of states (DOS) of a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorber was observed by extracting the capacitance of the samples in nanostructured TiO2 and ZrO2 electrodes.53 DSSCs and bulk heterojunction organic solar cells take advantage of a nanostructured morphology that facilitates rapid charge separation of photogenerated carriers to different materials. Ultrafast charge injection from the absorber to electron and hole transport materials avoids the recombination of electron–hole pairs and produces long diffusion lengths for effective charge collection. At the beginning of its discovery, the perovskite solar cell was a TiO2 sensitized cell; thus, it was believed that electrons would be injected into the wide BG metal oxide as the main transport pathway. However, the observation of significant efficiencies in perovskite solar cells with no electron transporting material,51,54 or even in a thin film configuration,55,56 indicates that a perovskite solar cell can work in a different configuration than a DSSC. These results strongly indicate that photogenerated electrons and holes coexist in the CH3NH3PbX3 absorber material and travel to the selective contacts, where they are collected separately. In this sense, some important parameters for cell performance in terms of the Ebg assigned to the optical absorption ability and diffusion length (Ld) of electrons and holes should be carefully identified in working devices, constituting a step forward in the further optimization of the solar cells.

2.2 Perovskite materials
Perovskite initially referred to a mineral composed of calcium titanate with a chemical formula of CaTiO3. Later, this material lent its name to the class of compounds that have the same type of crystal structure as CaTiO3. The general chemical formula for perovskite compounds is ABX3, where A and B are two cations of different sizes, and X is an anion that bonds to the A and B cations. The ideal perovskite-type ABX3 structure has cubic symmetry with space group Pm3m. In this structure, the B cation is 6-fold coordinated, and the A cation is 12-fold cuboctahedral coordinated, surrounded by an octahedron of the X anions.
A wide variety of compositions and constituent elements essentially keep the basic structure unchanged, and more than 90% of metal elements can be successfully incorporated into the perovskite lattice. In the ABX3 structure, the A cation is typically larger than the B cation, and the properties of the perovskite are determined by the cations occupying its A- and B-site lattice. For the halide perovskite structure, ABX3 (where X is F, Cl, Br, or I), monovalent and divalent cations are usually stabilized in the A and B sites, respectively.
In the ideal perovskite structure with a cubic symmetry, where the atoms are connected to one another, the B–X distance is equal to a/2 (a is the cubic unit cell parameter), whereas the A–X distance is (a/√2), and the following relationship between the ionic radii holds: rA + rX = √2(rB + rX), where rA, rB and rX are the ionic radii of A, B and X-site elements, respectively. The relative ionic size requirements for stabilizing the cubic structure are quite stringent; therefore, slight buckling and distortion can produce several lower-symmetry distorted versions, in which the coordination numbers of the A cations, B cations or both are reduced. However, the cubic structure could be retained in the ABX3 compounds even if the above equation is not precisely obeyed. Goldschmidt first introduced a tolerance factor (t) to evaluate the deviation from the ideal structure, which is defined by the following equation: t = (rA + rX)/√2 (rB + rX).57
It has been generally accepted that perovskites can be stabilized when t ranges between 0.76 and 1.13. However, it has also been argued that perovskite structures are not stable, even in the most favorable range of 0.8 < t < 0.9.58 It has been indicated that perovskite stability cannot be predicted solely based on a tolerance factor. An additional consideration for the formability of perovskite is the octahedral factor (μ), μ = rB/rX, which was then proposed.59 For the alkali metal halide perovskite, formability was determined from the t–μ mapping, where the perovskite was stabilized for a tolerance factor ranging between 0.813 and 1.107, and an octahedral factor ranging from 0.442 and 0.895.59 For example, the ionic radii of rA in the APbX3 perovskite are estimated based on the effective ionic radii,52 where the A cation radii range from ∼160 picometers (pm) to ∼250 pm. The t values for CH3NH3PbX3 were calculated at 0.85, 0.84 and 0.83 for X = Cl, Br, and I, respectively, based on the radii of CH3NH3+ = 180 pm, Pb2+ = 119 pm, Cl− = 181 pm, Br− = 196 pm and I− = 220 pm. It was observed that the t value of most cubic perovskites is between 0.8 and 0.9;60 thus, CH3NH3PbX3 perovskites are expected to have a cubic structure. A tolerance factor larger than unity implies that the A cations are too large for the compound to adopt the ideal cubic perovskite structure; instead, hexagonal perovskites, in which the octahedra share faces and form chains along the hexagonal c-axis, are often formed. The hexagonal perovskites are less common than the cubic perovskites and are stabilized by the formation of metal–metal bonds between the B cations of the BX6 octahedra.
Substitution at both the A and B sites may change the composition and symmetry of the perovskite and create cation or oxygen vacancies, which have a major effect on the band structures and photocatalytic and photovoltaic behaviors of these materials. Moreover, many other properties, such as adsorption properties can also be designed by substitution on both A and B sites. In addition, doping of the X site could also affect the structure and BG of perovskites. Therefore, perovskites with photoactivity can be tuned easily using many methods including doping functional elements to the A, B and/or X sites as well as changing the crystallite size of the sample.
3. Perovskite materials as catalysts for photocatalytic reactions
TiO2 compounds are used widely as catalysts for photocatalysis reactions; however, only UV light can be utilized because of their wide BG. The development of new photocatalysts with reduced BGs to successfully utilize visible light, which is the main part of solar light, is of great importance. Perovskite has attracted increasing attention for the water splitting reaction and degradation of organic dyes.61–65 Based on the steps of the degradation reactions of organic pollutants, similar to the water splitting reaction, the key to improve the photocatalytic activity is to suppress electron–hole recombination and tailor the BG because the BG width is one of the most critical properties of photocatalytic materials and determines the amount of solar energy to be absorbed and that is available for conversion. In this section, a brief description of band gap engineering and suppressing electron–hole pair recombination strategies are presented and the detailed investigation of perovskite design based on above strategies for water splitting reaction and degradation of organic dyes were also conducted.
3.1 Strategies to design perovskite materials for the water splitting reaction and degradation of organic dyes

3.1.1 Band gap engineering. 
The strategies to engineer the Ebg include donor–acceptor coincorporation, using 4d and 5d cations as donors with higher atomic d orbital energies to guarantee that the conduction-band maximum (CBM) energy level is not lowered and high electron mobility is maintained, and incorporating 2p or 3p anions with higher atomic p orbital energies than that of O to raise the valence-band maximum (VBM) for reducing the Ebg. The doping of foreign elements into UV-active metal oxides is a conventional method used for the preparation of visible-light-responsive photocatalysts. In such doped photocatalysts, however, dopants in the photocatalyst act not only as visible-light absorption centers, with an absorption coefficient dependent on the density of dopants, but also as recombination sites between photogenerated electrons and holes.
In UV-active photocatalysts, the bottoms of the CBs, which consist mainly of empty transition-metal d orbitals, are located at a potential slightly more negative than 0 V, and the tops of the VBs, consisting of O 2p atomic orbitals, are more positive than 3 V. As mentioned above, such a large BG makes the material unable to harvest visible light, suggesting that the photocatalysts have sufficient potential to oxidize water, judging from the difference between the oxidation potential of H2O into O2 (1.23 V vs. NHE) and the VB edge potential (3 V vs. NHE). Therefore, if other elements (e.g., N 2p) having atomic orbitals with a potential energy higher than O 2p atomic orbitals are introduced, new VBs can be formed instead of pure O 2p atomic orbitals, which results in a decrease in Ebg without affecting the CB level, thus producing a visible-light-driven photocatalyst with band edge potentials suitable for the water splitting reaction. It was observed that for the Ta–N system, if 3.1% O was replaced with N, the VBM was shifted up by 0.34 eV and the CB also increased by 0.05 eV; thus, the BG was reduced by 0.29 eV.66 Various elements, such as Zn, N etc., are used to dope pristine perovskite to reduce the BG.67,68 In addition, the structure of the perovskite could also affect the Ebg.69


3.1.2 Suppressing electron–hole pair recombination. 
As mentioned above, the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs could decrease the photoactivity of the catalysts. Thus, the recombination process should be suppressed as much as possible. There are several strategies to suppress this recombination, such as a smaller particle size to reduce the diffusion length and a nanostructured morphology. A-site doping for the perovskite could yield a reduction in the particle size as well as nanostructuring.70
The preparation methods also have a strong effect on the nanostructure of perovskite materials. The commonly used solid-state reaction method requires annealing at high temperatures for a long time with frequent intermediary grindings, which results in poor homogeneity as well as difficulties in controlling the particle size of perovskite. Several wet chemical methods have been proposed to improve the homogeneity and reproducibility of the powders and to reduce the preparation temperature, such as sol–gel and hydrothermal methods.71,72 These advanced preparation technologies are expected to be used for the development of highly active and visible-light-driven perovskite photocatalysts.

3.2 Water splitting reaction
Recently, perovskites have been widely used as the catalysts for water splitting reactions using solar energy.67,92–94 The catalytic activity of a perovskite is mainly determined by the B-site element(s). There are two main groups of elements that can act as active cation components (B site) in a perovskite photocatalyst. The first group includes Ti4+, Nb5+, Ta5+, W6+, Zr4+, and Ce4+ elements with empty d orbitals. Elements, such as Ga3+, In3+, Ge4+, Sn4+ and Sb5+ in the second group with filled d orbitals have also been considered to be good catalysts for the water splitting reaction.31,32 In this section, we will focus on the design of perovskite catalysts using proposed strategies for the water splitting reaction to achieve UV and visible light. Fig. 5 presents schematics of a high-level summary of Section 3.
 Fig. 5  The schematics of the high-level summaries of Section 3. 

3.2.1 Band gap engineering. 
3.2.1.1 Selection and doping process of B-site elements. 
Recently, there have been many reports about pristine and doped perovskite photocatalysts, such as Ti, Ta, and Nb-based perovskite oxides for water splitting reaction under UV and visible lights.67,73–75 However, the undoped titanates always had a larger Ebg, which limited their applications in visible-light-driven water splitting reactions. For example, several metals, such as Rh, Mn, Ru and Ir were used to dope SrTiO3 to give visible light responses for H2 or O2 evolution reactions.76 Although SrTiO3 with a BG of 3.2 eV could not absorb visible light, SrTiO3 doped with Rh, Ir, Ru and Mn exhibits absorption in the visible light region, as observed in Fig. 6. The visible light responses were due to the electronic transition from donor levels formed with dopants to the CBs of the host photocatalysts. Among the various doped photocatalysts, Rh-doped SrTiO3 exhibited the highest activity among the doped photocatalysts for H2 evolution under visible light irradiation.76 In this case, the dopant exists as a trivalent ion (Rh3+) on the B-site (Ti4+ site), which forms a donor level at a lower potential than the top of the VB composed of O 2p orbitals, and the apparent BG consequently became narrowed.
 Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance spectra of SrTiO3:M (0.5%). M = (a) Mn, (b) Ru, (c) Rh, (d) Pd, (e) Ir, and (f) Pt. A broken line represents a spectrum of nondoped SrTiO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to SrTiO3, some other titanates have also attracted considerable attention by doping suitable elements such as Cu, Sc, Cr and Fe in the B-site.75,77,78 CaTiO3 is one of the best-known wide gap insulating oxides with a BG of approximately 3.5 eV. However, careful doping with Cu in the B site could make it conducting. CaTi1−xCuxO3 (x = 0.01, 0.02, 0.03 and 0.04) compounds were prepared by the sol–gel method coupled with the ultrasonic technique and used as catalysts for H2 evolution reactions under UV light.75 It was observed that 2 mol% Cu2+-doped CaTiO3 exhibited the highest activity for the water splitting reaction. The excessive Cu2+ doping became the recombination centers for photogenerated charges; therefore, the photocatalytic activity of hydrogen production decreased. The photocatalytic activity of doped CaTiO3 for H2 evolution under UV light was increased dramatically by approximately 8-fold compared to that of pure CaTiO3. However, the addition of Cu also led to the absorption of visible light on the CaTiO3, which could be attributed to the transition from the donor levels formed by Cu2+ to the CB of copper-doped CaTiO3, as evidenced by density functional theory (DFT) calculations.75 Yun et al. studied the stability, electronic structure and photocatalytic properties of the Sc-doped Sr2TiO4 using first-principles calculations based on DFT.77 The BG of Sr2Sc0.125Ti0.875O4 narrowed by approximately 0.25 eV compared to that of undoped Sr2TiO4, resulting in a red-shift in the absorption spectra edge. In particular, the dispersion of the CBs and VBs of Sr2Sc0.125Ti0.875O4 was enhanced after the doping, which was preferable for the photocatalytic performance. In addition, a new weak absorption appeared in the visible light region, which somehow contributed to the photocatalytic activity of Sr2Sc0.125Ti0.875O4. Hwang et al. also studied the effects of B-site metal dopants on the band structure of the layered perovskite La2Ti2O7 and observed that only Cr and Fe exhibited intense absorption in the visible light region due to the decreased BG by the B-site doping.78 In addition, these two catalysts produced H2 photocatalytically by the water splitting reaction under visible light irradiation.
3.2.1.2 Selection and doping process of A-site elements. 
In addition to B-site doping of titanates, Zn2+ was also used as an A-site dopant to modify SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 perovskites (Sr2/3Zn1/3TiO3 and Ba5/6Zn1/6TiO3) to enhance the photoactivity for water splitting reactions by reducing Ebg.67 It was observed that the top of the VBs dominantly consisted of the O 2p orbital, whereas the bottom of the CBs was composed of the Ti-3d orbital and Zn-3d orbital. Furthermore, with increasing Zn content, the contribution of the Zn-3d orbital to the CBs increased; thus, the BG narrowed for Zn-doped SrTiO3 and Zn-doped BaTiO3, and the BG values decreased with increasing concentration of Zn atoms.67 This study demonstrated that the partial doping of the A-site with Zn ions could change the crystal and band structures and significantly promote the carrier mobility of the catalysts to result in good photocatalytic activities.67 Specifically, the BGs for Zn ions doped at the Sr or Ba sites with different concentrations were all narrowed with respect to pure SrTiO3 or BaTiO3. The reduced BG values were 0.675, 0.555 and 0.526 eV by Zn doping at the Sr site with molar ratios of 1/3, 1/6 and 1/10, respectively, whereas the BG values were reduced to 0.169, 0.118 and 0.087 eV by doping with Zn at the Ba site with molar ratios of 1/3, 1/6 and 1/10, respectively.
Some researchers have also investigated the A-site cation in tantalate and niobate systems for the optimization of Ebg for realizing water splitting reactions under visible light irradiation. For example, the band structures of perovskite-type materials ATaO3 (A = Li, Na, K, Ag) were studied by Kato et al.74 It was observed that the Ebg of AgTaO3 was 3.4 eV, lower than those of LiTaO3 (4.7 eV), NaTaO3 (4.0 eV) and KTaO3 (3.6 eV). The authors considered that the differences in BG were not determined by the Ta–O–Ta bond angle in the perovskite because the Ta–O–Ta bond angle in KTaO3 was closer to 180°, which was beneficial for the reduction of Ebg. A hybrid orbital of Ag 4d and O 2p forming a VB at a more negative level than O 2p orbitals should be attributed to the smaller BG of AgTaO3. In addition, AgTaO3 exhibited reasonable photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction. Machida et al. studied the effects of dual doping at the A-site on the band structure and photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction for the layered perovskite MLnTa2O7 (M = Cs, Rb, Na, and H; Ln = La, Pr, Nd, and Sm).79 The optical Ebg was dependent on lanthanum, Ln, but negligibly affected by the monovalent interlayer cations, M. The effect of Ln can be explained by the shift of the Ln 4f levels from the CB edge to the VB edge with an increasing number of Ln 4f electrons. In contrast, the photocatalytic activity was strongly affected by not only Ln, but also M; the highest activity was attained by a series of M = Rb with a sequence of Ln:Nd > Sm > La > Pr. Similar results were obtained by Machida et al. in the RbLnTa2O7 system.80 Yin et al. developed a series of photocatalysts by changing the ionic radius in the A-site cations in MIn0.5Nb0.5O3 (M = Ca, Sr, and Ba) with the ABO3-type perovskite structure.81 It was observed that the larger ionic radius in the A-site cations led to a smaller BG and that BaIn0.5Nb0.5O3 had the smallest BG. The BaIn0.5Nb0.5O3 photocatalysts exhibited the best photocatalytic activities for water splitting under visible light irradiation due to the small BG. Although the photocatalytic activities of these photocatalysts under visible light irradiation are relatively low, it is an effective route to designing new photocatalysts.
3.2.1.3 Selection and doping process of X-site elements. 
In addition to the A/B site doping of perovskite oxides, doping at the O site with N3− to form oxynitrides was also considered as an effective approach to enhance the activity for the water splitting reaction under visible light.68,82,83 In these materials, the N 2p orbitals form a new VB, thus reducing the Ebg. LaMO2N (M = Ti, Zr), LaMON2 (M = Nb, Ta), and AEMO2N (AE = Ca, Sr, Ba; M = Nb, Ta) are well-known perovskite oxynitrides. Most of these materials can absorb light with wavelengths up to 600 nm or longer. Furthermore, BG is flexible in a wide range from the UV to the near-IR region by forming solid solutions with other perovskite oxides and oxynitrides. The superior chemical and thermal stabilities of the oxynitrides made them attractive for applications as visible-light-responsive photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction. For example, tantalum oxynitride series ATaO2N (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) and PrTaON2 are promising candidates for the photocatalytic splitting of water under visible light. It was observed that BaTaO2N, SrTaO2N and CaTaO2N have cubic, tetragonal and orthorhombic symmetries, respectively, whereas PrTaON2 is orthorhombic and isostructural with CaTaO2N. The corresponding structures are shown in Fig. 7.82 Smaller A-site cations lead to more octahedral tilting and less dispersed CBs and thus a higher energy for the CB edge. Increasing the nitrogen content leads to an upward shift in the position of the VB edge. All the proposed catalysts have CB edges that lie above the reduction potential for water and are therefore suitable for the photocatalytic production of hydrogen, whereas the VB edges lie near the oxidation potential of water.
 Fig. 7  Structures of cubic BaTaO2N, tetragonal SrTaO2N, and orthorhombic CaTaO2N or PrTaON2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Some perovskite-type niobium oxynitrides (CaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, BaNbO2N, and LaNbON2) prepared by heating the precursors under flowing NH3 at an appropriate temperature are also examined for hydrogen and oxygen evolution from water under visible light. These materials possess visible-light absorption bands between 600–750 nm, depending on the A-site cations in the structures.68Fig. 8 presents the UV/vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of the samples. All the samples absorbed light in the visible region, and the estimated BGs decreased in the order Ca > Sr > Ba, most likely because a change in the distortion of NbOxNy blocks in the perovskite structure due to the increasing A-site cation size.68 As the distortion was reduced, the delocalization of the excited energy increased, resulting in a smaller BG.
 Fig. 8  UV/vis diffuse reflectance spectra of perovskite-type niobium oxynitrides: (a) CaNbO2N; (b) SrNbO2N; (c) BaNbO2N; (d) LaNbON2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Among the prepared samples, CaNbO2N exhibited the highest activity for both H2 and O2 evolution, producing 1.0 mmol h−1 of H2 and 31.2 mmol h−1 of O2. No continuous N2 evolution was observed, indicating that CaNbO2N was stable under both water reduction and oxidation conditions.68 However, SrNbO2N demonstrated a low O2 evolution rate and no H2 evolution, whereas BaNbO2N and LaNbON2 produced no gas evolution under visible light. Although BaNbO2N and LaNbON2 had smaller BGs, allowing more absorption of the solar spectrum, these materials showed no activity for the water reduction or oxidation. This phenomenon could be attributed to the fact that the small BGs of BaNbO2N and LaNbON2 led to an insufficient overpotential for the surface chemical reactions to occur. In addition, defect sites in the crystal structure may also have acted as recombination centers for photogenerated electrons and holes, leading to negligible activity.
3.2.1.4 Crystal structure of the perovskite photocatalysts. 
The crystal structure also had an effect on the BG of the perovskite. For example, Li et al. examined the effect of crystallographic symmetry (cubic and orthorhombic, shown in Fig. 9) on the electronic structure and photocatalytic activity of NaNbO3 for the water splitting reaction.69 The cubic phase NaNbO3 oxide exhibited a narrower BG (3.29 eV) than the common orthorhombic NaNbO3 (3.45 eV).69 The photocatalytic H2 evolution activity over cubic NaNbO3 was approximately twice that of the orthorhombic NaNbO3. The DFT calculation indicated that the higher activity over cubic NaNbO3 could be attributed to its unique electronic structure of high symmetry, which was beneficial for electron excitation and transfer. This suggested that a higher symmetry of the perovskite improved the photoelectron excitation and transfer, offering a new approach to enhance the photocatalytic activity in some other perovskite photocatalysts.
 Fig. 9  Schematic crystal structures of cubic and orthorhombic NaNbO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Suppressing electron–hole pair recombination by reducing particle size and/or nanostructuring. 
3.2.2.1 A-site doping process. 
Doping of a foreign element into a photocatalyst is one of the strategies that can affect the morphology (particle size and surface structure) of photocatalysts to improve the photocatalytic activity. For example, some highly active A-site-doped NaTaO3 photocatalysts were successfully developed for the water splitting reaction.70,84,85 Kudo et al. observed that doping changed the morphology of the NaTaO3 particle shown in Fig. 10.84 The decrease in the particle size and the formation of the characteristic surface nanostep structure yielded excellent photocatalytic performance. More specifically, the particle size of La-doped NaTaO3 was 0.1–0.7 μm, whereas that of non-doped NaTaO3 was 2–3 μm. In addition, the surface of non-doped NaTaO3 was smooth, whereas La-doped NaTaO3 had surface nanostructures with sizes of 3–15 nm. The decrease in the particle size and the formation of characteristic surface nanostep structure yielded excellent photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 10  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a) non-doped NaTaO3 and (b) La-doped NaTaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007, Elsevier Inc. 
Iwase et al. also observed that the photocatalytic water splitting reaction over NaTaO3 was drastically enhanced by doping the Na site with Ca, Sr, and Ba;85 these doping processes resulted in reduced NaTaO3 particles. Moreover, surface nanostep structures were constructed on the doped NaTaO3 catalysts. It was observed that the surface morphology was affected by the amounts of Sr and Ba. Fig. 11 presents SEM images of various doped NaTaO3; the particles of the doped catalysts were well-crystallized. The particle sizes (0.1–0.5 μm) of the Sr-, Ca- and Ba-doped NaTaO3 materials (5 mol%); (Fig. 11f–h) were remarkably smaller than those of the undoped NaTaO3 powder (2–3 μm; Fig. 11a). Although the surface nanostep structures did not appear at Sr doping levels of 0.1 and 0.5 mol%, the particle size decreased and the crystallinity increased compared to the values for undoped NaTaO3, as illustrated in Fig. 11a–c. The surface nanostep structure, however, was created on the NaTaO3 surface at Sr doping levels equal to or greater than 1 mol% (Fig. 11d–f). The surface nanostep structures were created by Ba doping levels equal to or greater than 1 mol%, as observed for Sr-doped NaTaO3, while they were also constructed with 0.5 mol% of Ca doping. The threshold amount of dopant for the creation of the surface nanostep structures was dependent on the dopant. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) suggested that the surface nanostep structures were constructed by the doping of alkaline-earth metal ions inside the NaTaO3 particles. Photoluminescence measurements revealed that a small amount of doped Sr promoted charge separation, whereas a large amount of doped Sr stimulated the formation of charge recombination centers due to the formation of significant amounts of defects. The photocatalytic performance was determined by balancing these positive and negative effects.
 Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) nondoped NaTaO3, and NaTaO3 doped with (b) 0.1 mol% Sr; (c) 0.5 mol% Sr; (d) 1 mol% Sr; (e) 2 mol% Sr; (f) 5 mol% Sr; (g) 5 mol% Ca; and (h) 5 mol% Ba. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.2.2.2 Preparation methods. 
As mentioned above, the preparation methods had a strong effect on the nanostructure of the perovskite. In addition to the commonly used solid-state reaction method, several wet chemical methods have been proposed to improve the homogeneity and reproducibility of the powders and reduce the preparation temperature, such as sol–gel and hydrothermal methods. Tijare et al. used a sol–gel method to synthesize LaFeO3 perovskite catalysts,86 which exhibited an optical BG of 2.07 eV with the absorption spectrum predominantly in the visible region of the spectrum. This photocatalyst exhibited high visible light activity for an ethanol-assisted water splitting reaction with H2 generation of 3315 mmol g−1 h−1, which is comparable to several other potential semiconductor-based photocatalysts and much higher than the reported values for the same composition. The improved photocatalytic activity for the sol–gel-derived LaFeO3 should be due to its higher surface area and nanosized particle morphology. Smaller particles are expected to have a smaller period for migration of the photogenerated change to the surface, thereby reducing the possibility of charge recombination, which is one of the major bottlenecks in such photocatalysts.
A comparative study of alkali tantalate ATaO3 and niobate ANbO3 (A = Na and K) powders with perovskite structures, synthesized using the hydrothermal method, as the catalysts for the water splitting reaction was conducted.73 The BGs of the niobates were smaller than those of the tantalates, whereas the tantalates exhibited higher activity than niobates, especially for NaTaO3 with a cubic crystalline structure.73 A fast and facile process for the preparation of perovskite NaTaO3 nanocrystals with Ta2O5 and NaOH as starting materials using a microwave-assisted hydrothermal (MHT) technique was reported by Shi et al.87 By pretreating the Ta2O5 powder by ball milling, pure-phase NaTaO3 was successfully synthesized under quite mild conditions in less than 3 hours through the formation of an intermediate pyrochlore Na2Ta2O6 phase, whereas a much longer time, typically 24 hours, was required in a conventional hydrothermal (CHT) process. After cooperation with a NiO co-catalyst, the NaTaO3 prepared by MHT exhibited photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting that was more than two times higher than that attained using the CHT method due to the good crystallinity and large surface area achieved in a short reaction time.87
Some new methods, such as direct dehydration, nanosheet processing and template-based methods have been used for the preparation of perovskite catalysts for the water splitting reaction. For example, Sr0.5TaO3 with a perovskite structure was prepared using layer-structured H2Sr1.5Ta3O10 by direct dehydration and nanosheet processing, and the photocatalytic activities of the two obtained structures were investigated for the evolution of H2 and O2 from distilled water under UV light irradiation.88 As illustrated in Fig. 12, Sr0.5TaO3 was synthesized using two processes, direct dehydration of H2Sr1.5Ta3O10 and soft chemical stacking of (Sr1.5Ta3O10)2− nanosheets obtained from H2Sr1.5Ta3O10 through nanosheet processing.88 The average gas evolution rates were 66 μmol h−1 (H2) and 16 μmol h−1 (O2) for Sr0.5TaO3 prepared by direct dehydration, whereas those obtained by nanosheet processing were 126 μmol h−1 (H2) and 33 μmol h−1 (O2).88
 Fig. 12  Schematic structural drawing of the transformation from host materials H2Sr1.5Ta3O10 to dehydrated materials RE-Sr0.5TaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Nuraje et al. demonstrated a novel and general approach to the synthesis of perovskite nanomaterials in an aqueous system using the genetically engineered M13 virus with the preparation method shown in Fig. 13.89 Carboxylate ions on the surface of the virus chelate with Ti4+ ions (shown in yellow) and electrostatically interact with Sr2+ ions (shown in blue). The filamentous body of the M13 virus comprises approximately 2700 identical copies of the major coat protein pVIII (Fig. 13). Genetically engineered viruses provided effective templates for perovskite nanomaterials. SrTiO3 nanoparticles were successfully prepared using the virus templates and a smaller particle size and higher crystallinity compared to conventional techniques were obtained. This new method will extend the scope of biotemplated synthesis to ternary metal oxides as well as more complex materials. Furthermore, the virus-templated SrTiO3 perovskite nanomaterials exhibited good photocatalytic performance for the water splitting reaction under UV and visible light irradiation.89
 Fig. 13  Schematic of M13 virus-assisted synthesis of perovskite nanomaterials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition to the main systems of titanates, niobates and tantalates for the water splitting reaction, some other SrSnO3-based perovskite oxides have been used as photocatalysts owing to their high photocatalytic activity, which could be attributed to the spatial structure of SrSnO3. The three-dimensional network of the corner-sharing SnO6 octahedra can help charge carriers move more easily, and octahedral tilting distortion had a positive effect on local charge separation.90 SrSnO3 nanoparticles with peanut-like morphologies were synthesized via a simple aqueous peroxide route.91 These peanut-shaped SrSnO3 were formed by the fusion of two or more nanoparticles with a mean size of 45 nm, which exhibited much higher photocatalytic activity than the SrSnO3 powder synthesized via a solid-state reaction, which could be attributed to their higher structural order, higher surface area and smaller particle size.91 It was reported for SrSnO3 that the top of the VB is composed mainly of the O 2p orbital, whereas the bottom of the CB was composed mainly of the Sn 5s orbital. Therefore, the higher degree of order of the SnO6 octahedra for SrSnO3 nanoparticles is helpful for the migration of charge carriers without recombination.
3.2.2.3 Crystal structure of the perovskite photocatalysts. 
It has been reported that NaTaO3 photocatalyst powders synthesized using a solid-state method usually formed the orthorhombic phase with a Ta–O–Ta bond angle of approximately 163°.92 Hu and Teng compared the structures of NaTaO3 powders synthesized from a sol–gel method and the conventional solid-state method.92 The sol–gel method produced NaTaO3 nanoparticles with high crystallinity at temperatures as low as 500 °C, whereas the solid-state method required a higher temperature of 1200 °C. Because of the temperature difference, the NaTaO3 powders synthesized from the sol–gel and solid-state methods were of the monoclinic and orthorhombic phases, respectively.92 The monoclinic NaTaO3 has several advantages over the orthorhombic one for applications in photocatalytic reactions. Regarding the electronic structure, the monoclinic and orthorhombic phases have indirect and direct BGs, respectively. Because phonons are involved, the recombination rate for electron–hole pairs in sol–gel-prepared catalysts would be much smaller than that in a direct gap transition. In addition, the monoclinic phase was observed to have a larger number of effective states available for the photo-induced electrons and holes. The longer lifetime of the free electrons and holes is expected to increase the probability of their participation in water splitting. For the crystalline structure, the bond angle of Ta–O–Ta for the monoclinic phase was approximately 180°, a value ideal for delocalization of the excited energy in tantalate crystals. The larger surface area and the advantageous features in the electronic and crystalline structures for the monoclinic phase resulted in a remarkably higher photocatalytic activity for the sol–gel-synthesized NaTaO3 than for the solid-state-synthesized material.
The photocatalytic activities of the selected perovskite-based photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction are listed in Table 1. As shown in this table, in addition to the choice of photocatalyst, the photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction is also strongly dependent on the sacrificial reagent and the cocatalyst. Overall, the addition of sacrificial reagent and the cocatalyst is helpful for improving the photocatalytic activity. Sometimes, the addition of an excess Pt cocatalyst of 1.5 wt% could reduce the activity. A loading of 1.0 wt% provided a proper cover ratio and size of the cocatalyst and hence induced the highest H2 evolution rate for the cubic NaNbO3 photocatalyst. In addition, not all catalysts had high activity for both O2 evolution and H2 evolution reaction, and some of them showed high selectivity to the individual reaction. As shown in Table 1, NaTaO3 is the most widely investigated photocatalyst and generally showed superior activity than NaNbO3, KNbO3 and KTaO3. The effect of the preparation methods and the selection of A-site elements for doping on the photocatalytic activity of NaTaO3 have been studied intensively. Although a nanostructure is formed in the A-site doped NaTaO3 with improved activity, its BG is unchanged, which may restrict its wider applications in the visible light-induced water splitting reaction. In the future, co-doping of the A-site with La, Sr, etc. and the O site with N, S, etc. on NaTaO3 should be an effective way to obtain both a nanostructure and a reduced BG. However, a reduced BG does not always bring about improved activity. For example, SrNbO2N, BaNbO2N, LaNbON2 with BGs lower than 2 eV showed almost no photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction because the absolute energy position of the BG is also important for the water splitting reaction. For the SrSnO3 catalyst prepared by a wet chemistry method, doping in the O site should be a useful way to further enhance the activity by reducing the BG. Nevertheless, doped perovskites always show a lower BG than the commercial TiO2 and higher activity under visible light irradiation should be expected with perovskite catalysts. Advanced methods, such as nanosheet processing, template-based methods, hydrothermal process and sol–gel process, are beneficial for achieving high photocatalytic activity. However, solid state reaction is still the most investigated methods because of its convenience and more importantly, universality. In the future, it will be of great importance to improve the universality of these advanced technologies. In addition, in most of the studies mentioned in this review paper, the solar-energy conversion efficiency for this system was not presented and the presented values are very low, particularly under visible light irradiation, which should be improved further in the future.
Table 1 Photocatalytic activity of the selected perovskite-based photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction




No.
Photocatalyst
BG (eV)
O2 evolutiona
H2 evolutiona
Quantum yields
Preparation method
Light type
Ref.


Rate (μmol h−1 g−1)
Sacrificial reagent
Rate (μmol h−1 g−1)
Sacrificial reagent
Cocatalyst





a For a clear comparison, the units of the rates are also correlated to μmol h−1 g−1 by a simple calculation.





1
Sr2/3Zn1/3TiO3
3.15




732
Ethanol




Sol–gel
UV

67



2
Sr2/3Zn1/3TiO3
3.15
121




3
Ba5/6Zn1/6TiO3
3.2
575
Ethanol


4
Ba5/6Zn1/6TiO3
3.2
29




5
CaNbO2N
2.0
10
AgNO3
312
Methanol
1 wt% Pt
1.1% at 420.5 nm
Polymerized complex

λ > 420 nm

68



6
SrNbO2N
1.8
0
15




7
BaNbO2N
1.7
0
0




8
LaNbON2
1.6
0
0




9
Cubic NaNbO3
3.29




423
Methanol




Furfural alcohol derived polymerization–oxidation

λ > 300 nm

69



10
Orthorhombic NaNbO3
3.45




241






11
Cubic NaNbO3
3.29




425
0.5 wt% Pt




12
Cubic NaNbO3
3.29




520
1 wt% Pt




13
Cubic NaNbO3
3.29




324
1.5 wt% Pt




14
NaTaO3
4.0
0.78
AgNO3
10.3
Methanol




Solid state reaction (SSR)

λ > 270 nm

70



15
2 mol% La doped NaTaO3
4.09
1.7
13.2
56% at 270 nm


16
NaNbO3
3.08




950
Methanol




Hydrothermal
UV

73



17
KNbO3
3.14
100


18
NaTaO3
3.96
36750


19
KTaO3
3.42
1040


20
CaTiO3






670.1
Methanol
NiOx


Sol–gel coupled with ultrasonic dispersing technique
UV

75



21
CaTi0.98Cu0.02O3
5410.8


22
CaTiO3
0

λ > 400 nm


23
CaTi0.98Cu0.02O3
22.7


24
Mn-doped SrTiO3
2.7
9
AgNO3
0.67
Methanol
0.5 wt% Pt


SSR

λ > 440 nm

76



25
Ru-doped SrTiO3
1.9
13
5.7




26
Rh-doped SrTiO3
1.7
0
57.3
5.2% at 420 nm and 6% at 365 nm


27
Ir-doped SrTiO3
2.3
1.3
27.7




28
RbLaTa2O7
∼3.9
3


6






SSR
UV

79 and 80



29
RbPrTa2O7
∼3.6
<0.5
4.5


30
RbNdTa2O7
∼4.2
126.5
235


31
RbSmTa2O7
∼4.1
28.5
53


32
2 mol% Ca doped NaTaO3
4.11
113
AgNO3
756
Methanol




SSR
400 W Hg lamp

85



33
2 mol% Sr doped NaTaO3
4.11
186
830


34
2 mol% Ba doped NaTaO3
4.09
160
696


35
NaTaO3
4.03
40
563


36
NaTaO3
4.0
∼1000










MHT



87



37
NaTaO3
4.0
∼400
CHT


38
Sr0.5TaO3
3.7
177


733






Direct dehydration
400 W Hg lamp

88



39
RE-Sr0.5TaO3
3.7
366
1400
Nanosheet processing


40
SrTiO3






300
Methanol
0.5 wt% Pt


M13 virus template method
UV

89



41
SrSnO3
4.04




57.3






Wet chemistry
UV

91



42
SrSnO3
4.01
7
SSR


43
NaTaO3
4.1
∼900


2050






SSR
400 W Hg lamp

92



44
NaTaO3
4
6
13
Sol–gel





3.3 Degradation of organic dyes
As discussed previously, a semiconductor catalyst in the contaminated water can absorb solar energy to result in the formation of electron donor (reductive) sites and electron acceptor (oxidizing) sites, which facilitate the oxidation of carbon-containing pollutants to carbon dioxide, water and other anions, such as nitrate, sulfate or chloride. In this section, we will focus on the material development of perovskite catalysts for the photocatalytic degradation of different dyes, such as methyl orange (MO), methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RB) based on the strategies for the designation of perovskite catalysts. The strategies for the development of catalysts for the degradation of organic dyes are similar to those for the water splitting reaction, including band gap engineering and reducing the recombination rate of the electron–hole pairs.

3.3.1 Band gap engineering. 
3.3.1.1 Selection and doping process of B-site elements. 
The undoped Ti-based perovskite always had large BGs due to the large difference in electronegativity between Ti and O. The replacement of Ti by another element with higher electronegativity, such as Ni, is an effective approach to reduce Ebg. For example, LaNiO3 was synthesized using a sol–gel combustion technique for the degradation of the MO reaction under visible light.93 The BG of LaNiO3 was 2.26 eV, suggesting potential visible-light-induced photocatalytic activity, which was evaluated by the degradation of MO in water under visible light irradiation. It was observed that the photo-degradation of MO over LaNiO3 was a zero-order reaction, that the rate constant k of LaNiO3 was 0.152 (10−2 g L−1 h−1) and that the degradation percentage after 5 h on the sample was approximately 74.9%, suggesting the effective degradation activity of MO on the LaNiO3 catalysts.
In addition to tailoring the B-site element, Fei et al. also examined the effect of partial substitution of the titanium cation on the photocatalytic oxidation activity for the degradation of the Nile blue reaction in the CeCoxTi1−xO3+δ perovskite system prepared using the sol–gel method.94 Based on UV-vis diffuse reflectance measurements, it was observed that the perovskite catalysts exhibited significantly lower BG (1.45–2.15 eV) than P25 (3.2 eV); however, the Ebg remained almost unchanged at a doping level of x > 0.1, as shown in Fig. 14. The incorporation of 5 mol% Co in the B-site led to a decrease in BG from 2.15 eV to 1.57 eV. Using the oxidative photodegradation of a aqueous Nile blue solution for activity evaluation, the CeCo0.05Ti0.95O3.97 perovskite was the best in the series with a conversion of 91% in a 3 hour run and was also suitable for the solar photocatalysis because it could be activated by visible light (λ < 785 nm).
 Fig. 14  Band-gap energy of various CeCoxTi1−xO3+δ perovskites and TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2005, Elsevier Inc. 
Su et al. applied a hydrothermal route for the dual substitutions of a single Cr dopant in a perovskite lattice of NaTaO3 for the degradation of the MB reaction under visible light.95 It was observed that the pure orthorhombic perovskite phase was retained regardless of Cr3+ doping. The undoped NaTaO3 had a BG of 4.13 eV (corresponding to a 300 nm absorption edge) with an excitation from O 2p to Ta 5d. Upon increasing the doping level of Cr3+, a systematic redshift of the absorption edge and the appearance of two broad absorptions in the range 400–750 nm were observed with increased intensities. Furthermore, Ebg decreased from 4.13 eV for the undoped sample to 3.14 eV for the 6.39 mol% Cr3+ doped sample. The absorption observed in the range of 400–500 nm was ascribed to the charge transfer from the 3d orbital of Cr3+ to the 5d orbital of Ta5+, whereas that ranging from 550–750 nm corresponded to the d–d transition for Cr3+.96,97 The single or dual substitutions of Cr on the B site or both A site and B site depended on the doping level of Cr. Specifically, at a lower doping level of Cr3+ (2.47 mol%), Cr3+ primarily occupied the Ta5+ (B site) sites, creating certain oxygen vacancies, resulting in no obvious impact on the lattice dimension but enhanced photocatalytic activities. With a further increase in the Cr3+ content, Cr3+ started to simultaneously substitute for both Na+ in the 12-fold coordination sites and Ta5+ in 6-fold coordination states of the perovskite NaTaO3. This dual substitution was further observed to yield a certain concentration of oxygen vacancies, a systematic decrease in lattice dimensions, an increased surface area and a decreased Ebg. However, the higher dopant concentration resulted in a significant decrease in photocatalytic activity. A schematic diagram of the electronic intraband transitions of the Cr-doped NaTaO3 could be speculated and is presented in Fig. 15.95 Under visible light irradiation, electrons will be excited directly from the O 2p VB to the Ta 5d CB, corresponding to an excitation of >4 eV in the UV spectrum for pure NaTaO3 (Fig. 15a). Accordingly, the excitation of O 2p to Ta 5d is expected to red shift due to the hybridization of Cr 3d and Ta 5d in the CB for the model of Cr@Na (Fig. 15c). In contrast, in the model of the dual substitution Cr@(Na, Ta), there may be two types of photoexcitation electrons under visible light irradiation (Fig. 15d), which may explain the two different absorptions in the long-wavelength visible region estimated from the UV-vis reflectance spectra. The dual substitution yielded mid-gap levels between the CB and VB, which resulted in a decrease in the BG energies, which is beneficial for visible-light absorption.
 Fig. 15  A schematic diagram of the electronic intraband transition of (a) NaTaO3, (b) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Ta atom, (c) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Na atom, (d) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Ta and Na atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3.1.2 Selection and doping process of A-site and X-site elements. 
Some researchers have focused on reducing Ebg of the perovskites via selective A-site or X-site doping.98,99 Lowering the BGs was achieved by Kumar et al. for the layered perovskite K2La2Ti3O10 because of the incorporation of Sn2+ in the A-site.98 Visible light absorption was observed with an absorption edge red shift of approximately 100 nm from that of the parent K2La2Ti3O10. The narrowing of the BG by Sn2+ doping was estimated to be 2.67 eV versus 3.63 eV for K2La2Ti3O10. The lowering of the BG can be related to the VB formation of Sn 5s and O 2p orbitals and with a CB resulting from Ti 3d orbitals. The K2La2Ti3O10 did not exhibit any visible absorption and was observed to decompose RB only under UV light. A much higher rate of degradation was observed for the Sn2+-substituted sample under visible light irradiation.
Nitrogen doping is known to shift the absorption edge toward higher wavelengths because of the contribution of N 2p orbitals to the VB comprised of O 2p orbitals, thereby moving the VB upwards. The nitrogen-doped K2La2Ti3O10−xNx photocatalyst was successfully prepared using conventional solid-state reactions and a wet chemical process.99 After nitrogen doping, Ebg of K2La2Ti3O10 was decreased from 3.69 to 3.44 eV. The degradation of dyes under UV and visible light radiation was better with a K2La2Ti3O10−xNx photocatalyst than with a pure K2La2Ti3O10 photocatalyst. In addition, the K2La2Ti3O10−xNx photocatalyst exhibited significantly higher visible-light photocatalytic activity than pure TiO2 (P25) in organic dye solution under visible light irradiation.
A noticeable lowering of Ebg has been achieved for the layered perovskite K2La2Ti3O10 as a result of the attempts made to incorporate N3− ions. Nitrogen incorporation was attempted by the solid-state reaction of the parent oxide with urea at approximately 400 °C in air. Nitridation using urea resulted in not only nitrogen doping but also sensitization due to the presence of carbon nitride (CN) polymers, which resulted in visible light absorption. Simple doping of nitrogen under an ammonia atmosphere at 400 °C for 6 h in N-K2La2Ti3O10 resulted in a BG reduction from 3.63 eV (K2La2Ti3O10) to 3.59 eV (N-K2La2Ti3O10),98 which is comparable to the earlier observed BG reduction of 3.69 eV (K2La2Ti3O10) to 3.44 eV (K2La2Ti3O10−xNx).99 However, CN polymers become incorporated as in the present case of CN-K2La2Ti3O10, whose UV-visible absorption spectra exhibited a larger red shift of approximately 100 nm. The BG was reduced to 2.92 eV for the CN polymer-incorporated nitrogen-doped K2La2Ti3O10. The noticeable reduction in the BG (0.71 eV) of CN-K2La2Ti3O10 can only be explained by the presence of CN polymers, rather than by simple doping of nitrogen for oxygen, suggesting a new route for the N doping for perovskites.


3.3.2 Reduction of the recombination rate of the electron–hole pair. 
3.3.2.1 A/B-site doping process. 
Many researchers have focused on developing highly active photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes using doping foreign elements at the A site or B site to reduce the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs by reducing the particle size.64,65,100 Among the various doping processes, Sr and Mn were used to dope BiFeO3 and LaFeO3 perovskite catalysts at the A site and B site, respectively, which resulted in reduced particle sizes of the perovskite.64,65 Using the A-site doping of Ca for LaFeO3 catalysts (La1−xCaxFeO3, x = 0.05–0.20) for the photocatalytic degradation of MB reaction as an example revealed that partial substitution of La3+ in LaFeO3 with Ca2+ decreased the crystalline size and enhanced the visible light absorption and photocatalytic activity.100 The 10 mol% doping of Ca resulted in the best photoactivity among the various catalysts, and the degradation rate of MB improved from 48.9 to 77.5% after 1 hour operation with visible light after the 10 mol% doping of calcium. Based on the results, we can see that La0.9Ca0.1FeO3 exhibited strong photocatalytic activity for the decomposition of MB under visible light irradiation. There are three factors that are related to the photocatalytic activity. First, the photocatalytic activity increases with increasing Ca concentration because the particle size decreases and the surface area increases, leading to an increase in the adsorption of pollutants on the photocatalyst. Second, when the La3+ ion was displaced by the Ca2+ ion, CaLa′ donor centers and oxygen vacancies were formed. When the doping concentration was relatively low, the number of CaLa′ donor centers increased with increasing dopant concentration, resulting in an increase in the number of photoinduced electrons and an increase in the photocatalytic activity. However, when the doping concentration was too high, the dopant likely acted as an electron–hole recombination center and decreased the photocatalytic activity. Finally, the photocatalytic activity was also related to photo absorption. The Ca-doped photocatalyst exhibited a larger light absorption capacity at λ > 420 nm than that of the undoped photocatalyst.
It was observed that the difference in the filled f shell of the A-site dopant also affected the recombination rate of the electron–hole pair of the perovskite catalysts. Li et al. studied the effect of the Ln element doping on the performance of La2Ti2O7 perovskite for the photocatalytic degradation of MO reaction.101 Nanocrystalline La1.5Ln0.5Ti2O7 (Ln = Pr, Gd, Er) was prepared using a polymeric complex method. Among the three doped perovskites, La1.5Gd0.5Ti2O7 exhibited the best photocatalytic activity, and it was assumed that the half-filled electronic configuration of Gd3+ promoted charge transfer and then enhanced the photocatalytic activity. The difference in the photocatalytic activity for La1.5Ln0.5Ti2O7 (Ln = La, Pr, Gd, Er) can be related to the different Ln 4f shell. Among the various dopants, Gd3+ is different from other rare-earth ions because this ion has a half-filled f shell. The half-filled configuration of the metal ion is more stable, and this ion has a strong tendency to return to the original stable state when such a configuration is destroyed. This particular characteristic of the dopant ion with the half-filled electronic configuration can promote charge transfer and efficiently separate the electron–hole pairs by shallowly trapping electrons.101 Although other metal ions can also trap the photo-excited electrons, detrapping is more difficult on these metal ions. Therefore, La1.5Gd0.5Ti2O7 exhibits higher efficiency in the separation and transfer of charge carriers and exhibits higher reactivity than other rare-earth La1.5Ln0.5Ti2O7 compounds (Ln = La, Er and Pr).
3.3.2.2 Preparation methods. 
Some researchers have observed that the preparation methods also have a strong effect on the photocatalytic activity of LaFeO3 and LaCoO3 perovskite catalysts for the degradation of organic dyes by reducing the possibility of the recombination of electron–hole pairs.72,102–106 LaFeO3 exhibits significant physical and chemical properties, making them important for use in photocatalysis.72,102,103 For the preparation of LaFeO3, several wet chemical methods have been proposed to improve the homogeneity and reproducibility of the powders and reduce the preparation temperature, such as sol–gel and hydrothermal methods. For example, LaFeO3 nanoparticles were directly synthesized using a one-step microwave-assisted route without an additional high-temperature calcination process.102 It was observed that the prepared LaFeO3 was a single-phase perovskite with a sphere-like shape that exhibited strong visible-light absorption and an optical absorption onset of 525 nm, corresponding to a BG of 2.36 eV. These results showed that LaFeO3 was highly visible-light photocatalytic active for the degradation of MB. The degradation rate of MB was approximately 100% after 1 h operation with visible light, which was even much higher than the Ca-doped LaFeO3 catalysts prepared by the reverse microemulsion method under the same conditions, suggesting the effective improvement in activity by adopting the microwave-assisted route. In addition, nanosized LaFeO3 photocatalysts for the photo-degradation of the RB reaction under visible light irradiation were also synthesized using a sol–gel method. The activity of the as-prepared LaFeO3 was much higher than that of commercial Degussa P25 TiO2 under visible irradiation, and the degradation rate of RB on the LaFeO3 after sintering at 500 °C was approximately 8 times higher than that of P25 TiO2.
In addition to the aforementioned methods, the hydrothermal method has been widely used for the preparation of nanosized LaFeO3 perovskite with the advantages of a well-controlled size, low temperature growth, cost effectiveness, and less complicated product. Thirumalairajan et al. successfully synthesized microspheres composed of LaFeO3 nanoparticles with an orthorhombic structure via a citric-acid-assisted hydrothermal method.103 Morphological analysis revealed microspheres with diameters of 2–4 μm composed of nanoparticles with an average size of 85 nm. The absorption edge at 600 nm emphasized that LaFeO3 could serve as a potential visible-light-driven photocatalytic catalyst for the degradation of RB aqueous solutions with good photocatalytic activity. The formation mechanism of the LaFeO3 microspheres is illustrated schematically in Fig. 16.103 In the initial stages of the hydrothermal reaction, metal ions in the solution react with citric acid to form relatively stable distorted primary particles of LaFeO3 under supersaturated condition, which decreased the free metal ion concentration in solution and resulted in the slow generation of primary particles. Generally, the Ostwald ripening process involves the formation of aggregates with primary crystallites through the crystallization process due to the energy difference. The formed LaFeO3 nanoparticles aggregated together, driven by minimization of the interfacial energy. The aggregated nanoparticles would act as primary cores that favor homogenous assembly to produce larger self-assembled aggregates via the self-assembly process. The aggregated particles tend to form a spherical shape, as the aggregation speed of the nanoparticles from each direction to the core could be the same. The effect of the reaction time and calcination temperature on the LaFeO3 microsphere morphology also supports the finding that the Ostwald ripening effect is an essential mechanism.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the formation mechanism of LaFeO3 microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2012, Elsevier Inc. 
LaFeO3 nanostructures, such as nanocubes, nanorods and nanospheres, tailored using different surfactants, were synthesized using the hydrothermal process by Thirumalairajan et al.;72 the authors considered that the possible growth mechanism of the formation of LaFeO3 nanostructures was based mainly on the self-assembly growth mechanism occurring due to the localized Ostwald ripening process. The morphologies of the LaFeO3 nanostructures synthesized by hydrothermal reactions with and without structure-directing agents are shown in Fig. 17.72 The cube-like LaFeO3 morphology was obtained by direct hydrothermal synthesis without the use of any structure-directing agents. These cube-like structures have sharp edges and a smooth surface, as illustrated in Fig. 17a. When urea was used as a structure-directing agent, nanorods of LaFeO3 were obtained, as shown in Fig. 17b. The use of another structure-directing agent, citric acid, resulted in sphere-shaped nanostructures with an average size of 52 nm, as shown in Fig. 17c and d. The enhanced photocatalytic activity for the degradation reaction of RB on the LaFeO3 nanospheres compared to other nanostructures and P25 TiO2 can be ascribed to the high specific surface area, pore size distribution and smaller particle size.
 Fig. 17  SEM images of three different LaFeO3 morphologies (a) nanocubes, (b) nanorods and (c and d) low and high magnifications of nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Completely replacing Fe with Co led to the formation of LaCoO3 perovskite oxides, which have attracted considerable attention for the degradation of organic dye reactions.104,105 Jung and Hong studied the photocatalytic activity for the decomposition of MO on LaCoO3 oxides prepared using different methods, such as the microwave method, malic acid method, and solid-state reaction method, on the photocatalytic performance of the LaCoO3 catalysts.104 The LaCoO3 catalyst prepared using the microwave-assisted process exhibited the highest activity at the same sintering temperature. Specifically, the rate constant k of LaCoO3 prepared with the microwave-assisted process was 1.7 and 40 times higher than that of the catalysts prepared by the malic acid method and solid-state reaction method, respectively. Fu et al. reported a simple method to synthesize perovskite-type LaCoO3 hollow nanospheres at a relatively low calcination temperature at 550 °C by utilizing the carbonaceous colloids as a template and internal heat sources.105 The formation process of perovskite-type LaCoO3 hollow spheres, which can be divided into two steps, is illustrated in Fig. 18.105 The carbonaceous colloid template is hydrophilic and negatively charged and is prepared from a saccharide solution and functionalized with OH and C@O groups with large surface area and nano-scale pores distributed uniformly on its surface. First, carbon@LaCo are formed through the surface-layer-adsorption process: the functional groups and nano-scale pores in the surface layer can bind or capture La3+ and Co2+ cations through coordination or electrostatic interactions upon the dispersal of the carbonaceous spheres in the solution with [La3+]:[Co2+] = 1:1. The sequential removal of the carbon cores, densification, cross-linking, and phase transformation of La and Co in the layer via a calcination process resulted in the formation of LaCoO3 hollow spheres. It was also clearly demonstrated that the carbonaceous polysaccharide microspheres played a dual-functional role as templates and internal heat sources in the formation process, which could be attributed to the low-temperature formation of a perovskite-type structure at temperatures as low as 550 °C. The LaCoO3 hollow spheres exhibited broad and strong absorption at 220–550 nm regions with a narrow BG of 2.07 eV. The LaCoO3 hollow nanospheres also exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity for the degradation of MB, MO and neutral red, which is comparable to P25 after a 100 min reaction, making it a promising candidate for environmentally friendly applications, such as the treatment of wastewater.
 Fig. 18  Illustration of the formation process for perovskite-type LaCoO3 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2013, Elsevier Inc. 
3.3.2.3 Crystal structure. 
Zhang et al. prepared Cu-doped KNb3O8 photocatalysts using a simple solid-state method and observed that the doping of Cu affected the crystal structure, morphology and Ebg.106 It was suggested that Cu doping can induce the formation of the compound, K6Nb10.8O30, with a tungsten-bronze structure and that the relative content of K6Nb10.8O30 in the Cu-doped samples increased increasing Cu doping amount. When the Cu doping amount reached 2 wt%, the as-prepared sample consisted mainly of K6Nb10.8O30.106Fig. 19 presents SEM images of the as-prepared samples undoped or doped with Cu. In general, the crystal morphology of KNb3O8 was flake-like and that of the crystal of K6Nb10.8O30 assumed a quadrate column shape. According to Fig. 19, the crystal sizes increased and more uniform quadrate crystals formed with increasing Cu doping amount. This indicates that Cu doping promoted an increase in the crystal sizes and the uniformity of the shape. The Cu dopant increased the absorption of the Cu-doped KNb3O8 samples in the visible light region and a red-shift of the absorption edge of the samples.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of the as prepared samples: (a) KNb3O8; (b) 0.3 wt% Cu-doped; (c) 0.5 wt% Cu-doped; (d) 1 wt% Cu-doped; and (e) 2 wt% Cu-doped. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2011, Elsevier Inc. 
The photocatalytic properties of the catalysts were evaluated using the degradation of acid red G. The results indicated that Cu doping significantly increased the photocatalytic activity of the KNb3O8 catalyst. After UV irradiation for 60 min, the photodegradation rate of acid red by the KNb3O8 catalyst was 63.03%. For the KNb3O8 catalysts doped with 0.3, 0.5, 1, and 2 wt% Cu, the photodegradation rates of acid red G increased to 93.23, 93.06, 93.63, and 83.92%, respectively.106 The authors considered that the enhanced photocatalytic activity could be attributed to three causes. First, the layered materials KNb3O8 used their interlayer space as reaction sites, where the electron–hole recombination process could be retarded by the physical separation of electron and hole pairs and Cu(II) ions likely entered into the interlayer spaces, which acted as receptors or transmitters of photogenerated electrons to inhibit the recombination and extend the lifetime of the charge carrier. Second, Cu doping induced the formation of the compound, K6Nb10.8O30. Both the CB bottom and the VB top of K6Nb10.8O30 lay below the CB bottom and VB top of KNb3O8, respectively. Under UV-light irradiation, an electron at the CB bottom of KNb3O8 migrated to that of the K6Nb10.8O30. Moreover, a hole at the VB top of the K6Nb10.8O30 migrated to that of KNb3O8.106 In this manner, the formed nanostructure heterojunction on K6Nb10.8O30 and KNb3O8 led to more efficient interelectron transfer, which played an important role for the enhanced photocatalytic activities. Third, the highly distorted surface NbO6 octahedral sites played an important role in heterogeneous catalysis. Cu(II) ions could enter the NbO6 octahedral sites and increase the photocatalytic effect of the catalyst by enhancing the distortion of the NbO6 octahedral sites and the mobility of active oxygen in the crystal structure of the catalyst.
The photocatalytic activity of the selected perovskite-based and P25 photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes are listed in Table 2. In addition to the choice of photocatalysts, the photocatalytic activity for the degradation of organic dyes is also strongly dependent on the types and concentration of the dye and the loading of the catalyst in solution. Under visible light irradiation, the perovskite catalysts investigated always show much better performance than the commercial TiO2 (P25). For a LaFeO3 catalyst, the calcination temperature, morphology, preparation methods have a strong influence on its photocatalytic activity for the degradation of organic dyes in solution. CN-K2La2Ti3O10 was found to be more active than the N-K2La2Ti3O10, which is higher than P25 under visible light irradiation for the degradation of RB. The successful doping of CN in K2La2Ti3O10 by urea using the SSR method suggests a facile way of preparing N-doped perovskites and also some non-perovskite materials, such as TiO2. In addition, the selection of the A-site element and the phase structure control are also essential for achieving high photocatalytic activity. When Cr3+ is used as a dopant for NaTaO3, the amount of Cr3+ should be well controlled because excessive Cr3+ would lead to a sharp decrease in photocatalytic activity. In addition, Cr3+ could function as an A-site or B-site dopant depending on the amount, which may provide a new aspect for developing new photocatalysts with enhanced photocatalytic activity. The LaCoO3 prepared by a surface-ion adsorption method showed comparable activity to P25 under UV light irradiation for the degradation of MO and MB. Owing to its lower BG, it should be expected that much higher activity under visible light irradiation should be obtained compared to P25.
Table 2 Photocatalytic activity of the selected perovskite-based and P25 photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes




No.
Photocatalyst
BG (eV)
Dye types and/or concentration
Degradation rate (1 − C/C0, %)
Catalyst loading
Light type
Preparation method
Ref.




1
P25
3.2
RB, 20 μmol L−1
3
5 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Commercial

71



2
LaFeO3(500)


24
Sol–gel


3
LaFeO3(600)
16


4
LaFeO3(700)
13


5
LaFeO3(800)
9


6
LaFeO3 nanocube
2.01
RB
76.81 at 180 min
1 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Hydrothermal

72



7
LaFeO3 nanorod
2.05
88.36 at 180 min


8
LaFeO3 nanosphere
2.1
90.8 at 180 min


9
P25
3.2
5.1 at 180 min
Commercial


10
LaNiO3
2.26
MO, 10 mg L−1
74.9 at 5 h
2 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Sol–gel

93



11
CeCo0.05Ti0.95O3.97
1.57
Nile blue, 30 ppm
91 at 3 h
3 g L−1
254–310 and 410–500 nm
Sol–gel

94



12
NaTaO3
4.13
MB, 2 × 10−4 mol L−1
60 at 200 min
50 mg

λ > 420 nm
Hydrothermal

95



13
2.47 mol% Cr doped NaTaO3
3.95
70 at 200 min


14
6.35 mol% Cr doped NaTaO3
3.28
∼35 at 200 min


15
P25
3.2
RB, 5 × 10−6 mol L−1
75 at 150 min
2 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Commercial

98



16
K2La2Ti3O10
3.63
10 at 150 min
SSR


17
N-K2La2Ti3O10
3.59
20 at 150 min
SSR + NH3 gas


18
CN-K2La2Ti3O10
2.92
90 at 150 min
SSR + urea


19
P25
3.2
MO, 0.02 g L−1
∼6 at 30 min
0.8 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Commercial

99



20
K2La2Ti3O10
3.69
∼2 at 30 min
SSR


21
N-K2La2Ti3O10
3.44
∼30 at 30 min
SSR + NH3 gas


22
LaFeO3


MB, 10 mg L−1
∼50 at 90 min
0.5 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Reverse microemulsion

100



23
La0.9Ca0.1FeO3
∼80 at 90 min


24
La2Ti2O7


MO, 1 × 10−5 mol L−1
∼55 at 90 min
1 g L−1
UV, λ = 254 nm
Polymeric complex

101



25
La1.5Pr0.5Ti2O7
∼25 at 90 min


26
La1.5Gd0.5Ti2O7
90 at 90 min


27
La1.5Er0.5Ti2O7
∼50 at 90 min


28
LaFeO3
2.36
MB, 10 mg L−1
∼100 at 90 min
2 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Microwave-assisted route

102



29
P25
3.2
20 at 90 min
Commercial


30
LaFeO3
2.1
RB
>90 at 180 min
1 g L−1

λ > 400 nm
Hydrothermal

103



31
P25
3.2
MO, 10 mg L−1
∼85 at 100 min
0.2 g L−1
UV
Commercial

105



32
LaCoO3
2.07
∼85 at 100 min
Surface-ion adsorption method


33
P25
3.2
MB, 10 mg L−1
∼85 at 100 min
Commercial


34
LaCoO3
2.07
∼85 at 100 min
Surface-ion adsorption method


35
KNb3O8
3.06
Acid red G, 50 mg L−1
63.03 at 60 min
1 g L−1
UV, λ = 253.7 nm
SSR

106



36
0.3 wt% Cu doped KNb3O8


93.23 at 60 min


37
2 wt% Cu doped KNb3O8
83.92 at 60 min





4. Perovskite materials in energy-related photovoltaic reactions (solar cells)
Within the past 2 years, the efficiencies of the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells have increased to more than 15%. These solar cells are solution-processable, inexpensive and composed of earth-abundant materials, making them promising candidates for highly efficient and low-cost solar power generation systems. In this section, first of all, some strategies used to design perovskite light absorbers in solar cells are given and related perovskite designation is also presented in detail.
4.1 Strategies to design perovskite light absorbers in solar cells

4.1.1 Band gap engineering. 
Materials for solar light harvesting are diversified but the good candidates all have a common feature: broad and strong absorption over the visible to near infrared region of the solar spectrum. It is believed that semiconductors with a BG below 1.1 eV are suitable for solar light absorption. However, if the BG is too narrow, the cell will collect extra current with a decrease in voltage. Through a trade-off of these two effects, the optimal BG is approximately 1.4 eV for a solar cell prepared from a single material. Researchers have observed that the BG of perovskite materials will decrease with (1) a decrease in the difference in the effective electronegativity between the metal (B site) cation and the anion, (2) a decrease in the electronegativity of X site anions, (3) an increase in the dimensionality of the BX6 network, and (4) an increase in the angle of the B–X–B bonds.107
4.1.1.1 Decrease of the difference in electronegativity between B-site cation and anion. 
Some perovskite oxides, such as alkaline-earth metal titanates (ATiO3, A = Ca, Sr, Ba), have wide BGs (3–5 eV) due to the large difference in electronegativity between the oxygen and titanium atoms (3.5 vs. 1.5).108 By modifying the composition by reducing the difference in electronegativity between oxygen and the B site element in the perovskite, a low BG of 2.7 eV was obtained for BiFeO3 perovskite due to the higher electronegativity of Fe than Ti.109 In addition, for the CH3NH3PbI3 system, due to the smaller difference in electronegativity between I and Pb atoms (2.5 vs. 1.9), the BG value of CH3NH3PbI3 was reported to be only approximately 1.55 eV, which is much lower than that of the ATiO3 system.
4.1.1.2 Decrease of the electronegativity of anions. 
For CH3NH3PbX3, experimental studies have shown that absorption was shifted to the blue region by moving from I to Br to Cl. For example, CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 exhibited blue-shifted absorption compared to that of CH3NH3PbI3 because the electronegativity of the I anion was lower than that of the Br anion.110,111
4.1.1.3 Increasing the dimensionality of the BX6 network. 
The variation in the A-site cation can affect the optical properties by deforming the BX64− octahedron network. A larger or smaller A cation can cause the entire lattice to expand or contract and lead to a change in the B–X bond length, which has been reported to be important for determining the BG. If the cation is over-sized, the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite structure is unfavorable, and more stable lower-dimensional layered or confined perovskites will be formed. For example, an ethylammonium-cation-based perovskite, which had been explored previously in solar cells, was demonstrated to form a perovskite with a wider BG due to a 2H-type structure.112 Thus far, it has been reported that small monovalent cations, such as Cs+, methylammonium (MA+), or formanidinium (FA+), can form a 3D framework with the PbI6 network.113 Fujisawa et al. demonstrated a self-assembled one-dimensional (1D) perovskite material methylviologen (MV)Pb2I6 as a light absorber for perovskite-based solar cells.114 MVPb2I6 had a higher BG of 2–3 eV due to the 1D structure.
4.1.1.4 Increasing the angle of B–X–B bonds. 
As mentioned above, the B–X–B bond angle has the greatest impact on tuning the BG for each individual metal. Using ABI3 (B = Ge, Sn, Pb) as an example, the B–I–B bridging angles between the BI6 octahedra are 166.27(8)° for Ge, 159.61(5)° for Sn, and 155.19(6)° for Pb.115 In addition, with the downward selection of the metal cation, a decrease in the covalent character of the B–I bond was observed, meaning an increase in the difference between the electronegativity of the two atoms. Therefore, the BG of the perovskites follows the trend of AGeI3 < ASnI3 < APbI3. Doping Pb with Sn in CH3NH3PbI3 resulted in a reduced BG.116


4.1.2 Diffusion length of the electron–hole pair. 
The diffusion length plays a key role in the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells, limiting the active layer thickness to a few hundred nanometers. To study the accumulation of a photogenerated charge and charge separation, tremendous efforts have been made to characterize these different processes occurring in the perovskite layer by measuring the Ld in prepared samples or complete devices and the lifetime. Some researchers have reported the diffusion-length measurements performed on hybrid perovskites, which shed light on the dynamics of photoexcited species in these materials.117,118 It was found that CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, had an Ld for electrons and holes exceeding 1 μm as compared with an Ld of approximately 100 nm was obtained with CH3NH3PbI3.117,118 This high value provided hope for a future study of hybrid perovskite solar cells by making the fabrication of devices with thicker active layers possible, where the absorption of light can be increased without affecting the collection efficiency of the generated charges.


4.1.3 Crystallinity and morphology control of the perovskite. 
In addition to the above-mentioned factors, the fabrication techniques of the perovskite layer also have a strong effect on the cell performance of perovskite-based solar cells. The photovoltaic performance of the devices with perovskite light absorber is greatly dependent on the film morphology, which in turn is related to the deposition techniques and subsequent treatments employed. To improve the performance of the thin-film devices, delicate control of their grain structures is required, and several advanced preparation methods, such as spin coating, vapor-assisted solution process and surface passivation, etc. have been developed recently.119–125
Currently, researchers are focused mainly on high performance via the selection and modification of perovskite-based light absorbers and related HTMs fabrication methods. In addition, inorganic perovskites have also been exploited as photoanodes in DSSCs with some excellent results available. In this section, we will focus on the development of perovskite materials in light absorbers and photoanodes based on the proposed strategies mentioned above, and then provide some guidelines for the further improvement of perovskite-based solar cells. Shown in Fig. 20 are schematics of the high-level summary of Section 4.
 Fig. 20  The schematics of the high-level summaries of Section 4. 

4.2 Development of CH3NH3PbI3-based light absorbers

4.2.1 Basic structural and electronic properties. 
The structural and electronic properties of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 materials have been well studied using theoretical calculations and Raman spectroscopy.126–128 First-principle DFT calculations have been performed to study the structural and electronic properties of orthorhombic perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 materials.126 In Fig. 21, the atomic structures of orthorhombic perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 crystals without (left) or with (right) PbI6 octahedra are shown. These structures demonstrate that the main interaction between the organic groups and inorganic framework is through ionic bonding between the CH3+ cations and I− anions. The different interaction strengths between I atoms with their adjacent atoms cause the formation of two types of I atoms in the Pb–I framework. An analysis of the electronic properties also suggested that orthorhombic CH3NH3PbI3 was a direct-BG crystal with the minimum BG at the G symmetry point. During light harvesting, I 5p electrons could be photo-excited to the Pb 6p empty states. The theoretical study presents some guidelines for further theoretical studies on this type of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite material for sensitized solar cells. Quarti et al. reported the resonant Raman spectrum of the widely used CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite measured between 60 and 450 cm−1, assigning its main vibrational features with the help of electronic structure calculations.128 The measured spectrum assignment was assisted by DFT simulations of the Raman spectra of suitable periodic and model systems. Important markers of the inorganic component have been observed at 60 and at 94 cm−1, which were mainly associated with the I–Pb–I bending and Pb–I stretching. The region between 100 and 200 cm−1 was instead associated librational motions of the CH3NH3 cations. Based on the electronic structure calculations, it was observed that the interactions between the organic cations and the inorganic counterpart affected the vibrational frequency and Raman intensity of the CH3NH3 torsional mode in CH3NH3PbI3. The broad and unresolved band at 200–340 cm−1 was consequently assigned to the torsional mode of the CH3NH3 cations, and this mode was proposed as a possible marker of the orientational order of the organic cations in the material and thus of the entire crystal. The study could provide the required assignments for the interpretation of the Raman spectra of organohalide perovskites, which may be extremely useful for understanding the properties of CH3NH3 and its applications in solar cells.
 Fig. 21  Atomic structures of orthorhombic perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 crystals without (left) or with (right) the [PbI6] octahedra. Key: grey-Pb, purple-I, light blue-N, brown-C and pink-H. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2014. 


4.2.2 Band gap engineering. 
4.2.2.1 Selection and doping of X-site elements. 
As mentioned above, the electronegativity of the X-site elements has a strong effect on the Ebg of perovskite. In principle, doping of the X site of CH3NH3PbI3 with Br could result in an increase in Ebg, which decreases the PCE of the solar cells. However, the substitution of I with Br with the formation of CH3NH3PbBr3 improved the Voc of the solar cells, although η was not increased or even reduced to some extent due to the increased BG.111,129 For example, Kojima et al. observed that the replacement of I by Br dramatically improved Voc from 0.61 to 0.96 V. The high Voc of the bromide (CH3NH3PbBr3) was associated with the higher CB of the bromide relative to that of the iodide. However, the PCE reduced from 3.8 to 3.2% with the replacement of Br because Jsc was greatly reduced in the CH3NH3PbBr3-based cell, which could be attributed to the lower light adsorption ability as well as the increased Ebg of CH3NH3PbBr3.111
To achieve both high Voc and generated photocurrent, partial replacement of I by Br may be a useful strategy.130–132 CH3NH3PbI2Br was synthesized by Qiu et al. and used as a visible light absorber to sensitize 1D TiO2 nanowire arrays (NWAs) for all-solid-state solar cells.130 Higher Voc (0.82 V vs. 0.74 V) and PCE (4.9% vs. 4.3%) values were achieved by Br-substitution in CH3NH3PbI3. Aharon et al. also studied the effect of Br doping on the photovoltaic activity and operational stability of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite.131 The hybrid perovskite was deposited by a two-step deposition technique, enabling control of the perovskite composition and its BG. The best hybrid CH3NH3PbI2Br perovskite solar cell achieved a PCE of 8.54%, which is higher than the values of CH3NH3PbI3 (7.2%) and CH3NH3PbBr3 (1.69%). In addition, improved stability was achieved for this hybrid perovskite compared to that of CH3NH3PbI3 without the Br substitution.
Hybrid organometallic halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI2Br nanosheets with a BG of 1.8 eV were prepared using a thermal decomposition process from a precursor containing PbI2, CH3NH3Br and CH3NH3Cl.132 This process affected not only the phase evolution of CH3NH3PbI2Br but also the morphologic shape and surface coverage of perovskite films on the planar substrate and then strongly affected the performance of the solar cells. The solar cell with CH3NH3PbI2Br nanosheets exhibited a PCE of 10% and a single-wavelength conversion efficiency of up to 86%. It was observed that CH3NH3Cl functions as a glue or soft template to control the initial formation of a solid solution with the main CH3NH3PbI2Br precursor components (i.e., PbI2 and CH3NH3Br). BG tuning of mixed anion lead halide perovskites CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 (0 < x < 1) was demonstrated by Kulkarni et al. using a sequential deposition process.110 The PbI2 film dipping time in halide precursors as well as the concentration of halide precursors was observed to play a crucial role in determining the composition and thus the Ebg of mixed halide perovskites. A systematic shift of the absorption band edge to shorter wavelengths with increasing Br content in the perovskite was observed, which results in a decrease in photocurrent.
Chung et al. reported that doping inorganic perovskite CsSnI3 with 5% fluorine could dramatically improve the photocurrent density by almost 40%.133 Importantly, Mosconi et al. reported that the mixed halide perovskite system consisted of two different structures, whose stability of which decreased from I− to F− along column VIIA in the periodic table.134 Therefore, it is difficult to stabilize I−- and F−-based mixed halide perovskite systems, making F− a non-ideal dopant for CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Nagane et al. reported an interesting strategy to incorporate F− in the perovskite structure via partial substitution of I− by BF4−.135 Importantly, I− and BF4− both have a similar ionic radius, making the incorporation of BF4− feasible in the structure. The BF4− substituted perovskite exhibited significant enhancement in electrical conductivity at low frequencies (one order of magnitude) and an improved photo-response under AM1.5 illumination (more than four orders of magnitude) compared to the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, even though Ebg was increased to a relatively higher value. This provides a new approach to improving the electrical conductivity and photo-response for the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite.
4.2.2.2 Selection and doping of B-site elements. 
The toxicity of lead is a concern regarding the use of CH3NH3PbI3; thus, a key scientific challenge is to replace the lead with a less toxic metal. However, limited studies have been reported.116,136,137 The most viable replacements for Pb in the perovskite material are Sn and Ge because these metals have larger X–B–X angles, as mentioned above, which are beneficial for reducing Ebg. However, the major problem with the use of these metals is their chemical instability in the required oxidation state. A recent study by Ogomi et al. reported a mixed metal, Sn–Pb, perovskite that enabled the tunability of the BG of the perovskite absorber by varying the Sn:Pb ratio, indicating that Sn could be a good choice for metal ions, especially for lower BG solar cells.116 The best performance was obtained using CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite and a PCE of 4.18% with a Voc of 0.42 V, FF of 0.50 and Jsc of 20.04 mA cm−2 was reported. The edge of the incident photon to the current efficiency curve reached 1060 nm, which was red-shifted by 260 nm compared to that of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. However, the same study reported that the CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite did not exhibit significant photovoltaic properties, as shown in Fig. 22 and that a minimum content of Pb was needed to stabilize the Sn2+ oxidation state.
 Fig. 22  
I–V curves for CH3NH3SnxPb(1−x)I3 perovskite solar cells. Composition: CH3NH3SnxPb(1−x)I3/P3HT. Solar cells were measured under 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) light illumination with masked area 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Hao et al. examined the performance of perovskite solar cells based on alloyed perovskite solid solutions of methylammonium tin iodide and its lead analogue (CH3NH3Sn1−xPbxI3).136Ebg of the mixed Pb–Sn compounds did not follow a linear trend (Vegard's law) in between these two extremes of 1.55 and 1.35 eV but had a narrower BG (<1.3 eV), thus extending the light absorption into the near-infrared region (1050 nm). These results were confirmed by optical measurements of the materials, and for example, an optimal short-circuit photocurrent density over 20 mA cm−2 was obtained for the mixed alloy CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight of 100 mW cm−2. The anomalous trend in the BG of CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3 was the same as the trend observed in Pb1−xSnxTe.136 In this system, band inversion occurred with varying x, which was associated with a systematic change in the atomic orbital composition of the CBs and VBs. This occurred because the CBM in SnTe had a similar orbital composition as the VBM in PbTe and vice versa, which could be attributed to the anomalous trend rather than the expected Vegard's law trend in Ebg. An in-depth understanding of this unique effect, which is responsible for being able to significantly extend the solar absorption spectrum of perovskite-based systems, will require careful electronic band structure calculations. In addition, the Sn doping in CH3NH3PbI3 could also affect the morphology of the thin film. Fig. 23 shows two representative SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 films on mesoporous TiO2 electrodes. The CH3NH3PbI3 film was composed of interconnected nanoscale domains with sizes ranging from 200 to 500 nm with good film coverage. However, the CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film displayed superior film quality and coverage. Compared to the CH3NH3PbI3 film, the contrast features apparent in the hybrid CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film suggest the formation of smaller crystallite domains, implying more efficient film formation via favorable crystal growth of the mixed-metal perovskite. Fig. 23c presents elemental maps of Pb, Sn, and I in the CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film obtained via SEM-energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). It is apparent that Sn and Pb are distributed homogeneously throughout the film with no evident phase separation.
 Fig. 23  Representative SEM images of the (a) CH3NH3PbI3 and (b) CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 films on top of the mesoporous TiO2 electrodes. The scale bars represent 1 μm. (c) EDS elemental mapping of Pb, Sn and I in film (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, Noel et al. employed a completely lead-free perovskite, CH3NH3SnI3, for perovskite-based solar cells.137 A PCE greater than 6% was achieved under simulated full sunlight with a Voc of 0.88 V and a BG of 1.23 eV. However, the stability of CH3NH3SnI3 remains a challenge, and the main issue is now the stabilization of the material then the oxidation of the Sn is suppressed. By solving this issue, it can be expected that the performance of Sn perovskites will surpass those of the state-of-the-art Pb-based perovskites over the next few years, with a distinct toxicological advantage. Importantly, this finding demonstrates that Pb-based materials are not unique in delivering efficient perovskite solar cells.
4.2.2.3 Selection and doping of A-site elements. 
It was reported that in the CH3NH3PbI3 system, the A cation did not play a major role in determining the band structure but acted to ensure charge compensation within the lattice. Nevertheless, the A cation could affect the optical properties by deforming the BX64− octahedron network due to the variations of its size. A larger or smaller A cation can cause the entire lattice to expand or contract, leading to a change in the B–X bond length, which has been demonstrated to be important in determining Ebg. Based on the tolerance factor (t) calculation in the perovskite APbI3 structure, the A site cation radii range from 164 pm to 259 pm, corresponding to the t values ranging from 0.8 to 1.0, respectively, assuming Pb2+ = 119 pm and I− = 220 pm. The CH3NH3+ cation is suitable for the perovskite structure because of its suitable ionic radius of 180 pm. A reduced BG of the perovskite was obtained by replacing the MA component with a slightly larger cation, FA.113,138–140 As shown in Fig. 24a, perovskites are defined as any compound that crystallizes in the ABX3 structure, consisting of corner-sharing BX6 octahedra with the A component neutralizing the total charge.113 As demonstrated in Fig. 24b, cesium has a smaller effective ionic radius than MA, whereas that of FA is slightly larger. Fig. 24c presents the absorbance spectra of these materials; CsPbI3 is observed to absorb at a shorter wavelength than MAPbI3, whereas FAPbI3 absorbs at a longer wavelength than MAPbI3. It is suggested that as the A cation increases in ionic radius, the lattice expands while BG decreases, causing a red-shift in the absorption spectra. Therefore, FAPbI3 is a potential candidate to produce even more efficient solar cells than CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). Very high currents could be generated under simulated sunlight, and high short-circuit currents of >23 mA cm−2 and a PCE as high as 14.2% have been achieved. Thus, FAPbI3, as a new candidate for this class of solar cell, requires further attention.
 Fig. 24  Tuning perovskite BG by replacing the A cation. (a) ABX3 perovskite crystal structure. (b) The atomic structure of the three A site cations explored. (c) UV-vis spectra for the APbI3 perovskites formed, where A is either caesium (Cs), methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium (FA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lee et al. reported that weak absorption at long wavelength was observed with FAPbI3 perovskite, which could be overcome by the introduction of an extremely thin CH3NH3PbI3 layer on top of the FAPbI3 layer.140 Consequently, an average PCE of 15.56% was achieved by a FAPbI3 layer with a thin CH3NH3PbI3 overlayer. The best PCE of 16.01% was obtained from this developed structure, suggesting that FAPbI3 is a promising candidate for high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. However, some researchers focused on the replacement of MA in the A site as well as X-site doping of CH3NH3PbI3, and some excellent results based on FAPbBr3 and FAPbI3−xClx were obtained.141,142 For example, Hanusch et al. demonstrated a highly efficient FAPbBr3 perovskite for solar cells.141 This material exhibited much longer diffusion lengths of the photoexcited species than CH3NH3PbI3. A PCE of 6.6% was obtained with FAPbBr3 perovskite, which was more than 10 times higher than that of CH3NH3PbI3 under the same conditions. Hence, FAPbBr3 is a strong candidate as a wide BG absorber in perovskite solar cells.
Pellet et al. have demonstrated a perovskite with mixed A-site cations (CH3NH3)x(FA)1−xPbI3 (x = 0–1) for further improvement of the performance of perovskite-based photovoltaics.143 Devices based on FAPbI3 perovskite produced a PCE of 11.0% (a lower value than that of CH3NH3PbI3 because of the presence of the yellow δ-phase). The addition of 20% CH3NH3 to the FA completely avoided the undesirable formation of the δ-phase while maintaining the red-shifted BG of FAPbI3. This combination leads to an enhanced short-circuit current and thus superior devices to those based on only CH3NH3, and a PCE of 14.9% was obtained. The strategy of mixing organic ammonium compounds opens up new prospects for further improvements in the photovoltaic efficiency of perovskite-sensitized solar cells by tuning the optical, electrical, and morphological properties of the semiconducting sensitizer. It was believed that the performance of pure FAPbI3 would most likely surpass that of CH3NH3PbI3-based mesoscopic solar devices if the formation of the yellow δ-FAPbI3 component could be fully avoided. Similarly, FAPbI3 was introduced successfully into hole-conductor-free fully printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with a carbon counter electrode. Using the sequential deposition method, the FAPbI3-based solar cell yielded an efficiency of 11.9%, which is superior to that of the MAPbI3 solar cell of 11.4% due to broadening the light to 840 nm. By optimizing the FA and MA cation mixing ratio to 3:2, a PCE of 12.9% was achieved with this low-cost fully printable mesoscopic solar cell, which indicated a promising prospect for low-cost photovoltaic technology. Choi et al. demonstrated cesium-doping in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (CsxMA1−xPbI3) light absorbers to improve the performance of perovskite-based solar cells. The CsxMA1−xPbI3 perovskite devices with an optimized 10 mol% Cs doping concentration exhibited remarkable improvement in the device efficiency from 5.51 to 7.68% due to increases in Jsc and Voc.144 This improvement should be attributed to the increased light absorption capability, improved film morphology and almost unchanged Ebg. The optical BG of CsxMA1−xPbI3 perovskite gradually increased from 1.52 eV for pure MAPbI3 to 2.05 eV for pure CsPbI3 with increasing Cs content, which suggests that the optical BG can be tuned easily by controlling the amount of Cs in CsxMA1−xPbI3 perovskites.


4.2.3 Increase in the diffusion length of the electron–hole pair. 
It is well known that the recombination lifetime of the electron–hole pair is a crucial factor that contributes to the charge diffusion length of light-absorbing materials and hence affects their photovoltaic performance. In other words, longer charge diffusion lengths are associated with longer recombination lifetimes of electron–hole pairs, which is beneficial for improving the performance of perovskite light-absorber-based solar cells. For example, for CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, both perovskites have a similar light absorption range, whereas CH3NH3PbI3−xClx has a longer recombination lifetime than CH3NH3PbI3, followed by a longer diffusion length. The relatively large charge carrier diffusion lengths arise from the higher mobility and larger charge carrier lifetimes in these materials. Therefore, light-generated electrons and holes can move ultra-long distances in the perovskite, resulting in the generation of a photocurrent, instead of losing their energy as heat within the solar cells. In addition, unlike CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx does not require a mesoporous electron transport layer (e.g., TiO2). The long electron diffusion length enables CH3NH3PbI3−xClx to work perfectly on insulating scaffolds and even in bulk films. A longer electron diffusion length facilitates a larger optimized thickness of the light-absorbing layer, where charge carriers can be extracted in a timely manner before recombination. A thicker light-absorbing layer will eventually contribute to more effective light utilization by employing more absorbers.
Specifically, Stranks et al. used transient absorption and photoluminescence-quenching measurements to determine the electron–hole diffusion lengths, diffusion constants and lifetimes in CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorbers.118 It was observed that the diffusion length was larger than 1 μm in the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite, which is an order of magnitude greater than the absorption depth. In contrast, the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber had smaller electron–hole diffusion lengths of ∼100 nm. Similarly, Xing et al.117 also reported that the electron–hole diffusion lengths of CH3NH3PbI3 absorber were approximately 100 nm by applying femtosecond transient optical spectroscopy to bilayers that interface this perovskite with either selective-electron or selective-hole extraction materials.
Recently, Wehrenfennig et al. examined the charge carrier dynamics in vapor-deposited CH3NH3PbI3−xClx using ultrafast THz spectroscopy, revealing the carrier mobility and recombination rates.145 Under typical solar-cell operation conditions, the charge carrier lifetimes were limited by only mono-molecular decay processes, such as trap-mediated recombination, which have previously been observed to be exceptionally slow. The resulting charge diffusion length was observed to be 3 μm, highlighting the ability of dual-source evaporation as a fabrication route for organolead halide absorber layers in highly efficient planar-heterojunction solar cells.
Because of their longer diffusion lengths of electron–hole pairs, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx series have attracted increasing attention.146–150 Ma et al. synthesized CH3NH3PbI3−xClxvia a two-step sequential solution deposition process using a mixture of PbCl2 and PbI2 as the precursor to overcome the low solubility of pure PbCl2 with easy morphology control, and an achieved a PCE of 11.7%.146 Although excellent photovoltaic performance was achieved using CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, the formation of this mixed halide perovskite and the role of the chloride is unclear. Colella et al. studied the role of the chloride dopant on the transport and structural properties of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx light absorbers.147 These authors observed that independent of the ratio of components in the precursor solution, Cl incorporation in an iodide-based structure is possible only at relatively low concentrations (below 3–4%). The PCE increased from 3.85 to 6.15% with Cl doping. The strong difference in the halogen ionic radii interferes with the formation of a continuous solid solution. However, even if the BG of the material remains substantially unchanged, the Cl doping dramatically improves the charge transport within the perovskite layer, explaining the outstanding performance improvement of this material.
It was observed that the doping amount of Cl in CH3NH3PbBr3 was much larger than that in CH3NH3PbI3, which led to increased recombination lifetimes of electron–hole pairs. Zhang et al. reported that the mixed halide perovskites CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx (x = 0.6–1.2) exhibited different optical properties.151 In particular, the thin films prepared with these perovskites exhibited extraordinary photoluminescence emission intensities and prolonged recombination lifetimes, which are desirable for light-emitting and photovoltaic applications. The recombination lifetime of CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx was determined by measuring the photoluminescence decay at the emission peak wavelengths. The time-resolved photoluminescence decay curves of CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx with different Cl substitution ratios are presented in Fig. 25. CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx exhibits a longer average recombination lifetime than CH3NH3PbBr3. In particular, for CH3NH3PbBr2.4Cl0.6, the average recombination lifetime can be extended up to 446 ns compared to 100 ns and 44 ns for CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, respectively. However, the corresponding average recombination lifetime of the CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx perovskite decreased with a larger Cl substitution ratio for I.
 Fig. 25  Time-resolved photoluminescence decay detected at the peak wavelength of emission for various CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the selection of the X-site element in the CH3NH3PbX3 perovskite, the selection of the A-site element also had a strong effect on the recombination lifetimes and diffusion lengths of the electron–hole pairs. Hanusch et al. examined the recombination lifetimes of the electron–hole pairs of the FAPbBr3 perovskite compared to those of CH3NH3PbBr3.141 The FAPbBr3 films exhibited an unusually long decay lifetime of approximately 200 ns, which is much slower than the lifetime exhibited by CH3NH3PbBr3 films (17 ns). Stranks et al. attributed the comparable lifetime of approximately 200 ns for the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite to a diffusion length of electrons and holes of more than 1 μm.118 In contrast, the CH3NH3PbBr3 variant exhibited a similar lifetime to that of the non-Cl treated CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, and therefore, diffusion lengths closer to 100 nm. A high PCE of 7% was obtained by FAPbBr3 in a planar heterojunction architecture without the need for a mesoporous scaffold. The devices fabricated from CH3NH3PbBr3 in the same configuration were observed to be charge collection limited, whereas the formamidinium variant exhibited diffusion lengths that were orders of magnitude longer and could achieve a high charge collection efficiency.


4.2.4 Crystallinity and morphology control. 
The photovoltaic performance of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based solar cells is greatly dependent on the crystallinity and film morphology, which is determined by the deposition techniques and subsequent treatments. Precise control of the surface structures is required to improve the performance of the thin-film perovskite-based solar cells, and several advanced preparation methods, such as spin coating, spray deposition, vapor-assisted solution process and surface passivation, have been developed recently.121,152–156
4.2.4.1 Spin coating method. 
The solution processability of an organic–inorganic perovskite material is one of its major advantages, and the simplest method of deposition requires only a simple heating step to convert the deposited precursor solution (consisting of the organic and inorganic components) to the crystalline perovskite film. Spin coating was used by Burschka et al.119 to prepare CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, and some parameters, such as the temperature used in the annealing process, were carefully investigated by Dualeh et al.122 In addition, to avoid PbI2 crystals protruding from the surface of the substrate for a complete and fast conversion from PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3, the spin-coating step of PbI2 normally uses high spin speed or low concentration PbI2 solution.119,156 However, reliable deposition of high-quality films of phase-pure CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites with full coverage and high crystallinity still remains a challenge. In addition, films produced by the conventional spin-coating methods were observed to be composed of large CH3NH3PbI3 grains and many uncovered pin-hole areas.123,124 This structure can be attributed to slow crystallization because of the high boiling point of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 153 °C) and crystal growth arising from a slow nucleation rate during the natural drying process in spin-coating. Therefore, tremendous efforts have been devoted to modification of the spin coating process to improve the film morphology and achieve high crystallinity of the perovskite.123,124,157 Some additives are added to the preparation process of the perovskite, such as NH4Cl, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), etc.123,124 Zuo and Ding reported that the NH4Cl additive can improve the crystallinity and film morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 light-absorbing perovskite layer.123 For comparison, another chloride additive of CH3NH3Cl was also examined for the aspects of perovskite film properties and photovoltaic performance. X-ray diffraction (XRD) suggested that the additives favored CH3NH3PbI3 crystallization and that NH4Cl was more effective than CH3NH3Cl. The morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared using different additives was investigated by SEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM).

Fig. 26 presents SEM and AFM images of CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared using different additives.123 The film prepared using no additives exhibited large voids and an extremely rough surface (Fig. 26a). Almost no voids were observed in the film prepared using the CH3NH3Cl additive, and pebble-like nanocrystals (70–200 nm) were distributed in the film (Fig. 26b). The film prepared using the NH4Cl additive contained uniform nanocrystals (Fig. 26c) and exhibited better coverage than the film prepared using the CH3NH3Cl additive. The film prepared using no additive exhibited a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 47.5 nm. The films prepared using the CH3NH3Cl and NH4Cl additives were much smoother with RMS roughnesses of 15.3 nm and 5.2 nm, respectively. The improved crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite films fabricated using the NH4Cl additive led to remarkable enhancement in the device performance (a PCE of 9.93% and a FF of 0.8011). This work provided a very simple but effective approach to enhance the PCE of perovskite solar cells. Liang et al. reported a significantly enhanced PCE of the planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells from 9.0% up to 11.8% by incorporating a small amount of DIO additives into the perovskite precursor solutions to improve the crystallization of the perovskite thin films.124 It was observed that the incorporated additives facilitated homogenous nucleation and modulated the kinetics of growth during crystallization, as evidenced from the surface SEM images and XRD spectra. The enhanced crystallization facilitates charge transfer between the charge transporting interlayers and the perovskite absorber.
 Fig. 26  SEM (left), AFM height (middle) and phase (right) images for CH3NH3PbI3 films fabricated using no additive (a), 17.5 mg mL−1 CH3NH3Cl (b), 17.5 mg mL−1 NH4Cl (c), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To overcome the problem of incomplete conversion and uncontrolled particle sizes of perovskite on the mesoporous scaffolds, Wu et al. optimized the sequential deposition of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by retarding the crystallization of PbI2 by changing the solvent in the spin-coating process.157 The use of strong coordinative dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) instead of DMF as the solvent for PbI2 resulted in extremely uniform and amorphous featured PbI2 films, which were fully converted to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite crystals within 10 min. The resulting perovskite films consisted of a small distribution of crystal sizes and exhibited a flat surface morphology. The highly reproducible perovskite films enabled reproducible planar-structured perovskite solar cells with a PCE of 13.5% to be prepared. The reproducible high performance devices provided a platform for in-depth device studies and the further optimization of the photovoltaic performances. Moreover, the strategy of retarding the crystallization of precursor films is worth further study and can be applied to fabricating new perovskites as well as other planar substrates. In addition, some researchers have systematically studied the effect of the CH3NH3I/PbI2 precursor ratio on the perovskite film morphology and device performance.153,158 A non-stoichiometric precursor solution was demonstrated to be critical to form stoichiometric perovskite films. The compositions of the perovskite films were quite sensitive to the surface of the substrates and could be very different from that in precursor solutions.153
4.2.4.2 New and advanced technologies for the preparation of the perovskite layer. 
Unfortunately, there are several drawbacks in the spin-coating process for the preparation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. It was observed that for the organic part, longer organic chains made it more difficult to find a good solvent. For the inorganic part, solvent techniques always encounter some problems related to the solubility, strong solvent coordination or stability of the metal valence state. Vacuum evaporation is one of the most promising techniques to construct CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films with precise control of the film property.55 The resulting perovskites prepared by the co-evaporation of two precursors (PbCl2 and CH3NH3I) exhibited satisfactory film coverage and uniformity.55 However, this technique demands high vacuum, which is too energy intensive and unsuitable for mass production. In addition, the preparation of various perovskites using different organic components is expected to be limited in the vacuum evaporation process, and deposition without vacuum evaporation might be advantageous for low-cost solar cells. A low-temperature vapor-assisted solution process (VASP) based on the kinetically favorable reaction between the as-deposited film of PbI2 and CH3NH3I vapor was demonstrated to produce polycrystalline perovskite thin films with full surface coverage, small surface roughness and grain sizes up to the microscale as well as 100% precursor transformation completeness.120 The film was prepared via an in situ reaction of the as-deposited film of PbI2 with CH3NH3I vapor (Fig. 27).120 This method is conceptually different from the current solution process and vacuum deposition by avoiding the co-deposition of organic and inorganic species. Solar cells with the as-prepared films achieve a high PCE of 12.1% based on CH3NH3PbI3 with the planar heterojunction configuration. The VASP method provides a simple, controllable and versatile approach to obtain high-quality perovskite films for solar cells and some other organic–inorganic hybrid optoelectronics. The charge transport behavior of the as-prepared films requires further study. Lewis and O'Brien have used aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition (AACVD) to produce CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite films on glass substrates.154 The films produced using this method are comparable in quality to those prepared using the current methods for the deposition of the inorganic–organic perovskites, such as spin coating.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through a vapor-assisted solution process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
By combining the advantages of the spin-coating and vacuum-evaporation processes described above, Liang et al. created a two-step deposition (TSD) technique to prepare hybrid perovskites.159 First, a layer of metal halide, MI2 (M = IVB group metal), was deposited using vacuum evaporation or spin coating, followed by dipping the film into an organic salt solution. Bi et al. used this TSD technique for preparing CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells.156 Considering the low-cost advantages associated with a non-vacuum preparation technique, spin coating is used for the first step. PCEs of 10.8 and 9.5% were obtained with ZrO2 and TiO2 under AM 1.5G illumination, respectively. Comparing TSD and the one-step spin-coating method in a TiO2 solar cell, it was demonstrated that Jsc can be higher because of the larger amount of perovskite that can be deposited by the TSD method due to the better solubility. These results suggest that TSD is expected to be particularly useful for preparing films of organic–inorganic systems in which the organic and inorganic components have incompatible solubility characteristics or for systems in which the organic component is difficult to evaporate.156 Shi et al. further modified the TSD process by adding the times of spin-coated PbI2 to achieve CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films with high uniformity and coverage.160 Incomplete coverage on the TiO2 film with CH3NH3PbI3 crystals was observed by spin-coating the PbI2 solution for the first time, which was attributed mainly to the relatively rough surface of the prepared PbI2 films. However, by spin-coating the PbI2 solution for a second time, the morphology of the PbI2 film on TiO2 was clearly ameliorated and complete coverage of CH3NH3PbI3 on the TiO2 film was observed. This study provides a useful method for the further development of perovskite-based solar cells. In addition, a mixed halide perovskite of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx was recently synthesized by Ma et al. via two-step sequential solution deposition.146 A mixture of PbI2 and PbCl2 was used as the precursor rather than pure PbCl2 to ensure a high loading in the mesoporous TiO2 film, with easy morphology control, which results in great enhancement of the light absorbance for the device and suppression of the electron–hole recombination by separating the bare TiO2 and HTM layer. A PCE of 11.7% was achieved for the mesoscopic cell, which is much higher than that for the cell constructed via a spin-coating process.
As mentioned above, the PCEs have been improved to 15% using a two-step sequential deposition technique, involving spin-coating of PbI2 followed by exposure to a solution of CH3NH3I to form CH3NH3PbI3 or a dual-source vapor deposition technique to fabricate a planar heterojunction solar cell. To date, the CH3NH3PbI3 layer in the most efficient planar solar cells has been fabricated by vapor deposition, a two-step sequential solution deposition, or a vapor-assisted two-step reaction process.55,119,120 The vapor deposition process could increase the manufacturing cost, whereas the sequential two-step deposition procedure involves a longer overall processing time. Therefore, a faster, facile solution-processing technique that can regulate the perovskite crystallization process and produce high-quality films with a controlled morphology is highly desirable for the construction of planar devices with superior performance. Xiao et al. reported a one-step, solvent-induced, fast deposition crystallization (FDC) method involving the spin-coating of a DMF solution of CH3NH3PbI3 followed immediately by exposure to chlorobenzene (CBZ) to induce crystallization to obtain flat, uniform CH3NH3PbI3 thin films.125 This simple approach involves the spin coating of a DMF solution of CH3NH3PbI3 on a substrate, followed immediately by exposure of the wet film to a second solvent, such as CBZ, to induce crystallization. This FDC spin-coating method offers the advantage of single-step processing and short deposition times because film formation is complete within 1 min. The FDC method for preparing the CH3NH3PbI3 films is shown in Fig. 28.125 First, a dense TiO2 layer was deposited by spray pyrolysis on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass. A DMF solution of CH3NH3PbI3 (45 wt%) was then spin-coated on the TiO2 layer. After a specific delay time (e.g., 6 s), a second solvent was quickly added to the substrate. The role of the second solvent was to rapidly reduce the solubility of CH3NH3PbI3 in the mixed solvent and thereby promote fast nucleation and growth of the crystals in the film. The instant darkening of the film when the second solvent was added was taken as evidence of the formation of the desired material. In contrast, during the conventional spin-coating process, where no second solvent was added, the wet film dried slowly and a shiny-gray film was obtained. The films were then subjected to annealing at 100 °C for 10 min to evaporate any residual solvent and to further promote crystallization. Planar heterojunction solar cells constructed with these solution-processed thin films yielded an average PCE of 13.9% under standard AM 1.5 conditions.
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the FDC process and conventional spin-coating process for fabricating perovskite films. Conventional spin-coating (top) results in a shiny gray film composed of non-uniform large crystals as a result of slow crystallization. In the FDC process (bottom), a second solvent (e.g. CBZ) introduced on top of the wet film during the spin-coating process induces fast crystallization of uniformly sized perovskite grains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite the tremendous efforts in the film-formation processes, useful guidelines for processing perovskite films remain less explored. Some researchers aim to exploit the surface/interfaces and grain boundaries (GBs) in the perovskite films that affect the carrier behavior within the relevant heterojunction. Accordingly, a technique will ultimately be developed to achieve delicate control over the film property that promotes charge generation, transportation and collection in the solar cell. A controllable passivation technique has been used for the preparation of perovskite films, which enables their compositional change and allows substantial enhancement in corresponding device performance.121 It was observed that the presence of PbI2 species in the GBs upon thermal annealing leads to successful passivation that controls the carrier behavior along the heterojunctions. An appropriate amount of PbI2 species in the CH3NH3PbI3 film led to improved carrier behavior, possibly due to the reduced recombination in the GBs and the TiO2/perovskite surface. Additionally, the GB property of the perovskite film behaved differently after passivation. This controllable self-induced passivation technique represents an important step to understanding the polycrystalline nature of hybrid perovskite thin films and judiciously contributes to the development of perovskite solar cells. Future work focused on the nature of the GBs of perovskite materials to design a rational approach to passivate the film will be needed. Recently, Noel et al. reported that treatment of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite films with the Lewis bases thiophene and pyridine resulted in a significant decrease in the rate of non-radiative recombination in perovskite films.161 These results were attributed to the electronic passivation of under-coordinated Pb atoms within the crystal. The Lewis base molecules bind to the under-coordinated Pb ions in the perovskite crystal, thus passivating these defect sites. Using this method of Lewis base passivation, the PCEs for solution-processed planar heterojunction solar cells were enhanced from 13% to 15.3% and 16.5% for the untreated, thiophene-treated and pyridine-treated solar cells, respectively.


4.2.5 Other issues concerning CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cells. 
4.2.5.1 Development of active hole-transporting materials to suppress electron–hole pair recombination. 
Perovskite solar cells generally consist of a conductive substrate, a compact TiO2 layer, an organohalide lead perovskite light-absorption layer (single or combined with a porous scaffold), a hole-transporting material (HTM), and a metal cathode (Ag or Au). Studies have focused mainly on designing scaffold layers, optimizing the perovskite layer and exploring alternative structures. As one of the key components in perovskite solar cells, the HTM separates the photo-excited electron–hole pairs and transports the holes to the external circuit. Recently, researchers have focused on the development of a HTM suitable for organohalide lead perovskites to achieve high performance. Appropriate HTMs for perovskite solar cells should primarily meet the following requirements: good hole mobility, a compatible HOMO (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) energy level relative to the perovskites and low cost for commercialization. Fluorine-doped CsSnI3 was adopted by Kanatzidis and co-workers in 2012 as a p-type solid HTM in DSSCs with N719 (bis(tetrabutylammonium)[cis-di(thiocyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4-carboxylate-4′-carboxylic acid)-ruthenium(II)]) as the absorber.133 This study was the first to use a perovskite material as the HTM in a solid-state DSSC with efficiencies reaching 10.2%, which revived the concept of all-solid-state inorganic solar cells and demonstrated that perovskite materials could be good HTM candidates.133 The next breakthrough occurred in late 2012, when M. Grätzel and co-workers teamed with N. G. Park, who used CH3NH3PbI3 as a light harvester in combination with solid HTM spiro-MeOTAD on mesoporous TiO2, leading to a PCE of 9.7%.50 Spiro-MeOTAD was demonstrated to be an effective HTM for perovskite-based solar cells. For example, Bi et al. studied the effects of HTMs on the performance of CH3NH3PbI3-based solar cells, and various HTMs include spiro-MeOTAD, poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and 4-(diethylamino)-benzaldehyde diphenylhydrazone (DEH).162 The PCEs were 8.5, 4.5 and 1.6% under AM 1.5G illumination for the spiro-MeOTAD, P3HT and DEH, respectively. Electron lifetime measurements showed that the recombination of the separated charges in the device using spiro-MeOTAD as the HTM was more than 10 times slower than that in the device with P3HT and more than 100 times slower than that in the device with DEH. These results suggest that the nature of the HTM is essential for charge recombination and suggests that finding an optimal HTM for the perovskite solar cell includes controlling the perovskite–HTM interaction. However, spiro-MeOTAD alone in HTM is insufficient for obtaining high PCEs because of the low conductivity and other problems. Adding different types of functional additives to spiro-MeOTAD can further improve the properties of HTM and ensure high-efficiency perovskite solar cells.163–165 Zhang et al. used a stable ionic liquid N-butyl-N′-(4-pyridylheptyl) imidazolium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (BuPyIm-TFSI) as a dual-functional additive to simultaneously improve the electrical property of spiro-MeOTAD and suppress charge combination in perovskite solar cells.163 The PCE increased greatly from 3.83% to 7.91% with this additive, which is comparable to that of the conventional spiro-MeOTAD containing lithium salt and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). Moreover, using such a dual-functional additive can effectively simplify the components of the HTM and help reduce the production costs.
The highest cost of materials in perovskite-based solar cells come from spiro-MeOTAD, which is very expensive because of its multistep synthesis process. The current commercial price of high purity spiro-MeOTAD is more than ten times that of gold and platinum precious metals. Therefore, it is imperative, from a commercialization viewpoint, to develop efficient and cost-effective HTMs. Some new organic HTMs based on triptycene core, 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene, quinolizino acridine, polythiophene and tetrathiafulvalene derivatives have recently been developed with high PCEs.166–171 For example, Li et al. reported an electron-rich molecule based on 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (H101).167 When H101 was used as the HTM in a perovskite-based solar cell, the PCE reached 13.8% under AM 1.5G solar simulation. This result is comparable to that obtained using the well-known HTM spiro-MeOTAD, highlighting its potential to replace the expensive spiro-MeOTAD given its much simpler and less expensive synthesis. Despite its high cost, the most investigated wide-gap spiro-MeOTAD almost exhibited no absorption in the visible and near-IR region of the solar spectrum. In this respect, low BG donor–acceptor (D–A) polymers with strong absorptions in this spectral region should be designed for the HTM in perovskite-based solar cells. Low BG oligothiophenes incorporating S,N-heteropentacene central units were developed by Qin et al.172 and used as an HTM in solid-state perovskite-based solar cells. In addition to appropriate electronic energy levels, these materials exhibit high photo absorptivity in the low energy region and could contribute to the light harvesting of the solar spectrum, which opens up a new avenue for the fabrication and material selection of perovskite-based devices. Solution-processed CH3NH3PbI3-based devices using this HTM achieved PCEs of 9.5–10.5%.
The developed HTMs are all organic compounds, which are likely to remain expensive due to the synthetic methods and high purity required for photovoltaic applications. Therefore, the design of new inorganic HTMs is suggested. Compared to organic HTMs, inorganic p-type semiconductors appear to be an ideal choice given their high mobility, stability, ease of synthesis, and low cost. Copper iodide (CuI) was recently reported as a hole conductor in lead halide perovskite-based devices, exhibiting a PCE of 6.0%.173 CuI has a higher FF than spiro-MeOTAD because of its higher electrical conductivity. However, the efficiency obtained with CuI remains lower than that for spiro-MeOTAD because of the exceptionally high voltages obtained in spiro-MeOTAD solar cells. Recently, Qin et al. demonstrated an effective and inexpensive inorganic p-type HTM, copper thiocyanate (CuSCN) on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based devices.174 Using a low-temperature solution-process deposition method, a PCE of 12.4% was achieved under AM 1.5G solar simulation. This opens the door for integrating a class of abundant and inexpensive materials for photovoltaic applications.174
4.2.5.2 Stability. 
The degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 is often ignored, which is a large concern for practical applications. Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 films were observed to be extremely sensitive to moisture in air.119 Grätzel and co-workers demonstrated that the device fabrication should be performed under controlled atmospheric conditions with a humidity of <1%.119 Niu et al. systematically studied the stability of CH3NH3PbI3 films and also observed that CH3NH3PbI3 was sensitive to moisture.175 To improve the stability of CH3NH3PbI3, alumina oxide was used as a post-modification material in all-solid-state perovskite solar cells. Al2O3 could protect this perovskite from degradation. Moreover, the solar cells post-modified with Al2O3 exhibited more brilliant stability than those prepared without modification when exposed to moisture. The Al2O3 layer could act as an insulator barrier to protect CH3NH3PbI3 from degradation by moisture and suppress the electron recombination between TiO2 and spiro-MeOTAD. The restrained electron recombination is caused by the coverage of Al2O3 on TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3, which was verified by the decreased dark current and increased interface resistance in the dark. This study would open a new pathway to improve the long-term performance of all-solid-state solar cells.

4.3 Other perovskite-based light absorbers
Ferroelectric perovskites have recently attracted attention as candidates for use in photovoltaic devices due to their special properties, such as the promotion of the desirable separation of photo-excited carriers and allowing voltages higher than the BG.176–180 Ferroelectric oxides are also stable in a wide range of mechanical, chemical and thermal conditions and can be fabricated using low-cost methods, such as sol–gel thin-film deposition and sputtering. Grinberg et al. described a family of single-phase solid oxide solutions made from low-cost and non-toxic elements using conventional solid-state methods: [KNbO3]1−x[BaNi1/2Nb1/2O3−δ]x (KBNNO).181 These oxides exhibit both ferroelectricity and a wide variation of BGs in the range of 1.1–3.8 eV.181 In particular, the x = 0.1 composition has a direct BG of 1.39 eV at room temperature and exhibits a photocurrent density that is approximately 50 times larger than that of the classic ferroelectric (Pb,La)(Zr,Ti)O3 material. The ideal match of the BG of KBNNO to the solar spectrum, its compositional tuning throughout the visible range and its photo-response properties open up the possibility of ferroelectric photovoltaic efficiency of above 3% in a thin-film device and the use of ferroelectric materials as solar absorber layers and carrier separators in practical photovoltaics. The capability of KBNNO to absorb 3 to 6 times more solar energy than the current ferroelectric materials suggests a route to viable ferroelectric semiconductor-based cells for solar energy conversion and other applications. This is also important for ferroelectric perovskites as visible-light-absorber for solar cells. Similar results have also been reported by Zhou et al.,182 and it was observed that KBNNO with compositions of x = 0.1–0.3 have a narrow Ebg of below 1.5 eV, which is much smaller than the 3.2 eV BG of the parent KNbO3 (KNO) due to the increasing Ni 3d electronic states within the gap of KNO. Furthermore, the KBNNO materials exhibit room-temperature ferromagnetism (RTFM) near a tetragonal-to-cubic phase boundary. With increasing x from 0 to 0.3, the magnetism of the samples developed from diamagnetism to ferromagnetism and paramagnetism, originating from the ferromagnetic–antiferromagnetic competition. These results are helpful in achieving a deeper understanding of the phase transitions, Ebg tunability, and magnetism variations in perovskite oxides and demonstrate that such materials could play a potential role in perovskite solar cells and multiferroic applications.

Table 3 listed the photovoltaic performance of the selected perovskite light absorbers-based solar cells. CH3NH3PbI3 is the most investigated material up to now but it suffers from a large BG and small diffusion length of the electron–hole pair. The BG can be tailored by A-site, B-site and X-site doping and replacement and some excellent results are obtained. The B-site doping of a less toxic element Sn4+ for Pb2+ was used to modify the CH3NH3PbI3 materials to reduce the BG; however, the performance has not been satisfactory to date. In addition, some divergences have been observed in the efficiency of Sn-doped CH3NH3PbI3 light absorber and more research is needed to study the photovoltaic performance of the Sn-doped CH3NH3PbI3 in the future. The doping of the A site with formamidinium and the X site with Cl or Br could be used to increase the diffusion length of CH3NH3PbI3. However, the incorporation of Br led to an increase in BG and then a sharp decrease in PCE was obtained. Thus, the content of Br should be well controlled in future research. CH3NH3PbI3−xClx was demonstrated to be a highly efficient light absorber with both high Voc and PCE. However, it was reported that only 3–4% Cl could be incorporated in the X site of CH3NH3PbI3, resulting a relative high BG, which is comparable to CH3NH3PbI3. The doping of the A site of formamidinium can result a higher PCE than CH3NH3PbI3 and it is expected that some other organic cations with suitable radius will be widely developed in the future. It was found that HTM also played an important role in achieving high PCEs. Spiro-OMeTAD is more active than some other organic HTMs, such as P3HT, etc. Some inorganic HTMs, such as CuI and CuSCN, have been developed to reduce the high cost of spiro-OMeTAD but the photovoltaic performance is unsatisfactory. As shown in Table 3, spin coating is the most investigated method for the preparation of the perovskite layer in solar cells. However, poor crystallinity and non-uniform morphology are always obtained with the spin coating method. Some modifications for the spin coating method, such as introducing functional additives of NH4Cl, CH3NH3Cl, 1,8-diiodooctane, thiophene and pyridine and replacement of DMF solvent by DMSO were investigated and some convincing results are reported. A PCE as high as 16.5% was delivered based on the spin coating method with pyridine additive. Some advanced methods, such as vapor-assisted solution process, fast deposition crystallization, controllable passivation technique, two-step deposition, spray deposition etc. have been developed, and among them, vapor-assisted solution process was considered to be the most efficient. However, the PCEs with new methods are generally lower than those of spin coating, which need to be improved along with the morphology and crystallinity.
Table 3 Photovoltaic performance of the selected perovskite light absorbers-based solar cells




No.
Light absorbera
HTM
Preparation method and/or treatment
BGa (eV)
PCE (%)

V
oc (V)
FF
Ref.





a MA = CH3NH3, FA = formamidinium, some BGs are calculated by the absorption edge in the UV-vis spectra.





1
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.5
9
0.888
0.62

50



2
CH3NH3PbI2Cl
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.55
10.9
1.1
0.63

51



3
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating


12.3
1.02
0.67

54



4
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Spiro-MeOTAD
Solution-processed


8.6
0.84
0.58

55



5
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Vapour-deposited


15.4
1.07
0.67


6
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating


11.4
0.89
0.64

56



7
MAPbI3


Spin coating
1.56
10.64
0.977
0.6113

110



8
MAPb(I0.88Br0.12)3
1.62
8.13
0.890
0.6531


9
MAPb(I0.05Br0.95)3
2.23
1.03
0.832
0.4981


10
CH3NH3PbBr3


Spin coating
2.17
3.13
0.96
0.59

111



11
CH3NH3PbI3
1.55
3.81
0.61
0.57


12
(CH3CH2NH3)PbI3


Spin coating
∼2.2
2.4
0.66
0.704

112



13
FAPbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.48
14.2
0.94
0.65

113



14
FAPbBr3
2.23
1.9
1.02
0.65


15
FAPbI0.8Br2.2
∼1.6
9.1
1.00
0.67


16
CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3
P3HT
Spin coating
1.17
4.18
0.42
0.5

116



17
CH3NH3PbI3
1.55
0.18
0.23
0.29


18
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating


12.2
0.97
0.45

118



19
CH3NH3PbI3
4.2
0.71
0.7


20
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.55
15.0
0.993
0.73

119



21
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Vapor-assisted solution process
1.55
12.1
0.94
0.682

120



22
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Self-induced passivation
1.5
12
0.959
0.6932

121



23
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating annealing at 60 °C
1.5
1.78
0.799
0.68

122



24
CH3NH3PbI3
Spin coating annealing at 100 °C
11.66
0.938
0.68


25
CH3NH3PbI3
Spin coating annealing at 200 °C
0.56
0.589
0.67


26
CH3NH3PbI3
PEDOT:PSS
Spin coating with NH4Cl additive
1.59
9.93
0.88
0.8011

123



27
CH3NH3PbI3
Spin coating with CH3NH3Cl additive
8.16
0.92
0.694


28
CH3NH3PbI3
Spin coating with no additive
0.04
0.37
0.2753


29
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
PEDOT:PSS
Spin coating with DIO additive
∼1.5
11.8
0.92
0.73

124



30
Spin coating with no additive
9
0.9
0.62


31
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Fast deposition-crystallization
1.55
13.9
0.98
0.68

125



32
Spin coating
1.5
0.52
0.52


33
CH3NH3PbI2Br
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.8
4.87
0.82
0.59

130



34
CH3NH3PbI3
1.55
4.29
0.74
0.54


35
CH3NH3PbI2Br


Two-step deposition technique based on spin coating and dipping
1.58
8.54
0.77
0.68

131



36
CH3NH3PbI3
1.51
7.2
0.77
0.6


37
CH3NH3PbBr3
2.12
1.69
0.79
0.46


38
CH3NH3SnI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.3
5.44
0.716
0.5007

136



39
CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.17
7.27
0.584
0.6032


40
CH3NH3PbI3
1.55
8.31
0.863
0.6803


41
FAPbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.47
4.3
0.97
0.687

138



42
FAPbI3
P3HT
Spin coating
1.43
3.7
0.55
0.41

139



43

In situ dipping technology
1.43
7.5
0.84
0.5


44
FAPbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.47
16.01
1.032
0.74

140



45
FAPbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
2.26
6.5
1.35
0.73

141



46
MAPbI3
2.34
0.4
1.48
0.48


47
FAPbI3−xClx
P3HT
Spin coating
1.492
6.6
0.65
0.51

142



48
MA0.6FA0.4PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.53
13.4
0.992
0.692

143



49
Cs0.10MA0.90PbI3
PEDOT:PSS
Spin coating
1.54
7.68
1.05
0.73

144



50
MAPbI3
1.52
5.51
0.89
0.70


51
CsPbI3
2.05
0.09
0.79
0.45


52
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
PEDOT:PSS
Spray deposition
1.55
11.1
0.92
0.72

155



53
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Two-step deposition


9.5
0.89
0.58

156



54
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating with DMSO solvent


10.8–13.5





157



55
Spin coating with DMF solvent
1.3–14.2


56
CH3NH3PbI3


Modified two-step deposition
1.61
10.47
0.948
0.69

160



57
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating with thiophene additive


15.3
1.02
0.68

161



58
Spin coating with pyridine additive
16.5
1.03
0.72


59
CH3NH3PbI3
Spiro-MeOTAD
Spin coating
1.55
3.83
0.63
0.50

163



60
Spiro + BuPyImTFSI
7.91
0.87
0.56


61
Spiro + Li + TBP
8.16
0.91
0.57


62
CH3NH3PbI3
CuI
Spin coating
1.55
6.0
0.55
0.62

173



63
CH3NH3PbI3
CuSCN
Spin coating


12.4
1.016
0.62

174





4.4 Perovskite-based photoanodes

4.4.1 A brief overview of the photoanodes. 
DSSCs have attracted considerable attention due to their low fabrication cost and the capability of varying many components. A DSSC is typically composed of a sensitizer, an electron-transporting phase, a hole-transporting phase and current-collecting substrates. To overcome the problem of low energy conversion efficiency, tremendous efforts have been devoted to several areas, including the use of nanostructures of oxides and additional compact blocking layers to allow effective injection and collection of photo-generated charge carriers and the use of panchromatic dyes or multi-dye systems to improve the light-harvesting capabilities. Among the various methods to enhance the efficiency of DSSCs, the photoanode is highly critical in determining the performance because this component allows the practical use of the charge carriers that are generated by light harvesting. The most commonly used material is TiO2 with a wide BG of 3.2 eV, whereas most relevant studies have focused on modification of the TiO2 electrodes.183–190 However, the sole use of TiO2 could limit the selection of other components. For example, small semiconductor quantum dots occasionally cannot be used as sensitizers for a TiO2 electrode because their CB level is lower than that of TiO2; therefore, the excited photoelectrons cannot be injected from the sensitizer to TiO2. Although several other oxides or mixed oxides, such as ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5, and Zn2SnO4 have also been reported as photoanodes for DSSCs,191–198 these materials always exhibit lower photovoltaic performance compared with DSSCs with TiO2. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop highly active photoanodes to replace TiO2. As mentioned above, some perovskites with an ABO3 structure exhibited superior photoactivity compared to TiO2, and their activity as well as band structure could be well controlled by suitable doping or replacement of the A site and/or B site and the preparation methods.108,199–203


4.4.2 Material development. 
Recently, there have been many reports on the photovoltaic properties of BaSnO3-based DSSCs because BaSnO3 perovskite is an n-type semiconducting material with a BG of approximately 3.1 eV.199–202 For example, various preparation methods including co-precipitation, hydrothermal reaction and solid-state reaction were employed by Guo et al. to synthesize BaSnO3 particles to optimize the photoelectric activities of electrode materials.199 The light-to-electricity conversion of 1.1% is preliminarily reached on the DSSC made of the co-precipitation-derived BaSnO3 particles. However, Li et al. also reported the synthesis of one-dimensional BaSnO3 hollow architectures with a length of 1.5–5 μm as a photoelectrode of DSSCs using BaCO3@SnO2 core–shell nanorods as precursors.200 The absorption band of BaSnO3 is in the UV region and N719-sensitized BaSnO3 films exhibited a clear photovoltaic response. However, the performance of the above BaSnO3-based DSSCs was very poor with conversion efficiencies less than 1.1%.
Recently, highly crystalline BaSnO3 nanoparticles were synthesized by Kim et al. using a simple liquid-phase reaction followed by a calcination process.201 A PCE of 5.2% was achieved for a DSSC with the synthesized BaSnO3 nanoparticles acting as the photoanode, which was fabricated without any functional layers or treatments. The formation process of these BaSnO3 nanoparticles is summarized in Fig. 29. Initially, amorphous BaSnO3 particles precipitated before the particles gradually crystallized to form low-crystalline peroxo-precursor particles during the liquid-phase reaction; these precursor particles then formed highly crystalline BaSnO3 perovskite nanoparticles through calcination.
 Fig. 29  The formation process of BaSnO3 nanoparticles shown with TEM images of (a) as-precipitated powders, (b) precursor powders obtained at a liquid phase reaction time of 12 h, and (c) calcined powders in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The thickness of the BaSnO3 film was observed to strongly affect the photovoltaic performance. An obvious increase in efficiency was observed with increasing thickness of the BaSnO3 film. The highest efficiency was obtained at a thickness of 43 μm. Further increases in thickness did not have a positive effect. The highest photovoltaic performance, which was obtained from the DSSC based on the 43 μm-thick BaSnO3 film, was attributed to its superior electron collection property, which indicates that BaSnO3 has great potential for use as a photoanode material in DSSCs. Shin et al. examined the effect of a TiCl4 treatment on the physical, chemical and photovoltaic properties of BaSnO3-based DSSCs.202 The TiCl4 treatment was observed to form an ultrathin TiO2 layer on the BaSnO3 surface. The formation of the TiO2 shell layer improved the charge-collection efficiency by enhancing the charge transport and suppressing charge recombination. The optimized treatment time to achieve a high efficiency of 5.5% compared to 4.5% for the bare BaSnO3 was found to be 3 min. The conversion efficiency could be further increased to 6.2% by increasing the thickness of the BaSnO3 film, which is one of the highest reported efficiencies from non-TiO2-based DSSCs. Further study will be needed to completely understand the physical origin of such remarkable electron transport properties and to considerably enhance the photovoltaic performance of BaSnO3 cells.
In addition to the development of new perovskite photoanodes, such as BaSnO3, the substitution of cations, such as Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+, in the crystal lattice of TiO2 to modify the electronic structure of TiO2 to form a Ti-based perovskite, which was then applied as the photoanodes for solar cells, was also reported.108,203 MTiO3 (M = Ca, Sr and Ba) perovskite oxides with specific morphologies were fabricated in alkaline solution at low temperature via a soft chemical route for potential applications in solar cells.108 The as-prepared CaTiO3 exhibited a microtubular structure with a rectangular cross section, whereas the SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 exhibited assemblies consisting of aggregated particles in a compact fashion. Based on the experimental results, the authors proposed two types of growth mechanisms to study the formation processes of CaTiO3, SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 microstructures, respectively. As shown in Fig. 30, the fabrication of microtubular CaTiO3 underwent the initial dissolution of titanate nanofibers via the Ostwald ripening process for conversion to micrometer-sized fiber-bundles, whereas recrystallization occurred simultaneously until tubular microstructures were obtained. The formation of SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 microstructures involved ion exchange reaction and an in situ growth process at the self-sacrifice of the titanate nanofiber framework based on the chemical reactivity. In addition, the CaTiO3 microtubes exhibited better photoelectrochemical performance than the SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 microstructures, suggesting their potential applications in solar cells as photoanodes.
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of the possible formation mechanism of MTiO3 (M = Ca, Sr and Ba) perovskites with various morphologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 

5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we discussed the recent progress in the field of photocatalysis and photovoltaic reactions based on perovskite-type functional materials. Our aims were to review the present research on the development of and strategies for the designation of perovskite materials in photocatalysis and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment to provide some useful guidelines for future research. Although great progress has been made over recent decades, considerable research is needed to realize the widespread application of perovskites in the photocatalysis and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment to achieve a sustainable future.
5.1 Catalysts for water splitting reaction
For hydrogen production from a water splitting reaction, research is focused on the development of photocatalysts and strategies to improve the photocatalytic activity. Because there is an activation barrier for surface chemical reactions that evolve H2 and O2, a photocatalyst with a 600 nm absorption edge would be optimal for this reaction. Therefore, more efficient photocatalytic materials with a BG as narrow as 2 eV are needed. The main achievement, problems and perspectives are shown below.
1. The proper doping of the A, B and X sites in the perovskite is the most investigated method to reduce the BG. Non-metal doping, in particular nitrogen doping, was observed to be an effective approach to improve the photoactivity of perovskite catalysts under visible light. Several candidates, such as CaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, BaNbO2N, LaNbON2, which have BGs of approximately 2 eV, have already been developed. However, among these catalysts, only CaNbO2N had considerable activity for water splitting. The different activities of various perovskites with similar BG should be attributed to the different energy positions of the VB and CB. It can be concluded that not only the value of the BG but also its absolute energy position should be optimized for the water splitting reaction.
2. The suppression of the electron–hole pair recombination is also essential for the achievement of high photocatalytic activity, and some strategies have been explored, such as A-site doping, the development of advanced synthesis methods, such as hydrothermal method to reduce the particle size and forming a nanostructure in the surface of the catalysts. However, until now, limited elements have been investigated for A-site doping to form a nanostructure.
3. In future research on the photocatalytic water-splitting reaction, in addition to the search for new photocatalysts and improvement of their preparation methods, an investigation of the reaction mechanisms should be performed in the future. There are some technological problems that must still be overcome, such as the design and materials for large-scale reactors, the supply of water and the environmentally benign separation of O2 from explosive H2 and O2 mixtures. Extensive research is still needed to overcome these problems.
5.2 Catalysts for degradation of organic dyes
Based on the steps of degradation reactions of organic dyes, the key to improving the photocatalytic activity is to suppress electron–hole recombination and to reduce Ebg. The doping and selection of A and B sites as well as the doping of N in the X site are useful for reducing Ebg, and some advanced methods as well as A-site or B-site doping to reduce the particle size are effective in suppressing electron–hole recombination. The main achievement, problems and perspectives are shown below.
1. For example, the incorporation of 5 mol% Co to the B site of CeCoxTi1−xO3+δ perovskite catalysts led to a reduction in the BG from 2.15 eV to 1.57 eV. The Ebg decreased from 4.13 eV for the undoped NaTaO3 sample to 3.14 eV for the 6.39 mol% Cr3+ doped sample. The amount of the doped element should be well controlled as excessive doping amount may have a negative effect on the photocatalytic activity.
2. Many methods are suitable for the preparation of perovskite-based photocatalysts, such as microwave, sol–gel, hydrothermal, ultrasonic irradiation-assisted self-combustion and surface-ion adsorption methods. Among these approaches, the hydrothermal and microwave techniques have attracted increasing attention for nanostructured catalysts and some excellent results have been reported. However, in addition to the hydrothermal method, some other methods are limited to prepare a specific perovskite, which have not demonstrated as general methods for the perovskite synthesis.
3. In addition to the development of perovskite-based photocatalysts, several key technical constraints for some other aspects exist, such as the need for a catalyst immobilization strategy to provide a cost-effective solid–liquid separation, improvement of the photocatalytic operation for wider pH, and effective design of a photocatalytic reactor system for higher utilization of solar energy to reduce the costs. In addition, the low efficiency design of current solar collecting technology has encouraged the developmental progress of photocatalytic technology in the water treatment industry.
5.3 Light absorbers for perovskite-based solar cells
Rapid progress in the development of perovskite solar cells has been attained in recent years. The strategies for the designation of perovskite light absorbers include band gap engineering, increasing the diffusion length to reduce electron–hole pair recombination and improving the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite film. The main achievement, problems and perspectives are shown below.
1. To date, there are few reports of other candidates from CH3NH3PbI3-based materials that are suitable for solar cells. The B-site doping of a less toxic element Sn4+ for Pb2+ was used to modify the CH3NH3PbI3 materials to reduce the BG; however, the performance has not been satisfactory to date. Many elements, such as Co2+, Fe2+, Mn2+, Pd2+ and Ge2+, can be incorporated through various structural adaptations with the guidance of the Goldschmidt tolerance factor to form a stable perovskite structure. The A-site doping of CH3NH3PbI3 was limited to several organic cations, such as alkylammonium, formamidinium as well as methylviologen and the related reports are limited. In the future, the combination of A sites, B sites, and/or I sites could be a useful method for developing highly active CH3NH3PbI3-based light absorbers and FAPb1−xSnxI3−xClx may be a possible candidate for light absorbers in perovskite-based solar cells. In addition, theoretical calculations are needed to provide guidance to identify newer families of photovoltaic perovskites.
2. The doping of the A site of formamidinium and the I site by Cl or Br could be used to increase the diffusion length of CH3NH3PbI3 to suppress electron–hole recombination. In addition, the stability of the perovskite under wet conditions should be well addressed, even though there are a few pre-treated methods to improve the stability. Well-designed doping processes and/or pre-treatment processes would also be effective ways to enhance the stability against moisture.
3. The HTM in the perovskite-based solar cells is currently a bottleneck for the realization of cost-effective and stable devices. The most investigated HTM is spiro-MeOTAD, which exhibits low conductivity and other problems, leading to a low PCE. Adding different types of functional additives, such as BuPyIm-TFSI to spiro-MeOTAD can improve the PCE of the solar cells. In addition, due to the high cost of spiro-MeOTAD and some new organic HTMs, some inorganic HTMs, such as CuI and CuSCN, have been investigated, but the PCEs were relatively low. These studies may bring a new aspect to the development of HTMs for perovskite-based solar cells.
4. The deposition methods of perovskite films have a strong effect on the crystallinity and morphology of the film and thus the performance of the solar cells. The simplicity of making solar-cell components via liquid-phase chemical reactions and depositing the materials by methods such as spraying, spin coating, screen-printing and ink-jet printing may make their use widespread in practical applications in the future.
5.4 Photoanodes for DSSCs
Perovskite materials have also been investigated as photoanodes in solar cells. For the development of perovskite photoanodes, BaSnO3 and some titanates have been used. For BaSnO3, a PCE of 5.2% was achieved for a DSSC with the synthesized BaSnO3 nanoparticles as the photoanode, which was fabricated without any functional layers or treatments; this value is higher than that of the previously investigated conventional BaSnO3 anode. Further study is needed to understand the physical origin of such remarkable electron transport properties as well as the operation principles or mechanism of the BaSnO3-based solar cells with improved performance. For the titanates, the selection of A-site elements is very important for the improvement of the photoactivity. Novel architectures should be widely used in this field because there are numerous opportunities for further improvements through systematically engineering high-electron-mobility electrodes, such as nanofibers, nanospheres, nanowires and nanocubes.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Australia Research Council for supporting the project under contract FT100100134. Dr Wei Wang also acknowledges Curtin University for a postdoctoral fellowship.
Notes and references
S. Sadhishkumar and T. Balusamy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 37, 191–198 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, J. Seo, C. H. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8304–8338 RSC .
M. Kitano and M. Hara, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 627–641 RSC .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. K. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Reddy, S. C. Kaushik, K. R. Ranjan and S. K. Tyagi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 258–273 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Teh and A. R. Mohamed, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 1648–1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fominykh, J. M. Feckl, J. Sicklinger, M. Döblinger, S. Böcklein, J. Ziegler, L. Peter, J. Rathousky, E. W. Scheidt, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3123–3129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, C. Liu, H. M. Cheng and S. P. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10089–10098 CAS .
W. Zhang, H. L. Tay, S. S. Lim, Y. S. Wang, Z. Y. Zhong and R. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 93–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sharma, T. Jain, S. Singh and O. P. Pandey, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 626–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Soldat, R. Marschall and M. Wark, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3746–3752 RSC .
Y. H. Yang, Q. Y. Chen, Z. L. Yin and J. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 488, 364–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, J. H. Ma, L. N. Wang and H. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 583, 539–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhang, M. K. Lü, S. W. Liu, L. Y. Wang, Z. L. Xiu, Y. Y. Zhou, Z. F. Qiu, A. Y. Zhang and Q. Ma, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 144, 716–721 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Conibeer, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 17–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 133–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yang, D. E. Wang, H. X. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S. A. Lee, M. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, T. Ohno and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1362–1368 RSC .
P. Zhang, J. J. Zhang and J. L. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4395–4422 RSC .
W. N. Zhao and Z. P. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2256–2264 RSC .
M. Kitanoa, M. Matsuoka, M. Ueshima and M. Anpo, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 325, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Thimsen, S. Biswas, C. S. Lo and P. Biswas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2014–2021 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi, M. Matsuoka, J. M. Thomas and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 133–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Fu, W. J. Han, B. Tang, M. Hu and Z. H. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 232, 534–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. P. Pint, L. Lintomen, L. F. L. Luz Jr. and M. R. Wolf-Maciel, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2005, 228–229, 447–457 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Köck-Schulmeyera, M. Villagrasa, M. L. D. Alda, R. Céspedes-Sánchez, F. Ventura and D. Barceló, Sci. Total Environ., 2013, 458–460, 466–476 CrossRef PubMed .
I. K. Konstantinou and T. A. Albanis, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 49, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dawood and T. K. Sen, J. Chem. Proc. Eng., 2014, 1, 1–11 Search PubMed .
E. Forgacs, T. Cserháti and G. Oros, Environ. Int., 2004, 30, 953–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, V. S. R. Kambala, M. Srinivasan, D. Rajarathnam and R. Naidu, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 359, 25–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, Y. N. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. L. Zhang, D. E. Wang, M. Yang, J. H. Yang, B. Y. Zhang, Z. X. Jiang and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 127, 363–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, H. Zhang, X. G. Zhou and X. H. Zhong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 755–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Priyanka and V. C. Srivastava, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 17790–17799 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Li and F. B. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 2381–2387 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yi, F. Giordano, N. Cevey-Ha, H. N. Tsao, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1107–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chang, S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, C. S. Lim, J. H. Heo and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N. L. Cevey-Ha, C. Y. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Euscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, S. H. Im and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
H. S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N. G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1927, 60, 1263–1268 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Li, K. C. K. Soh and P. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 372, 40–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. G. Lu, W. Z. Ding, L. M. Feng, Y. H. Gao and Z. M. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Jiang, J. K. Guo, H. B. Liu, M. Zhu, X. Zhou, P. Wu and C. H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1531–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rodríguez-González, X. L. García-Montelongo, L. L. Garza-Tovar, S. W. Lee and L. W. Torres-Martínez, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2009, 35, 187–196 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2014, 310, 67–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Onozuka, Y. Kawakami, H. Imai, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and J. N. Kondo, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 192, 87–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, S. M. Wang, L. X. Gong and Z. F. Zhou, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 6643–6649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wei, Y. Wang, J. P. Liu, C. M. Xiao and W. W. Zeng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 755–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, H. W. Tang, S. H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. F. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
J. P. Zou, L. Z. Zhang, S. L. Luo, L. H. Leng, X. B. Luo, M. J. Zhang, Y. Luo and G. C. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17068–17077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, S. X. Ouyang, G. C. Xi, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7621–7628 CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Li, L. Q. Jing, W. Fu, L. B. Yang, B. F. Xin and H. G. Fu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, N. Y. Hebalkar, D. Mangalaraj, C. Viswanathan and N. Ponpandian, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7549–7561 RSC .
J. W. Liu, G. Chen, Z. H. Li and Z. G. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2269–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12441–12447 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhang, G. Chen, Y. X. Li and Y. J. Teng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2713–2716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8992–8995 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Yun, Z. Y. Zhang, J. F. Yan and W. Zhao, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 542, 276–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Hwang, H. G. Kim, J. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. Li and S. H. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2093–2102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Machida, K. Miyazaki, S. Matsushima and M. Arai, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1433–1437 RSC .
M. Machida, J. Yabunaka and T. Kijima, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 813–817 Search PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balaz, S. H. Porter, P. M. Woodward and L. J. Brillson, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3337–3343 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Paven-Thivet, A. Ishikawa, A. Ziani, L. L. Gendre, M. Yoshida, J. Kubota, F. Tessier and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6156–6162 Search PubMed .
A. Kudo, R. Niishiro, A. Iwase and H. Kato, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 104–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 873–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Tijare, M. V. Joshi, P. S. Padole, P. A. Mangrulkar, S. S. Rayalu and N. K. Labhsetwar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10451–10456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Shi, G. J. Liu, N. Wang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18808–18813 RSC .
K. Inaba, S. Suzuki, Y. Noguchi, M. Miyayama, K. Toda and M. Sato, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 5471–5475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nuraje, X. N. Dang, J. F. Qi, M. A. Allen, Y. Lei and A. M. Belcher, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2885–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Zhang, J. W. Tang and J. H. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 174–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, D. W. Kim, I. S. Cho, S. Park, S. S. Shin, S. W. Seo and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10557–10563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Hu and H. Teng, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 331, 44–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Li, S. S. Yao, W. Wen, L. H. Xue and Y. W. Yan, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 491, 560–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Fei, T. Hudaya and A. A. Adesina, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 253–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Su, S. W. Wang, Y. Meng, H. Han and X. J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12932–12939 RSC .
M. Yang, X. L. Huang, S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, J. Tao and X. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2873–2879 CAS .
V. Kumar, Govind and S. Uma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 89, 502–508 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, Y. L. Wei, S. H. Cheng, L. Q. Fan, Y. B. Li, J. M. Lin and J. H. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 761–766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Liu, R. H. Liu, Z. M. Sun, D. S. Zhao and C. G. Kou, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 223–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Li, H. Xue, X. X. Wang and X. Z. Fu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 260, 56–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Tang, Y. Tong, H. F. Chen, F. Cao and G. X. Pan, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 340–343 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, I. Ganesh, D. Mangalaraj, C. Viswanathan, A. Balamurugan and N. Ponpandian, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 420–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Jung and S. S. Hong, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2013, 19, 157–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Fu, H. L. Niu, Z. Y. Tao, J. M. Song, C. J. Mao, S. Y. Zhang, C. L. Chen and D. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 576, 5–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Zhang, J. Gong, H. H. Gan and F. Lü, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 9791–9797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
Y. Li, X. P. Gao, G. R. Li, G. L. Pan, T. L. Yan and H. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4386–4394 CAS .
S. R. Basu, L. W. Martin, Y. H. Chu, M. Gajek, R. Ramesh, R. C. Rai, X. Xu and J. L. Musfeldt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 091905 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221–9225 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, J. Chung, S. J. Kim and N. G. Park, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 353 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. Fujisawa and G. Giorgi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17955–17959 RSC .
J. L. Knutson and J. D. Martin, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4699–4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. L. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. G. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. P. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. S. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. P. Zhou, T. B. Song, S. Luo, Z. R. Hong, H. S. Duan, L. T. Dou, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Zuo and L. M. Ding, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9935–9938 RSC .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Xiao, F. Z. Huang, W. C. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Gould, J. F. Dobson, H. M. Zhang, H. G. Yang, X. D. Yao and H. J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1424–1429 RSC .
G. Giorgi, J. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12176–12183 CAS .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 897–902 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Qiu, Y. C. Qiu, K. Y. Yan, M. Zhong, C. Mu, H. Yan and S. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3245–3248 RSC .
S. Aharon, B. E. Cohen and L. Etgar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17160–17165 CAS .
Y. X. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12241–12244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. Q. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902–13913 CAS .
S. Nagane, U. Bansode, O. Game, S. Chhatre and S. Ogale, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9741–9744 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
T. M. Koh, K. W. Fu, Y. N. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CAS .
S. P. Pang, H. Hu, J. L. Zhang, S. L. Lv, Y. M. Yu, F. Wei, T. S. Qin, H. X. Xu, Z. H. Liu and G. L. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, D. J. Seol, A. N. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Hanusch, E. Wiesenmayer, E. Mankel, A. Binek, P. Angloher, C. Fraunhofer, N. Giesbrecht, J. M. Feckl, W. Jaegermann, D. Johrendt, T. Bein and P. Docampo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Lv, S. P. Pang, Y. Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, H. Hu, L. Wang, X. H. Zhou, H. M. Zhu, L. X. Zhang, C. S. Huang and G. L. Cui, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19206–19211 RSC .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, J. Jeong, H. B. Kim, S. Kim, B. Walker, G. H. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Z. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2269–2275 CAS .
Y. Z. Ma, L. L. Zheng, Y. H. Chung, S. S. Chu, L. X. Xiao, Z. J. Chen, S. F. Wang, B. Qu, Q. H. Gong, Z. X. Wu and X. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12458–12461 RSC .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, R. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. D. Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abrusci, S. D. Stranks, P. Docampo, H. L. Yip, A. K. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3124–3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Giacomo, S. Razza, F. Matteocci, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, T. M. Brown and A. D. Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 152–156 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Q. Lyu, Q. Wang, J. H. Yun and L. Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11727–11730 RSC .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. C. Shao, Q. F. Dong, Z. G. Xiao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 CAS .
D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6319–6321 RSC .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 CAS .
D. Q. Bi, S. J. Moon, L. Häggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762–18766 RSC .
Y. Z. Wu, A. Islam, X. D. Yang, C. J. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Q. Peng and L. Y. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 CAS .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, C. D. Dobbelaere, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2041–2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Liang, D. B. Mitzi and M. T. Prikas, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shi, Y. H. Luo, H. Y. Wei, J. H. Luo, J. Dong, S. T. Lv, J. Y. Xiao, Y. Z. Xu, L. F. Zhu, X. Xu, H. J. Wu, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9711–9718 CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. T. Shi, F. Yan, L. Wang, K. Wang, Y. J. Xing, Q. S. Dong and T. L. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5020–5022 RSC .
W. H. Nguyen, C. D. Bailie, E. L. Unger and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10996–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Li, H. P. Dong, L. D. Wang, N. Li, X. D. Guo, J. W. Li and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13587–13592 CAS .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, H. R. Li, J. Yin, P. P. Boix, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2702–2709 RSC .
H. R. Li, K. W. Fu, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4085–4088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Paek, M. I. Dar, N. Pellet, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8516–8519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Yan, Y. L. Li, W. H. Sun, H. T. Peng, S. Y. Ye, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. Bian and C. H. Huang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33039–33046 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Z. Wu, C. J. Qin, X. D. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Q. Peng, W. Chen and L. Y. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2963–2967 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. Lee, J. H. Noh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19087–19090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, H. Kast, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2981–2985 CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 CAS .
B. Kang, B. K. Rhee, G. T. Joo, S. Lee and K. S. Lim, Opt. Commun., 2006, 266, 203–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ichiki and R. Maeda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 395–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S. W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Wang, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235105 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, I. Grinberg, F. G. Wang, S. M. Young, P. K. Davies and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 075153 CrossRef .
I. Grinberg, D. V. West, M. Torres, G. Y. Gou, D. M. Stein, L. Y. Wu, G. N. Chen, E. M. Gallo, A. R. Akbashev, P. K. Davies, J. E. Spanier and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2013, 503, 509–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Zhou, H. M. Deng, P. X. Yang and J. H. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 111904 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Chou, M. G. Guo, K. H. Liu and Y. S. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2012, 92, 224–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, X. J. Li, M. Z. Feng, F. L. Zhou and J. Z. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 2572–2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hwang, S. M. Jo, D. Y. Kim, V. Armel, D. R. MacFarlane and S. Y. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1521–1527 CAS .
L. J. Meng, C. Li and M. P. Santos, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2013, 23, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Chou, F. C. Chou and J. Y. Kang, Powder Technol., 2012, 215–216, 38–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chae, D. Y. Kim, S. Kim and M. Kang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2010, 16, 906–911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Y. Li, J. S. Wang, J. S. Wu, D. S. Li, M. Liu and P. L. Su, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 744–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yang, H. Z. Kou, H. J. Wang, K. Cheng and J. C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 305–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, Y. H. Lai, H. W. Chen, J. G. Chen, C. W. Kung, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3448–3455 CAS .
F. Xu, M. Dai, Y. N. Lu and L. T. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2776–2782 CAS .
S. F. Shaikh, R. S. Mane and O. S. Joo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35919–35927 RSC .
Y. F. Wang, K. N. Li, W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. Y. Chen, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13804–13810 RSC .
J. Z. Ou, R. A. Rani, M. H. Ham, M. R. Field, Y. Zhang, H. D. Zheng, P. Reece, S. Zhuiykov, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-zadeh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4045–4053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ghosh, M. K. Brennaman, T. Uher, M. R. Ok, E. T. Samulski, L. E. McNeil, T. J. Meyer and R. Lopez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3929–3935 CAS .
M. M. Jaculinea, C. J. Raj, H. J. Kim, A. J. Rajendran and S. J. Das, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 25, 52–58 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Shin, D. W. Kim, D. Hwang, J. H. Suk, L. S. Oh, B. S. Han, D. H. Kim, J. S. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 501–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Guo, G. Q. Li and W. F. Zhang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 105878 Search PubMed .
B. H. Li, Y. W. Tang, L. J. Luo, T. Xiao, D. W. Li, X. Y. Hu and M. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 197–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Kim, S. S. Shin, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. S. Jung and K. W. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 449–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, J. S. Kim, J. H. Suk, K. D. Lee, D. W. Kim, J. H. Park, I. S. Cho, K. S. Hong and J. Y. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1027–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Jin, Y. F. Li, Z. L. Wang, H. Y. Peng, W. N. Lin, A. K. K. Kyaw, Y. L. Jin, K. J. Jin, X. W. Sun, C. Soci and T. Wu, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 042131 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Wei Wang
	Wei Wang completed his PhD in Chemical Engineering at the Nanjing University of Technology in June, 2013. He has a postdoctoral fellow in Curtin University (Australia) working with Professor Zongping Shao since December, 2013. His research interests include anode materials and anode catalyst layers for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) operating on hydrocarbons, fuel selection and application for SOFCs, coke formation mechanism of the anode materials for hydrocarbon fuelled SOFCs, photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes, photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells and light absorbers for perovskite-based solar cells.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 to 2005. His research interests include solid-oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes and solar cells. He has published more than 300 papers with more than 8000 citations. He was selected by Thomson Reuters as one of the Highly Cited Researchers 2014 (Engineering Section).

 	Fig. 1  Basic principle of the overall water splitting on a heterogeneous photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Honda–Fujishima effect-water splitting using a TiO2 photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) H-type glass container for the separate evolution of H2 and O2 using a TiO2 thin film photocatalyst device (TiO2 side, 1.0 M NaOH aq.; Pt side, 0.5 M H2SO4 aq.). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2007, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Processes involved in overall photocatalytic water splitting on a heterogeneous photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 
photocatalyst + hν → e−+h+	(1)
eCB− → eTR−	(2)
hVB+ → hTR+	(3)
eTR− + hVB+(hTR+) → eCB− + heat	(4)
(O2)ads + e− → O2˙−	(5)
OH− + h+ → OH˙	(6)
organic + OH˙ → CO2 + H2O	(7)
organic + h+ → Intermediates/CO2 + H2O	(8)
O2˙− + OH˙ → HOO˙	(9)
HOO˙ + e− → HO2−	(10)
HO2− + H+ → H2O2	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 4  Structural progress in the perovksite-based solid-state solar cell from a perovskite dot deposited on TiO2 with a PCE of 9.7% to a planar p–n junction with PCE of 15.4%, via the meso-superstructured scaffold Al2O3 concept with a PCE 10.9% and perovskite-infiltrated nanocomposite with PCE of 15%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  The schematics of the high-level summaries of Section 3.	 

 	Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance spectra of SrTiO3:M (0.5%). M = (a) Mn, (b) Ru, (c) Rh, (d) Pd, (e) Ir, and (f) Pt. A broken line represents a spectrum of nondoped SrTiO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structures of cubic BaTaO2N, tetragonal SrTaO2N, and orthorhombic CaTaO2N or PrTaON2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  UV/vis diffuse reflectance spectra of perovskite-type niobium oxynitrides: (a) CaNbO2N; (b) SrNbO2N; (c) BaNbO2N; (d) LaNbON2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic crystal structures of cubic and orthorhombic NaNbO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a) non-doped NaTaO3 and (b) La-doped NaTaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) nondoped NaTaO3, and NaTaO3 doped with (b) 0.1 mol% Sr; (c) 0.5 mol% Sr; (d) 1 mol% Sr; (e) 2 mol% Sr; (f) 5 mol% Sr; (g) 5 mol% Ca; and (h) 5 mol% Ba. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic structural drawing of the transformation from host materials H2Sr1.5Ta3O10 to dehydrated materials RE-Sr0.5TaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of M13 virus-assisted synthesis of perovskite nanomaterials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 



1	Sr2/3Zn1/3TiO3	3.15	
	
	732	Ethanol	
	
	Sol–gel	UV	
67

2	Sr2/3Zn1/3TiO3	3.15	121	

3	Ba5/6Zn1/6TiO3	3.2	575	Ethanol
4	Ba5/6Zn1/6TiO3	3.2	29	

5	CaNbO2N	2.0	10	AgNO3	312	Methanol	1 wt% Pt	1.1% at 420.5 nm	Polymerized complex	
λ > 420 nm	
68

6	SrNbO2N	1.8	0	15	

7	BaNbO2N	1.7	0	0	

8	LaNbON2	1.6	0	0	

9	Cubic NaNbO3	3.29	
	
	423	Methanol	
	
	Furfural alcohol derived polymerization–oxidation	
λ > 300 nm	
69

10	Orthorhombic NaNbO3	3.45	
	
	241	
	

11	Cubic NaNbO3	3.29	
	
	425	0.5 wt% Pt	

12	Cubic NaNbO3	3.29	
	
	520	1 wt% Pt	

13	Cubic NaNbO3	3.29	
	
	324	1.5 wt% Pt	

14	NaTaO3	4.0	0.78	AgNO3	10.3	Methanol	
	
	Solid state reaction (SSR)	
λ > 270 nm	
70

15	2 mol% La doped NaTaO3	4.09	1.7	13.2	56% at 270 nm
16	NaNbO3	3.08	
	
	950	Methanol	
	
	Hydrothermal	UV	
73

17	KNbO3	3.14	100
18	NaTaO3	3.96	36750
19	KTaO3	3.42	1040
20	CaTiO3	
	
	
	670.1	Methanol	NiOx	
	Sol–gel coupled with ultrasonic dispersing technique	UV	
75

21	CaTi0.98Cu0.02O3	5410.8
22	CaTiO3	0	
λ > 400 nm
23	CaTi0.98Cu0.02O3	22.7
24	Mn-doped SrTiO3	2.7	9	AgNO3	0.67	Methanol	0.5 wt% Pt	
	SSR	
λ > 440 nm	
76

25	Ru-doped SrTiO3	1.9	13	5.7	

26	Rh-doped SrTiO3	1.7	0	57.3	5.2% at 420 nm and 6% at 365 nm
27	Ir-doped SrTiO3	2.3	1.3	27.7	

28	RbLaTa2O7	∼3.9	3	
	6	
	
	
	SSR	UV	
79 and 80

29	RbPrTa2O7	∼3.6	<0.5	4.5
30	RbNdTa2O7	∼4.2	126.5	235
31	RbSmTa2O7	∼4.1	28.5	53
32	2 mol% Ca doped NaTaO3	4.11	113	AgNO3	756	Methanol	
	
	SSR	400 W Hg lamp	
85

33	2 mol% Sr doped NaTaO3	4.11	186	830
34	2 mol% Ba doped NaTaO3	4.09	160	696
35	NaTaO3	4.03	40	563
36	NaTaO3	4.0	∼1000	
	
	
	
	
	MHT	
	
87

37	NaTaO3	4.0	∼400	CHT
38	Sr0.5TaO3	3.7	177	
	733	
	
	
	Direct dehydration	400 W Hg lamp	
88

39	RE-Sr0.5TaO3	3.7	366	1400	Nanosheet processing
40	SrTiO3	
	
	
	300	Methanol	0.5 wt% Pt	
	M13 virus template method	UV	
89

41	SrSnO3	4.04	
	
	57.3	
	
	
	Wet chemistry	UV	
91

42	SrSnO3	4.01	7	SSR
43	NaTaO3	4.1	∼900	
	2050	
	
	
	SSR	400 W Hg lamp	
92

44	NaTaO3	4	6	13	Sol–gel

 	Fig. 14  Band-gap energy of various CeCoxTi1−xO3+δ perovskites and TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2005, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 15  A schematic diagram of the electronic intraband transition of (a) NaTaO3, (b) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Ta atom, (c) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Na atom, (d) Cr doped NaTaO3 for Cr replacing Ta and Na atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the formation mechanism of LaFeO3 microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2012, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of three different LaFeO3 morphologies (a) nanocubes, (b) nanorods and (c and d) low and high magnifications of nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Illustration of the formation process for perovskite-type LaCoO3 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2013, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of the as prepared samples: (a) KNb3O8; (b) 0.3 wt% Cu-doped; (c) 0.5 wt% Cu-doped; (d) 1 wt% Cu-doped; and (e) 2 wt% Cu-doped. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2011, Elsevier Inc.	 

1	P25	3.2	RB, 20 μmol L−1	3	5 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Commercial	
71

2	LaFeO3(500)	
	24	Sol–gel
3	LaFeO3(600)	16
4	LaFeO3(700)	13
5	LaFeO3(800)	9
6	LaFeO3 nanocube	2.01	RB	76.81 at 180 min	1 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Hydrothermal	
72

7	LaFeO3 nanorod	2.05	88.36 at 180 min
8	LaFeO3 nanosphere	2.1	90.8 at 180 min
9	P25	3.2	5.1 at 180 min	Commercial
10	LaNiO3	2.26	MO, 10 mg L−1	74.9 at 5 h	2 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Sol–gel	
93

11	CeCo0.05Ti0.95O3.97	1.57	Nile blue, 30 ppm	91 at 3 h	3 g L−1	254–310 and 410–500 nm	Sol–gel	
94

12	NaTaO3	4.13	MB, 2 × 10−4 mol L−1	60 at 200 min	50 mg	
λ > 420 nm	Hydrothermal	
95

13	2.47 mol% Cr doped NaTaO3	3.95	70 at 200 min
14	6.35 mol% Cr doped NaTaO3	3.28	∼35 at 200 min
15	P25	3.2	RB, 5 × 10−6 mol L−1	75 at 150 min	2 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Commercial	
98

16	K2La2Ti3O10	3.63	10 at 150 min	SSR
17	N-K2La2Ti3O10	3.59	20 at 150 min	SSR + NH3 gas
18	CN-K2La2Ti3O10	2.92	90 at 150 min	SSR + urea
19	P25	3.2	MO, 0.02 g L−1	∼6 at 30 min	0.8 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Commercial	
99

20	K2La2Ti3O10	3.69	∼2 at 30 min	SSR
21	N-K2La2Ti3O10	3.44	∼30 at 30 min	SSR + NH3 gas
22	LaFeO3	
	MB, 10 mg L−1	∼50 at 90 min	0.5 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Reverse microemulsion	
100

23	La0.9Ca0.1FeO3	∼80 at 90 min
24	La2Ti2O7	
	MO, 1 × 10−5 mol L−1	∼55 at 90 min	1 g L−1	UV, λ = 254 nm	Polymeric complex	
101

25	La1.5Pr0.5Ti2O7	∼25 at 90 min
26	La1.5Gd0.5Ti2O7	90 at 90 min
27	La1.5Er0.5Ti2O7	∼50 at 90 min
28	LaFeO3	2.36	MB, 10 mg L−1	∼100 at 90 min	2 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Microwave-assisted route	
102

29	P25	3.2	20 at 90 min	Commercial
30	LaFeO3	2.1	RB	>90 at 180 min	1 g L−1	
λ > 400 nm	Hydrothermal	
103

31	P25	3.2	MO, 10 mg L−1	∼85 at 100 min	0.2 g L−1	UV	Commercial	
105

32	LaCoO3	2.07	∼85 at 100 min	Surface-ion adsorption method
33	P25	3.2	MB, 10 mg L−1	∼85 at 100 min	Commercial
34	LaCoO3	2.07	∼85 at 100 min	Surface-ion adsorption method
35	KNb3O8	3.06	Acid red G, 50 mg L−1	63.03 at 60 min	1 g L−1	UV, λ = 253.7 nm	SSR	
106

36	0.3 wt% Cu doped KNb3O8	
	93.23 at 60 min
37	2 wt% Cu doped KNb3O8	83.92 at 60 min

 	Fig. 20  The schematics of the high-level summaries of Section 4.	 

 	Fig. 21  Atomic structures of orthorhombic perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 crystals without (left) or with (right) the [PbI6] octahedra. Key: grey-Pb, purple-I, light blue-N, brown-C and pink-H. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 22  
I–V curves for CH3NH3SnxPb(1−x)I3 perovskite solar cells. Composition: CH3NH3SnxPb(1−x)I3/P3HT. Solar cells were measured under 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) light illumination with masked area 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Representative SEM images of the (a) CH3NH3PbI3 and (b) CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 films on top of the mesoporous TiO2 electrodes. The scale bars represent 1 μm. (c) EDS elemental mapping of Pb, Sn and I in film (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Tuning perovskite BG by replacing the A cation. (a) ABX3 perovskite crystal structure. (b) The atomic structure of the three A site cations explored. (c) UV-vis spectra for the APbI3 perovskites formed, where A is either caesium (Cs), methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium (FA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Time-resolved photoluminescence decay detected at the peak wavelength of emission for various CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  SEM (left), AFM height (middle) and phase (right) images for CH3NH3PbI3 films fabricated using no additive (a), 17.5 mg mL−1 CH3NH3Cl (b), 17.5 mg mL−1 NH4Cl (c), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through a vapor-assisted solution process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the FDC process and conventional spin-coating process for fabricating perovskite films. Conventional spin-coating (top) results in a shiny gray film composed of non-uniform large crystals as a result of slow crystallization. In the FDC process (bottom), a second solvent (e.g. CBZ) introduced on top of the wet film during the spin-coating process induces fast crystallization of uniformly sized perovskite grains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


1	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.5	9	0.888	0.62	
50

2	CH3NH3PbI2Cl	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.55	10.9	1.1	0.63	
51

3	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	
	12.3	1.02	0.67	
54

4	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Spiro-MeOTAD	Solution-processed	
	8.6	0.84	0.58	
55

5	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Vapour-deposited	
	15.4	1.07	0.67
6	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	
	11.4	0.89	0.64	
56

7	MAPbI3	
	Spin coating	1.56	10.64	0.977	0.6113	
110

8	MAPb(I0.88Br0.12)3	1.62	8.13	0.890	0.6531
9	MAPb(I0.05Br0.95)3	2.23	1.03	0.832	0.4981
10	CH3NH3PbBr3	
	Spin coating	2.17	3.13	0.96	0.59	
111

11	CH3NH3PbI3	1.55	3.81	0.61	0.57
12	(CH3CH2NH3)PbI3	
	Spin coating	∼2.2	2.4	0.66	0.704	
112

13	FAPbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.48	14.2	0.94	0.65	
113

14	FAPbBr3	2.23	1.9	1.02	0.65
15	FAPbI0.8Br2.2	∼1.6	9.1	1.00	0.67
16	CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	P3HT	Spin coating	1.17	4.18	0.42	0.5	
116

17	CH3NH3PbI3	1.55	0.18	0.23	0.29
18	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	
	12.2	0.97	0.45	
118

19	CH3NH3PbI3	4.2	0.71	0.7
20	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.55	15.0	0.993	0.73	
119

21	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Vapor-assisted solution process	1.55	12.1	0.94	0.682	
120

22	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Self-induced passivation	1.5	12	0.959	0.6932	
121

23	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating annealing at 60 °C	1.5	1.78	0.799	0.68	
122

24	CH3NH3PbI3	Spin coating annealing at 100 °C	11.66	0.938	0.68
25	CH3NH3PbI3	Spin coating annealing at 200 °C	0.56	0.589	0.67
26	CH3NH3PbI3	PEDOT:PSS	Spin coating with NH4Cl additive	1.59	9.93	0.88	0.8011	
123

27	CH3NH3PbI3	Spin coating with CH3NH3Cl additive	8.16	0.92	0.694
28	CH3NH3PbI3	Spin coating with no additive	0.04	0.37	0.2753
29	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	PEDOT:PSS	Spin coating with DIO additive	∼1.5	11.8	0.92	0.73	
124

30	Spin coating with no additive	9	0.9	0.62
31	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Fast deposition-crystallization	1.55	13.9	0.98	0.68	
125

32	Spin coating	1.5	0.52	0.52
33	CH3NH3PbI2Br	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.8	4.87	0.82	0.59	
130

34	CH3NH3PbI3	1.55	4.29	0.74	0.54
35	CH3NH3PbI2Br	
	Two-step deposition technique based on spin coating and dipping	1.58	8.54	0.77	0.68	
131

36	CH3NH3PbI3	1.51	7.2	0.77	0.6
37	CH3NH3PbBr3	2.12	1.69	0.79	0.46
38	CH3NH3SnI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.3	5.44	0.716	0.5007	
136

39	CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.17	7.27	0.584	0.6032
40	CH3NH3PbI3	1.55	8.31	0.863	0.6803
41	FAPbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.47	4.3	0.97	0.687	
138

42	FAPbI3	P3HT	Spin coating	1.43	3.7	0.55	0.41	
139

43	
In situ dipping technology	1.43	7.5	0.84	0.5
44	FAPbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.47	16.01	1.032	0.74	
140

45	FAPbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	2.26	6.5	1.35	0.73	
141

46	MAPbI3	2.34	0.4	1.48	0.48
47	FAPbI3−xClx	P3HT	Spin coating	1.492	6.6	0.65	0.51	
142

48	MA0.6FA0.4PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.53	13.4	0.992	0.692	
143

49	Cs0.10MA0.90PbI3	PEDOT:PSS	Spin coating	1.54	7.68	1.05	0.73	
144

50	MAPbI3	1.52	5.51	0.89	0.70
51	CsPbI3	2.05	0.09	0.79	0.45
52	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	PEDOT:PSS	Spray deposition	1.55	11.1	0.92	0.72	
155

53	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Two-step deposition	
	9.5	0.89	0.58	
156

54	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating with DMSO solvent	
	10.8–13.5	
	
	
157

55	Spin coating with DMF solvent	1.3–14.2
56	CH3NH3PbI3	
	Modified two-step deposition	1.61	10.47	0.948	0.69	
160

57	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating with thiophene additive	
	15.3	1.02	0.68	
161

58	Spin coating with pyridine additive	16.5	1.03	0.72
59	CH3NH3PbI3	Spiro-MeOTAD	Spin coating	1.55	3.83	0.63	0.50	
163

60	Spiro + BuPyImTFSI	7.91	0.87	0.56
61	Spiro + Li + TBP	8.16	0.91	0.57
62	CH3NH3PbI3	CuI	Spin coating	1.55	6.0	0.55	0.62	
173

63	CH3NH3PbI3	CuSCN	Spin coating	
	12.4	1.016	0.62	
174


 	Fig. 29  The formation process of BaSnO3 nanoparticles shown with TEM images of (a) as-precipitated powders, (b) precursor powders obtained at a liquid phase reaction time of 12 h, and (c) calcined powders in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of the possible formation mechanism of MTiO3 (M = Ca, Sr and Ba) perovskites with various morphologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
