New-generation integrated devices based on dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE03165C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE03165C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 476-526New-generation integrated devices based on dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Sining 
            Yun
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Qin
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alexander R. 
            Uhl
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Nick 
            Vlachopoulos
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Yin
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Dongdong 
            Li
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Xiaogang 
            Han
          
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
          
        
      d
aFunctional Materials Laboratory (FML), School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710055, China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@aliyun.com; yunsining@xauat.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-29-82205245;   Tel: +86-29-82205245
bInstitute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
dLaboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
eShanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201210, China
fCenter of Nanomaterials for Renewable Energy (CNRE), Key Lab of Smart Grid of Shaanxi Province, State Key Lab of Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, China
Received 
      5th November 2017
    , Accepted 3rd January 2018First published on 3rd January 2018AbstractThe sharp increase of research passion in the new-generation solar cells in recent years has resulted in a new trend in combining multiple types of energy devices in a single device. In view of the enhanced and/or diversified function of integrated devices, as compared with conventional devices with limited performance or sole applicability, many integrated power packs have been widely developed by combining different devices, such as a silicon solar cell (SSC), Cu(In,Ga)(Sn,Se)2 (CIGS), organic solar cell (OSC), dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), perovskite solar cell (PSC), lithium-ion battery (LIB), nanogenerator (NG), supercapacitor (SC), photoelectrosynthetic cell (PESC), and electrolysis cell (ELC), into one unit. In this Review, with a particular emphasis on their recent advances, we cover the integrated solar cell device research in a broad sense and provide an overview of state-of-the-art progress on the integrated solar cell devices based on DSSC and PSC, such as DSSC/LIB, DSSC/SC, DSSC/NG, DSSC/LIB/NG, PSC/OSC, PSC/CIGS, PSC/PSC, PSC/SSC, SSC/SC, PSC/SC, OSC/SC, DSSC/PESC, PSC/PESC, and PSC/ELC, for energy harvesting and storage that are significantly important for self-powering systems and portable/wearable electronics. Finally, the challenges and future outlooks in this promising photovoltaic (PV) field are featured on the basis of current development.
Sining Yun
Sining Yun is a Professor at School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, China. He obtained his PhD from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2007 and was a postdoctoral fellow at Yonsei University (Korea). He is a visiting professor at State Key Lab. of Fine Chemicals (China), University of Reading (UK), Prof. Michael Grätzel and Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's laboratory at EPFL (Switzerland). He is currently a Research Director and Group Leader of Functional Materials Laboratory and Key Lab of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology of Shaanxi Province (China). His research focuses on solar energy and biomass energy.
Yong Qin
Yong Qin received his BS (1999) in Material Physics and PhD (2004) in Material Physics and Chemistry from Lanzhou University. From 2007 to 2009, he worked as a visiting scholar and Postdoc in Professor Zhong Lin Wang's group at Georgia Institute of Technology. Currently, he is a professor at the Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Lanzhou University, where he holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. His research interests include nanoenergy technology, functional nanodevices and self-powered nanosystems. Details can be found at: http://www.yqin.lzu.edu.cn.
Alexander R. Uhl
Alexander R. Uhl is a postdoctoral fellow in Chemical Engineering at the University of Washington (USA) with Prof. Hugh W. Hillhouse. He obtained his PhD in Material Science in 2013 from ETH Zurich (Switzerland) under Prof. Ayodhya N. Tiwari and Prof. Joerg Loeffler. He received his Diploma in Nanostructural Engineering from the University of Wuerzburg (Germany) after graduate stays at the University of British Columbia (Canada) and University of Uppsala (Sweden), where he worked together with Prof. Marika Edoff. His primary research focus is on solution-processing and characterization of thin film layers for the application in photovoltaic devices.
Dongdong Li
Dongdong Li received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 2010. Under the support of the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, he worked in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Southern California (2007–2009). Currently, he is a professor at Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on structural and interfacial engineering of functional nanomaterials, for technological applications in energy conversion and storage.
Xiaogang Han
Xiaogang Han is a professor at Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU) in China. He obtained his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2009, and then worked as a postdoc at the University of California and the University of Maryland in the US, respectively. After that he joined XJTU. Currently, his research interests are solid-state lithium batteries, lithium metal anode, and holey graphene applications.
Anders Hagfeldt
Anders Hagfeldt has been a Professor at the Institute of Chemical Sciences Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) and the Head of the Laboratory of Photomolecular Science since 2013. He obtained his PhD in 1993 from Uppsala University and was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL, Switzerland. Before 2014 he was a professor in Physical Chemistry and the director of Center for Molecular Devices at Uppsala University, Sweden. He is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, European Academy of Sciences, Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in Stockholm.

Broader context
The integration of devices, that is the combination of several technologies in a single unit, is a powerful means to improve the performance of a system, reduce its size and weight, and widen its applicability. Both dye-sensitized- (DSSC) and perovskite- (PSC) based solar cell technologies have received growing attention with respect to device integration on account of increasing performance values and their ease of processing at low temperatures. Three main areas of integration can be distinguished depending on their combinations with (i) other solar cells, (ii) electrical energy storage devices, and (iii) electrochemical devices for energy storage in solar fuels. This Review aims to provide a comprehensive summary of the current status and recent research trends and highlights in the area of integrated devices employing both DSSCs and PSCs. Our concluding remarks and future outlook offer a critical evaluation of various power systems and discuss challenges and opportunities for their successful realization and marketability.

1. Introduction
1.1. Solar energy resource and photovoltaic technologies
Human activities strongly depended on the abundance of natural resources (especially water, minerals, and energy). A sustained population growth and the desire for improved living conditions make people have an increasing energy demand that may be far beyond the available conventional energy supply such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas. The estimated energy consumption of the world will reach 27 Terawatt-years in 2050.1,2 This means that the energy consumption pattern need be shifted from finite energy reserves to renewable resources in a more efficient manner, and by doing so, reduce our dependence on traditional fossil fuels, mineral, and natural resources. In this regard, utilizing renewable energy is of importance for a sustainable development of our society and the protection of our planet/environment.
Comparing various energy resources of our planet (Fig. 1), the potential of solar energy dwarfs the potential from any other energy resource on the planet.1,2 Solar energy produced from sunlight striking the earth in 1 h is higher than all the energy consumed by human beings on the planet in one year. Therefore, solar energy, as the most abundant renewable energy source on the planet, can be harvested and transformed into various forms of energy for practical applications by thermoelectric, photocatalytic, photovoltaic (PV), and photoelectrochemical (PEC) technologies. Among them, the PV technology as one model of solar energy utilization is generally deemed to play a critical role in capturing solar energy and directly transforming it into electrical energy.
 Fig. 1  Estimated finite and renewable planetary energy reserves (Terawatt-years). Note that total recoverable reserves are shown for the finite resources whereas yearly potential is shown for the renewables. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 and 2. Copyright 2015 International Solar Energy Society. 
The PV technologies are growing in high speed in basic research and industrialization. Historically, the development of solar cells, from the first crystalline silicon solar cell (SSC) with 6% efficiency envisioned by Bell Lab in 1954 to today, can be divided into three stages.3 The first-generation solar cells are known as silicon-based solar cells (SSCs). The confirmed power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of crystalline silicon cells have exceeded 20% and those of single crystalline cells have reached up to 26.6%.4 The SSCs have been an advanced and proven PV technique that are completely dominating the total PV market with a total market share of more than 90%.5 The second-generation solar cells are represented by thin-film solar cells such as GaAs, CdTe, and Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGS). The confirmed record PCEs are 28.8%, 22.1%, and 22.6% for GaAs, CdTe, and CIGS, respectively.6 As compared to silicon-based and thin-film solar cells, the third-generation solar cells such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have the potential for a lower processing cost in the emerging PV fields. Record PCEs of 13% in DSSCs have been obtained while accelerated lifetime tests passed with high durability efficiencies.7,8 The newer PSC technology has achieved a champion PCE of 22.1%, which has been independently confirmed by the international authority and authenticating institution, NREL.6,9 Large-area PSCs with an aperture area exceeding 1 cm2 have achieved a maximum PCE of 20.5% and a certified PCE of 19.6%.10
Although the cell efficiencies of the third-generation solar cells are at present still lower than those of silicon-based and thin-film solar cells, the total cell efficiency of the hybrid devices combining PSCs with SSCs is expected to exceed 30% in the near future, while the estimated maximum attainable efficiency in theory for this type of tandem device can reach up to 44%, as predicted by Prof. Michael Grätzel, who is the inventor of DSSCs (or Grätzel cell).11 Remarkably, both the DSSC and PSC technologies can fulfill all of the desired properties of conventional SSCs, such as environment-friendly and earth-abundant materials, high cell efficiency, low-cost and large-scale solution manufacturing processes.
1.2. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)
Over the past 20 years, great progress has been made in fundamental research and the technological application for DSSCs. Recent advances and the basic working principles of DSSCs have been summarized in several important review papers.12–28 A sandwich-type DSSC is composed of a dye-sensitized mesoscopic TiO2 photoelectrode, an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple electrolyte, and a platinized counter electrode (CE). Generally, each component of a DSSC system performs a specific task. This means that each DSSC component must be carefully designed to meet its practical application. From 1991 to now, the development of alternative cell components, such as PEs, CEs, electrolytes and dyes, has resulted in a tremendous advancement in the PCE of DSSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 2.9,29–45 The PCEs of DSSCs have increased from 7.12% in 1991 to 14.3% in 2015.9,11,19 For early metal Ru dye-based DSSCs with an iodine-mediator and a Pt CE, the best reported cell efficiency was 11.7% while lower PCEs of 10.3% were obtained for DSSCs with organic dyes. By contrast, the prophyrin dye can achieve better cell efficiency in cobalt-mediated DSSCs. The champion PCE value of 14.3% was achieved in cobalt-mediated DSSCs with graphene nanoplatelet (GNP) CEs and combined photosensitizers of ADEKA-1 and LEG4 dyes, close to the standard required for commercialization (15%). It is apparent that the superior performance of DSSCs depends strongly on the optimized and well-matched cell components within the device. Note that the substantial increase in PCE in the past two decades has been far lower than that of the recently discovered PSCs. A large amount of publications did not result in a substantial improvement in PCE for DSSCs. This means that more focused research is highly desirable for achieving more efficient and more stable DSSC components. This will promote the practical applications of DSSCs to a broader PV market.
 Fig. 2  Advances in PCE for DSSCs with a TiO2 photoelectrode reported in the past 25 years (1991–2016). For more detailed PV parameters of DSSCs depicted in Fig. 2,9,29–45 please refer to our recent reviews.15,19,22 
The goal of targeted research projects related to DSSCs is to enhance the industrial application of DSSCs. Advances made in design, incorporation on different substrates, modules, stability, and scalable fabrication techniques have allowed DSSC technology to transfer from the laboratory to practical applications.46 Although the cell efficiency of DSSCs is lower than that of silicon-based and thin film solar cells, it is a truth that DSSC panels can deliver more electricity than their silicon-based and thin film counterparts of similar power ratings when they are exposed to weak light operating conditions. DSSC's workability under such conditions makes them become potential market leaders in building and automobile integrated PV and portable or indoor light harvesting PV technology. On the other hand, due to their low-cost and tenability of color and transparency, DSSCs are well suited for BIPV and portable devices. While the former prompts rather large area devices, several applications in the portable device area can be envisaged where small scale integrated devices are useful. Actually, large-area DSSC modules suffer from performance loss and long term stability issues compared to their lab-scale devices.13,47–49 The above-mentioned facts are the main reasons that a DSSC system can distinguish itself among other solar cells from building integrated BIPV and portable electronic devices.
Commercial sales of DSSCs have started in solar modules for building integrated PV (BIPV) and portable electronic devices. Three examples are: (1) the energy producing glass facade made of DSSCs in Swiss-Tech Convention Center in Lausanne, Switzerland,50 (2) the electric power generating colored look-through glass panels produced by G2E (http://www.g2e.ch), and (3) backpacks with integrated flexible DSSCs to produce continuous electricity and stored in a power bank for powering electrical equipment (http://lpi.epfl.ch). Reports on integrated devices based on DSSCs are more numerous as compared to PSCs based on the maturity of the DSSC technology. To date, the DSSC technology excels with inherent low toxicity, low cost, and increased long-term stability which has been realized by several commercial companies such as G2E, SOLARONIX, G24 Power Limited, EXEGER, and others. On the way to practical application of DSSC technology, the integrated DSSC devices for energy harvesting and storage will be given a special concern in this review.
We want to stress that the main commercial selling points of DSSCs are (next to the choice of rigid or flexible substrates, low cost, and scalability) their excellent performance under low light conditions (e.g. in-door), and tenability of color and transparency. This makes DSSC an excellent choice for BIPV and portable electronic devices.
1.3. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs)

1.3.1. Structural evolution of PSCs. 
Perovskite materials are well-known for their distinctive crystal structure and unique properties in electronic ceramics (i.e. BaTiO3-based ferroelectric ceramics).51–59 Use of perovskite-structured organometal halide materials (i.e. methylammonium–lead iodide, MAPbI3) as the key materials to fabricate the PSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 3a and b, has become very popular in recent years. An overview of the historical development of the organometal halides has been recently elucidated by Prof. Michael Grätzel in a 2014 Nature Materials article.60 In the organometal halide perovskite materials, organic CH3NH3+ (MA) and HC(NH2)2+ (FA) cations occupy position A whereas metal cations (Pb2+, Sn2+) and halogen ions (I−, Br−, Cl−) occupy the B and X positions, respectively.61 Ideal perovskite has a cubic crystal structure while it in reality structures is often pseudo-cubic or distorted cubic because of distortion. The distorted structure will evidently affect the optical, electronic, magnetic, and dielectric properties of perovskite materials.62
 Fig. 3  (a) Crystal structure of cubic metal halide perovskite with generic chemical formula ABX3 (A site: the large organic cations; B site: the small metal cations; and X site: halogen ions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014 NPG. (b) Organolead halide perovskite materials in PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the involved charge-transfer processes in PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
The working principle of PSCs can be generally demonstrated by the critical charge-transfer processes shown in Fig. 3c. Under light illumination, the perovskite absorbers undergo photoexcitation and charge separation (1), electrons are collected by the ETL and move to the fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO) conductive substrate (2), while holes move to the metal contact through the HTM (3). Those light-generated charge carriers (both electrons and holes) produce a potential difference at the front and back contacts of the PSCs and can generate an electric current through a connected external circuit. During the charge-transfer processes, some undesirable charge recombination often occur at the interfaces of the involved layers. Light-generated electrons can recombine with holes in the perovskite layer (4) and at the interface of perovskite and the HTM layer (7). The injected electrons may further recombine with the holes at the interfaces of ETL/perovskite (5) and ETL/HTM (6). The interfacial properties mainly determine the performance of solar cell devices. The interface molecular engineering has turned out to be one effective strategy to solve the charge recombination that occurs at the interface of PSCs.63–66 For achieving high-performance PSCs, charge generation and extraction (1)–(3) must be on much faster timescales than charge recombination (4)–(7).
Today, so-called PSCs originate from the solid-state DSSCs containing perovskite as a sensitizer. The historical evolution of device architectures for the PSCs is in detail depicted in Fig. 4a–d. The incipient PSCs are an exact mimic of the solid-state DSSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. The N719 dye or MAPbI3 perovskite plays the role of a sensitizer that generates electrons and holes that are injected into the conduction band of a mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold and a solid-state hole-transporter material (HTM) (spiro-OMeTAD in most cases), respectively.68,69 In the meso-superstructure (Fig. 4b), a film of mesoporous scaffold Al2O3 instead of TiO2 is covered with an ultrathin conformal coating of MAPbI3 perovskite. It is evident that Al2O3 is not able to aid in electron extraction and transport due to its large bandgap. Therefore, MAPbI3 is regarded as a light harvester as well as an electron conductor. This meso-superstructured configuration sporadically suffers from the poor pore filling of the HTM. Although a PCE of up to 10.9% has been achieved, the role of the mesoscopic Al2O3 scaffold in these PSC devices remains unclear. It should be noted that MAPbI3 also plays a role of an hole conductor in HTM-free mesoscopic architectures.70,71 This is different from its role in the meso-superstructured configuration. A certified PCE of up to 12.8% has been obtained in HTM-free PSCs with excellent stability, as compared with many HTM-based PSCs. Based on the HTM-free architecture, a more advanced architecture has been developed (Fig. 4c) where the mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold is fully infiltrated with the perovskite light harvester and poly(triarylamine) HTM while the latter penetrates the mesoscopic scaffold to a much smaller degree. This permeation has been confirmed by energy-dispersive spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction depth profiling technologies.72 In this advanced configuration, the perovskite plays the dual role of a light absorber and a hole conductor, and the thickness of the mesoscopic MAPbI3/TiO2 nanocomposited film can be reduced to 200–300 nm without photocurrent loss. The high PCE of 12% that was obtained in this configuration indicated that the MAPbI3 perovskite was very effective as a hole conductor. An improved PCE of 15% was further achieved by the MAPbI3 infiltrated composite structure with a two-step coating method.73 Since the perovskite can play a dual role in transporting electrons and holes, the mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold layer is not required. Based on this design idea, the planar pn junction concept was proposed, as depicted in Fig. 4d. A thin layer of perovskite material is sandwiched between the HTM layer and the compact TiO2 blocking layer, which made the device fabrication much easier than the before-mentioned two configurations. In the PSC architectures with a planar geometry, 300 nm-thick MAPbI3−xClx films were fabricated by vapour deposition of CH3NH3I and PbCl2, and a PCE of 15.4% was achieved.74 By contrast, the planar configuration could achieve a similar device performance to the mesoporous configuration. It is noted that a thin TiO2 blocking layer as the bottom electron transport layer (ETL) is still required in the planar configuration lacking the TiO2 mesoporous scaffold.
 Fig. 4  (a) Solid-state mesoscopic solar cell using MAPbI3 as a sensitizer and spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM (9.7%). (b) Meso-superstructured Al2O3 scaffold nanocrystals covered with an ultrathin layer of MAPbI3 perovskite (10.9%), (c) the mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold infiltrated by the perovskite (12%). (d) A planar pn heterojunction solar cell lacking the TiO2 mesoporous scaffold (15.4%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2014 NPG. (e) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of typical layered common device architectures of mesoscopic (left) and planar (right) PSCs composed of fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO), ETLs (TiO2 or SnO2), the perovskite film, HTM (spiro-OMeTAD), and a gold top electrode. SEM image by courtesy of Dr Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena. 
Except for the difference in the design configuration mentioned above, another difference between the mesoscopic and the planar structure is that approximately 200 nm mesoporous metal oxide (mp-TiO2) is employed as the electron transport layer (ETL) for the former, whereas an only 10–70 nm-thick compact metal oxide ETL is used for the latter, as illustrated in Fig. 4e. In addition, the role of the perovskite materials changes from an electron conductor in the meso-superstructure configuration to a hole conductor in the mesoscopic-structured configuration besides acting as a light absorber. Although planar and mesoporous configurations have achieved champion PCE records, the mesoporous configuration requires a high temperature (usually greater than 450 °C) sintering process for the TiO2 scaffold, and the planar configuration based on the TiO2 ETL usually suffers from a J–V hysteresis. It should be mentioned that based on this regular planar configuration, an inverted planar structure, which adopted a similar device structure to the OSC devices, was firstly proposed.75,76 This inverted planar structure uses p-type and n-type materials as bottom and top charge transport layers, respectively, and the charge transport layers used in OSC devices were successfully transferred into PSC devices. The inverted planar structure of PSCs has shown PCE values as high as 18%, lower temperature processing, flexibility, and, furthermore, negligible J–V hysteresis effects.76


1.3.2. Advances in the efficiency level for PSCs. 
Each big breakthrough of device configuration can generate a key advance in cell efficiency and fabrication process. The development of the device configuration of PSCs, from DSSCs to the planar heterojunction PSCs, was accompanied by a dramatic advance in PCE from 3.81% in 2009 to 22.1% in 2016, as presented in Fig. 5a.69,71–74,77–90 MAPbI3 was initially used by Miyasaka and co-workers as a sensitizer in liquid-state DSSCs with a PCE of 3.81% in 2009.83 Subsequently, a PCE of 6.5% was reported in 2011 for perovskite sensitized DSSCs in which perovskite quantum dots were used as sensitizers and the triiodide/iodide redox couple was employed.82 A major breakthrough was achieved in 2012, and PCEs of 9.7% and 10.9% were achieved by introducing organometal halide perovskite sensitizers in perovskite-based solid-state DSSCs (or PSCs).62,91 As a milestone, these two publications enabled a huge application potential for perovskite materials in low-cost and high-performance solar cells. As a result, more exciting discoveries and great progress in PSCs came within a short period of time from 2012 to 2015. For example, sequential deposition as a route to fabricate high-performance PSCs greatly increased the performance reproducibility and achieved a PCE of 15%. A dual-source vapour-deposited perovskite as the absorbing material yielded a PCE of 15.4% in a simple planar heterojunction PSC. Solvent engineering resulted in extremely uniform and dense perovskite layers for high-performance PSCs with a PCE of 16.2% by combining mesoscopic and planar structures.81 Compositional engineering by incorporating MAPbBr3 into FAPbI3 stabilizes the perovskite phase of FAPbI3 and improves the PCE of PSCs to 18.4%.79 With interface engineering by controlling the formation of the perovskite layer and careful choices of other materials, a PCE of approximately 19.3% was achieved in a planar geometry without an antireflective coating, and while carrier recombination in the absorber was suppressed, good carrier extraction at the electrodes was retained.78 The perovskite layers fabricated through intermolecular exchange in PSCs brought about a certified PCE of 20.1%.77 Today, the best research-cell efficiency has reached a NREL certified PCE of 22.1% by KRICT/UNIST, which is more than 5.8 times higher than the value achieved in 2009 (3.81%). This is an unprecedented rise in PCE for a PV technology. Moreover, the higher efficiency level indicates that PSCs will have a more efficient operation in the integrated devices based on solar cells.
 Fig. 5  (a) Some representative PCE advances in perovskite-based and solid-state DSSCs reported in top journals. The certified cell efficiency records resulted from the efficiency chart by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) (http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/) and ref. 60 and 96. (b) A comparison of PCEs of mesoporous and planar PSCs. The highest published PCE for a TiO2 mesoporous infiltrated PSC (c) and a planar SnO2 heterojunction PSC (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 RSC. 
As discussed, early PSCs came from solid-state DSSCs that can be dated back to 1998 (Fig. 5a), where a PCE of 0.74% was achieved when the HTM spiro-OMeTAD and the N719 dye were used in solid-state DSSCs.90 In 2001, the performance of solid-state DSSCs was improved to 2.56% by controlling the charge recombination across the interface of the heterojunction by adding lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonimide) (LiTFSI) and tert-butylpyridine (tBP).85 A replacement of the N719 dye with the metal-free organic D102 dye resulted in an enhanced PCE of 4.1% in solid-state DSSCs in 2005.87 The use of D–π–A dye C220 in solid-state DSSCs resulted in a new record of 6.08%, and a PCE of 7.2% was further achieved by using p-type dopant FK102 in 2011.84,89 The solid-state DSSCs were not given a special concern at early stages because of the relatively low PCE values. No noticeable advance was made from 2005 to 2011.
A comparison of PCEs of mesoporous and planar PSC is shown in Fig. 5b. This graph illustrates that the PCE of mesoporous PSCs is generally higher than that of planar PSCs. The current–voltage (J–V) hysteresis phenomenon depending on the forward or backward scan direction was ignored, and non-stabilized efficiencies were measured during the first few years (shaded in grey in Fig. 5b). Many efforts have been made to improve measuring protocols from 2014 to today, and slow scan rates of the J–V curve and/or maximum power point tracking define the record PCEs today (inset in Fig. 5c). A stabilized efficiency of 21.6%, with remarkable Voc values of up to 1.24 V (for a theoretical maximum of 1.35 V), was achieved in TiO2 mesoporous infiltrated PSCs with multiple cation formulations by incorporating Rb into the Cs/FA/MA perovskite.92 By contrast, the highest stabilized PCE of 20.8% with Voc values above 1.19 V was reported in solution-processed SnO2 as ETLs in planar PSCs (Fig. 5d).93,94
Intrinsically, the high performance of PSCs can be contributed by the fact that ABX3 are suitable to be efficient light absorber materials to meet desired demands for solar cells, such as an appropriate bandgap for outstanding light-harvesting ability, energy level/band alignment with contacting materials, high charge carrier lifetime, and high charge carrier mobility. High and balanced electron–hole mobility and lifetime mean that the light-generated electrons and holes can move sufficiently large distances (the average carrier-diffusion distance ranging between 100 nm and 1000 nm) to be extracted as a current, instead of losing their energy as heat within the cell.60,67,95
Very recently, accelerated degradation of MAPbI3 perovskites has illustrated that the release of I2 vapor can cause MAPbI3 (including FAPbI3 and FA0.8Cs0.2PbI3) to be severely degraded due to chemical chain reactions.97,98 The volatile I2 vapor was produced when the MAPbI3 was subjected to moisture, oxygen, light illumination, thermal stress, and applied electric fields. In this regard, the release of volatile I2 vapor will be inevitable for PSCs in practical applications. This means that research on alternative perovskite materials is highly required to obtain good long-term stable PSCs.97 Interestingly, Pb-free Sn-based CsSnI3 perovskite ingots with high-quality large single crystal grains have recently been melt-synthesized, and long minority-carrier diffusion lengths reaching 1 μm and low surface-recombination velocities of approximately 2 × 103 cm s−1 (similar to Pb-based perovskites) were measured. A PCE of approximately 23%, beyond the current highest certified efficiency level of 22.1%, was predicted for optimized CsSnI3 single crystal solar cells, highlighting their great potential in practical applications.99 In addition, enhanced stability and cell efficiency in HTM-free CsSnI3-based PSCs have been very recently verified.100 It should be noted that a road towards 25% efficiency and beyond has been recently proposed for tandem PSCs.101 Apart from developing alternative perovskite materials to solve the degradation issue of MAPbI3, there are several reported strategies to overcome this challenge;98,102,103 for more details, please consult recent review papers.104–106
All kinds of solar technologies will find their own markets, and the new-generation perovskite PV technology is approaching the performance of the existing silicon-based and thin film PV technologies. However, the present efficiency level of PSCs is still far behind the theoretical Schockley–Queisser limit (greater than 34%) and can be expected to be increased further by using revolutionary technologies in the future. In addition, the reproducibility and long-term stability of the PSCs need to be specially addressed to improve the technology's practical utility. Several review papers have recently summarized the progress of PSCs.60–62,64,66,67,95,96,106–129 For more composition engineering, interface engineering, solvent engineering, device operation, structure evolution, efficiency achievement, charge transport behavior, stability improvement, commercialization challenge, open issues and pitfalls, and others, please refer to several important papers.60,61,64,96,113–115,118

1.4. Integrated solar cell devices
Solar energy is generally intermittent and is typically installed in remote regions which can make it difficult to connect them directly to the national grid. In addition, solar cells cannot directly store the electrical energy captured from sunlight. Therefore, the intermittence of solar energy creates an urgent demand for suitable energy storage technologies. Currently, the universal practice for energy storage is to externally connect rechargeable batteries to the solar module installation. For example, silicon solar panels and solid-state lithium batteries were conventionally developed as two independent devices. Recent advances in energy harvesting and storage technologies have demonstrated a new trend in harvesting multiple types of energy using a single device.130–140 This means that an integrated power pack, energy harvesting and storage technologies operating together in a power system, may be an effective path to obtain a small sized, light-weight, high power density, and high reliability energy system. In this regard, the development of integrated energy harvesting and storage technologies, that capture and convert solar energy from sunlight with high efficiency, and then consecutively store the electrical energy by means of an electrochemical battery or other devices, is of great importance to meet the special demands in the future.
Present research on new-generation solar cells generally focuses on improving the PCE. Other fields of research like the integration of energy harvesting and storage systems receive only minor attention but are significantly important for emerging markets such as self-powering systems and portable/wearable electronics. Generally, DSSCs, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), nanogenerators (NGs), and supercapacitors (SCs) can be deposited on a rigid or flexible substrate, which means that they can easily be integrated into one unit. Due to the ease of fabrication and higher efficiency, solar cells are often chosen as sources of electrical energy harvesting whereas LIBs and SCs are often utilized as energy storage units. Great progresses have been made on integrating conventional planar devices for energy harvesting and storage. A planar-shaped integrated device for both PV conversion and energy storage has been realized.141,142 As an example, the voltage of the integrated DSSC/SC device can be charged and maintained at 0.72 V with an energy storage efficiency as high as 84% and an entire photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of 5.12%.141 However, the planar structure can not meet the combined requirements of light weight, miniaturization, and flexibility of modern electronics. To meet these requirements, flexible and fiber-shaped integrated devices have been recently developed.130,135,143,144 The integration of new-generation solar cells (DSSCs, PSCs, SSCs, and OSCs) and chemical energy storage technologies (LIBs, SCs) enable us to store flexibly and fully utilize the intermittent solar energy.
In view of the enhanced and/or diversified function of integrated solar cell devices as compared with conventional devices with limited performance or sole applicability, many integrated systems have been widely developed by combining different devices into one unit. DSSCs as low-cost PV devices are especially suited for building and automobile integrated PV and portable/wearable or indoor light harvesting applications.46 Although the PCEs of DSSC systems are not on a par with commercially available silicon-based or thin film solar cells, DSSCs possess many features, such as transparency, light weight, flexibility, conformability, workability under weak-light conditions, and easy integration with other devices, that can compel further DSSC's development in modules. Unlike silicon-based devices, DSSCs weakly depend on the angle of incident light and perform much better under low light operating conditions, which makes them suitable energy harvesting devices for integration with other energy storage devices. Note that the transparent and flexible devices deliver low PCEs at the lab scale, which means that the devices turning into practical applications still face many challenges. Likewise, PSCs have shown great promise for next-generation PV technology, due to their intriguing optoelectronic properties (strong absorption in the visible range,145,146 high carrier mobility,147,148 bipolar transport,149 long photo-generated carrier diffusion length),150,151 and low cost and high efficiency, which enable realization of highly efficient integrated PV devices. In addition, the research enthusiasm, observed from the increasing number of papers about PSCs, make PSC-based integrated devices a topic of increasing popularity.
The noteworthy examples of integrated solar cell devices based on PSCs and DSSCs are illustrated in Fig. 6. (i) PSCs can be integrated with other solar cells (CIGS, OSCs, and SSCs) into one unit to form a tandem device; (ii) solar cells such as DSSCs, PSCs, OSCs, and SSCs can be integrated with LIBs, SCs, and NGs into one unit to achieve integrated systems; (iii) DSSCs and PSCs can be integrated with photoelectrosynthetic cells (PESCs) into DSSC/PESC and PSC/PESC for hydrogen generation and CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 6  (a) Integrated devices for energy harvesting and conversion based on PSCs. (b) Integrated solar cell devices for energy harvesting and storage. DSSC: dye-sensitized solar cell; PSC: perovskite solar cell; SSC: silicon solar cell; CIGS: Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2; OSC: organic solar cell; PESC: photoelectrosynthetic cell: ELC: electrolysis cell. 
The challenge to review the growing research field of integrated devices is the rapidly increasing number of publications and research data. With the risk of missing some interesting and important works for developing the integrated solar cell technologies, the purpose of this review is to cover the integrated solar cell device research in a broad sense and provide an overview of trends in solar energy harvesting and storage applications. We will, however, mainly limit ourselves to the integrated devices based on DSSCs and PSCs.
2. Integrated solar cell devices for energy harvesting and conversion
2.1. PSC/silicon tandem devices
Tandem solar cells present an exciting means for increasing the PCE of solar modules thereby reducing the balance of system cost (BOS) for PV systems and potentially the cost per watt peak ($ per Wp) of modules if the associated added costs can be kept negligible. Tandem solar cells are fabricated such that one or more p–n junctions that employ wide-bandgap absorbers are above a p–n junction that employs a small-bandgap absorber, in order to improve the utilization of the solar spectrum and reduce the thermalization losses of photons.152,153 Highest efficiency tandem solar cells are based on III–V semiconductors and five-junction cells have achieved up to 38.8% efficiency under one sun.154 However, the high material cost and expensive epitaxial layer growth of III–V semiconductors limit tandem devices to special markets such as concentrated PV or extra-terrestrial applications. PSCs are highly suitable for their integration in tandem devices as they exhibit wide bandgap tunability and low sub-bandgap absorption while allowing for the use of economical solution processing methods with low processing temperatures, which is indispensable for their use as top cells.155–159 Moreover, the lack of a liquid electrolyte in solid-state (p-i-n) PSCs allows for easier manufacturing and increased stability of integrated tandem devices as reduced emphasis has to be devoted on leaking and hermetic sealing.160
The combination of large-bandgap perovskite and small-bandgap SSCs in an integrated or tandem device is a highly popular research field and widely regarded as a market entry point for the perovskite technology.5,161 With the leading market share of over 90% for Si modules, any improvements to the existing technology can have a major impact on the consumer market.162 The nearly ideal band gap for tandem bottom cells of 1.12 eV makes Si devices a good match in conjunction with perovskite top cells having large band gaps between 1.7–1.8 eV.101,163–165 While optimal top cell band gaps can be obtained by the substitution of I− with Br− in typical MAPbI3 absorbers,166–168 increasing research is devoted to address the reported photo-induced instability of mixed halide composition.169–171
Mechanically stacked, monolithic, as well as spectrally split tandem devices have been explored with various types of Si cells, device architectures, top cell band gaps, transparent contacts, and light trapping schemes. Simulations predict tandem device efficiencies over 30–35% for two-terminal165,171–179 and four-terminal devices163,171,176,177,180,181 with optimized light management, bandgap tuning, layer thicknesses, and architecture, surpassing the record for single junction c-Si at 26.6%.6,182 Jiang et al. estimated highest tandem performances for two-terminal devices, recommending the use of indium tin oxide (ITO) as top contacts as compared to graphene or thin metal layers.176
Several Si cell technologies have been employed for integrated devices such as polycrystalline, monocrystalline homojunction, passivated emitter rear contact (PERC),183–186 heterojunction technology (HJT),187 and inter-digitated back contact (IBC) cells,188 and the choice has major ramifications for tandem efficiencies, device processing, and the choice of architecture.171 Four-terminal, mechanically stacked architectures are inherently easier to manufacture and can be readily amended to the existing Si technology.173 Requirements for monolithic devices, such as current matching, flatness of the bottom cell, suitable contacting layers, and choice of adequate processing temperatures and reagents to allow fabrication on prior deposited films, can be omitted. Additionally, the energy yield of monolithic devices in real time operation can be affected by up to 5% by variations in spectral irradiance distribution, incident angle of light, and temperature, due to non-ideal current-matching.164,189 Recently, Braly et al. investigated the impact of phase segregating mixed halide perovskite top cells on the performance of current-matched tandem devices. Notably, the authors found that despite the induced phase segregation and the accompanied dramatic decrease in output current in the top cell, the current output of the PSC-shaded bottom cell was left unaffected, which could point to an additional advantage for four-terminal devices.190
The biggest hurdle in the manufacturing of mechanically stacked tandems is the replacement of opaque contact layers in the perovskite top cell. Lang et al. used a flexible transfer process of a single graphene layer to fabricate up to 6.2% efficient semi-transparent PSCs, which resulted in 13.2% efficient tandem devices when stacked on HJT bottom cells. The reduced FF in the MAPbI3 device as compared to the Au contacted cell was attributed to the high sheet resistance of graphene, which was estimated to be 350 ohm sq−1.191 The use of a MoOx/ITO hole transport layer (HTL) yielded a slightly reduced top cell transmittance of around 55% but enabled MAPbI3 devices with a similar performance at 6.2% PCE and tandems up to 13.4% when combined with HJT cells.178 McGehee and co-authors employed transfer-laminated Ag nanowire (NW) electrodes with 90% transmission and around 10 ohm sq−1 sheet resistance to develop semitransparent MAPbI3 top cells with up to 12.7% efficiency. These cells were mechanically stacked on both polycrystalline and monocrystalline Si cells to obtain 17.0% and 17.9% PCE, respectively.192 Transparent top cells with improved stability and efficiency of up to 12.3% were fabricated by sputtering ITO contacts on an Al-capped ZnO nanoparticle layer on PCBM ETLs. This inverted architecture was seen to exhibit an improved temperature stability as compared to opaque cells with Al/Ag contacts with a temperature coefficient as low as 0.22% per °C. In combination with 17.0% efficient mono-Si bottom cells, up to 18.0% efficient tandem devices were achieved.193
Sputtered ITO was also used by Duong et al. to obtain 12.4% semi-transparent top cells with a high transmission of 80% at around 900 nm wavelength. When these cells were stacked on high performance PERC Si cells with 19.6% PCE, up to 20.1% efficient tandems could be measured.194 McMeekin et al. investigated larger band-gap (FA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3 perovskite materials for optimum band-gap matching with bottom Si cells and increased light stability and achieved stabilized 16.0% efficient opaque devices with a band gap of 1.74 eV. An ITO nanoparticle layer allowed the sputter deposition of ITO on a spiro-OMeTAD HTL for 15.1% efficient (12.5% stabilized) semi-transparent top cells. 19.2% efficient HJT bottom cells enabled up to 19.8% steady-state PCE while up to 25.2% was projected from best performing opaque devices assuming 100% transparent electrodes.195 Employing thin metal layers as transparent top contacts, i.e. 7 nm Au on 1 nm Cu seed layer, 16.5% semi-transparent MAPbI3 PSCs were presented by Chen et al. In combination with 21.2% HJT cells as bottom absorbers, 23.0% efficient tandem devices were obtained.196 Ren et al. presented semi-transparent PSCs with a MoO3/Au/MoO3 multilayer stack that was evaporated on a spiro-OMeTAD HTL to achieve 18.1% efficient top cells. The combination with 19.1% efficient monocrystalline Si cells resulted in 23.6% efficient tandem devices.197 Peng et al. introduced indium doping of state-of-the-art TiO2 ETL layers to improve conductivity and band alignment at the ETL/perovskite interface. ITO and Au gold fingers were deposited on MoO3 and spiro-OMeTAD HTLs to enable 16.6% stabilized PCEs for (Cs,MA,FA)Pb(I,Br)3 devices. In combination with 24.0% highly efficient, IBC Si bottom cells,188 up to 24.5% tandem devices were achieved.198 Ballif and co-workers developed near-infrared (NIR) transparent MAPbI3 perovskite top cells with transmission values over 70% between 800–1200 nm wavelength and stabilized efficiencies up to 16.4% with IO:H/ITO layers that were sputtered on MoOx. An optical coupling liquid was used between the subcells to optically connect cells and reduce reflection losses (see Fig. 7a). Tandem efficiencies of up to 25.2% were obtained in combination with 22.1% SHJ bottom devices.199,200 Close to the current single junction Si record at 26.6% PCE, a recent publication by Duong et al. presented highest mechanically stacked, four-terminal PSC/Si tandem devices of up to 26.4% efficiency.201 Multi-cation MA/FA/Cs/Rb perovskites with a bandgap of 1.73 eV and quartz glass substrates were used to obtain semi-transparent devices with steady state PCEs of up to 16.0% and an average transmittance of 84% between 720 and 1100 nm wavelength. Silicone gel was employed to improve the optical coupling between the perovskite top cell and the 23.9% efficient IBC Si cell bottom cell.
 Fig. 7  (a) Four-terminal HJT Si-perovskite tandem device architecture that yielded up to 25.2% efficiency. An optical coupling liquid was used between the subcells to optically connect cells and reduce reflection losses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2016 ACS. (b) Monolithic devices on polished HJT Si substrates have achieved up to 23.6% efficiency to date. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
A few results were reported for mechanically stacked two-terminal devices. Two separate subcells are thereby individually processed and finally electrically connected by enabling a direct contact between the cell top electrodes. Matteocci et al. reported up to 14.5% efficient devices using a stacked ITO interlayer to connect a MAPbI3 and HJT cell. 14.5% PCE was reported with Voc of up to 1.56 V confirming good voltage addition of the subcells. However, large hysteresis of the devices was observed.202 Similar devices with ITO interlayers but on monocrystalline Si bottom cells and with the addition of a thin Au layer between spiro-OMeTAD and ITO were presented by Kanda et al., showing reduced hysteresis and up to 13.7% PCE.203
Another means of mechanically connecting tandem devices is spectral beam splitting.204,205 The inherent advantage in this architecture is a higher degree of freedom in manufacturing as compared to stacked devices as the need for a semi-transparent top cell is omitted. Uzu et al. employed a dichroic mirror that was positioned at 45° with respect to a 25.2% efficient HJT and a 15.3% MAPbI3 perovskite device to gain combined efficiencies of up to 28.0%.206 Sheng et al. used a similar architecture with a beam splitter to combine large-band-gap MAPbBr3 solar cells with both multicrystalline Si and PERC devices to arrive at up to 18.8% and 23.4% efficiency, respectively.207 Duong et al. reported on a reflective tandem configuration, in which the PSC acts as a spectral filter and reflects the long wavelength light to a Si cell. In this setup, a combined efficiency of up to 23.1% was obtained using 22.4% and 15.2% efficient IBC Si and perovskite devices, respectively.208 A similar performing tandem device was reported by Li et al. using a 16.4% efficient (FA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3 PSC and a 21.3% efficient PERC Si cell in a reflective tandem configuration.209
There are also several reports on two-terminal, monolithic tandem devices with perovskite and Si absorber layers. Reduced resistive and optical losses stemming from the omission of an additional substrate and/or charge transport layers should enable monolithic devices to reach more superior performance than mechanically stacked devices.173,176,178 However, the more stringent requirements on current matching, device interconnection, and consecutive processing steps add complexity to the realization of such devices. The direct deposition of perovskite top cells on Si substrates requires feasible manufacturing and high cell performance in the substrate configuration. SSCs can be fabricated with both n-type and p-type wafers leaving some flexibility on the device polarity of the top cell. The use of certain high efficiency Si technologies, however, such as HJT devices with n-type wafers or PERC cells with p-type wafers, can dictate the use of conventional or inverted cell architecture, respectively, as well as operation of the top cell in the superstrate or more commonly the substrate configuration. As highest PSC device efficiencies are typically obtained in the superstrate configuration, additional research and optimization is required to mitigate performance losses in inverted device operation. The thin layers of perovskite layers might further require a planar surface of bottom cell substrates, which can lead to increased reflection losses in the Si device.210 Light trapping structures for high PCE Si devices receive major attention to improve the inherently weak light absorption in the NIR.211,212 High efficiency Si cells therefore typically employ sophisticated light trapping schemes with textured front and/or rear surfaces. Other limitations on processing can arise from temperature restrictions of the Si cell. While diffused junction silicon devices undergo diffusion and oxidation steps around 800–900 °C and should therefore be compatible with processing temperatures around 500 °C (as can be required by NiOx or TiO2 layers in PSCs),213,214 thin HJT cells might necessitate much lower temperatures below 150–200 °C to avoid performance loss due to passivation degradation and substrate warping.187,213–215 Additionally, typically used ITO or indium zinc oxide (IZO) transparent conducting tin oxide (TCO) layers in HJT cells are neither electrically nor optically stable upon annealing at 500 °C in an oxygen containing environment.213 With record efficiencies up to 26.3% and their use of TCO top contacts, HJT Si cells are nevertheless highly attractive and commonly used for monolithic tandem applications with perovskite top cells.6,182
McGehee, Buonassisi, and co-workers reported first monolithic Si-perovskite devices with up to 13.7% stabilized efficiency by employing a Si-based n++/p++ tunnel junction between an n-type Si wafer and a perovskite top cell. The semi-transparent top cells were manufactured in the conventional architecture with high temperature processed TiO2 layers and transparent Ag NW mesh top electrodes.216,217 Werner et al. reported increased PCEs of up to 16.4% with homojunction Si bottom cells utilizing zinc tin oxide (ZTO) as a high temperature stable recombination layer for mesoscopic TiO2-based perovskite top cells.213 Albrecht et al. employed HJT bottom cells and replaced TiO2 ETLs with low-temperature-processed tin oxide layers by the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique, which formed the recombination contact together with ITO. MoO3 and ITO were used as HTLs for semi-transparent (FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3 perovskite devices to enable up to 19.9% efficient (18.1% stabilized) monolithic tandem solar cells.165,218 Werner et al. presented low-temperature-processed IZO films as recombination layers between HJT bottom cells and MAPbI3 top cells. Highly transparent top cells with up to 16.4% stabilized power output were enabled by sputtering of IO:H and ITO layers on MoOx HTLs. Monolithic two-terminal tandems from this architecture resulted in up to 21.2% and 20.5% stabilized efficiency for 0.17 cm2 and 1.43 cm2 large devices, respectively.199,219 Bush et al. recently presented monolithic perovskite-HJT devices with up to 23.6% certified PCE with stable power output and no hysteresis (see Fig. 7b). Encapsulated, semi-transparent (Cs,FA)Pb(I,Br)3 cells with SnO/ZTO buffer layers and sputtered ITO exhibited up to 14.5% PCE and withstood a 1000 hour damp heat test at 85 °C and 85% relative humidity, which is the international electrotechnical commission (IEC) standard for crystalline Si modules.220
2.2. PSC/CIGS tandem devices
Chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (or CIGS) solar cells are a highly attractive technology for the incorporation into integrated or tandem devices due to their thin film nature, high PCE, and tunable bandgap. PCEs of up to 22.6% have been achieved for single junction devices, which exceeds PCEs of market leading pc-Si and all other thin film PV technologies.221,222 The thin film nature allows for a wide choice of deposition methods and substrates which opens the door for low-cost printing techniques, roll-to-roll deposition, and flexible tandem modules.223,224 The bandgap of CIGS can be tailored from 1.0 eV up to 2.4 eV by increasing the gallium and sulfur content in the absorber.225 Both highest performing devices at a band gap of 1.15 eV and lower band gap variants down to 1.0 eV are gaining increasing attention for the use as bottom cells in tandem devices with perovskite top cells.226,227 Simulations predict theoretical tandem PCEs of up to 42% for a combination of a 1.6–1.9 eV band-gap top cell with a 0.9–1.2 eV band-gap bottom cell, which is well accessible for perovskite and chalcopyrite absorbers, respectively.228–232
Most reports on PSC/CIGS tandem devices to date have focused on the mechanically-stacked architecture. A semi-transparent perovskite solar cell is thereby stacked on top of a CIGS device to increase the utilization of the solar spectrum. The low capital investment of this method allows upgrading of existing technologies, providing a simple pathway for commercialization.192 The typically employed four-terminal configuration omits the need for sophisticated current matching via the bandgap, absorber thickness, or area of in-series-connected cells, which is crucial for two-terminal devices. The use of two separate substrates further reduces restrictions on processing parameters, reagents, and device architecture.
The biggest hurdle for four-terminal devices has been the fabrication of semi-transparent perovskite devices. Typically used opaque metal contacts, such as gold,233–236 silver,237–240 or aluminum,241,242 have to be replaced by transparent contacts. Bailie et al. developed a transparent contact in the form of a spray-coated Ag NW film that was transferred via a lamination process onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer of the perovskite cell. While this method posed a high risk of shorting or incomplete transfer, low sheet resistances (12.4 ohm sq−1) and high transmission values (90%) were obtained. Due to the poor stability of mixed-halide perovskites,169 semi-transparent MAPbI3 devices with 12.7% PCE and a band-gap of 1.6 eV were stacked on 17.0% CIGS solar cells (Eg = 1.1 eV) to produce up to 18.6% tandem devices.192 Improved tandem PCEs of up to 19.5% were obtained by Tiwari and co-authors by using a transparent contact composed of evaporated MoO3 and sputtered ZnO:Al to yield 12.1% semi-transparent MAPbI3 PSCs and stacking them on 18.4% efficient CIGS bottom cells (see Fig. 8a).243 Substitution of the ZnO:Al TCO by sputtered In2O3:H led to 14.2% efficient PSCs and 20.5% tandem devices due to higher NIR transmission of the TCO.244 By moving to a substrate configuration and inverting the architecture of the PSC, up to 16.1% transparent PSCs were obtained without any additional anti-reflective (AR)-coating. Amongst others, substitution of MoO3 with PTAA HTL resulted in over 80% transmission of the PSCs in the NIR region. The combination with 1.15 eV bandgap CIGS and 1.0 eV bandgap CuIn(S,Se)2 (CIS) devices resulted in up to 22.1% and 20.9% efficient tandem devices. It is noteworthy that the bottom cells thereby had a stand-alone PCE of 19.2% and 13.0% for CIGS and CIS, respectively.245 A 20.7% efficient tandem device was recently presented by Guchhait et al. The group utilized a 1 nm thin Ag buffer layer together with sputtered ITO to obtain 16.0% semi-transparent MAPbI3 devices; bottom cells exhibited a stand-alone PCE of 12.3%.246 First tandem modules of up to 17.8% efficiency have been reported for a mechanically stacked 3.76 cm2 sized mini-module, surpassing individual module efficiencies for both subcell technologies.247
 Fig. 8  (a) Four-terminal CIGS-perovskite integrated device architecture that yielded up to 19.5% efficiency. Further advancements by the same group led to up to 22.1% efficient devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 ACS. (b) Solution-processed monolithic devices have achieved up to 10.9% efficiency to date. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
The thin film nature of both perovskite and chalcopyrite absorbers allows for the employment of low-cost printing methods which are expected to further reduce cost for tandem devices. Lee et al. have reported four-terminal tandem devices with solution-processed absorbers and electrode layers that achieved up to 10.8% PCE. CIGS absorbers with an absorption edge at 1250 nm were thereby formed from a methanol solution with polyvinyl acetate (PVA) binder that was converted with Se vapors and H2S gas. Semi-transparent PSCs with up to 8.3% PCE were obtained using Ag NW films that were transferred onto spiro-OMeTAD. For the 8.0% efficient CIGS device, ZnO and ZnO:Al layers were spin-coated from sol–gel solutions with embedded Ag NWs to improve the conductivity.248 Yang et al. reported solution-processed tandem devices with up to 15.5% efficiency. Hydrazine solutions were employed to fabricate 12.4% efficient CIGS devices while semi-transparent PSCs with up to 11.5% PCE were obtained by thermally evaporating MoOx/Au/Ag/MoOx layer stacks that served as the transparent HTL.249 Uhl et al. used a combination of spin-coated C60/bisC60 bi-layers together with sputtered ITO as the ETL to gain semi-transparent PSCs with up to 13.6% PCE (without AR-coating). CIGS absorbers were obtained from a molecular ink with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and thiourea to yield up to 14.3% efficient CIGS and 13.0% efficient CIS devices. Mechanically-stacked tandems with various top and bottom bandgap combinations showed highest tandem stabilized efficiencies of up to 18.8% for CIGS bottom cells with MAPbI3 top absorbers and up to 18.7% for CIS with MAPbI3. Current-matched, two-terminal tandem devices were also projected which resulted in up to 18.5% PCE when combining low-bandgap CIS with MAPbI3 absorbers, highlighting the excellent suitability of low-bandgap CIS devices for the application in monolithic bottom cells. Best current matching was thereby obtained for 1.15 eV and 1.70 eV devices as well as 1.0 eV and 1.51–1.59 eV devices. The authors also highlighted potential fill factor (FF) losses for CIS bottom cells under UV-filtered light, which were shown to be mitigated by a slight adjustment to the sulfur content.250
To date, there has only been one report of monolithic tandem devices with CIGS and perovskite absorbers, which points to the increased difficulty of device manufacturing. Processing temperatures, layer compatibilities, film roughness, and device architectures have to be considered carefully. The formation of the CIGS absorber typically requires temperatures between 400–600 °C,223,251–253 which is incompatible with perovskite devices.254–256 Similarly, high temperature calcination steps that are used for typical charge transport layers in perovskite cells are incompatible with CIGS solar cells. The TiO2 ETL and NiOx HTL, for example, that are used for highest efficiency perovskite devices in the conventional and inverted architecture, respectively, require annealing steps around 400–550 °C for 30–60 minutes.136,192,234,237,241 Kijima et al. have shown that temperatures over 320 °C can lead to a dramatic breakdown of the CIGS device performance due to the counter-doping of the absorber by Cd or Zn diffusion from the buffer layer.257 Low temperature air-annealing at 200 °C is typically regarded to be harmless (or even beneficial) for CIGS devices when conducted for several minutes, while extended durations can result in cation diffusion as well.258,259 Todorov et al. found that the proximity of ZnO layers in CIGS devices can lead to deterioration of the perovskite at temperatures as low as 60 °C, while ZnO-free CIGS devices allowed annealing at 120 °C for several hours without damage.260 The planarization of the bottom cell might also have to be addressed due to the inherent roughness of polycrystalline CIGS absorbers.192,224 Lastly, the electrode polarity of CIGS devices in the substrate configuration with a bottom anode and a top cathode demands the perovskite top cells to be fabricated in substrate configuration and inverted architecture when monolithic tandem devices are desired, which can impose severe constraints on device processing and limit the electronic quality of the absorber and charge selective contacts.250,261 The list of practical disadvantages, however, might be offset by economic benefits from cost savings in manufacturing (i.e. monolithic integration and omission of an additional substrate and electrode) and improved performance (i.e. reduced optical and resistive losses), which can make monolithic two-terminal devices economically advantageous.178,224,228,232
Todorov and co-authors have addressed these issues and reported on up to 10.9% efficient monolithic tandem devices (see Fig. 8b). Semi-transparent PSCs were developed with ETLs composed of PCBM and thin Al layers (50% transmission) or Ca-based electrodes (80% transmission), respectively. The polystyrenesulfonate doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT:PSS) was employed as a recombination layer between ITO and the perovskite. CIGS solar cells with a band gap of 1.04 eV were fabricated with a hydrazine-based solution process and covered with mixed-halide PSCs with a band gap of 1.72 eV to achieve monolithic tandem devices with up to 8.0% PCE for Al contacts and 10.9% PCE for Ca-based contacts. From single junction device performances, two-terminal PCEs of up to 15.9% were projected assuming an ideal top electrode with 100% transmission, which highlights the potential for further improvements.260 Detailed optical modeling and optimization for planar CIGS/hybrid perovskite tandems claims possible PCEs as high as 29% without any antireflection (AR)-coating or light scattering structures.262
2.3. PSC/PSC tandem devices
Tandem solar cells based on two perovskite subcells are receiving increasing attention due to their high potential for achieving high performance at very low cost and energy payback time.95,263 Simulations show that PSC/PSC devices could attain efficiencies of over 35%, which would be competitive to tandems with other bottom cell technologies.264 The main hurdle for PSC/PSC tandems so far has been the absence of stable low-bandgap perovskite compositions. Hao et al. presented lead-free compositions by substituting Pb with Sn that achieved up to 5.73% PCE.265 It was shown that MASn(I,Br)3 absorbers can cover a band-gap range from 2.15 eV down to 1.30 eV for pure bromide and iodide compositions, respectively. Liao et al. investigated (FA,MA)PbSnI3 absorbers and achieved PCEs of up to 15.0% with a perovskite band-gap as low as 1.2 eV.266 Sn-based perovskites were reported to exhibit poor atmospheric stability as compared to their lead-based analog.265 However, several alternative low-bandgap compositions have since been explored with the addition of FA+, Cs+, Pb2+, and Cl− that show improved performance and stability.263,264,266,267 Bottom cell absorbers with a band-gap of 1.2 eV are well matched with top cell absorbers with 1.75–1.85 eV and 1.6–1.9 eV in two-terminal and four-terminal architectures, respectively.263
Heo et al. presented mechanically-stacked PSC/PSC devices that were connected via a lamination technique. Wet poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PTAA top contact layers on MAPbI3 devices were pressed onto the PCBM top contacts of MAPbBr3 bottom devices to obtain two-terminal tandem cells with a Voc of 2.25 V and up to 10.4% PCE.268 Eperon et al. reported remarkable four-terminal devices of up to 20.3% efficiency (see Fig. 9). In this work, (FA,Cs)(Sn,Pb)(I,Br)3-based absorbers allowed bandgap tailoring and improved device stability. Bottom devices with 1.2 eV bandgap and up to 14.8% efficiency were combined with semi-transparent top cells of 1.6 eV bandgap and 15.8% efficiency to reach the highest efficiency tandems.263
 Fig. 9  (a) Two and four terminal tandem configuration that yielded up to 17.0% and 20.3% PCEs. (b) SEM micrograph of the two-terminal perovskite tandem device with 1.2 eV and 1.8 eV band-gap subcells. (c) Stabilized power output of the two- and four-terminal tandems and subcells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2016 AAAS. 
Jiang et al. were the first to report on bottom up, solution-processed, two-terminal tandem devices. A multilayer of spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/PCBM:PEI (poly(ethyleneimine) is abbreviated to PEI) was thereby employed as a charge recombination layer. Monolithic tandem devices in the substrate configuration exhibited up to 1.89 V, but PCE (7.0%) and short circuit current density (Jsc) values were limited due to the use of two equal band-gap MAPbI3 absorber layers with non-complementary absorption spectra.269 Eperon et al. combined 1.2 eV (FA,Cs)(Pb,Sn)I3 bottom cell absorbers and 1.8 eV (FA,Cs)(Pb,Sn)(I,Br)3 top cell absorbers to gain monolithic tandem efficiencies of up to 17.0% (see Fig. 9). It was seen that the top ITO contact of the bottom devices acted as a protection layer to avoid solvent damage from consecutive layer processing. Forgacs et al. deposited 1.55 eV MAPbI3 bottom cells on 2.0 eV band-gap (FA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3 top cells. Monolithic tandems in the superstrate configuration achieved up to 18.1% PCE in reverse scan (17.4% in forward scan) using small molecular weight organic semiconductors as selective charge transporting layers. Notably, all layers were vacuum evaporated, except for the wide-bandgap perovskite and the TiO2 ETL.270
2.4. PSC/organic solar cell (OSC) tandem devices
Usually, solar radiation below a wavelength of about 800 nm can be utilized in most state-of-the-art PSCs with MAPbI3 or FAPbI3 whereas the majority of the NIR range cannot be efficiently used, which hinders the efficient harvest of photons and further advance in PCE. Therefore, one promising way to improve the cell's performance is to broaden the light absorption of the perovskite layer to the NIR spectral region (higher than 800 nm). Very successfully, the photo-response of hybrid halide perovskites as light harvesters for PSCs has been pushed to 950 nm (MASnI3) and 1060 nm (MASn0.5Pb0.5I3) by replacing Pb with Sn. However, the corresponding PCE (5.73% and 4.18%) and open circuit voltage (Voc) (0.82 V and 0.42 V) of the MASnxPb1−xI3 PSC with poor stability were much lower as compared with the typical MAPbI3 PSC.265,271 Another alternative strategy is to broaden the light absorption to the NIR spectral region by integrating PSCs with other solar cells to enhance the PV performance of PSCs. As we reviewed above, the overwhelming majority of work has focused on integrating PSC with CIGS or SSCs. Here, we will highlight another type of integrated devices based on PSCs and OSCs.
The integration of PSCs and OSCs into one unit means to integrate both a perovskite and a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) in an interlayer-free tandem cell. More exactly, some examples cannot be regarded as an integrated system; it is just the modification of PSCs. The BHJ is a photoactive layer composed of a NIR absorbing conjugated polymer and small molecule or a fullerene derivative usually used as light absorbers in OSCs that have exhibited superior PV performance. The electrons and holes produced in perovskite films and BHJ films can be collected at each electrode based on their ambipolar charge transporting properties. It is highly desirable for capturing full-range solar light from ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) to NIR solar spectrum by integrating a perovskite layer as a UV-vis absorber and a BHJ layer as a NIR absorber in an interlayer-free tandem cell. The PCE value of the as-fabricated integrated device can be expected to increase to the one approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit.272,273
Until now, there have been several interesting reports that investigated integrated PSC/OSC devices, and their performances, including FF, Jsc, photo-response, and NIR harvesting, which are greatly improved by the integration pattern.274–278 These innovative designs present huge potential to achieve high PCEs in the development of new-generation PV technologies. Poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (PDPP3T) is a typical low-bandgap polymer with an optical bandgap of 1.33 eV, lower than that of MAPbI3 (approximately 1.55 eV).67,279 Integrating PDPP3T into a PSC forms a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/(PDPP3T-PC61BM)/Ca/Al (PC61BM stands for [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester), as illustrated in Fig. 10a, in which both perovskite and PDPP3T serve as the light absorber. The bilayer absorber film can efficiently enhance the light absorption of the integrated cells, resulting in an expanded photo-response of the integrated cell to 970 nm, higher than that of the single BHJ cell or single PSC. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum (Fig. 10b) of the integrated cell in the 300–755 nm section mainly stems from the PSC due to the strong absorption of MAPbI3 in that region while beyond 755 nm it mostly comes from the BHJ cell. Although the photo-response of the integrated cell has been greatly broadened, the average PCE (6.63%), FF (0.60) and Voc (0.86 V) values of the integrated cell have not achieved an evident increase as compared with the single PSC (9.46%, 0.80, and 0.90 V) (Fig. 10c).274
 Fig. 10  Structures (a), EQE spectra (b), and J–V curves (c) for the OSC (BHJ solar cell), PSC and the integrated PSC/BHJ cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2015 RSC. 
Through introducing a wide-band gap, small-molecule DOR3T-TBDT as a donor into the BHJ film, and integrating perovskite with BHJ together, Y. Yang's group developed an integrated perovskite/BHJ device with a structure of ITO/TiO2/perovskite/BHJ/MoO3/Ag, as illustrated in Fig. 11a and b.276 This improved planar structure is an interlayer-free parallel tandem solar cell based on both PSC and OSC subcells for efficient light harvesting. The MAPbI3−xClx perovskite layer absorbs UV-vis light while the DOR3T-TBDT/PC71BM or PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM (PC71BM stands for [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester) BHJ layer absorbs the light that has not been fully absorbed by the perovskite or NIR light. The efficient integrated PSC/OSC device using the PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM BHJ film achieves a higher PCE (12%) and a higher Jsc (20.6 mA cm−2), compared with a PSC using PBDTT-SeDPP alone (9.7%, 18.1 mA cm−2) (Fig. 11c). The EQE data confirms that the photo-response of the integrated perovskite/BHJ device with a structure of ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM/MoO3/Ag is extended to 900 nm whereas that of the PSC shows no photo-response higher than 800 nm (Fig. 11d). The extension to 900 nm can be attributed to the contribution of PBDTT-SeDPP which exhibits high light absorption in the UV-vis-NIR region. However, it should be noted that the neat small molecule or polymer HTM cannot contribute to the photocurrent whereas the PBDTT-SeDPP blended with PC71BM acceptor in BHJ forming an integrated device structure with perovskite will generate higher photocurrent and higher PCE.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic structure and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (c) J–V curves of the integrated PSC/OSC(perovskite/BHJ) device. (d) EQE spectra of the corresponding PV device and absorption spectra of the HTL (PBDTT-SeDPP) and BHJ (PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM) film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
A full-range absorbing integrated solar cell composed of UV-vis absorbing MAPbI3 perovskite layer and an NIR absorbing organic BHJ was recently developed by Lee and co-authors.277 As shown in Fig. 12a–c, the BHJ is composed of a diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based low-bandgap polymer DT-PDPP2T-TT, PC71BM and N2200 (poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene) is abbreviated as N2200). Thereby, the DT-PDPP2T-TT acts as a donor whereas PC71BM and N2200 serve as acceptors. The integrated device was fabricated based on a planar architecture with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/VOx/MAPb(I1−xBrx)3/BHJ/N-doped TiOx/Al, where the PEDOT:PSS/VOx layers are the hole transport/collection layers. A nitrogen-doped TiOx layer was used to enhance the electron selectivity and decrease the contact resistance between the BHJ film and the Al electrode. By introducing a novel n-type polymer N2200 as an electron transport enhancer and diphenyl ether (DPE) as a solvent processing additive, the BHJ morphology was optimized. The optimized integrated perovskite/BHJ devices generate a dramatically increased Jsc from 17.61 to 20.04 mA cm−2 because of the additional NIR harvesting, retaining a higher FF of 0.77 and a Voc of 1.06 V. As a result, a PCE of 16.36% was achieved in the integrated device based on PSC and OSC. This PCE value is so far the highest value for the reported integrated perovskite/BHJ devices, which is far higher than that value using the optimized reference PSCs (14.70%). In addition, a low-temperature-processable flexible integrated perovskite/BHJ device was also fabricated. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/ITO thereby served as flexible substrates. All of the processes were performed below 150 °C, and a PCE of 12.98% was achieved in the optimized flexible integrated perovskite/BHJ device (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  (a) Device architecture of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (b) Chemical structures of DT-PDPP2T-TT, PC71BM, and N2200. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (d) J–V curve of a flexible integrated PSC/OSC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Compared with the previous integrated PSC/OSC devices by Ding's group and Yang's group,274,276 Lee's group used the low-bandgap polymer DT-PDPP2T-TT to absorb NIR radiation up to 920 nm that is above the absorption edge of the perovskite (800 nm). Importantly, the optimized BHJ layers in Lee's work effectively provided additional light harvesting in the NIR without sacrificing Voc and FF of the PSCs.277 Similarly, an extended PV response up to 900 nm has been demonstrated by Sun's group in the integrated perovskite/BHJ device with a structure of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/BHJ/V2O5/Au using a small molecule/PC71BM BHJ layer. Through careful interface engineering, the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/HTM/PC70BM (PC70BM stands for [6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester) integrated devices showed an optimized PCE of 16.2%.278 Sun group's work is based on the narrow band-gap acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type small molecule HTM and PC70BM as the BHJ layer in the PSC/OSC integrated device, generating an improved photo-response. Note that the photo-response of the PSC/OSC integrated device with an architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PC61BM/C60-SB/Ag/MoO3/Polymer BHJ/C60-N/Ag (C60-SB stands for tris(sulfobetaine)-substituted fulleropyrrolidine, and C60–N stands for tertiary amino-fulleropyrrolidine) is not broadened even though a PCE of 16%, including a maximum Voc of 1.80 V and a maximum FF of 0.77, has been achieved, which can be attributed to an efficient graded recombination layer.275
It is clear from the above-mentioned results that the integration of a UV-vis absorbing PSC layer with a NIR absorbing BHJ layer into a tandem solar cell is an effective strategy for extending the absorption bandwidth of the perovskite, thus advancing the PCE of the integrated PSC-based devices. Those results show the feasibility and potential for integrated devices to improve cell efficiency, meanwhile, provides significant design principles for this novel PV architecture. It should be stressed again that, in terms of the commercialization of solar cells, the development of the integrated PSC/OSC device has three advantages: one is the achievement of high PCEs by broadening absorption to the NIR region; the second is the reduction of the thermalization losses resulting from the current and/or voltage mismatch among subcells; and the third is that it is much easier to manufacture the device by monolithically stacking the perovskite layer and the BHJ layer. These advantages for such an interlayer-free parallel tandem cell are among others similar to integrated devices for energy harvesting and storage, which is discussed in the next section.
3. Integrated solar cell devices for energy harvesting and storage
3.1. DSSC and LIB integrated devices
Solar cells are devices to convert sunlight into electricity (energy harvesting), while LIBs can convert electricity into chemical energy (energy storage). The fabrication of an integrated power system that hybridizes energy harvesting and storage, such as solar cells and LIBs, is a growing field of research and especially important for mobile electronics, as the supply of electric energy can be bridged over the intermittent periods of light harvesting. Typically, these energy harvesting and storage devices are developed as independent technologies but ultimately combined by the user to create a power system. Traditionally, this system is based on commercial silicon-based solar panels and solid-state LIBs, and with both independent parts usually being rather large, heavy, and inflexible. In order to satisfy the special needs in some fields such as mobile electronics, integrated power packs with properties such as small size, light-weight, and high energy density have to be developed. In particular, with advancements in nanomaterial science and technology, various nanostructures have been developed and widely applied in energy harvesting, conversion, and storage devices due to their superior efficiency and reduced weight.
Guo et al. demonstrated the successful fabrication of an integrated power pack consisting of tandem DSSCs and a LIB on the same Ti foil that employed double-sided TiO2 nanotube (NT) arrays.133 As illustrated in Fig. 13, the upper part used solar cells based on TiO2 NTs, while the lower part is a LIB for storing the generated energy by the DSSCs, utilizing TiO2 NTs as the anode and LiCoO2 as the cathode. When sunlight is irradiated on the DSSCs, the photo-generated electrons will be injected into the conduction band of TiO2 NTs from dye molecules and transported along the Ti foil to the TiO2 anode of the LIB, while the photo-generated holes accumulate at the Pt electrode. Thus, the LIB is in a charging process during which the electrons produced by DSSCs will promote the anode reaction of TiO2 + xLi+ + xe− → LixTiO2. Simultaneously, the cathode reaction of LiCoO2 → Li1−xCoO2 + xLi+ + xe− releases free electrons, which will flow to the Pt CE of the DSSC through an external circuit and combine with the holes there. Thus the entire process for charge generation, separation, and storage is complete. In order to provide a high enough voltage for charging the LIB with the solar cells, tandem solar cells are needed. An open-circuit voltage of 3.39 V and a short-circuit current density of 1.01 mA cm−2 have been reached, and the power pack can be charged to about 3 V in around 8 min, exhibiting a discharge capacity of about 38.89 μA h under the discharge density of 100 μA. However, the total energy conversion and storage efficiency for this system is still very low (only 0.82%) and further improvements are needed, especially with respect to the conversion efficiency of DSSCs, the energy density of LIBs, as well as the integration mode design.
 Fig. 13  Design and principle of an integrated power pack system based on double-sided TiO2 NT arrays. (A) TiO2 NT arrays grown on the Ti foil substrate by anodization in fluoric ethylene glycol solution. The top segments of the Ti foil are tandem DSSCs which are utilized to harvest sunlight from the environment, and the bottom segment is a typical LIB which is used to store energy converted from DSSCs. (B) Detailed structure and working principle of the integrated power pack system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2012 ACS. 
As promising alternatives for conventional lithium ion batteries, lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) and lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries have recently received considerable attention owing to their high specific energy density.282,283 The latter provide a new platform for developing integrated devices via photocharging to directly convert solar to electrochemical energy.282–284 In Li–O2 batteries, charge is stored at the cathode by the reversible formation/decomposition of Li2O2 on discharge/charge.284 However, the insulating Li2O2 and the sluggish kinetics of the Li2O2 oxidation reaction hinder the efficient electrochemical decomposition of Li2O2, which leads to a severe charging overpotential issue. Wu et al. proposed a new concept of a “photoassisted charging process” by integrating a triiodide/iodide redox-coupled dye-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrode with a Li–O2 battery.280 As shown in Fig. 14a–c, upon charging under illumination, the reduced form of the redox shuttle (Mred) is first converted to Mox on the oxygen electrode, which in turn oxidizes the Li2O2. Owing to the generation of photovoltage and the efficiently shuttling charges between Li2O2 particles and the oxygen electrode surface, the oxidation of Li2O2 is facilitated and the charging overpotential is greatly reduced. More importantly, the use of a redox shuttle to couple a photoelectrode and an oxygen electrode offers a unique strategy to address the overpotential issue of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries and also a distinct approach for integrating solar cells and batteries.
 Fig. 14  (upper row) The photoassisted charging process of a solar battery. (a) Schematic drawing of a three-electrode solar battery consisting of a Li anode, an oxygen electrode and a photoelectrode. On charging, the photoelectrode and Li anode are connected to the outside circuit, while on discharging, the oxygen electrode and Li anode are connected to the outside circuit. (b) The proposed photoelectrochemical mechanism of the photoassisted charging process: on charging under illumination, the redox shuttle (Mred) is oxidized to Mox on the photoelectrode and then diffuses to the Li2O2 particles that are deposited on the oxygen electrode. By oxidizing the Li2O2 to O2 and Li+, the Mox is reduced back to Mred. (c) Corresponding energy diagram of a solar battery (‘SC’ stands for semiconductor and ‘S’ stands for sensitizer). The photoassisted charging voltage is determined by the energy difference between the Li+/Li redox potential and the quasi-Fermi level of electrons in the semiconductor electrode (at best close to its conduction band (CB) edge). Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2014 NPG. (lower row) (d) In a different setup, the battery consists of a Li anode with an organic electrolyte, a Li-ion conductive LATP (Li1.35Ti1.75Al0.25P2.7Si0.3O12) glass ceramic separator, and an aqueous Li2Sn (1 ≤ n ≤ 4) alkaline catholyte containing the Pt/CdS photocatalysts (coated on Ti mesh). (e) The discharging process is the same as that of a common aqueous Li–S battery while the charging process is different: The discharged S2− ions are oxidized to polysulfide ions by photoexcited holes from the CdS photocatalyst driven by light irradiation. Meanwhile the photoexcited electron, freed from the Coulomb attraction of the hole, transfers to the Pt particle, where it then reduces protons to hydrogen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
In Li–S batteries, charge is stored at the S cathode by the reversible formation/decomposition of Li2S on discharge/charge. However, the reduction of S into the final Li2S product is accompanied by a series of intermediate species: Li2Sx (2 ≤ x ≤ 8) and insulating S.285 Note that the sulfide/polysulfide electrolytes are widely used in quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs), and the S2−/Sn2− redox species are able to strongly adsorb at the metal chalcogenide quantum dot surface, which can efficiently scavenge holes from quantum dots.286 As a consequence, Zhou et al. designed a new prototype of a solar-driven chargeable Li–S battery, in which the capture and storage of solar energy was realized by oxidizing S2− ions to polysulfide ions in aqueous solution with a Pt-modified CdS photocatalyst, whose working principle is as shown in Fig. 14d and e.281 This device delivered a specific capacity of 792 mA h g−1 during the 2 h photocharging process with a discharge potential at 2.53 V (vs. Li+/Li). Moreover, the charging process could proceed under natural sunlight irradiation. The developed device realized the direct storage of solar energy in a Li–S battery without using PV cells while also being accompanied by hydrogen generation.
3.2. DSSC, SSC, and NG integrated devices
Harvesting solar energy via solar cells is an important way to respond to the energy crisis and environmental pollution. However, in some circumstances, such as a cloudy day or for indoor applications, solar energy may be very weak or even impossible to access. In contrast to this, mechanical energy is ubiquitous. Taking advantage of a solar cell and a NG to form a hybrid cell is a promising way for energy harvesting. In 2009, Xu et al. developed a hybrid cell composed of a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) and a DSSC on a common substrate as shown in Fig. 15a–c.287 As for the PENG, a ZnO vertical NW array was grown on a GaN substrate by the vapor deposition process as the working component, while the ZnO continuous film deposited simultaneously with the ZnO NW array was used as the bottom electrode. A Pt-coated silicon substrate, with one side possessing the zig zag structure, was used as the top electrode of the PENG. The flat side of the silicon was used as the cathode of the DSSC. The ITO substrate acted as the anode of the DSSC while the dye-decorated ZnO NW array was used as the working component. This hybrid cell can harvest the solar energy and ultrasonic wave energy simultaneously or individually. By integrating these two cells in series or parallel, the hybrid cell can either enhance the output voltage from 0.591 V to 0.60 V or output current from 44 μA cm−2 to 45 μA cm−2. However, the utilization of a liquid electrolyte may cause the DSSC to suffer from evaporation and leakage as the back to back physical integration of these two cells on the same substrate was not a compact design. In order to solve these problems, Xu et al. developed a solid-electrolyte-based compact hybrid cell as shown in Fig. 15d.288 The ZnO NWs are grown via the hydrothermal method on the ITO substrate. After the dye was decorated on the ZnO NWs, the solid electrolyte was spun on the dye sensitized ZnO NWs followed by a baking procedure to remove the organic solution in the electrolyte. After depositing a layer of Au, a cone-shaped cathode, which can also be used as the top electrode of the PENG, was prepared. By stacking a GaN substrate with a ZnO NW array onto the DSSC, a compact teeth-teeth hybrid cell was fabricated. After incorporating the PENG into the device, the cell's optimum power could be enhanced by 6%. In order to harvest solar energy for remote locations, Pan et al. developed an optical fiber based hybrid cell as shown in Fig. 16.289 The ITO layer and ZnO seed layer were deposited on the optical fiber in sequence. After growing the ZnO NW array on it, the fiber was placed in a Pt-coated stainless steel capillary tube. The liquid electrolyte was introduced between the tube and the optic fiber via a capillary effect. ITO and Pt functioned as the photoanode and photocathode, respectively. On the outer side of the stainless steel tube, a densely packed ZnO NW textured film was fabricated by a wet chemical method while on top of it a conductive carbon tape was used as the electrode of the PENG. The hybrid cell's voltage was dominated by the PENG while its current was dominated by the DSSC which benefited the power output of the hybrid cell. With the development of wearable electronics, the development of lightweight, flexible, and sustainable power sources is highly desirable. Pu et al. developed a wearable power textile by integrating a grating-structured textile-based triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) and a fiber-based DSSC into a cloth as shown in Fig. 17a.290 The TENG, aimed to harvest the swing energy of arms during walking and running, was made up of a slider fabric located at the sleeve and a stator fabric located underneath the arm (Fig. 17b). Both interdigitated electrodes on the stator and parallel striped electrode on the slider were fabricated by a route of laser-scribed masking and subsequent electroless deposition. For the stator fabrics, an additional layer of parylene used as an electrification layer was deposited on the top of Ni via chemical vapor deposition. The relative sliding between the slider and stator fabric can generate alternative electricity between the interdigitated electrodes in the stator fabric. The fiber-based DSSC was fabricated by winding the Pt wire around the TiO2 coated Ti wires in a flexible plastic tube (Fig. 17c). After combining the TENG and DSSC via a bridge rectifier (Fig. 17d), the hybrid power textile can generate an additional short circuit current as shown in Fig. 17e. Chen et al. developed a compact hybrid textile composed of a TENG and DSSC.291 In this design, Cu-coated polymer polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) stripes, and a wire-shaped photoanode were woven on an industrial weaving machine to form the hybrid cell via a shuttle-flying process. By this hybridization, next to the enhanced output power, the load range can be tailored, which is useful for powering small electronics with varying resistance.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic structure of a serially integrated hybrid cell. (b) SEM image of the DSSC unit. (c) SEM image of the PENG unit. The SEM image inserted between (b) and (c) is a low-magnification cross-section view of the hybrid cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 287. Copyright 2009 ACS. (d) Schematic illustration of a hybrid cell consisting of a solid-state DSSC and a vertically aligned ZnO NW array grown on a GaN substrate using the high-temperature vapor deposition method for fabricating the PENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 16  (a) A demonstration of using the hybrid cell beneath a bridge. (b) Enlarged view of the hybrid cells mounted beneath the bridge. (c) The 3D HC is composed of an optical fiber-based DSSC with a capillary tube as the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 17  (a) A photo of a power-textile with a pair of TENG fabrics and seven fiber-based DSSCs in series on the shoulder. (b and c) Are the scheme of textile TENG and fiber-based DSSC, respectively. (d) An equivalent circuit of a self-charging system. (e) The short circuit current of fiber-based DSSCs, TENG fabrics, and the hybrid power textile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Abide by the DSSC/NG integrated device, Wang et al. developed a hybrid integrated device based on a silicon solar cell (SSC) and a NG in 2016 that was designed for simultaneously or individually harvesting solar and wind energy.292 The structure of the hybrid NG is shown in Fig. 18a. A Si-based solar cell was fixed on the top surface of a TENG. The TENG was composed of a middle vibrating Kapton/Cu/FEP film, top and bottom acrylic substrates with Cu electrodes. The TENG's operation was based on the middle film's periodic contact and separation with the top/bottom electrodes under the wind. The solar cell reached its optimal output power of 8 mW under an external resistance of 600 Ω, while the TENG achieved its optimal output power of 26 mW under an external resistance of 1 MΩ. After solving this impedance mismatch problem via a transformer, the hybridized NG exceeded the output current of the individual solar cell or TENG, as shown in Fig. 18b. Finally, four hybrid NGs were integrated together to power a temperature–humidity sensor, as shown in Fig. 18c.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the hybrid NG. (b) The output current of the TENG, solar cell and the hybrid NG. (c) Photograph of a temperature–humidity sensor powered by the hybrid NG at room-light illumination and a wind speed of ∼15 m s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2016 ACS. 
3.3. DSSC and SC integrated devices
In recent years, the solar rechargeable SCs have been designed for the efficient utilization of solar energy by integrating the solar cells and SCs.18,293–295 Combining the energy storage devices with solar cells to generate on-grid and off-grid systems can provide the temporal flexibility to balance local power generation and consumption, and improve the overall energy utilizations.296–298 Electrochemical SCs,299–302 as mentioned previously, are promising candidates to sustain the power stability management for on-grid applications. Generally, the photo-energy conversion and energy storage devices are operated independently and are connected externally,303–305 resulting in additional space and energy consumption from the external connection systems and consequently a lower energy storage efficiency. The direct integration of the solar cells and SCs into individual units is a prospective way to develop highly efficient, light-weight, and portable rechargeable solar SC devices, which can convert solar energy in situ into electrochemical energy.306,307
Most of the solar rechargeable SC research is based on the DSSCs, since DSSCs are very powerful even under diffuse and low intensity light conditions. An integrated DSSC/SC device generally comprises a DSSC photoanode, shared CE, and current collector of the SC in conjunction with two electrolytes. Under light illumination of the photoanode, the photo-active material is excited to form an electron–hole pair. The electrons move to the charge storage electrode where they are retained. The holes in the photoanode are counterbalanced by the electrons of the CE when the whole device is under the charged state. The electrons move back from the charge storage electrode to the CE during the discharging process. The overall efficiency of the integrated devices is dependent on both the energy conversion and storage materials, and the connection between solar cells and SCs. Firstly, the energy conversion and storage parts should be matched ideally for an efficient electron transfer, e.g. the voltage match and the geometrical size match. For example, organic PV systems can offer a voltage of about 800 mV, requiring a corresponding battery with fitting voltage. Also, geometrical restrictions limit the efficiency of the devices. The size of the DSSC and the SC determines the size of the corresponding counterpart, resulting in a possible capability mismatch. Secondly, the connection structure of the energy conversion and storage device should be designed for the optimal overall efficiency.
Early integrated DSSC/SC systems are based on a two-electrode configuration. In 2004, Miyasaka et al. developed a two-electrode integrated device with activated carbon as the storage material (Fig. 19a).294 The photo-generated positive and negative charges at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface are directly stored as double layer charges on the surface of active carbon. A problem of this method is a high internal resistance that slows the discharge process as electrons returning to the photo-electrode are supposed to go through the space charge Schottky barrier at the TiO2 layer. The device achieved a voltage of 0.45 V in the charged state, and a discharge capacity of 75 mC cm−2. Nagai and Segawa have developed a bridging three-electrode system that used an additional electrode for operation of efficient discharge by a redox reaction (Fig. 19b).308 Subsequently, researchers proposed a new configuration; further advancements were reported for a high-voltage DSSC/SC integrated system by introduction of an internal bifunctional electrode between the photoelectrode and CE, which conducts the redox electron transfer on one side and charge storage on the other side (Fig. 19c).309 This three-electrode configuration fabricated by Miyasaka et al. achieved a charge-state voltage of 0.8 V and high energy density per area of 47 μW h cm−2, which is five times larger than those of the previous two-electrode system.295 Because the planar format in such stacked devices has only limited application, other structures, such as wire-like integration (Fig. 19d), have been developed to enhance the flexibility and lightweight of the integrated devices.310 Such wires can be potentially woven into textiles or other deformable structures for self-powering applications, such as medical biomonitoring devices or implants, or safety and construction gear like illuminated vests and wearable electronics.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of an integrated DSSC/SC device employing the two-electrode system, (b) a bridging three-electrode system, (c) the three-electrode system and (d) the wire-shaped system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, 294, 295 and 308. Copyright 2004 AIP; Copyright 2004 RSC; Copyright 2005 RSC; Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Many reports of the three-electrode integrated DSSC/SC devices were devoted to the development of electrode materials for SC counterparts. A highly popular material for integrated DSSC/SC devices is the carbon nanotube (CNT). A DSSC/SC integrated device using a CNT film as the CE shows a PCE of 6.1%, a specific capacitance of 48 F g−1, and a storage efficiency of about 84%, with an entire photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of about 5.12% (Fig. 20a).141 To enhance the flexibility and lightweight of the integrated devices, Peng et al. utilized CNT/Ti wire composites and developed an integrated energy wire-shaped device, where the Ti wire was modified with TiO2 NTs.310 One part of the Ti wire was coated with a N719 dye, and the other part was covered with the electrolyte. The wire achieved an entire photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of 1.5% (PCE is 2.2%) with a wire thickness of 10–30 μm (Fig. 20b and c).132 Peng et al. modified the Ti substrate with perpendicularly aligned TiO2 NTs on the surface and horizontally aligned CNT, which served as two electrodes in the fiber device.311 The aligned NTs thereby offered a high performance and an effective pathway for the charge transport. The PCE reached 2.73% with an energy storage efficiency of 76%.293 Further, a self-powered energy fiber with energy conversion in the sheath and storage in the core was developed by using Ti/TiO2 as the photoanode within the energy-storage component while the electrolyte was sandwiched between two aligned CNT sheets (Fig. 20d). The CNTs remained highly aligned after being wound around the fiber substrate. This alignment enabled high photoelectric conversion and storage performance under bending and stretching of 10% and 20%, respectively, despite a slight decrease in the photovoltage when the fiber was stretched beyond 30%.312
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of an integrated DSSC/SC device based on aligned multi-wall CNT films as electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 RSC. (b) Device based on the CNT/Ti wire as electrodes and (c) typical current density/voltage curve under the illumination of AM 1.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. (d) DSSC/SC device employing Ti/TiO2 coaxial and aligned structured electrodes in the sheath and storage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (e) Based on bi-polar TiO2 NT arrays, (f) photograph of an integrated DSSC/SC device from side, top (DSSCs part) and bottom view (SC part), and (g) the current density and voltage transients of SC during photocharge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (h) Device based on WO3 coated CNTs as electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2012 ECS. (i) DSSC/SC based on Co-doped NiO electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Other charge conversion-storage systems employ photo- and electro-active materials like some metal oxides. Bi-polar anodic TiO2 NT arrays and a selective plasma-assisted hydrogenation treatment were employed to construct integrated DSSC/SC devices with improved SC performance (Fig. 20e–g).306 The optimized integrated device exhibited an overall photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of 1.64%, with a fast response and superior cycling capability for more than 100 photocharge/galvanostatic discharge cycles without any decay. Compared with TiO2, WO3 exhibits a lower conduction band and unique optical/electrical performance.313 Gao et al. utilized WO3 coated CNTs as the electron storage electrode, common DSSC photoanodes with N719 dye, and an electrocatalytic CE consisting of a TiN/Ti mesh for the reduction of I3− to I− to take place (Fig. 20h).314 The photo-charge efficiency of the three-electrode integrated DSSC/SC device can reach 69.5% compared with the electrochemical charge process.315 In addition, an integrated DSSC/SC device reported a specific capacitance of 46 F g−1 for a single SC device. By studying the individual electrodes, redox peaks were observed in the voltammogram of the cobalt-doped NiO electrode, ensuring the effective energy storage within the electrode/electrolyte interface ascribed to the redox transition. Nevertheless, a 14 F g−1 capacitive reduction of the asymmetric SC was observed, resulting in a capacitance of 32 F g−1 and an efficiency of 0.6% for the integrated device (Fig. 20i).316
Apart from carbon materials and transition metal compounds, organic conjugated polymers such as polypyrrole (PPy) were utilized by Segawa et al. as capacitor materials in a three-electrode integrated conversion-storage system. The PPy films on an indium tin oxide (ITO) slide were used as a charge-storage electrode to achieve capacitances of up to 1.91 mC cm−2 and charge storage efficiencies of up to 22%.308 Gao et al. utilized the dye-sensitized TiO2/PEDOT photoanode as positive charge storage while a p-doped PPy CE acted as electron storage in LiClO4 electrolyte. The total photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency was about 0.1%.296 Another conducting polymer film-based integrated device was fabricated by using a poly(3,4-(2′,2′-diethyl)-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT-Et2) conducting polymer thick film as an energy storage material and an N3 dye–TiO2 DSSC as an energy conversion device, which showed an energy storage efficiency of 0.6%.317
Notably, in a hydrogenated single crystal ZnO@amorphous ZnO doped MnO2 core shell nanocable (HZM), flexible SC showed a specific capacitance of 1260.9 F g−1 under inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy when the loading of MnO2 reached 0.11 mg cm−2. Furthermore, a stand-alone self-powered system was composed of their newly fabricated all solid-state SC, DSSC, and light emitting diode (LED). This novel, self-powered system successfully lit up a blue LED using three series-connected SCs. A red LED was lit for more than 30 min by a SC after being charged for 2 min using four series-connected DSSCs (Fig. 21a).318 The three series-connected SCs were charged at 0.5 mA to a potential of 2.4 V and kept at 2.4 V for 5000 s (the current profile), indicating a small leakage current (Fig. 21b). It attained ∼2.3 V after 120 s of charging when it was charged by four in-series-connected DSSCs (the voltage profile).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of integrated four series-connected DSSC and three series-connected flexible SC devices based on hydrogenated single crystal ZnO@amorphous ZnO doped MnO2 core shell nanocable (HZM), and (b) leakage current curve of three series-connected SCs. The inset is the voltage profile for three SCs in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2013 ACS. (c) Scheme of the integrated device configuration, showing the three-electrode architecture utilized in testing of the integrated solid-state DSSC/SC system with the porous silicon layer responsible for both the energy storage and conversion active materials. (d) Band diagram of the integrated device and charge transport processes occurring under illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
Further, an all silicon electrode integrated DSSC/SC device for integrated energy storage and conversion was developed by Pint's group (Fig. 21c and d).319 Authors demonstrated a simple wafer-scale process by which an individual silicon wafer could be processed into a multifunctional platform where one side was adapted to replace Pt and enable triiodide reduction in a DSSC, while the other side provided on-board charge storage as an electrochemical SC. The utilization of this silicon multifunctional platform as a combined energy storage and conversion system yielded a total device efficiency of 2.1%.
3.4. DSSC and SC and NG integrated devices
Bae et al. integrated a DSSC, SC, and NG simultaneously on a single micro sized fiber to realize solar and mechanical energy harvesting and subsequent storing, as shown in Fig. 22.320 The NG, SC, and DSSC share a common substrate which is an Au-coated polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) fiber of diameter ∼220 μm. The Au layer serves as the common inner electrode. Then, ZnO NWs were radially grown on the fiber as the active piezoelectric material of the NG, core material of the DSSC, and large surface area SC. As for the NG, graphene coated copper meshes were wrapped around the fiber to serve as the outer electrode. Under a shear stress driven by a push action at 5 Hz, the peak output current and voltage were 2 nA and 7 mV, respectively. To facilitate the SC, a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte was filled in after the graphene-coated copper meshes were wrapped around. The fabricated SC has a capacitance per unit length of 0.025 mF cm−1. As for the DSSC, the grown ZnO NWs were sensitized with a N719 dye solution, a ZnO NW-grown graphene sheet was wrapped around the fiber as the outer electrode, and finally a liquid electrolyte was filled in. The Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE of the DSSC were 0.35 mA cm−2, 0.17 V, 0.39, and 0.02%, respectively.
 Fig. 22  (a) SEM image of graphene. (b) Raman spectra of the graphene film. (c) The schematic diagram of the hybrid power cell and the SEM image of Au-coated PMMA fiber covered with ZnO NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
3.5. PSC and SC integrated devices
For the integrated energy conversion-storage systems, one of the critical issues that needs to be addressed is the enhancement of the PCE of current solar cells. In this regard, the recent availability of high-performance PSCs could not only facilitate the development of highly efficient (up to 20%) and low-cost solar cells for practical applications but also allow for the integration of PSCs into various energy systems. Some efforts were devoted to the connection between PSCs and SCs. In 2015, Wang's group integrated MAPbI3-based PSC and PPy-based SC as an energy pack (Fig. 23) and realized a high output voltage of 1.45 V and an overall output efficiency of 20% when the voltage of SC was set at 0.6 V. This system affords continuous output of electric power by using MAPbI3-based solar cells as an energy source, mitigating transients caused by light intensity fluctuations or the diurnal cycle.321 In 2016, Chai et al. developed a perovskite photovoltachromic supercapacitor (PVCS) with all-transparent electrodes.322 They integrated the semitransparent PSC and electrochromic WO3 SC into the PVCS in a vertically stacked configuration, which improved the integration level, achieved widely and automatically tunable optical transmittance of the integrated device, and could store the electrochemical energy accompanied by a color change. The power conversion efficiency of the PV component in the co-anode (co-cathode) PVCS was 8.25% (11.89%), while the energy density, average power density, and areal capacitance of the integrated device were 35.9 mW h m−2, 461.5 mW m−2, and 459.6 F m−2, respectively. Peng et al. presented a fusible device, where the SCs and PSC are fused to integrated devices by connecting the composite electrode from a SC with the composite electrode from a PSC.323 The energy storage was based on CNT/polyaniline (PANI) composites while the energy conversion was based on TiO2, MAPbI3 and spiro-OMeTAD. Compared with the traditional connection by external conducting wires, these fusible energy devices can be fused into various patterns at room temperature with high stability, high efficiency and low cost.
 Fig. 23  (A) Structural scheme and photograph of an integrated energy pack containing a MAPbI3-based PSC and a PPy-based SC, and (B) the performance of the integrated device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
3.6. SSC and SC integrated devices
The most well-known and established solar cell device is the crystalline silicon solar cell (SSC).324,325 This technology still dominates the field of commercial PV modules despite its inflexibility, high weight, and high production cost.326,327 SSCs are generally suitable for an integrated energy storage system. As depicted in Fig. 24, a direct integration of a SC into the backside of a SSC has been demonstrated by Pint et al.328 First, a commercial polycrystalline SSC panel (400 mA, 22 W, 14.8% cell efficiency) was pre-treated with a 1 M KOH solution to remove the Al current collector from the silicon absorbing layer. Following that, electrochemical etching using a 3:7 v/v HF and ethanol solution was performed directly into the backside of the polycrystalline SSC to fabricate porous silicon SC with 84% Coulombic efficiency. A mixture composed of polyethylene oxide (PEO), 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIBF4), and propylene carbonate (PC) in a 1:1:8 ratio by weight was subsequently cast onto the SC electrode, and was sandwiched with an equivalently prepared single crystalline porous silicon counter-electrode. Finally, an integrated solid-state SC and SSC was fabricated by removing the PC in a vacuum oven for 24 h at 50 °C. The porous silicon SC coupled with solid-state polymer electrolytes was used to achieve a solid-state architecture that sustained mechanical integrity and required no external electrolyte packaging. This design demonstrated that the SSC can charge the SC under an external load and that a constant current load can be maintained through periods of intermittent illumination, showing the feasibility of this integration concept as a way to advance the device performance and a practical scheme for integrated solar storage and application.
 Fig. 24  (a) Scheme demonstrating key steps for fabrication of a solid-state integrated SC with a commercial SSC, including KOH dissolution of the Al collector material, and HF electrochemical etching to produce porous silicon. (b) Photographs of the polycrystalline SSC after HF etching showing the dark circular porous silicon material, (c) SEM image of the interface of the porous silicon energy storage material and the absorbing layer of the solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2014 AIP. 
Since present solid-state PV cells and traditional PEC cells cannot directly store the converted energy, a kind of direct solar energy conversion and storage by coupling between PEC and ferroelectric effects has been developed by Jiang et al.329 In this paper, solar energy could be converted to electrical energy and directly stored in the form of mobile charge in a single structure by using an intrinsic coupling between the PEC material of Si and ferroelectric material of poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF). The device consisted of a transparent electrode, a current collector, a LiPF6 containing electrolyte, and ferroelectric PVDF particles, which were bound on silicon particles and a ferroelectric PVDF membrane. The integrated device configuration was photo-charged under 1000 W m−2 of white light to reach a Voc of 0.47 V with a capacity of 37.62 mC cm−2. The open-circuit output voltage was seen to be stable over 24 hours while its mobile charge was stable for more than 8 h in a dark environment. This new type of integrated device is based on the PEC and ferroelectric effects that holds the dual roles of solar energy harvesting and storage, and can be applied in a broad range of applications.
3.7. Organic solar cell (OSC) and SC integrated devices
The development of a number of modern portable devices and sensors requires the realization of flexible devices and long term off-grid power. In this respect, devices that are capable of performing different functions in a single unit, simultaneously realizing energy conversion and storage would be advantageous. OSCs are solution-processable, potentially low-cost, and suitable for ubiquitous deployment. SCs exhibit high power densities (15 kW kg−1) with rapid charge–discharge cycles, and are inherently safe while posing a relatively low environmental impact. Polymer OSCs and electrochemical SCs, being promising options for energy harvesting and storage devices, have been realized as flexible films which expands their application in various portable electronic areas. Similar to other integrated devices, such as DSSC/SC, PSC/SC, or SSC/SC, integrated OSC/SC devices can also offer energy on demand for off-grid applications. As illustrated in Fig. 25a–d, an integrated OSC/SC device can be realized by eight-series connected OSCs based on P3HT:PC60BM (P3HT stands for poly(3-hexylthiophene), and PC60BM stands for [6,6]-phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester) BHJ with Al electrodes and SCs based on graphene ink on a single substrate, using graphene as a common platform. The series-connected OSCs provide the energy harvesting capability and achieve a Voc of about 5 V and a PCE of approximately 1.6%. The SCs provide the energy storage capability and generate approximately 2.5 mF cm−2 capacitance. Together, the integrated OSC/SC device yields an overall system voltage of up to 4 V, which is suitable for driving red, green, and blue LEDs. The design of a graphene-based integrated OSC/SC device realizes a lighter and more flexible power pack with a mass of 0.35 g (including the substrate) for low-cost, self-powered electronic systems. The solution-processable, integrated device can be envisioned to be printed onto a single flexible substrate, which makes the process compatible with roll-to-roll manufacturing.
 Fig. 25  The front (a) and the back (the inset) view of an integrated OSC/SC device photograph. (b) Schematic illustration of an integrated device based on a graphene ink SC with ITO/glass and Al foil current collectors. (c) A graphene ink SC with ITO/glass and Al foil current collectors. (d) OSCs with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC60BM/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 330. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration of an integrated OSC/SC device in a flexible and stable fiber format and (f) the circuit connection state of an integrated OSC/SC device in the process of charging and discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 331. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. OPC: organic PV cells; GSC: graphene ink supercapacitor; PC: photovoltaic conversion; ES: energy storage. 
Since integrated devices with a conventional planar structure cannot meet the ongoing demand in the modern electronics of being lightweight, small, and weaveable in the modern electronics, it is highly desirable to develop flexible integrated devices. As mentioned in the previous sections, wire-shaped DSSCs can be integrated with SCs. However, as the wire-shaped DSSC part was sealed separately, the resulting devices were still planar. Sealing DSSCs and SCs together was seen to render devices ineffective and contribute to poor mechanical stability. This means that at this point in time the flexible integration of DSSCs for lightweight, fiber-like, and portable devices cannot be realized. In contrast, an all solid-state, coaxial, and self-powered “energy fiber” has been developed based on polymer OSCs without liquid electrolytes while integrated electrochemical SCs have been developed, which can simultaneously convert solar energy into electrical energy and store it in the SC part (Fig. 25e and f).331 The coaxial structure in flexible devices can provide a much higher effective contact area that favors a rapid charge transport as well as stable performance, while the use of flexible, transparent, strong, and conductive CNT sheets can greatly improve the photoelectric conversion and energy storage. The combined photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of the integrated fiber-shaped OSC/SC device reached 0.82%, which remained nearly unchanged with further increasing of the CNT layer thickness. This promising flexible fiber-shaped integrated device can be further scaled up for practical application in flexible electronics and in combination with the well-developed textile technology.
4. Integrated photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) based on DSSCs and PSCs
The application of dye-sensitized electrodes for the direct generation of solar fuels is a relatively new aspect of photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) research while substantial progress has been achieved in the last ten years. This technology has still a long way before reaching a higher PCE comparable to the one achieved in electricity-generating regenerative DSSCs. Such chemical-producing cells can be termed as dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cells (PESCs) as distinguished from the well-known electricity-generating regenerative DSSCs. More information on the basic principles and the detailed operation of the various dye-sensitized PESCs as well as the underlying molecular chemistry concepts is available in a number of reviews.332–349 With respect to photooxidation reactions at n-type dye-sensitized PESCs, the reaction attracting most attention is water oxidation to oxygen. Another aspect is the dye-sensitized photooxidation of organic compounds; effluent water remediation is a related application aspect. With respect to photoreduction reactions at dye-sensitized PESCs, two reactions attracting substantial interest are the H2O reduction to H2 and the CO2 reduction, the latter targeted at both the generation of useful carbonaceous fuels and the reduction of the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. In addition to dye-sensitized PESCs, two alternative options, to which the present section is devoted, consist of either (a) coupling one or more electricity-generating DSSCs or a PSC to a PESC needing an additional bias potential or (b) coupling one or more PSCs to an electrosynthetic cell with dark electrodes.
4.1. DSSC/PESC coupled cells for hydrogen generation
To date, dye-sensitized PESCs incorporating direct water oxidation to hydrogen and/or reduction to hydrogen at the dye/semiconductor interface are at best by one order of magnitude less efficient than DSSCs converting light to electricity. Therefore, a preferable solution, from the efficiency point of view, is to couple two or three DSSCs, the number depending on the DSSC voltage, to a traditional electrolysis cell. However, at present, DSSCs would not be mature enough for this technology-oriented approach in terms of reaching simultaneously both a high PCE (exceeding 10%) and long-term stability. There is interest in investigating the combination of PESCs, needing an external bias voltage, and DSSCs providing this voltage. Such PESCs can be based on the direct irradiation of semiconductor materials, e.g. n-Fe2O3, n-WO3, n-BiVO4, or p-Cu2O. Alternatively, a PESC with an n- or p-type PE and a dark CE can be coupled to a DSSC in order to cover the external voltage bias requirement. First, the basic principles of the coupling of a DSSC to a PESC will be discussed, and then literature examples will be presented. For the sake of brevity, the case of a PESC based on direct semiconductor excitation will be considered but the analysis can be readily extended to an alternative option of a PESC with dye-sensitized electrodes. Additionally, CEs and conductive semiconductor substrates with electrons, not holes, as carriers of electricity will be considered. Several reviews present the basic concepts of coupling DSSCs to PESCs.350–354
The overall photoelectrode (PE) reaction at the DSSC can be written as (1)where CTM (PEDSSC) is the charge-transport species between the photoelectrode and CE in the DSSC, which can be a redox mediator in a liquid electrolyte or a solid-state hole conductor.
The CE reaction of the DSSC part of the tandem cell is e−(CEDSSC) + CTM+ → CTM0(2)
The overall DSSC process can be written by adding the last two equations as (3)
The two redox couples in the PESC interacting with the anode (oxidation electrode) and cathode (reduction electrode) will be termed M01/M+1 and M02/M+2, respectively, with the corresponding half-reactions summarily formulated as one-electron reactions, as explained in the section devoted to n-PESCs:M01 ↔ M+1 + e− M02 ↔ M+2 + e−(4)
Additionally, EF(M01/M+1) < EF(M02/M+2)(5)
For water electrolysis in acidic solutions (6)Here, H+ means the generation of hydronium ions as the product.
First, the case of an n-type PESC, henceforth to be designated as n-PESC, will be considered. If SEMPESC is the directly irradiated semiconductor electrode of the PESC, then the photoexcitation reaction generating an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band is (7)
Holes are driven to the surface and react with M01 toward M+1, while electrons are driven to the conductive PE supportM01 + h+(SEMPESC) → M+1 e−(SEMPESC) → M+1 + e− (PEPESC) + (SEMPESC)0(8)
The overall n-PESC photoelectrode reaction is (9)
The n-PESC CE reductive reaction is M+2 + e−(CEPESC) → M02(10)
By adding the last two equations, the overall n-PESC reaction is derived: (11)
The processes coupling the DSSC and the n-PESC aree−(PEPESC) → e−(CEDSSC) e−(PEDSSC) → e−(CEPESC)(12)
In this respect, the photoelectrode of the PESC is short-circuit connected to the CE of the DSSC, and the CE of the PESC to the photoelectrode of the DSSC.
By adding together the last three equations, the overall tandem cell reaction consisting of a DSSC coupled to an n-PESC is derived as (13)

Fig. 26 shows the energy diagram for the coupling of an n-PESC and an n-DSSC. The case of a DSSC coupled to a p-type PESC photoelectrode can be similarly described, with the essential difference that photo-generated electrons are driven toward the electrolyte and holes toward the semiconductor bulk (14)with 0 in the last equation indicating the hole originating from SEMPESC being annihilated by an electron e−(PEPESC) originating from the conductive support of the PESC.
 Fig. 26  Schematic of the DSSC/PESC tandem cell with an n-type PESC in series to a DSSC. The energy was supplied by DSSC to PESC. The long horizontal arrow pointing to the right indicates electrons flowing from the PESC's photoelectrode to the short circuit-connected DSSC's CE. The short horizontal arrow lying above the long arrow and pointing to the left indicates electrons flowing from the DSSC photoelectrode to the short-circuited PESC CE. 
The overall p-PESC photoelectrode reaction is derived by adding the last three relations: (15)
The p-PESC CE oxidative reaction is M01 → M+1 + e−(CEPESC)(16)
By adding the last two equations the overall p-PESC reaction is derived: (17)
The processes coupling the DSSC and the p-PESC aree−(CEPESC) → e−(CEDSSC) e−(PEDSSC) → e−(PEPESC)(18)
In this respect, the photoelectrode of the p-PESC short-circuit is connected to the photoelectrode of the DSSC, and the CE of the p-PESC to the CE of the DSSC.
By adding together the last three equations to that for the overall DSSC process the overall tandem cell reaction consisting of a DSSC coupled to a p-PESC is derived as (19)which is identical to eqn (13) derived for the n-PESC/DSSC hybrid system. As regards the practical aspects of connecting the two devices, the PESC can be totally separated from the DSSC, being connected in series with the DSSC as indicated above. However, in principle a more compact configuration is desired. The first configuration is the so-called artificial leaf (see Fig. 27) in which the photoelectrode and the CE of the PESC are placed at the outside of the DSSC, directly on top of the CE and photoelectrode of the DSSC, respectively. The assembly is dipped into a single external compartment of an electrolyte, which wets both the CEPESC and PEPESC. The DSSC charged-transport medium is prevented from contacting the external electrolyte by appropriate sealing.
 Fig. 27  Schematic of an artificial leaf-type compact n-PESC/DSSC tandem cell. Illumination from the PESC may be sufficient in the case of transparent CEDSSC. Alternatively, in the case of transparent CEPESC illumination from both sides is possible, i.e. by means of a beam splitter. 
The assembly can be illuminated from one side or from both sides. In the latter case all electrodes should be deposited on TCO glass. One possibility is to use a glass plate coated on both sides with TCO layers which are appropriately connected by a short circuit, e.g. by means of conductive Ag paint. Alternatively two single-sided-coated TCO-supported electrodes are brought into contact, with the uncoated sides touching one another, while the conductive sides are short-circuit connected.
In the case of one-side illumination, the properties of the materials between the photoelectrodes should be adjusted so that minimal light absorption takes place in the interior of the tandem assembly. In the case of two side illumination, two approaches can be considered. Each of the photoelectrodes can be exposed to full sunlight. Alternatively, a beam splitter is used to appropriately divide the incident light into two parts so that the spectrum of each part matches the absorption properties of the photoactive substrate to which it is directed.
A modified artificial leaf assembly is depicted in Fig. 28a, with sunlight impinging only on the PEPESC. For practical reasons, the CE of the PESC unit is kept at some distance from the photoelectrode of the DSSC unit, being separated from the DSSC electrode by an electrolyte layer. Another variety of the above cell involves the order of placement of PEDSSC and CEDSSC reversed, as indicated in Fig. 28b with the light emerging from PEPESC directed first through CEDSSC and then through PEDSSC. It should be noted that the configuration of the electrode connections is thereby somewhat different from the previous case.
 Fig. 28  Schematic of the modification of the cell in Fig. 27 with CEPESC detached from the compact assembly of DSSC and PEPESC and with PEDSSC positioning (a) either immediately next to PEPESC or (b) next to a sufficiently transparent CEPESC. 
In the following paragraphs of this section the literature examples of tandem DSSC/PESC systems will be classified according to the type of the photoactive electrode.

(a) WO3 and hematite Fe2O3. 
Both Fe2O3 and WO3 semiconductors absorb a substantial amount of light in the 400–500 nm region, Fe2O3 being a stronger light absorber (band gap 2.1 eV) compared to WO3 (2.6 eV). Polycrystalline WO3 attracted a lot of attention for PESC applications in the polycrystalline form back in the 1980s. Contrarily, substantial efforts have been devoted in the last 20 years toward the synthesis of polycrystalline Fe2O3 in the hematite form to produce materials with desirable photocurrent density values in PESCs, i.e. exceeding 1 mA cm−2 under full sun. Therefore, systematic work in the latter started appearing in the literature only from the year 2000 onward. The main disadvantage of both materials is that the conduction band edge (Ecb) lies significantly below EF(H2/H+). Additionally, at electrode potentials positive of the photocurrent onset, the photocurrent increases gradually due to substantial recombination reactions, competing favourably with O2 evolution, so that a substantial difference EF(H2/H+) − EF(PE), larger than that accounted of the Ecb position, is needed. Therefore for photocurrents exceeding 1 mA cm−2 the applied bias potential may exceed 0.5 V so that two DSSC cells could be needed.
Park and Bard described an artificial-leaf type cell of the general configuration of Fig. 27.355 A weakly acidic aqueous electrolyte was in contact with a WO3 photoelectrode and a Pt CE according to the configuration was (20)with ELPESC indicating the electrolytes in the DSSC and PESC subunits. The composition of ELPESC was 0.25 M Na2SO4 at pH = 4 (fixed with HClO4). Under illumination provided by a Xe lamp of 100 mW cm−2 the photocurrent onset was +0.33 V/RHE (vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode in the same solution). The energy storage efficiency was 1.9% for a DSSC based on the well-known N719 dye, of the Ru/(bpy)2(SCN)2-type, and the I−/I3− mediator; the current density was 1.6 mA cm−2. A higher ηst of 2.6% was obtained by applying an external bias potential of 0.2 V, to the tandem solar cell. In fact, the output of the traditional I−/I3−-based DSSCs is not sufficient for a single DSSC cell to cover the voltage requirements of the PESC under consideration. A similar system was investigated by Kim et al. with the tandem cell having the modified artificial leaf configuration of Fig. 28a.356 In a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte the onset of photocurrent was 0.6 V/RHE. The unbiased tandem cell achieved a current density of 0.4 mA cm−2 under irradiation with a 150 W Xe lamp-based solar simulator, which increased to above 2 mA cm−2 under additional bias voltage.
Arakawa et al. investigated a tandem system with a WO3-based PESC in series with two DSSCs; the sensitizer was a Ru(terpyridine)(SCN)3-based dye, known as “black dye”, with significant absorption in the NIR of the solar spectrum. The energy conversion efficiency was 2.6% under simulated solar light irradiation.357 A tandem system with a Fe2O3-based PESC and two DSSCs, with chromophores having complementary light absorption spectra, has been proposed by Brillet, Cornuz et al.358 One of these dyes was the well-known sensitizer N749, of the Ru(bpy)3(SCN)2-type, and the other a squaraine-type dye (SQ1).359 The tandem Fe2O3/SQ1 dye/N749 dye illuminated from the Fe2O3 side produced an energy storage efficiency of 1.36%.
Brillet et al. investigated a tandem cell based on WO3 or Fe2O3 as a PESC photoelectrode in series with a DSSC based on a cyclopentadithiophene-bridged charge-transfer organic metal-free dye (Y123) and a Co(bpy)3-type complex as a redox mediator.360 This type of DSSC was seen to exhibit higher photovoltages, approaching 1 V at open-circuit, than cells with I−/I3− as the mediator. Their configuration was analogous of the modified artificial leaf in Fig. 28a and 29. In sum, the cell configuration was (21)where 1 was short-circuit connected to 1˙ and 2 to 2˙. INS indicates a transparent insulating phase (i.e. glass) separating the PEDSSC layer from the electrolyte wetting the CEPESC. The ELPESC was 1 M NaOH for the Fe2O3 and 1 M HClO4 for the WO3 photoanode. Under irradiation of a 450 W Xe lamp with appropriate filters to simulate sunlight, a ηst of 3.1% and 1.2% was obtained for the WO3- and the Fe2O3-based system, respectively, with respective photocurrents for the tandem connection of 3.1 and 1.2 mA cm−2, respectively.
 Fig. 29  Schematic of the tandem DSSC/PESC coupled cells with (a) WO3 and (b) Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 


(b) CdS quantum dots on TiO2. 
An alternative photoelectrode option is that of a TiO2 electrode decorated with CdS quantum dots which is coupled to a H2-evolving dark electrode. This electrode operates with a sulfur-based sacrificial donor system. The related photoelectrode reaction is (22)and the overall PEC reaction is (23)with a standard free enthalpy of 0.21 eV per absorbed photon. This system was studied by Gonzales-Pedro et al. and by Shin et al. in the tandem PESC/DSSC configuration.361,362
In the study of Gonzales-Pedro et al. CdS dots were deposited on colloidal TiO2, with the additional feature of a ZnS overlayer. The light source on the PESC was a Xe lamp providing 100 mW cm−2 light, and the aqueous electrolyte composition was 0.25 M Na2SO3–0.35 M Na2S. The DSSC was fabricated with a N719 sensitizer and a I−/I3− mediator in an acetonitrile-based electrolyte. The cell configuration is depicted in Fig. 28a. For the tandem system ηst was 0.8%, based on the free energy of the overall reaction as stated above, and the corresponding current density was 3.8 mA cm−2. These values compare very favourably with ηst = 0.3% and short-circuit current of 1.6 mA cm−2 for the stand-alone short-circuited PESC.
In the study of Shin et al. the substrate was in the form of a TiO2 nanorod array; both the PESC cell electrolyte and the DSSC was the same as in the report by Gonzales-Pedro et al. The cell configuration is shown in Fig. 28b, with a double-side-coated TCO plate supporting both the PESC photoelectrode and the DSSC CE layer. A short-circuit photocurrent of 5.5 mA cm−2 was generated. The DSSC was based on the N719 sensitizer and the I−/I3− mediator in an acetonitrile-based electrolyte.


(c) BiVO4/WO3. 
In the article by Shi et al.363 the photoelectrode of a PEC generating hydrogen and oxygen was a BiVO4/WO3 bilayer electrode, with the BiVO4 layer generated on top of a previously deposited WO3 on TCO. Additionally, a FeOOH–NiOOH oxygen evolving catalyst was overlaid. The configuration was that of Fig. 28b, with a double-coated TCO plate supporting both the PESC composite photoelectrode and the DSSC CE layer. The PESC electrolyte was 0.5 M Na2SO4 at pH = 7 fixed with phosphate buffer. The DSSC was based on a donor–acceptor metal-free chromophore (JK-306) and a Co(bpy)3-based redox mediator-containing electrolyte. Under illumination by a solar simulator, a ηst of 5.7% was obtained for the tandem cell corresponding to a short-circuit photocurrent of 5.7 mA cm−2.


(d) PESC coupled to DSSC. 
As already discussed previously, PESCs based on direct semiconductor excitation usually require an additional external bias voltage for efficient operation, which can be supplied by an electricity-generating DSSC placed in series. Two related studies have been published by Sherman, Bergkamp et al.364 and by Sherman, Sheridan et al.365
In the article by Sherman, Bergkamp et al. the electron-donating reaction at PEPESC is not oxygen evolution but the oxidation of hydroquinone (H2Q) to benzoquinone (BQ). The PESC electrolyte was 0.1 M Na2SO4 buffered at pH = 5.8 with Na2SiF6 containing 20 mM H2Q in the PE compartment while the photoelectrode and CE compartments were separated by a Nafion ion-exchange. With regard to photooxidation, EF(H2Q/BQ) was seen to be higher by 0.15 eV compared to EF(H2O/O2, H+) at pH = 5.8. The chromophore of the PEPESC was a metal-free porphyrin attached onto SnO2via –COOH. The DSSC was based on a Si-centered porphyrin on TiO2 attached via –COOH, and the I−/I3− mediator in an acetonitrile-based electrolyte. The tandem cell configuration is depicted in Fig. 30, analogous to Fig. 28a, with the difference that light is directed to the glass side and not the electrolyte side of the photoelectrode while the DSSC is placed between PEPESC and CEPESC.
 Fig. 30  Schematic of the tandem DSSC/PESC coupled cells consisting of a DSSC and a PESC with back irradiation of the PESC photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 364. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
In the article by Sherman et al., as indicated in Fig. 30, the PEPESC reaction was O2 evolution. The chromophore was a Ru(bpy)3-based complex attached via the phosphonated groups on TiO2. The substrate of PEPESC was of the SnO2 and TiO2 core–shell configuration. The catalyst for O2 evolution was of the (bipyridine)bis(isoquinoline)Ru-type, electrodeposited onto the PEPESC. In the DSSC two dye–mediator combinations were considered: N719 sensitizer with the I−/I3− mediator in an acetonitrile-based electrolyte and a metal-free donor–acceptor organic dye (D35) with a Co(bpy)3 mediator, also dissolved in acetonitrile. The same configuration as used by Sherman, Bergkamp et al., as depicted in Fig. 30 (upper part), was employed.364 Under white-light illumination of 100 mW cm−2, H2 evolution was detected in both cases; however, ηst was below 0.1%.

4.2. PSC/PESC coupled cells for H2 evolution
For the description of tandem systems involving PSCs two options can be distinguished. On the one hand, a PSC can be coupled with a PESC in need of an external bias potential. On the other hand, one or, usually, two perovskite cells can provide the voltage needed for the operation of an electrolysis with dark electrodes (not needing illumination for their operations). In this respect, several equations discussed earlier in this section with respect to the photoelectrochemical DSSC applications can be applied, with dye (D) replaced by perovskite in the kinetic equations; the overall equation at the PE will be (24)where CTM is the charge-transport medium, alternatively denoted as the hole conductor. The subscript PSC now replaces DSSC, and correspondingly, the CE and overall PSC reactions are expressed as (25)
The above formalism applies to all PSCs mentioned in this section apart from one case, based on the inverted planar architecture. The latter system is kinetically analogous to the p-DSSC described previously. The essential features of the tandem PSC-based systems appearing in the literature are presented below, classified according to the type of the PESCs coupled to the PSCs.

(a) PESC based on n-BiVO4 and n-BiVO4-composites. 
The most efficient system in this category was reported by Qiu et al. As illustrated in Fig. 31a, the tandem PSC/PESC cell consists of separate PESC and PSC cells connected by cables. The PEPESC was a specially structured Mo-doped BiVO4 layer deposited on top of a SnO2/SiO2 truncated microcone substrate layer.366 The latter substrate was generated by first creating a SiO2 layer on FTO and then covering it with a thin SnO2 coating. This particular electrode structure facilitates the separation of photo-generated electrons and holes. A Fe(Ni)OOH O2-evolution catalyst was deposited on top of Mo-BiVO4 while the CE was Pt. In a 0.5 M (pH = 7) phosphate buffer electrolyte, the maximum photocurrent for the PEPESC at 1.23 V/RHE was 4.3 mA cm−2 under simulated AM1.5 irradiance. The PSC was employing the inverted (p-i-n) planar device architecture, based on CH3NH3PbI3 as the photoactive material, which is connected on the one side to NiMgLiO as the hole-accepting contact and on the other side to a PC61BM layer as the electron-acceptor CTM, with the configuration of glass/FTO/NiMgLiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ti(Nb)Ox/Ag. This type of PESC is different from the ones described in the rest of this section by the fact that it is based on a CTM of the electron-conductor rather than the hole-conductor type.
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the configuration of the PSC/PESC tandem cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 366. Copyright 2016 AAAS. (b) Schematic of the tandem PSC/PESC coupled cell based on an n-PESC coupled to a PSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
The incident simulated AM1.5 beam was divided by a beam splitter into two portions, each appropriate to the cell to which it is directed, with wavelength below 515 nm for the PESC and above 515 nm for the DSSC. The energy storage efficiency was 6.2% corresponding to a maximal operating current density for the tandem cell jph(tandem) = 5.01 mA cm−2. The jph(tandem) is the current density obtained by series-connecting the PESC and PSC, without any external resistance in the circuit, and corresponds to the intersection of the DSSC and the PESC current–voltage curves.
Two other systems in the 3–5% efficiency range were investigated by Baek et al.368 and by Kim et al.367 In the former report, the PESC was based on a triple-junction BiVO4/WO3/WO3 + SnO2 triple-layer planar heterojunction (TPH) photoanode (PEPESC) for O2 evolution and a Pt CE for H2 evolution. The PEPESC was constructed by first depositing a porous SnO2 layer and then a WO3 layer penetrating into the pores of the SnO2 layer. The amount of WO3 was adjusted so that an overstanding layer was formed above the mixed layer WO3 + SnO2 layer. Finally, a BiVO4 layer was added on top of the WO3 + SnO2 layer. The TPH layer was covered with a cobalt oxide-based (CoOx) catalyst for O2 evolution. The electrolyte was 0.5 M phosphate buffer at pH = 7. In the PSCs, the photoelectrode was based on the CH3NH3PbI3/mp-TiO2/ul-TiO2/TCO, with mp-TiO2 denoting the mesoporous TiO2 support, ul-TiO2 denoting the TiO2 ultrathin compact layer (blocking layer or underlayer), and TCO the transparent conducting oxide support. The CTM was spiro-OMeTAD and the CEPSC was an Au layer. Hence, this PSC configuration will be termed the “standard configuration”. The tandem cell comprising one PSC cell in series with the PESC cell was based on the configuration in Fig. 28a. Under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation at 100 mW cm−2, a jph(tandem) of 3.1 mA cm−2 and an energy storage efficiency (O2) of 3.5% were obtained (being based on evolved oxygen measurement energy storage efficiency (O2) and accounting for the lower than unity faradaic efficiency). An alternative configuration with the single PSC cell being replaced by two smaller area PSCs in series gave a higher jph(tandem) of 3.9 mA cm−2 and energy storage efficiency (O2) of 4.5%.
In the system by Kim et al.367 the photoelectrode was a dual-doped BiVO4 (H2-treated and Mo-doped) coated with a Co catalyst, which was Co carbonate (Co-Ci) in the most efficient system. Two different configurations were used: the wireless, compact-type, with the CEPESC placed adjacently to PEPESC, as indicated in Fig. 28a, or the wired type, with CEPESC connected by an external long cable to PEPSC, as shown in Fig. 31b. The PSC was of the standard configuration apart from the fact that the CTM was poly-triarylamine (PTAA) in the place of spiro-OMeTAD. For the wireless configuration and the wired configuration, energy storage efficiencies of 3.0% and 4.3% were obtained under simulated one sun illumination, with the latter improvement being due to the lower ohmic resistance in the wired configuration.
Chen et al.369 presented a similar system with a photoelectrode based only on BiVO4, coated by a cobalt phosphate-based (CoPi)O2-evolution catalyst. The electrolyte was 0.1 M phosphate buffer and the configuration was analogous to Fig. 28a. The PSC was of the standard configuration. Under simulated AM1.5 irradiation, an energy storage efficiency of 2.5% was achieved.368 In the publication by Zhang et al.370 the PEPECS was based on a TiO2 and BiVO4 core–shell construction, with BiVO4 surrounding an array of TiO2 nanotubes. The cell configuration was analogous to Fig. 28a. The electrolyte was 0.1 M phosphate-buffer-saline (PBS, based on H2PO4−/HPO42− and Cl−) at pH = 7. In the PSCs the photoelectrode was based on the CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 configuration without the addition of a CTM and with a carbon layer CEPSC. The perovskite material played the role of a hole conductor. An Al2O3 layer was interposed between PBS at pH = 7. In the PSC the photoelectrode was based on the CH3NH3PbI3 and carbon CE so as to prevent photoinjected recombination. Under simulated AM1.5 irradiation, an energy storage efficiency of 1.4% was achieved for the tandem device.


(b) PESC based on n-Fe2O3. 
In the publication of Gurudayal et al. the PEPESC was hematite in the form of NWs deposited on FTO glass, both in the undoped and the Mn-doped state.371 The cell configuration was analogous to Fig. 28a, with a Pt electrode placed far away from the tandem assembly. The PSC was of the standard configuration (CH3NH3PbI3-spiro-OMeTAD-Au). In a 1 M NaOH electrolyte (pH = 13.6) under simulated AM1.5 irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 the tandem assembly achieved a ηst of 2.4% for the Mn–Fe2O3 PESC variant.


(c) PESC based on p-Cu2O. 
Dias et al. tested a tandem system consisting of a p-type PESC and a PSC, connected as indicated in Fig. 32.372 The PESC was based on a p-Cu2O photocathode and a dark IrO2 oxygen evolution anode. The PEPESC was of a quite elaborate construction, with thin metal underlayer and several overlayers, i.e. FTO/Au/p-Cu2O/Al:ZnO/TiO2/RuO2/Electrolyte, to ensure optimal electrocatalytic activity toward H2 evolution together with protection from corrosion. The PSC was of the standard configuration. In a 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 0.1 M phosphate (pH = 5) electrolyte under simulated AM1.5 irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 the tandem assembly yielded a ηst of 2.4% and a corresponding jph(tandem) of 2 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic of the tandem PSC/PESC coupled cell, with a p-type photocathode of a PESC placed adjacently to the photoelectrode of a PSC. This configuration is analogous to that depicted in Fig. 28a, but with different interelectrode connections. (b) Schematic of the PSC/PESC coupled cell with a Cu2O–perovskite–IrO2 tandem cell during operation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 

4.3. PSC/ELC coupled cells for H2 evolution and CO2 reduction

(a) Water electrolysis. 
In contrast to the cases discussed up to now, the following section involves the coupling of PSCs and electrolysis cells (ELCs) with two dark electrodes or PESCs. The system of Luo et al.136 consisted of an alkaline (1 M NaOH OH) water ELC coupled to two series-connected PSCs based on the CH3NH3PbI3-Spiro-OMeTAD-Au configuration (Fig. 33a–c). The catalytic electrodes of the ELC consisted of earth abundant materials, i.e. Ni foam for H2 evolution and Ni–Fe-layered double hydroxide (NiFe LDH) for both hydrogen and oxygen evolution.
 Fig. 33  (a) Schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with NiFe DLH/Ni foam electrodes for H2 evolution. (b) A generalized energy schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with two PSCs. (c) J–V curves of the PSC/ELC coupled cell in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination, and the NiFe/Ni foam electrodes in a two-electrode configuration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2014 AAAS. (d) Schematic diagram of the PSC/ELC coupled cell composed of perovskite light harvesters, earth-abundant catalysts, and a bi-polar membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with three PSCs. (f) Generalized energy diagram for converting CO2 into CO with three PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2015 NPG. 
Luo et al.373 studied the coupling of two PSCs and a ELC with electrocatalysts based on two compartments, separated by a bipolar ion-exchange membrane (i.e. a cation-exchange membrane laminated together with an anion-exchange membrane) with 0.5 M H2SO4 for the H2-evolution electrode and an alkaline solution 1 M KOH for the O2-evolution electrode, as illustrated in Fig. 33d. The particular reason for use of this electrolyte and separator is as follows: H2SO4 is useful for H2 evolution whereas KOH is useful for O2 evolution, and thus result in the long-term stability of both electrodes. In fact several earth-abundant electrocatalysts for H2-evolution are seen to be unstable in bases, as is the case with the cobalt phosphate (CoP) used in the present case. Similarly, the stability of several earth abundant electrocatalysts for O2 in acids is problematic, as seen for the NiFe LDH used in the present case.
The PSCs were based on MAPbBr3-stabilized FAPbI3 perovskite phase light harvester ((FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x). Under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation a ηst of 12.7% was obtained (Fig. 33c), corresponding to a jph(tandem) of 10.33 mA cm−2. Under this current, the ELC operated at 1.6 V while the thermodynamic potential of the cell in the absence of liquid-junction potential was 0.40 V, with the major part of the total cell overpotential appearing across the membrane.


(b) CO2 reduction. 
The reduction of CO2 to CO was studied by Schreier et al. in a tandem ELC-PSC system, as illustrated in Fig. 33e and f.374 The electromotive force (emf) of the reaction (26)is 1.34 V, as compared to the 1.23 V emf for water decomposition to H2 and O2. This corresponds to an electrode potential of −0.11 V/RHE for the half-reaction CO2 + 2H++ 2e− → CO + H2O(27)
However, the overpotential for the above reaction is substantial so that three PSC are required for the ELC. The latter was composed of a porous Au cathode for CO2 reduction and an IrO2 anode for O2 evolution in a CO2-saturated NaHCO3 electrolyte. A tandem cell constructed this way produced a jph(tandem) of 5.8 mA cm−2. The faradaic efficiency for CO generation was 80–90%, with the formation of H2 as by-product accounting for the rest. On the basis of the aforementioned 1.34 V emf for CO generation, ηst lies in the range 6–7%, or above 7% including H2 generation in the storage efficiency calculation.

5. Summary and future outlook
General summary and outlook
The present Review has summarized the recent progress in integrated solar cells based on DSSCs and PSCs for energy harvesting/conversion and storage. Researchers have designed different integrated devices for PV power generation and storage systems by using various technologies and materials. However, this field is still at a very early stage. For example, the Jsc and Voc of an integrated device are strongly affected by the band structure and the surface/interface characteristics of the connected PV unit. The solar cells, however, require operation at the maximum power point to make full use of the incident light. In addition, the photon-charge formation is a dynamic process. In this regard, it is better to introduce a smart power-conversion unit into the integrated device, which could extract more power from solar cells to be stored in the energy storage devices.
The revolutionary new technologies of generating usable energy from sustainable and non-polluting sources must have the flexibility to meet the energy demands of both consumers and users, while producing fewer carbon emissions than current energy systems. With regard to new-generation integrated solar cell devices comprising alternative PV technologies, improvements of DSSCs and PSCs in performance, durability, and scalability play a critical role in order to meet the high quality demand of the market. Continued research in that direction will enhance the production and sales of durable and highly efficient integrated solar cell devices in the future.
There is large interest in integrating solar cells in buildings utilizing their different colors, shapes, and transparencies to provide a competitive edge for this new-generation integrated solar energy technology. To promote the use of large-scale DSSCs in integrated systems in the future, new ionic liquid electrolytes (ILEs) have to be developed to achieve higher PCEs and provide the high stability and transparency that is greatly demanded for BIPV applications. Novel solid-state ILEs comprising gel-binding agents and inorganic nano-fillers will ascertain market prospects for large scale applications in the electric power generating glass panels. To meet the efficiency demand for DSSCs in commercial application, a Jsc of 20 mA cm−2 is expected to be achieved and maintained by controlling and modifying the pore size, quantity, and shape of the novel nanostructured TiO2 films that are used in conjunction with improved ILEs. To respond to the commercial demand for DSSC panels in specific colors (in particular green and blue), a novel class of high-stability and low-cost sensitizers, such as ruthenium complexes, blue organic dye, and green porphyrin dye, need to be designed and explored. Additionally, new alternative materials should meet the expectation of both lower cost and long-lived population of charge carriers that is required to reach the ambitious cell efficiency goals. The practical application and large-area fabrication for each material in DSSC and PSC will face many great challenges in future.5,375–377
A tremendous advance in PCE for the PSCs has been made, reaching a current certified level of 22.1% that has stunned the PV community. Nevertheless, this path-breaking PV technology is still in its infancy and there remains a big challenge of long-term stability. To date, the instability of PSCs has posed a hurdle for implementation and commercialization. The main source of instability for PSCs was found to stem from the degradation of MAPbI3 perovskite materials. The release of volatile iodine vapor was found to be inevitable for PSCs in practical applications due to their subjection to moisture, oxygen, light illumination, thermal stress, and applied electric fields. In addition, the use of toxic Pb is still a big problem for PSCs. Therefore, alternative perovskite materials need to be explored to achieve long-term stable PSCs that are considerable for practical applications.
In general, integrated devices based on DSSC and PSC technology have the potential to excel through a myriad of inherent advantages such as low-temperature and low-cost processing, mechanical flexibility and choice of rigid or flexible substrate, low-toxicity (in the case of DSSCs), excellent low-light performance, and tunability of color and transparency. It can be expected that taking advantage of the above properties will enable exciting novel integrated products and applications as well as wide-spread use of the technology.
Integrated tandem devices
The benefit of using wide-bandgap PSCs as top cells in integrated solar devices becomes increasingly enticing. Integrated tandem devices with silicon bottom cells and PSC top cells have resulted in up to 26.4% efficiency, close to the single junction silicon record of 26.6%.6,199–201 For monolithic devices, silicon bottom cells are often adjusted to accompany PSC top cells, thereby reducing their performance. Novel means of light trapping structures and passivation layers need to be explored that are compatible with the tandem architecture. Most reports to date have focused on high PCE HJT and PERC cells while the biggest economic advantage and impact might arise from the combination of perovskites with the market-leading polycrystalline Si technology, which should therefore receive more research focus. The limitation of silicon's bandgap to 1.12 eV further demands the improvement of wide-bandgap perovskite compositions around 1.7–1.8 eV, which can be achieved by the addition of bromide.94 The long lifetime of commercial silicon modules under operating conditions will have to be met by perovskite top-cells to allow for the market entry of integrated PSC/silicon tandem devices.
The combination of PSCs with thin film chalcopyrite bottom cells is particularly promising due to the tunability of the chalcopyrite's bandgap to values as low as 1.0 eV, which is not possible with silicon. Moreover, both chalcopyrite and perovskite absorbers can be fabricated on flexible substrates with low-cost solution methods which could facilitate roll-to-roll processing of flexible, monolithically integrated tandem modules. Efficiencies of up to 22.1% have been reported to date for integrated CIGS/PSC tandem devices, which is already close to the CIGS single-junction record efficiency at 22.6%.222,245 Further performance improvements and/or the use of economical deposition methods will be needed, however, to justify the additional cost and effort for the tandem fabrication. Albrecht et al. recently projected that tandem devices with Si or CIGS bottom cells could reach 30% PCE in 2020 and 35% by 2030, which would change the economics for these devices.
Attention has also been directed to the fabrication of CIGS absorbers via low-cost solution deposition methods and use of flexible substrates which could further reduce module costs as well as capital expenditure of new manufacturing plants by enabling roll-to-roll printing methods.223,226,378 In terms of tandem performance, further research should be focused on the improvement of low-bandgap CuInSe2-based devices that are predicted to lead to highest theoretical tandem efficiencies when used as bottom cells with high efficiency PSCs.229–231 Earth-abundant alternatives to CIGS might also be explored, such as low-bandgap Cu2ZnSnSe4 kesterite absorbers.379 Other topics of interest for the realization of monolithic devices are the improvement of high-PCE perovskite top-cells in inverted architecture and substrate configuration, the reduction of PSC processing temperatures, and the planarization of CIGS devices. Before a commercial implementation can be achieved, however, crucial points for the top cell have to be addressed such as long-term stability of PSCs or the technology's feasibility for large-scale processing.
Integrated all-perovskite tandem cells have a tremendous low-cost potential due to their thin film nature that enables monolithic integration and flexible substrates, ability to use solution methods with high material yield and low thermal budget, and ease of manufacturing. The integrated PSC/PSC tandem devices have achieved up to 20.3% stabilized power output, approaching the technology's single junction record at 21.7%.233,380 The development of low-bandgap perovskite absorbers down to 1.2 eV is still very recent and should trigger further improvements in device efficiency and even lower bandgap compositions that are more optimal for bottom devices. The large tunability range of the perovskite bandgap from 1.2–2.3 eV should further be exploited to realize multi-junction tandem devices with three or more junctions for efficiencies over 50%.229,381 High PCE tandem devices in the substrate configuration might enable flexible tandem devices on opaque or low transmittance metal or polymer foils.
In contrast to SSCs, whose production is comparatively expensive due to the technology's high energy and material demand, the use of DSSC and PSC based devices could allow for a more efficient fabrication and decrease costs significantly. Additional benefits of the DSSC and PSC technology arise under low light conditions. While the Jsc of typical solar cells is reduced under weak-light illumination, thin film solar cells such as PSCs and DSSCs possess improved PCE retention compared with their silicon counterpart. This in turn, however, might lead to challenges in current-matched tandem devices. As a result, more research should be focused on real operation conditions when designing tandem devices or multi-junction solar cells.
Integrated energy harvesting and storage devices
With the continuing development of PV and energy storage devices, the integrated devices are expected to feature some exciting new breakthroughs. Different energy storage devices could be widely integrated with PV to simultaneously realize the energy harvesting/conversion and storage and utilization. In terms of energy storage units, SCs exhibit high power densities while LIBs show high energy densities, which allow the integrated energy storage side to be configured for different applications. It should be noted that the operating voltage of a LIB is generally constant while the voltage of a SC will mostly change during the charge and discharge process, which can add difficulty when improving the efficiency of the whole device. The revised strategy therefore needs to be targeted towards circuit and device to achieve constant voltage charging and discharging for the SC unit. Moreover, the energy storage components are not limited to SC and LIB, as discussed in this Review, and other exciting types of energy storage devices, such as sodium-ion batteries, zinc–air batteries, etc., are heavily researched in the integrated solar cell systems.
To date, the majority of integrated photo-energy conversion and energy storage integrated devices have been based on DSSC and PSC technologies. The integration of DSSC/SC device has reached the highest efficiency of 5.12% by using CNTs as CEs. Other combinations of PV systems with storage systems also show the high potential of this area of research. In particular, the emergence of the PSCs has garnered considerable attention. It is noteworthy that the theoretical overall output efficiency of an integrated device (PSC/SC) can reach 20% with an output voltage of 1.46 V when the voltage of the SC is set at 0.6 V.321 PSCs are envisioned to be a great substitute for DSSCs due to their low processing cost and high efficiencies. Additionally, SCs can also be improved by integration with organic radical batteries, resulting in a fast charging, high capacity storage device. In terms of integrated systems, a four-electrode setup is a good means to optimize the solar re-chargeable SCs, as the solar cell and the SC part can be improved separately. Despite vast optimization requirements, solar-rechargeable energy storage systems based on DSSCs and PSCs have a high potential for efficient and direct storage of solar energy due to their inherent advantages compared to common inorganic devices such as exceptional low-light performance which enables use for indoor applications, and tunability of color and transparency which allows for the tailoring of the integrated device design to the customers’ individual preference.
Vast success has been achieved in the field of portable electronics; however, traditional LIBs are encountering growing challenges in the emerging applications (e.g. smart grid) as well as in flexible/micro-electronics due to their relatively low energy and power densities. Alternative lithium–oxygen and lithium–sulfur batteries with higher specific energy density are promising but rely on the breakthrough of electrode materials, electrolytes, and the cell structure design. Integrated devices are capable of realizing multiple functions by combining different energy units. The integration of DSSCs or PSCs and LIBs allows for simultaneous energy harvesting and storage in a single device, while the integration of LIBs and SCs can provide electronics with both high energy and high power densities, which are of importance for small sized, lightweight, and high-density energy systems.
Regarding the integration of NGs and solar cells, two major fields of research are apparent. The first is how to use NGs or their mechanism to increase the PCE of solar cells. Three key steps can be distinguished during the conversion of photoenergy to electricity in a solar cell: the incidence of solar light onto the solar cell, the conversion of photons into electron–hole pairs, and the separation of electron–hole pairs to the two opposing electrodes. How to employ the voltage of NGs or the piezoelectric field to effectively separate the electron–hole pairs is a very important field of research, which can contribute to the enhancement of solar cells’ PCEs. The second key research direction is how to effectively adapt integrated NGs and solar cells for different operating conditions to maximize the simultaneous harvesting of mechanical energy and solar energy. There are four modes for TENGs, which are lateral sliding mode, single electrode mode, vertical contact mode, and freestanding triboelectric layer mode, and two modes for PENGs, which are uniaxial compression mode and lateral bent mode.382 According to the specific operating condition, choosing the individual or complementary modes of the NG is also a very important field of research which can contribute to the overall system's power generation ability.
Many advances have been achieved by improving the architecture, stability, and performance of flexible integrated devices. However, there are still some critical problems that need further be overcome for their practical applications. First, the PCE of the employed solar cells can be further increased. Second, the sealing processes of typically used DSSCs to avoid electrolyte leaking during use can be further improved. Third, the scale-up production of integrated devices based on solar cells for practical applications still face a great challenge.
In general, integrated devices based on DSSCs exhibit a very poor performance, much smaller than the typical PCE value of DSSCs (i.e. 10%) due to the lack of optimization and match of cell components within the integrated devices. As mentioned above, future research of energy harvesting/conversion and energy storage devices (DSSCs, LIBs, SCs, NGs, etc.), improvements in the performance of the integrated units, through optimizing device architecture, substrates, materials design, matching, stability, tenability, cost, scalable manufacturing process, module, encapsulation, and etc., are highly desirable for integrated devices based on DSSCs to increase PCEs beyond current levels to real applications.
Integrated photoelectrochemical cells
In the past ten years, dye-sensitized electrodes have attracted a lot of interest as photoanodes or photocathodes for electrosynthetic applications, mainly for hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, and CO2 reduction, and usually in combination with catalysts. Despite the achieved substantial progress, the resulting photocurrents are substantially lower compared to those based on directly photoexcited semiconductors such as p-Cu2O, n-Fe2O3, n-WO3, and n-BiVO4. A substantial challenge is the matching between the energy levels of dye ground and excited states, the semiconductor conduction band or valence band, and the energy levels of the molecules injecting holes or electrons into the photoexcited dye. Additionally, the involved complex, multi-electron reactions in solution involved requires the judicious choice of catalysts. Therefore, the progress of this field is intimately linked to advances in the molecular chemistry of reactions such as water oxidation to oxygen, water reduction to hydrogen, and CO2 reduction. From the experimental point of view, an often encountered problem is the lack of standardization conditions for performing experiments, which would improve the comparison of results obtained by various laboratories. In particular, a variety of white or monochromatic light sources of intensity comparable to that of sunlight are used in addition to a multitude of solution compositions and pH values. Therefore, it is desirable that the same level of standardization is achieved as in the research on solar cells. In conclusion, more fundamental research is needed in order to reach a definite conclusion about whether the direct dye-sensitized photoanode and photocathode option is viable and, upon decision, which particular system should be the focus of further optimization.
A further field of interest is that of tandem systems comprising electricity-producing DSSCs and either ELCs with dark electrodes or PESCs needing additional bias potential. In both cases a prerequisite for advancement is the further optimization of DSSCs with respect to all three goals: PCE in the 10–20% range, extended long-term stability, and manufacturing on the basis of earth-abundant, inexpensive and non-volatile materials. Alternatively, the recently emerged PSCs, exhibiting higher PCEs, approaching those of traditional solid-state inorganic solar cells, are attracting increased attention in tandem PESC research, in particular the field of water decomposition to hydrogen and oxygen, and CO2 reduction. Provided that stability, low-price, and environment-compatibility criteria are fulfilled, PCEs could prove to be the solar cells of choice in chemical solar energy applications.
Abbreviations

ARAntireflection
ALDAtomic layer deposition
BQBenzoquinone
BHJBulk-heterojunction
cbConduction band
CECounter electrode
CNTCarbon nanotube
CTMCharge-transport material
CISCuIn(S,Se)2
CIGSCuInGaSe2
C60-SBTris(sulfobetaine)-substituted fulleropyrrolidine
C60-NTertiary amino-fulleropyrrolidine
DPEDiphenyl ether
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
n-DSSCDSSC with n-type photoanode and dark counter electrode (cathode)
p-DSSCDSSC with p-type photocathode and dark counter electrode (anode)
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
n-PESCPESC with n-type photoanode and dark counter electrode (cathode)
p-PESCPESC with n-type photocathode and dark counter electrode (anode)

E
cb
Conduction band edge
EQEExternal quantum efficiency
ELCElectrolysis cell
emfElectromotive force

η
st
Energy storage efficiency
ETLElectron transport layer
EMIBF41-Ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate
FFFill factor
FAHC(NH2)2+
FTOFluorine-doped tin dioxide
GNPGraphene nanoplatelet
HTMHole-transporter materials
HTLHole transport layer
HJTHeterojunction technology
H2QHydroquinone
IBCInterdigitated back contact
ITOIndium tin oxide
IZOIndium zinc oxide
IECInternational electrotechnical commission

J
sc
Short circuit current density
LIBLithium ion battery
LEDLight emitting diode
LATPLi1.35Ti1.75Al0.25P2.7Si0.3O12
LiTFSILithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonimide)
MACH3NH3+
MAPbI3Methylammonium-lead iodide
NWNanowire
NTNanotube
NGNanogenerator
NIRNear-infrared
N2200Poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)
OSCOrganic solar cell
PEPhotoanode
PCPropylene carbonate
PSCPerovskite solar cell
PECPhotoelectrochemical cell
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PBSPhosphate-buffer-saline
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PSSPoly(styrenesulfonate)
PPyPolypyrrole
PEIPoly(ethyleneimine)
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PVAPolyvinyl acetate
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
PESCPhotoelectrosynthetic cell
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PMMAPolymethylmethacrylate
PVCSPhotovoltachromic supercapacitor
PERCPassivated emitter rear contact
PENGPiezoelectric nanogenerator
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PANIPolyaniline
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PDPP3TPoly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene)
PC60BM[6,6]-Phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester
PC61BM[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
PC70BM[6,6]-Phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester
PC71BM[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
PProDOT-Et2Poly(3,4-(2′,2′-diethyl)-propylenedioxythiophene)
QDSCQuantum dot solar cell
SCSupercapacitor
SEMScanning electron microscope
tBP
tert-Butylpyridine
TCOTransparent conducting tin oxide
TPHTriple-layer planar heterojunction
TENGTriboelectric nanogenerator
UV-visUltraviolet-visible
vbValence band

V
oc
Open circuit voltage
ZTOZinc tin oxide

Author contributions
S. Yun designed the outline of the review manuscript. S. Yun wrote the Abstract and Sections 1.1–1.4. A. R. Uhl wrote Sections 2.1–2.3. S. Yun wrote Section 2.4. X. Han wrote Section 3.1. Y. Qin wrote Sections 3.2 and 3.4. D. Li, M. Yin and S. Yun wrote Section 3.3. D. Li and M. Yin wrote Section 3.5. S. Yun, D. Li and M. Yin wrote Section 3.6. S. Yun wrote Section 3.7. N. Vlachopoulos, A. Hagfeldt and S. Yun wrote Sections 4.1–4.3. All authors wrote Section 5 Summary and future outlook. S. Yun and A. R. Uhl provided final revisions for all sections. All authors reviewed the manuscript and proof-read the final manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from NSFC (51672208), Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2011JM6010 and 2015JM5183), and Shaanxi Provincial Department of Education (2013JK0927) is greatly acknowledged. The project was partly sponsored by SRF for ROCS, SEM. ARU acknowledges the financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under the project number P300P2_164660.
References
M. Perez and R. Perez, IEA-SHCP-Newsletter, 2015, 62, 1–4 Search PubMed .
R. Perez and M. Perez, International Energy Agency SHCP Solar Update, 2009, 50, 1–3 Search PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. Fuller and G. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2017, 25, 3–13 CrossRef .
C. Grätzel and S. M. Zakeeruddin, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 11–18 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 487–491 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J.-i. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yun, J. N. Freitas, A. F. Nogueira, Y. Wang, S. Ahmad and Z.-S. Wang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 59, 1–40 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187–3200 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. Yun, X. Li, X. Huang, Y. Hou, Y. Liu, J. Li, X. Zhou and W. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 325–336 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. Liu and S. Yun, Isr. J. Chem., 2015, 55, 943–954 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, P. D. Lund and A. Hinsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3495–3514 CAS .
S. Yun, Y. Liu, T. Zhang and S. Ahmad, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11877–11893 RSC .
S. Yun, H. Pu, J. Chen, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 442–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6210–6237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1584–1588 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, H. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhang and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1341–1348 CAS .
S. Yun, H. Zhang, H. Pu, J. Chen, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1407–1412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, M. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Shi, X. Lin, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 411–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, L. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Wang and T. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4286–4290 RSC .
S. Yun, L. Wang, W. Guo and T. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 24, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
C. J. Barbé, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157–3171 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yasuo, I. Ashraful, W. Yuki, K. Ryoichi, K. Naoki and H. Liyuan, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638–L640 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chen, M. Wang, J.-Y. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, L. Alibabaei, C.-h. Ngoc-le, J.-D. Decoppet, J.-H. Tsai, C. Grätzel, C.-G. Wu, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3103–3109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Yi, N. Zu, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6032–6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, A. Islam, H. Chen, C. Malapaka, B. Chiranjeevi, S. Zhang, X. Yang and M. Yanagida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6057–6060 CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska, R. Charvet, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. Takata, H. Miura, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1202–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, H. Miura, S. Uchida, M. Takata, K. Sumioka, P. Liska, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5194–5196 RSC .
W. Zeng, Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, M. Zhang, F. Wang, C. Pan and P. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari Astani, J. Teuscher, L. E. Polander, S. Mathew, J.-E. Moser, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and J. Frey, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2733–2739 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CAS .
T. Bessho, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6796–6799 CrossRef .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. CurchodBasile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, K. NazeeruddinMd and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fakharuddin, R. Jose, T. M. Brown, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3952–3981 CAS .
S. Ahmad, E. Guillen, L. Kavan, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3439–3466 CAS .
M. Ye, X. Wen, M. Wang, J. Iocozzia, N. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Lett., 2011, 2, 1861–1867 CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 344, 458 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yun and X. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2211–2213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang, B. Li and D. Xu, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 461–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun and X. Wang, J. Electroceram., 2008, 21, 585–588 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang and D. Xu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 1989–1995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang, J. Li, J. Shi and D. Xu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 116, 339–343 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang, J. Li and D. Xu, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang, J. Shi and D. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 485, 610–615 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, X. Wang, J. Shi and D. Xu, J. Mater. Res., 2009, 24, 3074–3077 Search PubMed .
S. Yun, X. Wang, J. Shi, J. Zhu and D. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1883–1885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia and S. Yanagida, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 3143–3159 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, X. Xu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Small, 2015, 11, 2472–2486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, R. A. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500213 CrossRef .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, J. You, T.-F. Guo and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 155–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, L. Cevey, M. Piccirelli, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2085–2087 CrossRef .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, M. Grätzel and H.-J. Matthieu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 367–369 CrossRef .
L. Schmidt-Mende, U. Bach, R. Humphry-Baker, T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, S. Ito, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 813–815 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, S.-J. Moon, M. Xu, K. Chittibabu, P. Wang, N.-L. Cevey-Ha, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Small, 2010, 6, 319–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cai, S.-J. Moon, L. Cevey-Ha, T. Moehl, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1452–1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 CAS .
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103–1111 CAS .
B. Wu, Y. Zhou, G. Xing, Q. Xu, H. F. Garces, A. Solanki, T. W. Goh, N. P. Padture and T. C. Sum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1604818 CrossRef .
K. P. Marshall, M. Walker, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16178 CrossRef CAS .
T. Todorov, O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2016, 1, 370–376 CAS .
G. Abdelmageed, L. Jewell, K. Hellier, L. Seymour, B. Luo, F. Bridges, J. Z. Zhang and S. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233905 CrossRef .
J. Chen, X. Cai, D. Yang, D. Song, J. Wang, J. Jiang, A. Ma, S. Lv, M. Z. Hu and C. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2017, 355, 98–133 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao and N.-G. Park, Photonics, 2015, 2, 1139–1151 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 705–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 CAS .
P. Gao, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 CAS .
T. Salim, S. Sun, Y. Abe, A. Krishna, A. C. Grimsdale and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8943–8969 CAS .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2597–2598 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 378–405 RSC .
M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nano, 2014, 9, 1440002 CrossRef .
L. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 684–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Rhee, C.-C. Chung and E. W.-G. Diau, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e68 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, B. Jia and M. Gu, Photonics Res., 2014, 2, 111–120 CrossRef .
H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Youn, H. J. Park and L. J. Guo, Small, 2015, 11, 2228–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahbazi and H. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2016, 123, 74–87 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, S. Ye, Y. Li, W. Sun, H. Rao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600474 CrossRef .
N. H. Tiep, Z. Ku and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501420 CrossRef .
Y. Rong, L. Liu, A. Mei, X. Li and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501066 CrossRef .
R. Fan, Y. Huang, L. Wang, L. Li, G. Zheng and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600460 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, T. Song and B. Sun, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 75–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang and H. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 1488–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Guilar, T. J. Kleeburg, A. Chen, D. R. Yankelevich and R. Amirtharajah, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 2009, 17, 627–637 CrossRef .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5031–5041 RSC .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, C. Pan, Y. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 259–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559–2579 CAS .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790–823 CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 954–958 CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Fang and H. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1139–1159 CAS .
S. Pan, Z. Zhang, W. Weng, H. Lin, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 276–284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, M. Zhang, X. Wang, F. Yang and X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8694–8709 CAS .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 CAS .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 174–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. T. Chiu, D. C. Law, R. L. Woo, S. B. Singer, D. Bhusari, W. D. Hong, A. Zakaria, J. Boisvert, S. Mesropian, R. R. King and N. H. Karam, 40th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 2014, 0011.
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, aaf9717 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
M. Freitag, Q. Daniel, M. Pazoki, K. Sveinbjornsson, J. Zhang, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2634–2637 CAS .
A. Steve, S. Michael, C.-B. Juan-Pablo, J. Klaus, K. Lars, H. Anders, G. Michael and R. Bernd, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 064012 CrossRef .
M. A. Green and T. Bein, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 559–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, M. Leilaeioun and Z. Holman, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16137 CrossRef .
M. H. Futscher and B. Ehrler, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 863–868 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, K. Jäger, L. Korte, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 064012 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, F. Li, X. Zhou, J. Yang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 304–307 RSC .
B. Suarez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. S. Ripolles, R. S. Sanchez, L. Otero and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401616 CrossRef .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, S. B. Jo, C.-C. Chueh, S. Williams, C.-C. Huang, J. K. Katahara, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7739–7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bailie and M. D. McGehee, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 681–686 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ibraheem, H.-B. Anita and A. G. Martin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 08KD04 CrossRef .
M. Filipič, P. Löper, B. Niesen, S. De Wolf, J. Krč, C. Ballif and M. Topič, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A263–A278 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Foster and S. John, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 103103 CrossRef .
D. T. Grant, K. R. Catchpole, K. J. Weber and T. P. White, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A1454–A1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, I. Almansouri, S. Huang, T. Young, Y. Li, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5679–5689 RSC .
D. Shi, Y. Zeng and W. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16504 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Loper, S. Moon, S. M. deNicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J. Yum, S. DeWolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
P. Loper, B. Niesen, S.-J. Moon, S. Martin de Nicolas, J. Holovsky, Z. Remes, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1545–1551 CrossRef .
R. Pandey and R. Chaujar, Superlattices Microstruct., 2016, 100, 656–666 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Lal, T. P. White and K. R. Catchpole, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1380–1386 CrossRef .
K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1433–1435 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Blakers, A. Wang, A. M. Milne, J. Zhao and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1989, 55, 1363–1365 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, J. Zhao and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57, 602–604 CrossRef CAS .
S. De Wolf, A. Descoeudres, C. Holman Zachary and C. Ballif, Green, 2012, 2, 7 CrossRef CAS .
E. Franklin, K. Fong, K. McIntosh, A. Fell, A. Blakers, T. Kho, D. Walter, D. Wang, N. Zin, M. Stocks, E.-C. Wang, N. Grant, Y. Wan, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Feng and P. J. Verlinden, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2016, 24, 411–427 CrossRef CAS .

          B. C. Duck, R. B. Dunbar, O. Lee, K. F. Anderson, T. W. Jones, G. J. Wilson and C. J. Fell, 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2016, pp. 1624–1629, DOI: 10.1109/PVSC.2016.7749896.
I. L. Braly, R. J. Stoddard, A. Rajagopal, A. R. Uhl, J. K. Katahara, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1841–1847 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lang, M. A. Gluba, S. Albrecht, J. Rappich, L. Korte, B. Rech and N. H. Nickel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2745–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Grätzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 CAS .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. Gehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Duong, N. Lal, D. Grant, D. Jacobs, P. Zheng, S. Rahman, H. Shen, M. Stocks, A. Blakers, K. Weber, T. P. White and K. R. Catchpole, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 679–687 CrossRef .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Yu, T. Li, X. Zheng, Q. Dong, L. Shen, M. Boccard, A. Gruverman, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601128 CrossRef .

          Z. Ren, J. Zhou, A. Ng, Q. Shen, H. Shen and C. Surya, 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC),  2016, pp. 816–820 Search PubMed .
J. Peng, T. Duong, X. Zhou, H. Shen, Y. Wu, H. K. Mulmudi, Y. Wan, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Tsuzuki, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601768 CrossRef .

          B. Niesen, J. Werner, A. Walter, J. P. Seif, C. Allebé, D. Sacchetto, M. Despeisse, S. J. Moon, S. Nicolay, S. D. Wolf and C. Ballif, 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC),  2016, p 0077 Search PubMed .
J. Werner, L. Barraud, A. Walter, M. Bräuninger, F. Sahli, D. Sacchetto, N. Tétreault, B. Paviet-Salomon, S.-J. Moon, C. Allebé, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, S. D. Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E.-C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .

          F. Matteocci, S. Razza, S. Casaluci, N. Yaghoobiniya, A. D. Carlo, L. Serenelli, M. Izzi, G. Stracci, A. Mittiga and M. Tucci, 2nd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC),  2015, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Kanda, A. Uzum, H. Nishino, T. Umeyama, H. Imahori, Y. Ishikawa, Y. Uraoka and S. Ito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33553–33561 CAS .
A. Mojiri, R. Taylor, E. Thomsen and G. Rosengarten, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 28, 654–663 CrossRef .
A. G. Imenes and D. R. Mills, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 19–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uzu, M. Ichikawa, M. Hino, K. Nakano, T. Meguro, J. L. Hernández, H.-S. Kim, N.-G. Park and K. Yamamoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 013506 CrossRef .
R. Sheng, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. Keevers, X. Hao, L. Jiang, Y.-B. Cheng and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3931–3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Duong, D. Grant, S. Rahman, A. Blakers, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 1432–1439 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Hu, B. Chen, T. Salim, J. Zhang, J. Ding, N. Yuan and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 134–139 RSC .
R. Santbergen, R. Mishima, T. Meguro, M. Hino, H. Uzu, J. Blanker, K. Yamamoto and M. Zeman, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A1288–A1299 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Eisenlohr, B. G. Lee, J. Benick, F. Feldmann, M. Drießen, N. Milenkovic, B. Bläsi, J. C. Goldschmidt and M. Hermle, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 142, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Chung, R. Singh, L. Kumar, M. A. Alam and P. Bermel, 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2016, 3625–3628.
J. Werner, A. Walter, E. Rucavado, S.-J. Moon, D. Sacchetto, M. Rienaecker, R. Peibst, R. Brendel, X. Niquille, S. D. Wolf, P. Löper, M. Morales-Masis, S. Nicolay, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233902 CrossRef .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 CAS .
D. Zhang, A. Tavakoliyaraki, Y. Wu, R. A. C. M. M. van Swaaij and M. Zeman, Energy Procedia, 2011, 8, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mailoa, C. D. Bailie, E. C. Johlin, E. T. Hoke, A. J. Akey, W. H. Nguyen, M. D. McGehee and T. Buonassisi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 121105 CrossRef .

          C. D. Bailie, J. P. Mailoa, E. C. Johlin, W. H. Nguyen, E. T. Hoke, A. J. Akey, T. Buonassisi and M. D. McGehee, 42nd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 2015, 1–3.
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. C. Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 9, 81–88 Search PubMed .
J. Werner, C.-H. Weng, A. Walter, L. Fesquet, J. P. Seif, S. D. Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 7, 161–166 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Kamada, T. Yagioka, S. Adachi, A. Handa, K. F. Tai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2016, 1287–1291.
P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, W. Witte and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chirilă, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, C. Gretener, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, J. Perrenoud, S. Seyrling, R. Verma, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 857–861 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. M. Beiley and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9173–9179 CAS .
M. Bär, W. Bohne, J. Röhrich, E. Strub, S. Lindner, M. C. Lux-Steiner, C.-H. Fischer, T. P. Niesen and F. Karg, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 3857–3860 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, J. K. Katahara and H. W. Hillhouse, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 130–134 CAS .
T. Feurer, P. Reinhard, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, J. Löckinger, P. Fuchs, R. Carron, T. P. Weiss, J. Perrenoud, S. Stutterheim, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2017, 25, 645–667 CrossRef .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, C. Sturdevant and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 173902 CrossRef .
A. De Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
S. R. Kurtz, P. Faine and J. M. Olson, J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 68, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meillaud, A. Shah, C. Droz, E. Vallat-Sauvain and C. Miazza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2952–2959 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mailoa, M. Lee, I. M. Peters, T. Buonassisi, A. Panchula and D. N. Weiss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2644–2653 CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, X. Liu, C. C. Chueh, S. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6478–6484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Polander, P. Pahner, M. Schwarze, M. Saalfrank, C. Koerner and K. Leo, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081503 CrossRef .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. D. Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 75–81 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-S. Kim, T.-M. Kim, M.-S. Choi, H.-S. Shim and J.-J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kranz, A. Abate, T. Feurer, F. Fu, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres and S. Buecheler, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
A. Guchhait, H. A. Dewi, S. W. Leow, H. Wang, G. Han, F. B. Suhaimi, S. Mhaisalkar, L. H. Wong and N. Mathews, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 807–812 CrossRef CAS .
U. W. Paetzold, M. Jaysankar, R. Gehlhaar, E. Ahlswede, S. Paetel, W. Qiu, J. Bastos, L. Rakocevic, B. S. Richards, T. Aernouts, M. Powalla and J. Poortmans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9897–9906 CAS .
M. Lee, S. J. Park, Y. J. Hwang, Y. Jun and B. K. Min, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 2102–2108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, Y.-T. Hsieh, T.-B. Song, N. D. Marco, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7714–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Uhl, Z. Yang, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3214–3220 CAS .
A. Chirilă, P. Bloesch, S. Seyrling, A. Uhl, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, C. Fella, J. Perrenoud, L. Kranz, R. Verma, D. Guettler, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger, D. Brémaud and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 560–564 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, P. Fuchs, A. Rieger, F. Pianezzi, C. M. Sutter-Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, H. Hagendorfer, Y. E. Romanyuk, F. LaMattina, S. Yoon, L. Karvonen, T. Magorian-Friedlmeier, E. Ahlswede, D. VanGenechten, F. Stassin and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1110–1119 CAS .
Y. E. Romanyuk, H. Hagendorfer, P. Stücheli, P. Fuchs, A. R. Uhl, C. M. Sutter-Fella, M. Werner, S. Haass, J. Stückelberger, C. Broussillou, P. P. Grand, V. Bermudez and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 12–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, F. D. Angelis and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kijima and T. Nakada, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 075002 CrossRef .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
C. Platzer-Björkman, J. Lu, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 321–325 CrossRef .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, C. Sturdevant, L. Y. Chang and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500799 CrossRef .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
C.-W. Chen, S.-Y. Hsiao, C.-Y. Chen, H.-W. Kang, Z.-Y. Huang and H.-W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9152–9159 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, J. P. Correa-Baena, G. Lozano, M. Saliba, P. Anguita, B. Roose, A. Abate, U. Steiner, M. Grätzel, M. E. Calvo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Miguez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11214–11221 CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liao, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, K. Ghimire, C. R. Grice, C. Wang, Y. Xiao, A. J. Cimaroli, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12360–12363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C.-C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5121–5125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiang, T. Liu, B. Luo, J. Tong, F. Qin, S. Xiong, Z. Li and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1208–1213 CAS .
D. Forgács, L. Gil-Escrig, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, C. Momblona, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602121 CrossRef .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Nayak and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1622–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9063–9066 CAS .
Y. Liu, L. A. Renna, M. Bag, Z. A. Page, P. Kim, J. Choi, T. Emrick, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7070–7076 CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, W. Chang, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, E. Young, Y. Yang, J. You and G. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 662–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, G. Kim, H. Back, J. Kong, I.-W. Hwang, T. K. Kim, S. Kwon, J.-H. Lee, J. Lee, K. Yu, C.-L. Lee, H. Kang and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3159–3165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, C. Chen, K. Aitola, F. Zhang, Y. Hua, G. Boschloo, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8631–8639 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Hendriks, G. H. L. Heintges, V. S. Gevaerts, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8341–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 9403–9406 CrossRef .
C. Tang, B.-Q. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Zhu, H.-F. Wang, J.-L. Shi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, H. Guo, F. Pei, X. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Fang, T. Wang and N. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8952–8959 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ottakam Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3061–3070 CAS .
F. Hetsch, X. Xu, H. Wang, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1879–1887 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5866–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 873–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, W. Guo, L. Dong, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3356–3361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pu, W. Song, M. Liu, C. Sun, C. Du, C. Jiang, X. Huang, D. Zou, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601048 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang, H. Zou, R. Liu, C. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Wang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5696–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3934 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami, N. Kawashima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3346–3348 RSC .
P. Liu, H. X. Yang, X. P. Ai, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 CAS .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Merlet, C. Péan, B. Rotenberg, P. A. Madden, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and M. Salanne, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2701 CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kelly and T. L. Gibson, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10430–10441 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, L. Li, H. Lin, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, J. Ren and H. Peng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 549, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Huang, C. Li and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H. Wu, L. Lu, S.-F. Leung, D. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Fan, G. Shen and D. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu, J.-G. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-C. Wang, K.-C. Huang and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6225–6231 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagai and H. Segawa, Chem. Commun., 2004, 974–975 RSC .
H. Chih-Yu, C. Hsin-Wei, L. Kun-Mu, H. Chih-Wei and H. Kuo-Chuan, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6232–6238 CrossRef .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Yang, Z. B. Cai, J. Ren, H. P. Li, H. J. Lin, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Chen, H. Sun, Z. B. Yang, G. Z. Guan, Z. T. Zhang, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, H. Sun, J. Ren, S. Pan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7038–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito, S. Uchida, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3033–3036 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Yan, G. R. Li, G. L. Pan and X. P. Gao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1770–A1774 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127–156 RSC .
N. Bagheri, A. Aghaei, M. Y. Ghotbi, E. Marzbanrad, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, M. Wang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, M. Skunik-Nuckowska and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 143, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Hsu, H.-W. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-W. Hu and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6232–6238 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Jin, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cohn, W. R. Erwin, K. Share, L. Oakes, A. S. Westover, R. E. Carter, R. Bardhan and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2727–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, Y.-B. Cheng and M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1782–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, Z. Ren, Y. Zhao, X. Shen, A. Wang, Y. Y. Li, C. Surya and Y. Chai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5900–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Jiang, L. Qiu, X. You, J. Yang, X. Fu, P. Chen, G. Guan, Z. Yang, X. Sun and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14977–14984 CAS .
H. Xiao, J. Wang, H. Huang, L. Lu, Q. Lin, Z. Fan, X. Chen, C. Jeong, X. Zhu and D. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, H. Huang, P. Chang, L. Lu, X. Chen, X. Yang, Z. Fan, B. Zhu and D. Li, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 141–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhao, A. H. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gaudiana, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1288–1289 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Westover, K. Share, R. Carter, A. P. Cohn, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 213905 CrossRef .
C. W. Lo, C. S. Li and H. R. Jiang, AIP Adv., 2011, 1, 042104 CrossRef .
C.-T. Chien, P. Hiralal, D.-Y. Wang, I. S. Huang, C.-C. Chen, C.-W. Chen and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Small, 2015, 11, 2929–2937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, H. Luo, R. L. House, P. G. Hoertz, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4133–4145 CAS .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bonomo and D. Dini, Energies, 2016, 9, 373 CrossRef .
M. K. Brennaman, R. J. Dillon, L. Alibabaei, M. K. Gish, C. J. Dares, D. L. Ashford, R. L. House, G. J. Meyer, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13085–13102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brimblecombe, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9374–9384 RSC .
J. J. Concepcion, R. L. House, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15560–15564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hammarström, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 840–850 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. House, N. Y. M. Iha, R. L. Coppo, L. Alibabaei, B. D. Sherman, P. Kang, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 25, 32–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kärkäs, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Åkermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Singh and L. Spiccia, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 2607–2622 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
H. Tian, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3746–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Young, L. A. Martini, R. L. Milot, R. C. Snoeberger Iii, V. S. Batista, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2503–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760–775 CAS .
G. Liu, K. Du, S. Haussener and K. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2878–2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Modestino and S. Haussener, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2015, 6, 13–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J.-H. Yun, S. Wang and L. Wang, PHOTOE, 2016, 7, 012006 Search PubMed .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, M. Ma, P. Li, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600602 CrossRef .
J. H. Park and A. J. Bard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, E5–E8 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, K. Shin, S. M. Cho, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1465–1470 CAS .
H. Arakawa, C. Shiraishi, M. Tatemoto, H. Kishida, D. Usui, A. Suma, A. Takamisawa and T. Yamaguchi, Proc. SPIE, 2007, 6650, 665003 CrossRef .
J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, J.-H. Yum, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, P. Walter, S. Huber, D. Rentsch, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, F. De Angelis, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10320–10321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
V. González-Pedro, I. Zarazua, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. de la Rosa, I. Mora-Seró and S. Giménez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 891–895 Search PubMed .
K. Shin, J.-B. Yoo and J. H. Park, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, M. Ma, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, J. K. Kim, H. K. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 182–191 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Sherman, J. J. Bergkamp, C. L. Brown, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1812–1817 CAS .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, K.-R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, D. Wang, L. Alibabaei, D. L. Ashford and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16745–16753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Baek, B. J. Kim, G. S. Han, S. W. Hwang, D. R. Kim, I. S. Cho and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1479–1487 CAS .
Y.-S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Zhang, K. Cao, J. Brillet, J. Chen, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21630–21636 CAS .
D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600100 CrossRef .
M. Schreier, L. Curvat, F. Giordano, L. Steier, A. Abate, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Luo, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, X. Zhou, J. Even and A. Hagfeldt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15806–15817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Yun, X. Zhou, Y. Hou, W. Fang, T. Zhang and Y. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 126, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Yun, X. Zhou, Y. Hou, T. Zhang, J. Li and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 390–399 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Powell, R. Fu, K. Horowitz, P. A. Basore, M. Woodhouse and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3395–3408 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Feng, H. Cui, F. Liu, X. Hao, G. Conibeer, D. B. Mitzi and M. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2016, 24, 879–898 CrossRef .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Hörantner, T. Leijtens, M. E. Ziffer, G. E. Eperon, M. G. Christoforo, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2506–2513 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250–2282 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Sining Yun
	Sining Yun is a Professor at School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, China. He obtained his PhD from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2007 and was a postdoctoral fellow at Yonsei University (Korea). He is a visiting professor at State Key Lab. of Fine Chemicals (China), University of Reading (UK), Prof. Michael Grätzel and Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's laboratory at EPFL (Switzerland). He is currently a Research Director and Group Leader of Functional Materials Laboratory and Key Lab of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology of Shaanxi Province (China). His research focuses on solar energy and biomass energy.

Yong Qin
	Yong Qin received his BS (1999) in Material Physics and PhD (2004) in Material Physics and Chemistry from Lanzhou University. From 2007 to 2009, he worked as a visiting scholar and Postdoc in Professor Zhong Lin Wang's group at Georgia Institute of Technology. Currently, he is a professor at the Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Lanzhou University, where he holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. His research interests include nanoenergy technology, functional nanodevices and self-powered nanosystems. Details can be found at: http://www.yqin.lzu.edu.cn.

Alexander R. Uhl
	Alexander R. Uhl is a postdoctoral fellow in Chemical Engineering at the University of Washington (USA) with Prof. Hugh W. Hillhouse. He obtained his PhD in Material Science in 2013 from ETH Zurich (Switzerland) under Prof. Ayodhya N. Tiwari and Prof. Joerg Loeffler. He received his Diploma in Nanostructural Engineering from the University of Wuerzburg (Germany) after graduate stays at the University of British Columbia (Canada) and University of Uppsala (Sweden), where he worked together with Prof. Marika Edoff. His primary research focus is on solution-processing and characterization of thin film layers for the application in photovoltaic devices.

Dongdong Li
	Dongdong Li received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 2010. Under the support of the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, he worked in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Southern California (2007–2009). Currently, he is a professor at Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on structural and interfacial engineering of functional nanomaterials, for technological applications in energy conversion and storage.

Xiaogang Han
	Xiaogang Han is a professor at Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU) in China. He obtained his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2009, and then worked as a postdoc at the University of California and the University of Maryland in the US, respectively. After that he joined XJTU. Currently, his research interests are solid-state lithium batteries, lithium metal anode, and holey graphene applications.

Anders Hagfeldt
	Anders Hagfeldt has been a Professor at the Institute of Chemical Sciences Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) and the Head of the Laboratory of Photomolecular Science since 2013. He obtained his PhD in 1993 from Uppsala University and was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL, Switzerland. Before 2014 he was a professor in Physical Chemistry and the director of Center for Molecular Devices at Uppsala University, Sweden. He is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, European Academy of Sciences, Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in Stockholm.

Broader context
The integration of devices, that is the combination of several technologies in a single unit, is a powerful means to improve the performance of a system, reduce its size and weight, and widen its applicability. Both dye-sensitized- (DSSC) and perovskite- (PSC) based solar cell technologies have received growing attention with respect to device integration on account of increasing performance values and their ease of processing at low temperatures. Three main areas of integration can be distinguished depending on their combinations with (i) other solar cells, (ii) electrical energy storage devices, and (iii) electrochemical devices for energy storage in solar fuels. This Review aims to provide a comprehensive summary of the current status and recent research trends and highlights in the area of integrated devices employing both DSSCs and PSCs. Our concluding remarks and future outlook offer a critical evaluation of various power systems and discuss challenges and opportunities for their successful realization and marketability.


 	Fig. 1  Estimated finite and renewable planetary energy reserves (Terawatt-years). Note that total recoverable reserves are shown for the finite resources whereas yearly potential is shown for the renewables. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 and 2. Copyright 2015 International Solar Energy Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Advances in PCE for DSSCs with a TiO2 photoelectrode reported in the past 25 years (1991–2016). For more detailed PV parameters of DSSCs depicted in Fig. 2,9,29–45 please refer to our recent reviews.15,19,22	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Crystal structure of cubic metal halide perovskite with generic chemical formula ABX3 (A site: the large organic cations; B site: the small metal cations; and X site: halogen ions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014 NPG. (b) Organolead halide perovskite materials in PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the involved charge-transfer processes in PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Solid-state mesoscopic solar cell using MAPbI3 as a sensitizer and spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM (9.7%). (b) Meso-superstructured Al2O3 scaffold nanocrystals covered with an ultrathin layer of MAPbI3 perovskite (10.9%), (c) the mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold infiltrated by the perovskite (12%). (d) A planar pn heterojunction solar cell lacking the TiO2 mesoporous scaffold (15.4%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2014 NPG. (e) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of typical layered common device architectures of mesoscopic (left) and planar (right) PSCs composed of fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO), ETLs (TiO2 or SnO2), the perovskite film, HTM (spiro-OMeTAD), and a gold top electrode. SEM image by courtesy of Dr Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Some representative PCE advances in perovskite-based and solid-state DSSCs reported in top journals. The certified cell efficiency records resulted from the efficiency chart by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) (http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/) and ref. 60 and 96. (b) A comparison of PCEs of mesoporous and planar PSCs. The highest published PCE for a TiO2 mesoporous infiltrated PSC (c) and a planar SnO2 heterojunction PSC (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Integrated devices for energy harvesting and conversion based on PSCs. (b) Integrated solar cell devices for energy harvesting and storage. DSSC: dye-sensitized solar cell; PSC: perovskite solar cell; SSC: silicon solar cell; CIGS: Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2; OSC: organic solar cell; PESC: photoelectrosynthetic cell: ELC: electrolysis cell.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Four-terminal HJT Si-perovskite tandem device architecture that yielded up to 25.2% efficiency. An optical coupling liquid was used between the subcells to optically connect cells and reduce reflection losses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2016 ACS. (b) Monolithic devices on polished HJT Si substrates have achieved up to 23.6% efficiency to date. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Four-terminal CIGS-perovskite integrated device architecture that yielded up to 19.5% efficiency. Further advancements by the same group led to up to 22.1% efficient devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 ACS. (b) Solution-processed monolithic devices have achieved up to 10.9% efficiency to date. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Two and four terminal tandem configuration that yielded up to 17.0% and 20.3% PCEs. (b) SEM micrograph of the two-terminal perovskite tandem device with 1.2 eV and 1.8 eV band-gap subcells. (c) Stabilized power output of the two- and four-terminal tandems and subcells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2016 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structures (a), EQE spectra (b), and J–V curves (c) for the OSC (BHJ solar cell), PSC and the integrated PSC/BHJ cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2015 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic structure and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (c) J–V curves of the integrated PSC/OSC(perovskite/BHJ) device. (d) EQE spectra of the corresponding PV device and absorption spectra of the HTL (PBDTT-SeDPP) and BHJ (PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM) film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Device architecture of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (b) Chemical structures of DT-PDPP2T-TT, PC71BM, and N2200. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the integrated PSC/OSC device. (d) J–V curve of a flexible integrated PSC/OSC device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Design and principle of an integrated power pack system based on double-sided TiO2 NT arrays. (A) TiO2 NT arrays grown on the Ti foil substrate by anodization in fluoric ethylene glycol solution. The top segments of the Ti foil are tandem DSSCs which are utilized to harvest sunlight from the environment, and the bottom segment is a typical LIB which is used to store energy converted from DSSCs. (B) Detailed structure and working principle of the integrated power pack system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2012 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 14  (upper row) The photoassisted charging process of a solar battery. (a) Schematic drawing of a three-electrode solar battery consisting of a Li anode, an oxygen electrode and a photoelectrode. On charging, the photoelectrode and Li anode are connected to the outside circuit, while on discharging, the oxygen electrode and Li anode are connected to the outside circuit. (b) The proposed photoelectrochemical mechanism of the photoassisted charging process: on charging under illumination, the redox shuttle (Mred) is oxidized to Mox on the photoelectrode and then diffuses to the Li2O2 particles that are deposited on the oxygen electrode. By oxidizing the Li2O2 to O2 and Li+, the Mox is reduced back to Mred. (c) Corresponding energy diagram of a solar battery (‘SC’ stands for semiconductor and ‘S’ stands for sensitizer). The photoassisted charging voltage is determined by the energy difference between the Li+/Li redox potential and the quasi-Fermi level of electrons in the semiconductor electrode (at best close to its conduction band (CB) edge). Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2014 NPG. (lower row) (d) In a different setup, the battery consists of a Li anode with an organic electrolyte, a Li-ion conductive LATP (Li1.35Ti1.75Al0.25P2.7Si0.3O12) glass ceramic separator, and an aqueous Li2Sn (1 ≤ n ≤ 4) alkaline catholyte containing the Pt/CdS photocatalysts (coated on Ti mesh). (e) The discharging process is the same as that of a common aqueous Li–S battery while the charging process is different: The discharged S2− ions are oxidized to polysulfide ions by photoexcited holes from the CdS photocatalyst driven by light irradiation. Meanwhile the photoexcited electron, freed from the Coulomb attraction of the hole, transfers to the Pt particle, where it then reduces protons to hydrogen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic structure of a serially integrated hybrid cell. (b) SEM image of the DSSC unit. (c) SEM image of the PENG unit. The SEM image inserted between (b) and (c) is a low-magnification cross-section view of the hybrid cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 287. Copyright 2009 ACS. (d) Schematic illustration of a hybrid cell consisting of a solid-state DSSC and a vertically aligned ZnO NW array grown on a GaN substrate using the high-temperature vapor deposition method for fabricating the PENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) A demonstration of using the hybrid cell beneath a bridge. (b) Enlarged view of the hybrid cells mounted beneath the bridge. (c) The 3D HC is composed of an optical fiber-based DSSC with a capillary tube as the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) A photo of a power-textile with a pair of TENG fabrics and seven fiber-based DSSCs in series on the shoulder. (b and c) Are the scheme of textile TENG and fiber-based DSSC, respectively. (d) An equivalent circuit of a self-charging system. (e) The short circuit current of fiber-based DSSCs, TENG fabrics, and the hybrid power textile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the hybrid NG. (b) The output current of the TENG, solar cell and the hybrid NG. (c) Photograph of a temperature–humidity sensor powered by the hybrid NG at room-light illumination and a wind speed of ∼15 m s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2016 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of an integrated DSSC/SC device employing the two-electrode system, (b) a bridging three-electrode system, (c) the three-electrode system and (d) the wire-shaped system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, 294, 295 and 308. Copyright 2004 AIP; Copyright 2004 RSC; Copyright 2005 RSC; Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of an integrated DSSC/SC device based on aligned multi-wall CNT films as electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 RSC. (b) Device based on the CNT/Ti wire as electrodes and (c) typical current density/voltage curve under the illumination of AM 1.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. (d) DSSC/SC device employing Ti/TiO2 coaxial and aligned structured electrodes in the sheath and storage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (e) Based on bi-polar TiO2 NT arrays, (f) photograph of an integrated DSSC/SC device from side, top (DSSCs part) and bottom view (SC part), and (g) the current density and voltage transients of SC during photocharge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (h) Device based on WO3 coated CNTs as electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2012 ECS. (i) DSSC/SC based on Co-doped NiO electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of integrated four series-connected DSSC and three series-connected flexible SC devices based on hydrogenated single crystal ZnO@amorphous ZnO doped MnO2 core shell nanocable (HZM), and (b) leakage current curve of three series-connected SCs. The inset is the voltage profile for three SCs in series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2013 ACS. (c) Scheme of the integrated device configuration, showing the three-electrode architecture utilized in testing of the integrated solid-state DSSC/SC system with the porous silicon layer responsible for both the energy storage and conversion active materials. (d) Band diagram of the integrated device and charge transport processes occurring under illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM image of graphene. (b) Raman spectra of the graphene film. (c) The schematic diagram of the hybrid power cell and the SEM image of Au-coated PMMA fiber covered with ZnO NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Structural scheme and photograph of an integrated energy pack containing a MAPbI3-based PSC and a PPy-based SC, and (B) the performance of the integrated device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Scheme demonstrating key steps for fabrication of a solid-state integrated SC with a commercial SSC, including KOH dissolution of the Al collector material, and HF electrochemical etching to produce porous silicon. (b) Photographs of the polycrystalline SSC after HF etching showing the dark circular porous silicon material, (c) SEM image of the interface of the porous silicon energy storage material and the absorbing layer of the solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2014 AIP.	 

 	Fig. 25  The front (a) and the back (the inset) view of an integrated OSC/SC device photograph. (b) Schematic illustration of an integrated device based on a graphene ink SC with ITO/glass and Al foil current collectors. (c) A graphene ink SC with ITO/glass and Al foil current collectors. (d) OSCs with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC60BM/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 330. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration of an integrated OSC/SC device in a flexible and stable fiber format and (f) the circuit connection state of an integrated OSC/SC device in the process of charging and discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 331. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. OPC: organic PV cells; GSC: graphene ink supercapacitor; PC: photovoltaic conversion; ES: energy storage.	 
	(1)
e−(CEDSSC) + CTM+ → CTM0	(2)
	(3)
M01 ↔ M+1 + e−
M02 ↔ M+2 + e−	(4)
EF(M01/M+1) < EF(M02/M+2)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
M01 + h+(SEMPESC) → M+1
e−(SEMPESC) → M+1 + e− (PEPESC) + (SEMPESC)0	(8)
	(9)
M+2 + e−(CEPESC) → M02	(10)
	(11)
e−(PEPESC) → e−(CEDSSC)
e−(PEDSSC) → e−(CEPESC)	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of the DSSC/PESC tandem cell with an n-type PESC in series to a DSSC. The energy was supplied by DSSC to PESC. The long horizontal arrow pointing to the right indicates electrons flowing from the PESC's photoelectrode to the short circuit-connected DSSC's CE. The short horizontal arrow lying above the long arrow and pointing to the left indicates electrons flowing from the DSSC photoelectrode to the short-circuited PESC CE.	 
	(15)
M01 → M+1 + e−(CEPESC)	(16)
	(17)
e−(CEPESC) → e−(CEDSSC)
e−(PEDSSC) → e−(PEPESC)	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 27  Schematic of an artificial leaf-type compact n-PESC/DSSC tandem cell. Illumination from the PESC may be sufficient in the case of transparent CEDSSC. Alternatively, in the case of transparent CEPESC illumination from both sides is possible, i.e. by means of a beam splitter.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic of the modification of the cell in Fig. 27 with CEPESC detached from the compact assembly of DSSC and PEPESC and with PEDSSC positioning (a) either immediately next to PEPESC or (b) next to a sufficiently transparent CEPESC.	 
	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 29  Schematic of the tandem DSSC/PESC coupled cells with (a) WO3 and (b) Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 30  Schematic of the tandem DSSC/PESC coupled cells consisting of a DSSC and a PESC with back irradiation of the PESC photoelectrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 364. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(24)
	(25)

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the configuration of the PSC/PESC tandem cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 366. Copyright 2016 AAAS. (b) Schematic of the tandem PSC/PESC coupled cell based on an n-PESC coupled to a PSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic of the tandem PSC/PESC coupled cell, with a p-type photocathode of a PESC placed adjacently to the photoelectrode of a PSC. This configuration is analogous to that depicted in Fig. 28a, but with different interelectrode connections. (b) Schematic of the PSC/PESC coupled cell with a Cu2O–perovskite–IrO2 tandem cell during operation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with NiFe DLH/Ni foam electrodes for H2 evolution. (b) A generalized energy schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with two PSCs. (c) J–V curves of the PSC/ELC coupled cell in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination, and the NiFe/Ni foam electrodes in a two-electrode configuration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2014 AAAS. (d) Schematic diagram of the PSC/ELC coupled cell composed of perovskite light harvesters, earth-abundant catalysts, and a bi-polar membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the PSC/ELC coupled cell with three PSCs. (f) Generalized energy diagram for converting CO2 into CO with three PSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2015 NPG.	 
	(26)
CO2 + 2H++ 2e− → CO + H2O	(27)
AR	Antireflection
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
BQ	Benzoquinone
BHJ	Bulk-heterojunction
cb	Conduction band
CE	Counter electrode
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CTM	Charge-transport material
CIS	CuIn(S,Se)2
CIGS	CuInGaSe2
C60-SB	Tris(sulfobetaine)-substituted fulleropyrrolidine
C60-N	Tertiary amino-fulleropyrrolidine
DPE	Diphenyl ether
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
n-DSSC	DSSC with n-type photoanode and dark counter electrode (cathode)
p-DSSC	DSSC with p-type photocathode and dark counter electrode (anode)
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
n-PESC	PESC with n-type photoanode and dark counter electrode (cathode)
p-PESC	PESC with n-type photocathode and dark counter electrode (anode)

E
cb
	Conduction band edge
EQE	External quantum efficiency
ELC	Electrolysis cell
emf	Electromotive force

η
st
	Energy storage efficiency
ETL	Electron transport layer
EMIBF4	1-Ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate
FF	Fill factor
FA	HC(NH2)2+
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin dioxide
GNP	Graphene nanoplatelet
HTM	Hole-transporter materials
HTL	Hole transport layer
HJT	Heterojunction technology
H2Q	Hydroquinone
IBC	Interdigitated back contact
ITO	Indium tin oxide
IZO	Indium zinc oxide
IEC	International electrotechnical commission

J
sc
	Short circuit current density
LIB	Lithium ion battery
LED	Light emitting diode
LATP	Li1.35Ti1.75Al0.25P2.7Si0.3O12
LiTFSI	Lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonimide)
MA	CH3NH3+
MAPbI3	Methylammonium-lead iodide
NW	Nanowire
NT	Nanotube
NG	Nanogenerator
NIR	Near-infrared
N2200	Poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)
OSC	Organic solar cell
PE	Photoanode
PC	Propylene carbonate
PSC	Perovskite solar cell
PEC	Photoelectrochemical cell
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PBS	Phosphate-buffer-saline
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PSS	Poly(styrenesulfonate)
PPy	Polypyrrole
PEI	Poly(ethyleneimine)
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PVA	Polyvinyl acetate
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
PESC	Photoelectrosynthetic cell
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PMMA	Polymethylmethacrylate
PVCS	Photovoltachromic supercapacitor
PERC	Passivated emitter rear contact
PENG	Piezoelectric nanogenerator
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PANI	Polyaniline
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PDPP3T	Poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene)
PC60BM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester
PC61BM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
PC70BM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester
PC71BM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
PProDOT-Et2	Poly(3,4-(2′,2′-diethyl)-propylenedioxythiophene)
QDSC	Quantum dot solar cell
SC	Supercapacitor
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
tBP	
tert-Butylpyridine
TCO	Transparent conducting tin oxide
TPH	Triple-layer planar heterojunction
TENG	Triboelectric nanogenerator
UV-vis	Ultraviolet-visible
vb	Valence band

V
oc
	Open circuit voltage
ZTO	Zinc tin oxide

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
