Environment-friendly Cu-based thin film solar cells: materials, devices and charge carrier dynamics  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP02067F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP02067F
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 16469-16487Environment-friendly Cu-based thin film solar cells: materials, devices and charge carrier dynamics

        
          
            Chengcheng 
            Xing
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Lei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Manying 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sixin 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Weiwei 
            He
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhi 
            Zheng
          
        
      *ab
aGreen Catalysis Center, College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China
bKey Laboratory for Micro-Nano Materials for Energy Storage and Conversion of Henan Province, College of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Institute of Surface Micro and Nano Materials, Xuchang University, Henan 461000, P. R. China. E-mail: heweiweixcu@gmail.com; zzheng@xcu.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory for Special Functional Materials of Ministry of Education, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan Province, China
Received 
      11th May 2021
    , Accepted 12th July 2021First published on 12th July 2021AbstractCu-based thin films are ideal absorbing layer materials for new-generation thin-film solar cells, which have many advantages, such as environment-friendly components, abundant raw materials, low cost, simple manufacturing process, strong anti-interference, radiation resistance, high light absorption coefficient and suitable band gap. Copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin-film solar cells, which have the highest photoelectric conversion efficiency (23.35%) among the various Cu-based materials, have been intensively investigated and exploited. To promote the progress of Cu-based thin-film solar cells, the rational design of efficient materials and devices and the in-depth understanding of their photophysical mechanisms are not only urgently required, but also have plenty of room for research. Accordingly, herein, we firstly define the concept of “Cu-based materials”, and further present a comprehensive review on the materials (design and fabrication), devices (assembly and performances), and charge carrier dynamics of Cu-based thin-film semiconductor materials, including perovskites, oxides, chalcogenides (binary, ternary, quaternary and quinary) and perovskite-like iodides. In addition, the current challenges and prospects in this topic are critically concluded. Particularly, this review may help researchers focused on investigating thin-film solar cells.
1 Introduction
To alleviate the energy crisis and environmental pollution, it is extremely urgent to utilize renewable energy instead of burning fossil fuels. Photovoltaic power generation technology is expected to play an important role in replacing traditional fossil fuels with green and sustainable power generation resources.1–3 Among the photovoltaic technologies, thin film technology has become one of the most cost-competitive solar technologies due to its low material and manufacturing costs. Thus far, commercial thin-film solar cells such as Si, CdTe and CIGS cells show a high conversion efficiency of 27.6%, 22.1% and 23.35%,4,5 respectively. However, the optical band gap of Si-based thin films does not match the solar spectrum, which limits their further commercialization. Cd is a heavy metal element, which is extremely harmful to the environment. Te and In are expensive and limited in reserves. These disadvantages severely restrict the production of materials based on these elements and their industrial application in the future.4,6,7 Besides, the emerging perovskite solar cells have reached the highest efficiency of 25.5% in a short period of several decades.5 However, the further industrialization of most of them is still challenging in due to the presence of toxic lead and their instability in polar solvents and at high temperatures.8–10 Therefore, it is highly required to explore semiconductor thin films that have rich reserves and environment-friendly and good photoelectric properties.
Cu-based materials, which are defined herein as compounds containing Cu element in their molecular composition, have many advantages such as environmental friendliness, abundant reserves, low cost, simple manufacturing process, strong anti-interference, radiation resistance, high light absorption coefficient and suitable band gap. In addition, it has been reported that Cu-doped compounds can increase the absorbance and reduce the band gap and resistivity of films.11–15 Therefore, Cu-based compounds have been widely investigated due to their excellent properties in the thermal, electrical, optical and magnetic fields. They are mainly used in a variety of energy devices, such as solar cells, fuel cells, thermoelectric devices, sensors, supercapacitors, integrated circuits and memory devices.12,16–19
Cu-based thin films represent ideal absorbing layer materials for new-generation thin film solar cells, and thus have received significant interest. Herein, we focus on their application and progress in thin-film solar cells. According to their chemical compositions, Cu-based thin films can be divided into binary (Cu–O, Cu–S and Cu–Se), ternary (Cu3Bi3S3, CuInS2 and CuSbS2), quaternary (CIGS and CZTS) and multivariate semiconductors,20 and Cu-based perovskite semiconductors. Cu-based thin films have been studied for a long time since 19th century by research groups worldwide. It is well documented that the photoelectric performance of Cu-based thin-film solar cells is dependent on various parameters. In principle, the critical step determining their performance lies in the generation and utilization efficiency of charge carriers. It is also of significance to determine the physical events of photogenerated charge carriers in materials and devices.
Particularly, this review will introduce studies on the photogenerated carrier dynamics in Cu-based thin films using transient surface photovoltage (TSPV).32–35 TSPV is one of the powerful means to study the dynamic process and reaction mechanism of photogenerated carriers in semiconductors. It can obtain important microscopic information about the generation, capture, recombination and separation of photogenerated carriers in semiconductors. This technology can help conveniently detect the conductivity type and carrier lifetime of semiconductor materials without making semiconductor materials into devices. It has the advantages of simple operation, wide application, good reproducibility and does not damage the sample. Cu-based thin-film solar cells are an emerging research field. The study of photo-generated carrier dynamics is of great significance to further improve their photoelectric conversion efficiency. Therefore, the application of TSPV Cu-based thin-film solar cells ate discussed here.
This review is helpful for beginners to have a preliminary understanding of the knowledge related to Cu-based thin-film solar cells. The application of TSPV in some Cu-based thin-film solar cells is summarized, which provides a reliable reference for studying the properties of thin films in the future. Finally, the development trend of Cu-based thin-film solar cells is prospected.
2 Cu-based thin-film solar cells: materials and devices
2.1 Cu-based perovskite thin-film solar cells

2.1.1 Cu-doped lead halide perovskite thin-film solar cells. 
Because of the instability and toxicity of lead-based perovskite, and inspired by the excellent characteristics of hybrid lead halide perovskite, Cu-based materials with abundant reserves and environmental friendliness have become ideal materials to replace lead-based perovskite.36,37 Cu-based perovskite usually forms a two-dimensional layered perovskite structure due to its small ionic radius. The general formula is (RNH3)2CuX4, where RNH3+ can be an aliphatic or aromatic cation and X a halogen. Its structure is body-centred cubic structure, which is composed of several layers of angle-sharing CuX6 octahedrons, and R-NH3 cations occupy the space between the X anions on both sides of the layer.38 These layered structures are stabilized by hydrogen bonding between the amino groups and halides and van der Waals interaction between the organic units.39–41 Cui et al.40 synthesized (p-F-C6H5C2H4-NH3)2–CuBr4 and [CH3(CH2)3NH3]2–CuBr4, 2D Cu-based perovskites with a band gap of 1.74 V and 1.76 V, respectively and used them as the photoactive layers to construct perovskite cells. Although the conversion efficiency is relatively low (0.51% and 0.63%, respectively), the devices showed good stability in the air with 50% humidity for one day.
Ye et al.61,62 considered that the incorporation of Cu+ cations in the perovskite layer can effectively passivate the trapped state of perovskite, reduce the recombination of carriers, and promote the hole transfer from the perovskite layer to the electrode. To accurately examine the effect of Cu doping on perovskite, a detailed investigation of the levels and forms of Cu doping is necessary. Song et al.63 prepared a perovskite absorption layer using Cu-based compounds (CuCl2 and CuI) as additives of FAPbI3 and found that the addition of a small amount of Cu+ can reduce the phase transition temperature of perovskite, inhibiting the production of undesirable phases, which strongly affect the electrical performance of perovskite devices. Upon doping with 0.1 mol% Cu+, the device showed high efficiency and long-term stability, and only a ∼2% decrease in PCE after 170 h under an N2 atmosphere. With an increase in the doping concentration, the photovoltaic performance of the device decreased. These works are helpful to understand the role of Cu+ doping in perovskite and realize high-efficiency and high-stability perovskite solar cells.
In 2017, our group34 fabricated a CuI film via the in situ reaction of a Cu film and I2 vapor on an ITO substrate. CuI was blended with CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution via the spin-coating process, and the CH3NH3PbI3 copper defect compensation material was rapidly formed via annealing through the “buoyancy effect”.64 This was the first time it was found that the perovskite energy band structure could be adjusted by compensating Cu dopant to adapt to the ITO electrode, which enables the inverted perovskite device to achieve high charge separation and hole collection. The ITO/(CH3NH3)1−xCuxPbI3/PCBM/Ag device was further fabricated, as shown in Fig. 2, and the PCE reached 15.14% ± 0.67%.
 Fig. 1  Energy level diagrams of Cu-based thin film solar cells (ETL, HTL,21 Cu2O, CuO,22 Cu2S, CuS,23,24 CuBiI4,25 Ag3CuS2,26 Cu3BiS3, CIGS, CZTS,27 CuSbS2,28 CuInS2, CuInSe2, CuGaS2,29 CFTS,30 and CBTS31). 
 Fig. 2  (a) Scheme for the inverted HTL free perovskite solar cells on ITO. (b) J–V curves of the perovskite devices using various thickness initial Cu films (forward scanning). (c) Fermi levels of the Cu-free and Cu doped perovskite films. (d) Variation in photon conversion efficiency on perovskite solar cells with different Cu contents.34 


2.1.2 Cu-based perovskite inorganic thin-film solar cells. 
Increasing efforts have been committed to the development of Cu-based perovskite-like inorganic thin-film materials, where CuBiI4 is the most representative one, which has a theoretical efficiency greater than 17%.65 Hu et al. pioneered the development of a low-temperature route to synthesize (111) CuBiI4 crystals by treating CuI and BiI3 powder by high vapor pressure in tributyl phosphate and HI–DMA co-solvent.66 A band gap of 2.67 eV for the resulting CuBiI4 thin film with optimized PCE of 0.82% was obtained. Our group25 synthesized (222) plane-oriented gray-black n-type ternary semiconductor thin-film CuBiI4 with a band gap of 1.8 eV through the direct metal surface elemental reaction (DMSER) method using Cu–Bi alloy and elemental iodine as precursors in 2019. Compared to the classical CH3NH3PbI3 thin film prepared via the solution method, the photogenerated carrier lifetime of the CuBiI4 thin film increased evidently, which indicates that CuBiI4 (perovskite-like lead-free material) can serve as a promising candidate photovoltaic material. The mixed organic solvent of TBP, CH3CN and Spiro-OMeTAD was used to prepare CuBiI4/Spiro-OMeTAD heterojunction films with uniform mixing and smooth density for the fabrication of solar cell devices. The ITO/CuBiI4:Spiro-OMeTAD/Au devices with a simple sandwich structure exhibited a conversion efficiency of 1.119% (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CuBiI4. UPS measurements (b and c), UV-vis and PL (226 nm light excited) spectra (d), and experimental band energy level (e) of the resulting CuBiI4 thin films.25 

2.2 Binary Cu-based thin-film solar cells

2.2.1 Copper oxide thin-film solar cells. 
Cu2O and CuO have been widely studied due to their low cost, non-toxicity and high electron transfer mobility.67 The band gap of CuO ranges from 1.0 to 2.1 eV, and that of Cu2O varies from 2.0 to 2.6 eV; therefore, CuO can absorb more photons than Cu2O.22,68,69 The fabrication of copper oxide thin films has also been well investigated using various techniques, such as sol–gel, electrodeposition, thermal evaporation, spray pyrolysis, DC reactive sputtering, and RF magnetron sputtering.70–76 These advantages make Cu2O and CuO suitable semiconductor materials for photovoltaic applications.
Copper oxide is generally used with other semiconductor materials to build p–n heterojunction solar cells. Kim et al.77 prepared heterojunction cells via the deposition p-type CuO and Cu2O on n-type silicon wafers by RF magnetron sputtering. They found that the band gap of the thin films increased with an increase in the sputtering pressure, and the PCE of the CuO-based solar cells (0.43%) was higher than that of the Cu2O-based cell (0.12%) (Fig. 4). Metal elements (e.g., Na, Mg, Sr, La, Yb, and Nd) can be doped in pure copper oxide films.78–84 Consequently, the crystallinity and electrical properties of copper oxide can be optimized to improve the PCE of solar cells. Minami et al.85 prepared p-type Cu2O:Na sheets with thermally oxidized Cu sheets to fabricate MgF2/AZO/Zn1−xGexO/Cu2O:Na heterojunction solar cells, which showed an optimal PCE of 8.1% at x = 0.62. Gordon et al.86 constructed thin film solar cells using a Cu2O absorption layer grown via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and gallium oxide (Ga2O3) buffer layer grown via atomic layer deposition (ALD). This continuous vapor deposition avoids the oxidation of Cu caused by exposure of the Cu2O film to air and effectively reduces the generation of defective copper oxide (CuO) at the interface, resulting in a primitive photovoltaic junction. This method can also be applied in other material systems to improve the performance of solar cells by reducing the interface recombination caused by oxides. Through calculation, the Jsc of this device is 8.4 mA cm−2, but its Voc is 1.2 V. In contrast, the CVD-Cu2O devices showed a better Voc value (1.8 V) and a Jsc of 2.0 mA cm−2. Finally, the simulation of a new type of double absorption layer (CVD-Cu2O on ECD-Cu2O) device showed the promising prospect of solar cells that combine the formation of an in situ junction with electrochemical deposition absorption layer (theoretical efficiency is 13.2%). Although numerous studies on the preparation methods and properties of copper oxide thin films have been conducted, there is a big step to improve the device efficiency.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure of p-type copper oxide-based heterojunction thin film solar cell. Power conversion efficiency of p-copper oxide/n-Si heterojunction solar cell.77 


2.2.2 Copper sulfide thin-film solar cells. 
Binary copper sulfide thin films with a narrow band gap energy in the range of 1.2 eV and 2.53 eV are suitable for thin-film solar cells. In 1954, Cu2S/CdS thin film solar cells with a p–n heterojunction were first reported with an efficiency of 1.5%.87 To date, a variety of chemical and physical synthetic techniques have been developed to deposit CuS thin films, including CVD, thermal co-evaporation, photochemical deposition, electrodeposition, spray pyrolysis, SILAR and CBD.88–94 Saraf95 used Cu2S and CdS nanoparticles to prepare a Cu2S nanoparticle film on CdS film via spinning coating. According to the UV-vis spectrum and Tauc plot, the band gap of CdS and Cu2S were measured to be 4.4 eV and 2.65 eV, respectively. The heterogeneous junction Cu2S/CdS thin film solar cells showed an efficiency of ∼10.9% and fill factor of ∼73%. Cu+ has high mobility in solid compounds, and easily diffuses into adjacent substances, which leads to the degradation of the Cu-deficient Cu2S phase and the transition from n-type to p-type CdS. As shown in Fig. 5, both of these conditions will lead to a decrease in the built-in electric field in the absorption layer and/or the increase in the series resistance in devices, resulting in a decrease in Jsc and PCE, which seriously hinders its commercialization.23,96–98
 Fig. 5  Potential effects of Cu diffusion, resulting in a higher carrier concentration in Cu2S and a change in the type of semiconductivity in the CdS:Cu layer.24 
Recently, Kute et al.24 synthesized CuS nanoparticles via a co-precipitation method, and then prepared CuS/SiO2 nanocomposites via a solid-phase diffusion method with silicic acid as the source of silicon. The optical response of the composite was in the range of 400–500 nm. An increase in the concentration of Cu2+ in the composite resulted in a blue shift. It was found that the FF and η have no direct relationship with the concentration of CuS in SiO2 composites. The highest FF was related to the SiO2 composite loaded with 25 wt% CuS, whereas the optimized power conversion efficiency was found in the 15 wt% CuS-loaded SiO2 composites. Under a light source with radiating power of 0.0104 W m−2, an η of 1.11% was obtained. Salih et al.99 used a simple and economical bath deposition method to successfully deposit an orthorhombic Cu7S4 film on a glass substrate, which showed a band gap of 2.477 eV. When the annealing temperature was increased, the grain size increased from 44 nm to 54 nm, and the optical band gap had a blue shift of 0.54 eV. It can also be used in the absorption layer of solar cells at a suitable annealing temperature.


2.2.3 Copper selenide thin-film solar cells. 
There are three main types of copper selenide films, i.e., CuSe, Cu2Se and Cu3Se2. Cu2−xSe has attracted increasing attention owing to its advantages such as p-type conductivity, tunable optical band gap, low toxicity and rich earth resources. The direct band gap of Cu2−xSe is about 2.2 eV, and its indirect band gap is about 1.4 eV.100 By simply changing the Cu/Se ratio, the band gap of Cu2−xSe NPs can be tuned in a wide range. In addition, given that the vacancy concentration of Cu2−xSe is directly related to the hole concentration, the photogenerated carrier concentration of Cu2−xSe can be easily controlled by changing the atomic ratio of Cu/Se.101 Thin films can be grown through various methods, such as electrodeposition, chemical bath deposition, spray pyrolysis, and flash evaporation.102,103
Recently, Pejjia et al.104 used ascorbic acid as a raw material to synthesize water-soluble non-stoichiometric Cu2−xSe nanoparticles (x = 0.2) at 70 °C for 15 min, and then prepared Cu2−xSe thin films via the drop-coating method, in which triethylene glycol (TEG) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) were used to adjust the ink fluidity and reduce cracks in the film. The annealed Cu2−xSe NPs film had a direct optical band gap of 1.82 eV and an indirect band gap of 1.69 eV. Hall effect measurement showed p-type conductivity, a carrier concentration of 3.18 × 1019 cm−3, resistivity of 1.31 × 10−1 Ω c, and hole mobility of 1.5 cm2 V−1 s−1. The SLG/Mo/Cu2−xSe NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/Al: ZnO/Ni/Ag device had a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 0.095% (as shown in Fig. 6). The low efficiency of Cu2−xSe NP thin-film solar cells is attributed to the high conductivity of the film and the relatively small grain size of the absorption layer.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of Cu2−xSe NP-based solar cell, (b) fabrication, (c) cross-sectional SEM image of Cu2−xSe NPs solar cell and (d) J–V characteristics.104 
To improve the photo-generated carrier concentration and photoelectric conversion efficiency of Cu2−xSe NP thin-film solar cells, the following two aspects are proposed: (1) doping appropriate elements to adjust the band gap and (2) optimizing the annealing parameters to increase the density and grain size of the films. Na, I, S, Te, Sn and Sb have been reported as dopants thus far.105–110 The properties and quantity of doped elements are critical, which affect the photoelectric properties of Cu2−xSe, and thus excessive doping may have adverse effects. The carrier concentration and conductivity of Cu2−xSe decrease by Na doping, suggesting that sodium ions act as an n-type dopant.109 A small amount of iodine doping is beneficial to produce VCu and increase the p-type carrier concentration and conductivity; however, excessive doping of iodine reduces the carrier mobility, and thus reduces the conductivity of Cu2−xSe, which is due to the substitution of Se to form a point defect.110 The volatilization of Se in Cu2−xSe can lead to high temperature metallization of the films. The VSe can produce two electrons in the lattice, and the stoichiometric deviation leads to the formation of the Cu2O impurity, which can be improved by doping Te. Khusayfan et al.111 also showed that the insertion/doping of Yb in the Cu2Se layer can increase the carrier mobility to 35.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and reduce the free hole concentration to 1.15 × 1018 cm3, which is conducive to the realization of high-efficiency solar cells. The selection of doping elements and the optimization of concentration will make Cu2−xSe nanoparticles become a prominent absorption material in thin-film solar cells.
Besides Cu2−xSe, Monjezi et al.112 fabricated Cu3Se2 films with different doping concentrations of Pb (2%, 4% and 6% Pb) on FTO glass substrates via electrochemical deposition. It was found that Pb doping enhanced the near-band-edge (NBE) emission band and induced a blue shift in the absorption band. The doping of Pb can also reduce the grain size of Cu3Se2, thereby increasing the specific surface area and photon absorption efficiency. In addition, an increase in the Pb doping amount can improve the atomic percentage of lead and copper vacancies. These vacancies act as holes in Cu3Se2 and enhance its p-type characteristics and electrical properties. The existence of Pb increases the optical band gap (Pb0 = 1.65, Pb1 = 1.67, Pb2 = 1.68 and Pb3 = 1.69 eV) of Cu3Se2 nanosheets and improves the efficiency of solar cells (Pb0 = 0.74%, Pb1 = 1.18%, Pb2 = 0.79% and Pb3 = 1.65%), respectively.

2.3 Ternary Cu-based thin-film solar cells

2.3.1 CBS thin-film solar cells. 
Cu3BiS3, also known as the mineral wittichenite, was first synthesized in 1947, but its potential as a solar absorber was not recognized until 1997.113,114 Mesa et al.115 reported that the theoretical power conversion efficiency of Cu3BiS3 thin-film solar cells is around 19.86%. As a p-type semiconductor, the advantages of Cu3BiS3 such as abundant reserves, low price, high light absorption coefficient (>105 cm), and suitable direct band gap (1.10–1.86 eV) make it one of the most promising absorption layers for low-cost thin-film solar cells.27,46 Cu3BiS3 thin films have been prepared via various techniques, including solid-state reaction, co-evaporation, CBD, reactive sputtering, electrodeposition, and hot injection.114,116–120 The synthesis and characterization of Cu3BiS3 have been studied, but few researchers have applied it to thin-film solar cells, and the best PCE reported is only 1.28% thus far.121 Li et al.122 successfully prepared a high-quality p-type Cu3BiS3 film with a direct bandgap of 1.47 eV using the DMSO solution method. When it was applied to a solar cell with the device structure of Mo/Cu3BiS3/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al, the PCE was 0.17% (Jsc = 2.37 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.19 V, and FF = 37.56%). Improper alignment of the band gap between CdS and Cu3BiS3 and the inter-diffusion of the interface results in the inefficient collection of photo-generated carriers, leading to a poor performance. To passivate the absorber surface and prevent unnecessary interface diffusion, an ultra-thin dielectric layer can be inserted between Cu3BiS3 and CdS.123
Hussain et al.124 deposited Cu–Bi–S thin films on soda-lime glass substrates via the co-evaporation of Cu2S and Bi2S3 at temperatures ranging from room temperature to 400 °C. They demonstrated that Cu3BiS3 is the dominant phase in Cu-rich thin films. The film obtained at 400 °C had an optical band gap of 1.4 eV, Hall mobility of 3.95 cm2 V−1 s−1 and carrier concentration of 7.48 × 1016 cm3. Based on Cu3BiS3 thin films, solar cell devices (glass/ITO/n-CdS/p-Cu3BiS3/Al) were constructed, but showed a poor performance. The inefficient collection of photogenerated carriers causes a low photocurrent, which may be limited by the poor interface contact between Cu3BiS3 and CdS, and interface interdiffusion.48,118,121,124,125 Although Cu3BiS3 has great potential as an absorber layer, there is still a big gap between its actual efficiency and theoretical power conversion efficiency. To improve Cu3BiS3 thin-film solar cells, it is necessary to find a suitable method to prepare Cu3BiS3 thin films, clarify the nature of their secondary phase and defects, and solve the effect of interfacial problems in chalcogenide solar cells on their performance.


2.3.2 CIS thin-film solar cells. 
As a representative of ternary Cu-based compounds and a type of I–III–IV compound semiconductor material, CuInS/Se2(CIS) has a direct band gap energy of 1.04 eV, which is close to the optimal solar spectrum, with a stable performance and no photo-induced attenuation effect.126 The techniques for the preparation of CIS thin films include spray pyrolysis, sol–gel dip coating, co-evaporation, electrodeposition and rapid thermal process.127–130
As early as the 1990s, CIS solar cells have been industrialized, but there are still some problems, such as limited reserves of the rare elements In and Se and serious environmental pollution caused by the chromium buffer layer. In 2017, Ahn et al.131 prepared an amorphous Cu–In–S nanoparticle ink with good atomic economy by replacing a large number of bulky organic ligands with modified metal salt-organic ligand complexes. The density, flatness and grain size of the CuInSe2 thin films were improved. It was used in Mo/CIS/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al devices, and its efficiency was enhanced to 10.85% from 7.75% (pure nanoparticle-based route).
Rehan et al.132 found that in the development history of CIGSe, alkali metal Na doping can passivate or eliminate donor-like defects to increase the carrier concentration of the absorption layer, thus increasing the Voc and FF of CIGSe devices.133–135 This is mostly explained based on vacuum-based co-evaporation CIGSe devices, and relatively little is known about the effect of Na on solution-processed devices. Based on this, they doped Na into amorphous Cu–In–S nanoparticles and focused on the physical mechanism behind it. With an increase in the Na content, the efficiency increased sharply. However, when the amount exceeded the optimal level, Na had a negative impact on the device performance due to the destruction of its morphology, leading to a reduction in the device efficiency. They suggested that an increase in Na has little effect on the series resistance (Rs) and ideal coefficient (A) but can cause a significant increase in the shunt resistance (RSh) and decrease in the reverse saturation current density (i0). The impedance and C–V analysis of selected CISe devices show that the increase in Voc is independent of Na in the absorption layer. The distribution of the main elements (Cu, In and Se) remains the same in all cases, suggesting that the overall composition of the CIS thin films is not affected by the addition of Na, and is not related to the increase in Voc. The increase in the Voc in CISe devices may be attributed to the reduction in the surface defects, which cause the valence band of the CISe/CdS junction to bend down suddenly to reduce the tunnel-induced interface recombination (Fig. 7). The addition of Na can reduce interfacial recombination by reducing unnecessary surface defects. The device fabricated with the SLG/Mo/CISe/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al structure had an efficiency of 12.83% and an effective area of 0.445 cm2, which is equivalent to the current world record of 13.1% for the CISe device fabricated via a solution method.136
 Fig. 7  Schematic energy band diagram of (a) undoped Na and (b) doped Na samples showing mutation band bending at the junction of the undoped Na samples. The units of energy in all cases are electric vehicles.131 


2.3.3 CAS thin-film solar cells. 
The CAS system is mainly composed of CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2, and several methods have been reported for the fabrication of CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2 thin films such as thermal co-evaporation, electrochemical deposition, solution-based approach, thermal treatment of deposited Sb2S3–CuS, and thermal diffusion of physically evaporated Cu in chemical bath-deposited Sb2S3 under high vacuum.137–140 They are all p-type semiconductors due to the Hall effect and the highest power conversion efficiency has exceeded 3%.141–143 However, they are still far away from the maximum spectral efficiency of 22.9%,144 mainly due to their low Jsc and FF caused by high interface recombination and high series resistance (Rs) in their devices.
In 2017, Vinayakumar et al.145 obtained pure CuSbS2 thin films through rapid heat treatment (RTP), and constructed a glass/ITO/CdS/CuSbS2/Ag device with a conversion efficiency of 0.6%. The optimal photoelectric parameters were Voc = 665 mV, Jsc = 1.35 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.62. The Voc and FF were the maximum values reported for CuSbS2-based solar cells at that time. In 2019, Liu et al.146 found that butyldithiocarbamate acid (BDCA) solution can dissolve MxOy and M(OH)x. The CuSbS2 precursor solution can be obtained by dissolving Cu2O and Sb2O3 in BDCA and spin coated on FTO/CdS substrate. A pure CuSbS2 phase with high crystallinity and particle size of 500 nm was obtained by annealing, and its band gap was 1.6 eV. A heterojunction solar cell of FTO/CdS/CuSbS2/Au was constructed, exhibiting the efficiency of 0.68% (Voc = 380 mV and Jsc = 4.02 mA cm−2).
To reduce the disorder of the crystal structure, the density of non-stoichiometric defects and the carrier recombination center of CuSbS2 thin films, Zhang et al.28 annealed the CdS/CuSbS2 heterojunction to improve the interface quality, and the Voc reached 622 mV. Fu et al.147 introduced Ag atoms into the CuSbS2 crystal structure prepared via spray pyrolysis. Ag-substituted CuSbS2 has a more stable crystal structure (Fig. 8). The short circuit current density of the photovoltaic device was much higher, and the efficiency is improved significantly from 0.73% to 2.48%. Recently, Gupta et al.148 used CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2 as absorbers to simulate the performance of an AZO/i-ZnO/n-CdS/absorption layer/back electrode. The optimized single junction device efficiency was about 14% and 10.18%, respectively, which further indicates the potential of CAS in photovoltaic application. In this direction, it can reduce the defect concentration of CuSbS2 films, improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers, act as a more suitable buffer layer and back electrode, and further optimize the design of device structure to obtain high conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 8  Energy band structure analysis of CdS/CuSbS2 and CdS/Ag-substituted CuSbS2 heterojunction. (a) UPS spectra without substitution and 20% Ag-substituted CuSbS2 films. (b) Schematic diagram of band alignment at the CdS/CuSbS2 and CdS/Ag-substituted CuSbS2 heterojunction interface.147 


2.3.4 CTS thin-film solar cells. 
In 1987, Kuku and Fakolujo149 reported for the first time that Cu2SnS3 (CTS) thin-film solar cells based on thermal evaporation had a conversion efficiency of 0.11%. CTS has three types of structures, tetragonal phase, orthorhombic phase and monoclinic phase. They have the advantages of suitable band gap (0.9–1.5 eV), environment-friendly and rich content.150,151 The theoretical efficiency of CTS is 30%.152 CTS can be synthesized via chemical and physical techniques. Chemical techniques include electrodeposition, successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), spray pyrolysis, hot injection and solvothermal method.153–156 Physical methods include sputtering, co-evaporation, vacuum evaporation, solid-state reaction, and PLD.157–161
Zhai et al.162 calculated that the crystal structure of CTS is related to the order and distribution of the Cu and Sn cations, and its direct band gap is 0.8–0.9 eV, in which the VB is dominated by the Cu d and S p states, while the CB is dominated by the Sn s and S p states. With an increase in the annealing temperature, the crystal structure of CTS changes from a disordered cubic structure to a partially disordered tetragonal structure, and then to a fully ordered monoclinic structure. The degree of disorder and the planar defect density of the Cu/Zn in monoclinic structure are low, which is most significant for photovoltaic applications.
Umehara et al.163 reported that the highest efficiency of 6.7% was obtained by co-sputtering deposition of a Ge-doped CTS absorption layer. However, vacuum methods are sophisticated and expensive, and thus many researchers have begun to focus on the preparation of thin films via non-vacuum methods. Wu et al.164 prepared monoclinic CTS thin films via a sol–gel method, with the atomic ratio of Cu/Sn ranging from 1.6 to 2.0. They found that SnS and other secondary phases gradually disappeared with an increase in the densification of the CTS films. When the Cu/Sn ratio was 1.9, the CTS film had a monoclinic structure with a band gap of 1.12 eV. The power conversion efficiency was 0.58% for Ag/ITO/i-ZnO/CdS/CTS/Mo/SLG devices. Zhao et al.165 prepared CTS-based solar cells via a solution method. When the sulfurization temperature was optimized to 580 °C, dense monoclinic CTS thin films with a large grain size and about 1.4 μm thickness were obtained, and their band gap was about 1.01 eV. The sulfurization time is the key factor affecting the electronic properties of the CTS absorption layer. The best performance of SLG/Mo/CTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al was achieved by sulfurization for 20 min (PCE = 2.41%). The research on CTS thin-film solar cells is still in its infancy, and thus there is still a wide gap between the theoretical power conversion efficiency and that of CTS thin-film solar cells.


2.3.5 Other ternary Cu-based thin-film solar cells. 
Beyond CuInS2/CuInSe2, CuSbS2/CuSbSe2 and Cu2SnS3 thin-film solar cells, other ternary Cu-based compounds thin films have been developed and applied to solar cells, such as Ag3CuS2, CuGaS2/CuGaSe2, and CuInTe2. In 2014, our group prepared high-quality n-type Ag3CuS2 thin films (Eg = 1.25 eV) via element direct reaction at room temperature and calculated the band structure of the direct band gap semiconductor Ag3CuS2 by DFT for the first time.33 The PCE of Ag3CuS2/P3HT and Ag3CuS2/PTB7 was only 0.79% and 0.31%, respectively. However, the enhanced photovoltaic response of Ag3CuS2 indicates that it may be a promising photovoltaic material, which can convert photons into carriers in a wide spectrum range.
In 2017, Park et al.166 prepared wide band gap chalcopyrite via a simple precursor solution spin coating and subsequent heat treatment process (Fig. 9). The synthesized CGSSe thin films were used as absorption layers in the traditional thin-film solar cell structure of SLG/Mo/CGSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/Al-ZnO/Ni/Al, with the Voc of 0.52 V, Jsc of 3.5 mA cm−2, and PCE of 1.0%. The photovoltage was lower than the expected value, which indicates that there is a large voltage loss relative to the wide band gap (∼2.11 eV), consistent with previous reports.29 The low efficiency is attributed to the unfavorable “cliff” band arrangement, which may accelerate the interface recombination. To improve the performance of wide band gap CGSSe thin-film solar cells, it is necessary to optimize the morphology of CGSSe and find a more suitable buffer layer.
 Fig. 9  Process for the synthesis of CGSSe thin film.166 
Fan et al.167 also synthesized a new intermediate band material, Sn-doped CuGaSe2, via the ball milling method. The effective doping of Sn enhanced the optical absorption. With an increase in the Sn content (doping level x from 0.00 to 0.06), the band gap decreased from 1.65 eV to 1.41 eV. The prepared thin films were uniformly distributed and had no aggregation phenomenon, which can be used as another candidate material for the light absorption layer of high efficiency solar cells. Jia et al.52 synthesized p-type CuInTe2 nanoparticles with a zinc blende (cubic) structure via the cation exchange route, and added stearic acid to control the particle size and improve its dispersion in polar solvents. The band gap was 1.0 eV, and for the fabricated Au/CuInTe2/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO devices, the PCE was 1.221%. Compared with previous reports, the efficiency is still low, and thus the synthesis process and device manufacturing process need to be further optimized.53

2.4 Quaternary and quinary Cu-based thin-film solar cells

2.4.1 CIGS/CIGSSe thin-film solar cells. 
Cu(In,Ga)S2/Cu(In,Ga)Se2/Cu(In,Ga)(SSe)2 thin-film solar cells are regarded as the most promising absorbers because they have competitive characteristics such as resistance to high-intensity radiation, high optical absorption coefficients (≈105 cm−1), tunable bandgap in the range of 1.02–1.67 eV, stable performance, and their photoelectric conversion efficiency is comparable to that of single-crystal silicon solar cells.168 CIGS/CIGSe/CIGSSe thin films can be synthesized via both vacuum and non-vacuum processes. The vacuum deposition methods include co-evaporation and reactive magnetron co-sputtering, RF magnetron sputtering, and sulfurization of electron beam-evaporated precursors.169–174 Non-vacuum solution processes include molecular-based precursor solution, particulate-based precursor solution and electrodeposition methods.
In 1974, S. Wanger added Ga to CuInSe2 thin-film materials and prepared CIGS thin film solar cells for the first time. To date, a world record power conversion efficiency of 23.35% was realized in 2019 for a CIGS solar cell. A series of critical technological improvements was carried out to realize the current high-efficiency CIGS solar cells. (1) Alkali doping in CIGS absorber. Alkali metal doping can improve the performance of CIGS solar cells due to the increase in hole carrier concentration and passivation of the grain boundary. In the case of Na, Zhang et al.175 used first principles calculation to screen the most likely secondary phases of Na in CIGS. It was found that these alkali compounds not only inhibit the electron hole recombination on the surface and grain boundary, but also are harmless to the optical absorption of sunlight in the absorption layer. In the case of heavy alkali metals (K, Rb, and Cs), they exhibited better device performances than Na. Successive world record efficiencies of 22.3%, 22.6% and 22.9% were achieved via the incorporation of K, Rb, and Cs, respectively. The reason for this is that they can form high-bandgap alkali–In–Se compounds and enhance the Cu-depletion at the CIGS surface, which is favourable for device performance improvement. (2) Construction of double-graded bandgap CIGS absorber. Double-graded absorbers can be prepared by optimizing the Ga/(In + Ga) or S/(S + Se). The front-gradient at the CdS side can result in a higher Voc. The back-gradient across the Mo side provides a back surface field, which can facilitate an increase in carrier collection, resulting in a higher Jsc. (3) Buffer layer optimization. Solar Frontier4 successfully manufactured CIGSSe thin film photovoltaic devices with the highest power conversion efficiency in 2019 by replacing the traditional CdS buffer layer with a Zn(O,S,OH)x/Zn0.8Mg0.2O double buffer layer with the PCE of 23.35%. The double buffer layer enhances the Voc and reduces the recombination rate. Similar to CIS, despite the high efficiencies of CIGS solar cells, the scarcity of Ga and In largely limits their large-scale development.


2.4.2 CZTS/CZTSe/CZTSSe thin film solar cells. 
In recent years, increasing attention has been paid to kesterite CZTS, CZTSe and CZTSSe solar cells. Several strategies for the synthesis of CZTS, CZTSe and CZTSSe absorbers have been developed, including both vacuum and non-vacuum techniques, demonstrating promising solar cell performances.176–179 The efficiency of CZTS solar cells with CZTSSe as an absorption layer has not been improved since it reached 12.6% in 2013.180 This is mainly because the similar ionic radius of Cu2+ and Zn2+ easily leads to position exchange between Cu and Zn, that is, the position of Cu occupying Zn (CuZn) and Zn occupying Cu (ZnCu), forming an anti-position defect. The anti-position defect will cause band local fluctuation and band edge tailing, thus limiting the improvement in the open circuit voltage and device performance.181,182
In the past few years, significant progress has been made in clarifying material properties and developing new strategies to achieve higher performances. Doping and alloying are the key strategies to improve the conversion efficiency of CZTS.183,184 Liu et al.185 prepared Mo/absorber/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO solar cell devices with CZTS:Na as the absorber layer (the band alignment at CZTS/CdS and CZTS:Na/CdS interface with respect to vacuum is shown in Fig. 10). When Na (Na/(Cu + Zn + Sn) = 10%) was doped in CZTS, the conduction band offset decreased from 0.25 eV to 0.1 eV, the Voc, FF and PCE increased to 0.653 V, 63.5% and 7.46%, respectively. It has been reported that Na doping can increase the carrier concentration and improve the efficiency. However, excessive carrier concentration will reduce the carrier mobility, thus affecting the performance of solar cells. Therefore, it is important to control the carrier concentration by adjusting the Na concentration. Beside Na, Li doping can reduce the deep defects and increase the Voc, Li alloy can increase the band gap, and K doping can inhibit Sn loss and enhance Jsc.186,187 Alloying strategies such as Ag substituting Cu, Cd substituting Zn and Ge substituting Sn can change the absorption band gap in various solid solutions, inhibiting the formation of secondary phases and reducing the disorder of some cation sublattices.
Zhao et al.188 used H2O as a simple and effective additive to optimize the film formation process of DMSO-based CZTS precursors. They found that the introduction of a small amount of H2O reduced the oxygen content in the CZTS precursor film, thus limiting the formation of the SeO2/Sn(O,Se)x secondary phase in the CZTSe layer. The PCE of the CZTSSe solar cell device significantly increased from 7.45% for the pure DMSO precursor solution to 9.30% for the optimized DMSO/H2O ratio. This strategy was applied for the preparation of (AgxCu1−x)2ZnS(S,Se)4 solar cells, and the best efficiency of 10.3% was obtained. Viviana et al.189 fabricated CZTSe solar cells using CdS/ZnS double films as a buffer layer through chemical bath deposition. They found that a proper deposition time could increase the device efficiency from 7.2% to 10%. Li et al.190 prepared CZTS precursor films via solution spin-coating at room temperature and selenization in an N2 atmosphere. It was found that the selenization conditions played a dominant role in the thickness of the top large grain layer and the middle fine grain layer, but had little effect on the thickness of the bottom large grain layer.
 Fig. 10  Band alignment at CZTS/CdS and CZTS:Na/CdS interface with respect to vacuum.185 
They proposed a temperature gradient-induced growth mechanism to explain the variation in the grain size in each layer of the CZTSSe thin film.
Sun et al.191 proposed a simple and effective post heat treatment (PHT) process to improve the device performance of electro-deposited coarse CZTSSe thin film solar cells, and studied the internal recombination kinetics of CZTSSe devices by analyzing and evaluating the temperature dependence of Voc through transient photovoltage decay (TPVD). Both the minority carrier lifetime and Voc of CZTSSe thin film solar cells improved with PHT. It is known that high recombination will occur when the recombination activation energy (EA) is close to the band gap energy, and a band gap energy larger than the EA will lead to interface-dominated recombination.192 After the application of the PHT process, the increase in EA indicates a decrease in interface advantage. In addition, the difference between the EA and band gap energy matches the difference in the Voc deficit. PHT can reduce the Voc deficit because of the reduction of non-radiative interface recombination, thus improving the device performance. The optimum temperature (200 °C) of PHT on the rough surface of the CZTSSe thin film significantly improved the efficiency from 7.11% (reference CZTSSe device) to 9.40%, which is close to the highest recorded efficiency of CZTSSe thin film solar cells prepared by electrodeposition.193 The PHT process changes the interface structure through the diffusion of Cd to the surface and expands the Cu poor/Zn-rich phase, resulting in a reduction in harmful deep defects and increase in shallow defects. Besides, it has been found that PHT can improve the conductivity and reduce the non-radiative interface recombination. Therefore, these results prove the importance of controlling the properties of interface materials. In addition, the simple and cheap PHT process can also be used in other chalcogenide thin-film solar cells.
Tumbul et al.194 have prepared CZTS films with different zinc sources. A change in the zinc salt source from nitrate to acetate can improve the crystallinity of the CZTS absorber. The band gap energy of CZTS (zinc acetate) is very close to the optimal band gap energy of solar cell absorbers. All samples showed p-type conductivity and a higher carrier concentration in the CZTS (Zn(CH3COO)·2H2O) film than in CZTS (Zn(NO3)2·4H2O) film. Their group also195 studied superstrte-type ITO/TiO2/In2S3/Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film solar cells using a simple and vacuum-free solution process. All-layer solution processed CZTS solar cells were obtained for the first time. Subsequently, Tumbul et al.196 studied the effect of the aging time of a glacial acetic acid (GAA) and metal/thiourea–aqueous/ethanol-based precursor solution on the properties of CZTS films prepared via the sol–gel method. With a prolonging of the solution aging time, the optical band gap energy of the film shifted to a more suitable energy value. This result is very attractive for the application of CZTS-based solar cells.
Despite these efforts, the performance improvement in CZTSSe solar cells is still insufficient. All the reported doping or alloying strategies have failed to break the efficiency record of 12.6% for undoped devices, which is much lower than the theoretical solar conversion efficiency of CZTS-based thin film solar cells (32.4%).200 This is mainly because there are many inherent defects in the CZTS crystal, which inhibit the photoelectron properties of the absorber and provide a special tolerance to external doping.203 It is worth noting that efficiencies of above 12% were reported very recently for non-doped CZTSSe solar cells. Li et al.204 demonstrated a soft-selenization process for the growth of CZTSe absorbers. This treatment modifies the local chemical environment and suppresses the formation of detrimental intrinsic defects. Consequently, a CZTSe solar cell with an efficiency of 12.5% was prepared. Gong et al.205 reported a CZTSSe solar cell with a total area efficiency of 12.4% (active area efficiency of 13.6%) by comparing the Sn2+ precursor and Sn4+ precursor. The Sn4+ precursor showed a better performance because it facilitated the direct formation of the CZTS phase, resulting in an absorber with a uniform composition. These results indicate that engineering the local chemical environment is efficient to passivate harmful defects. This strategy may be promising for an improvement in the performance of CZTSSe devices.


2.4.3 Other quaternary and quinary Cu-based thin-film solar cells. 
For CZTS/CZTSe/CZTSSe thin film solar cells, interface defects make CZTS show more non-radiating recombination than CIGS, resulting in a higher Voc deficit. Additionally, cation elements with the same coordination and similar radius form a large number of defects and defect clusters, which leads to high density of band-tail states and potential fluctuations.56 Choosing an element that can replace the Cu or Zn atoms and make the chemical properties of the formed compound similar to CZTS/CZTSe/CZTSSe can effectively reduce the inversion defects. Gershon et al.206 used Ag to replace part of Cu, and the anti-position defects decreased obviously. However, with an increase in the Ag content, the material changed from p-type to n-type. The ion radius of group IIA element Ba is much larger than that of Cu, Zn and Sn, and the formation energies of Cu–Ba and Sn–Ba are high, thus it is difficult to form anti-site defects. Therefore, substituting Ba for Zn is also a feasible method to inhibit band tails and reduce cation disorder.31
In 2016, Mitzi et al.201 found that the band gap of Cu2BaSn(S,Se)4 can be adjusted in the range of 1.5–2.1 eV by combining theory and experiment. They used a Cu2BaSn(S,Se)4 thin film with a band gap of ∼2 eV to fabricate an FTO/CBTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO solar cell device, and the PCE was 1.6%. Thereafter, it was found that it is difficult to further improve the power conversion efficiency. The fundamental reason may lie in the relatively wide band gap, which cannot efficiently capture long-wavelength sunlight. An effective way to reduce the band gap is to replace part of S with Se. Mitzi et al.60 further reported a CBTSSe-based photovoltaic device with a PCE of 5.2% (total area 0.425 cm2) by adjusting band gap with air annealing step, as shown in Fig. 11, which is the highest efficiency of CBTSSe-based thin film solar cells at present.
 Fig. 11  Properties of solar cells. (a) Light current density–voltage characteristics and (b) EQE spectra with and without annealing in air. (c) Current density–voltage characteristics under light and dark. (d) EQE spectra of current champion air annealed Cu2BaSnS4−xSex (x = 3) solar cells with negative bias and zero bias.60 
Pal et al.207 prepared Cu2FeSnS4 (CFTS) thin films via the continuous ion layer adsorption method. N-type chalcogenide (Bi2S3, CdS and Ag2S) layers can be deposited via the SILAR method on p-type CFTS to form p–n junction devices. They found that with an increase in light intensity, both Voc and Isc increase, while the fill factor decreases. Under low light intensity (0.1 sun), the efficiency increased to 4.72%. The linear dependence of Isc on intensity indicates that there is no space charge accumulation in the device. It is proposed that carrier recombination is reduced at low light intensity but enhanced at high light intensity. The p–n junction device constructed by CFTS and Bi2S3 achieved an efficiency of 2.9% (1 sun) without any high temperature vulcanization. In addition, researchers have also used various methods to replace Zn atoms with Mg, Sr, Ni, and Co atoms to synthesize semiconductor thin film materials with similar properties as CZTS/CZTSSe, which are expected to be applied as the absorption layer of thin-film solar cells.30
According to the current maximum efficiency of all types of Cu-based thin film solar cells, the preparation methods are compared here. The physical method is simple to operate, but it requires high temperature and high pressure. Furthermore, the contact between the film and the substrate is worse than the chemical method. The chemical method has good atom-economy and low cost, which does not require expensive equipment and has good development prospect.
The photo-electric conversion efficiency is determined largely by the band gap of materials (Fig. 1 and Table 1). According to the SQ limit, it is known that the theoretical efficiency is very high when each of Cu2S, CIGS/Se and CZTS/Se is used as the absorbing layer material, which can reach more than 30% (Table 2). In addition, since the 1970s, investigation of these semiconductors and their photovoltaic applications have been conducted continuously, and many groups around the world have been involved in this research direction. To date, significant progress has been made on the absorption layer, conductive glass, upper and lower interface, window layer, reflection reducing layer, etc., and device processing technology has been well-developed. Therefore, Cu2S-, CIGS/Se- and CZTS/Se-based film solar cells exhibit high efficiencies of over 10%.
Table 1 Summary of the band gap, absorption coefficient, carrier concentration, mobility carriers, and dominant defects of Cu-based thin-film solar cells




Absorber
Conductivity type
Band gap (eV)
Absorption coefficient (cm−1)
Carrier concentration (cm−3)
Mobility carriers (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Dominant defect
Ref.




CuBiI4
n
1.8
>104


33.3–110



25



CuO
p
1.0–2.1
105
1016–1018
0.48–2.03



42



Cu2O
n/p
2.0–2.6
104
1 × 1015–1 × 1016
20–100



43 and 44



CuxS
p
1.6–2.9
105
1019–1020
4



45



Cu3BiS3
p
1.10–1.86
>1.5 × 105
1015–1016
4
VCu

46–48



CuSbS/Se2
p
1.4–1.6
104–105
1016–1018
49
VCuVSCuSbVSe

49 and 50



Cu2SnS3
p
0.8–0.9
>104
4 × 1016–6 × 1016


VCuSnCu + CuSn

51



Ag3CuS2
n
1.25
–104







33



Cu–In–Te
p
0.91–1.02
∼104
1019





52 and 53



CIGS/Se
p
1.04–1.68
105
1 × 1016
25–100
VCu

54 and 55



CZTS/Se
p
1.0–1.5
104–105
–1 × 1019
100–140
CuZnZnCuVCu

56–58



CBTS
p
1.5–2.1
1 × 105–2 × 105
5 × 1014
∼10
VCu

56, 59 and 60





Table 2 Efficiency, device fabrication and methods for the fabrication of Cu-based compound thin film solar cells




Absorber
Theoretical efficiency (%)
Highest efficiency (%)
Device fabrication
Method
Ref.




CuBiI4
>17
1.19
ITO/CuBiI4/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Metal surface elemental reaction

25 and 65



CuO
18
2.11
FTO/ZnO/CuO/MoO3/Au
Chemical bath deposition

22, 84, 197 and 198



Cu2O
>20
8.1
MgF2/ZnO/Zn0.38Ge0.62−O/Cu2O:Na/Au
Thermal oxidation

68, 69, 77 and 100



CuxS


10.9
SLG/Ag/CdS/Cu2S/Au
Spin coating technique

23 and 87



Cu3BiS3
19.86
1.28
FTO/TiO2/Cu3BiS3/Pt
Solvothermal route

115 and 121



CuSbS/Se2
22.9
3.22
SLG/CuSbS2/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al
Hybrid inks

141–144



Cu2SnS3
30
6.7
Mo/Cu2Sn1−xGexS3/CdS/Ga–ZnO/Al
Co-sputtering deposition

150 and 152



Ag3CuS2
30
2.01
ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt
Chemical conversion method

33 and 199



Cu–In–Te


5.1
ZnO:Al/ZnO/CdS/CuIn3Te5/Mo/SLG
Co-evaporation

52 and 53



CIGS/Se
33.5
23.35
Mo/CIGSSe/CsF/Zn(O,S,OH)x/Zn0.8Mg0.2O/ZnO:B/Al/MgF2
Sputtering, sulfurization-after-selenization (SAS)

4 and 168



CZTS/Se
32.4
12.6
Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al/MgF2
Hydrazine pure-solution

180 and 200



CBTS
22
5.2
Mo/CBTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
Vacuum-based techniques

60, 201 and 202






3 Cu-based thin-film solar cells: charge carrier dynamics
The photoelectric properties of semiconductors are determined by the photogenerated carrier dynamics. The transient surface photovoltage (TSPV) technique, which is based on the detection of the change in surface charge induced by incident light, can provide important information about the photoinduced charge carrier dynamics, including charge carrier lifetime and transfer, charge transport direction and semiconductor conductivity type. TSPV measurements are often employed to understand the catalytic mechanism of photocatalysis. Recently, it has been exploited as a useful tool to understand the physical principle in thin-film solar cells.25,26,34,35,208,209Fig. 12 displays a diagram of the instrumental setup and detection principle of the transient surface photovoltage system.
 Fig. 12  Diagram of transient surface photovoltage test system. 
The photovoltage response consists of two parts, i.e., rise and decay. The rising part of the photovoltage physically corresponds to an increase in the electron concentration in the conductive substrate (similar to the process of capacitor charging), and this process is caused by the diffusion of photoelectronic carriers to the substrate. The falling part of the photovoltage mainly corresponds to the recombination process of electrons leaving the conductive substrate (similar to the process of capacitor discharge). Generally, the transient photovoltaic of semiconductor materials is divided into drift and diffusion processes, which correspond to short-term and long-term PV signals, respectively.32,210,211 According to the first-order dynamics and series process, the TSPV signal can be simulated as eqn (1), which is basically consistent with the experimental results. (1)where ksep and krec are the rate constants of charge separation and recombination, respectively; Qexc,0 is the initial excited charge of the laser pulse in bulk semiconductor, and C is the capacitance of TSPV. The parameter L has been created to evaluate the photoelectric performance in study of perovskite thin films:32,211,212L = Tt/Trwhere Tt is the time when the optical voltage reaches its maximum value and Tr is the time when the photogenerated carriers are completely recombined. A smaller L value indicates that the corresponding semiconductor has higher photoelectric performance.
In a pioneering work, TSPV was used to analyze the charge separation kinetics of the ITO/perovskite junction.34 Both Cu-free ITO/perovskite and Cu-doped perovskite have the characteristics of p-type semiconductor, which is attributed to the downward band bending near the surface to collect/accumulate negative charges on the solid/air surface. It was demonstrated that Cu+ doping can eliminate the interfacial charge recombination at the ITO/perovskite junction. The photoluminescence (PL) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques were also used to verify the hypothesis of improved charge separation at the ITO/Cu perovskite interface. Besides, the effect of Bi/Cu molar ratio on the photogenerated carrier life of CuBiI4 was studied by TSPV.35 It was found that with an increase in the Cu content in the precursor film, the carrier mobility of the CuBiI4 thin film decreased gradually. Bi has a concentration gradient from the surface to the bottom. This concentration gradient leads to the formation of a built-in electric field from high concentration to low concentration. This bulk heterojunction structure and built-in electric field are conducive to the separation and transport of photogenerated carriers. TSPV and PL results indicated that for the CuBiI4:HTL bulk heterojunction films prepared with a Bi/Cu20 nm film, the photo-generated carrier lifetimes of the CuBiI4:Spiro-OMeTAD and CuBiI4:PTB7 films are longer than that of CuBiI4:P3HT films because of the large number of holes in the films, resulting in a reduction in charge transport. TSPV of CuBiI4:HTL bulk heterojunction films prepared with Bi/Cu 30 nm film showed that the photo-generated carrier lifetime of the CuBiI4:HTL films prepared using the two other precursor films was significantly shorter than that of the CuBiI4:HTL films prepared using two other precursor films (as shown in Fig. 13). This may be due to the large gap at the film interface, which leads to the serious photo-generated electron–hole pair recombination. These results revealed that an appropriate Bi gradient structure can enhance the transfer of photogenerated carriers, increase the lifetime of carriers, and enhance the photoelectric performance.
 Fig. 13  TSPV results of CuBiI4 fabricated with different molar ratios of Bi and Cu. (a) CuBiI4: organic thin films. (b) CuBiI4: Spiro-OMeTAD. (c) CuBiI4: P3HT, and (d) CuBiI4: PTB7.35 
Zheng and co-workers also applied TPV to determine the photogenerated carrier transfer and lifetime in Ag3CuS2 and Ag3CuS2/polymer films.33 The positive TPV responses indicated that positive charges were accumulated on the surface in the form of an n-type semiconductor and n–p heterojunction. The lifetime of photogenerated carriers in the Ag3CuS2/P3HT film was slightly longer than that in the Ag3CuS2 film. The TPV of the pure PTB7 film is a positive signal because it is an n-type semiconductor (Fig. 14). The carrier lifetime in PTB7 films increased significantly to hundreds of milliseconds. They implied that the extension of the carrier lifetime is not the main factor influencing the performance of the Ag3CuS2/polymer heterojunction. The carrier separation at the inorganic/polymer heterojunction also affects the PCE.213,214 Both Ag3CuS2/P3HT and Ag3CuS2/PTB7 heterojunction films have a positive current, indicating that photogenerated carriers flow from the polymer to Ag3CuS2 through the junction. The potential barrier of the n–p-Ag3CuS2/P3HT junction may be lower than that of the n–n-Ag3CuS2/PTB7 junction, resulting in a higher current density in the Ag3CuS2/P3HT device and more effective carrier separation through the p–n junction. Ag3CuS2/P3HT devices can obtain a higher open circuit voltage due to their longer charge lifetime and/or lower dark current density, and thus these factors need to be optimized to make the photoelectric conversion efficiency closer to the theoretical efficiency.215 The modification of the interface will affect carrier separation and lifetime simultaneously, which is the biggest problem of inorganic/polymer heterojunction solar cells and needs further research.
 Fig. 14  Transient photovoltage curves: (a) of Ag3CuS2, P3HT and Ag3CuS2/P3HT, and inset is a scheme for the measurement and (b) Ag3CuS2, PTB7 and Ag3CuS2/P3HT. A single laser pulse (355 nm, 4 ns) was used for illumination.33 
To further demonstrate the electrical transport properties of Cu3BiS3 thin films, Mesa et al.216 determined the p concentration and μ mobility of carriers deposited via the co-evaporation of Cu3BiS3 using the conductivity and Hall coefficient as a function of temperature. The p vs. T and μ vs. t curves of the Cu3BiS3 films were plotted with different mCu/(mCu + mBi) ratios. The results showed that the p concentration of the carrier increased significantly when the temperature was higher than 250 K, which is obviously caused by the thermal excitation of electrons from the extended state in the valence band to the acceptor state in the energy gap, thus increasing the density of the impurity accepted by the negative ionization. A sharp increase in the conductivity of the Cu3BiS3 films was observed at k, which is basically caused by the increase in carrier concentration in the studied temperature range.217,218 Cu3BiS3 has a low mobility due to its inherent defects of high density and ionized impurities. With an increase in temperature, its mobility increases because a large number of carriers are excited from the band-tailed state to the valence band with a lower effective mass (they become lighter). The transient SPV curves of the Cu3BiS3 thin film and Cu3BiS3/In2S3 system were obtained under light excitation of different wavelengths, as shown in Fig. 15. When excited by photons with wavelength λ > 890 nm, the excitation of electrons induces the conduction band direction from the surface state, resulting in a decrease in the band deflection at the surface region. The transient SPV signal of the Cu3BiS3 film was positive and the decay time constant was 0.1 s. When photons with a wavelength of λ < 890 nm were used for excitation, the electron excitation from the surface state to the conduction band existed simultaneously, leading to a positive transient SPV value and basic excitation (electron transition from the valence band to conduction band), and subsequently a negative transient SPV value.119 In the transient SPV curves of Cu3BiS3/In2S3, the signals are generally negative unless excited by very low energy photons (λ = 1500 nm). The negative transient SPV of Cu3BiS3/In2S3 is further attenuated (two orders of magnitude), which is due to the passivation of the Cu3BiS3 surface state, thereby eliminating the positive contribution of the SPV net value. The photo energy decreases with an increase in λ, which leads to a decrease in electron density generated by the Cu3BiS3 light energy. Further efforts are needed to determine the peak conduction band offset at the interface, which may be beneficial for reducing carrier recombination.
 Fig. 15  (a) Transient surface optical voltage curves of Al/Cu3BiS3 and (b) Al/Cu3BiS3/In2S3 samples excited by 40 ns pulse laser at different wavelengths (■ 800 nm, ○ 1000 nm, △ 1300 nm, and  1500 nm).216 
Al-Jassim et al.219 studied the SPV of CZTS and CZTSe based on scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). STM reproduces the microstructure of CZTS under a positive voltage, which is contrary to the observation of CIGS. The value of SPV is greatly reduced and the photocurrent seems to be dominated by the surface electronic states. They proposed that (i) the depletion region is very weak in CZTS films or (ii) the recombination in the space charge region is very high, and its contribution to the SPV signal is greatly reduced. For CZTS, when the external light intensity increases, the photocurrent IpH will saturate rapidly, indicating that the states involved in this effect are limited (i.e., surface electronic states). In CZTSe, the photocurrent increases gradually with excitation, indicating that the surface band is bent. The accumulation region near the surface (upward band bending) will hinder the photocurrent collection in solar cells. The band bending-induced accumulation in CZTSe is weak, and thus may have an impact on improving the device performance. In the case of CZTS, if the recombination in the film is high enough, it is difficult to detect the existence of a depletion region. This indicates that the surface light response of kesterite is quite different from that of the related chalcopyrite, and the observed beneficial effect of chalcopyrite surface depletion does not spontaneously appear in kesterite.
4 Conclusion and outlook
In summary, we presented a comprehensive review on Cu-based thin-film solar cells based on the aspects of materials, fabrication, devices and physical mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers. In this highly promising direction, we believe that the two most promising types of Cu-based compounds are CZTSSe quaternary chalcogenide compounds and perovskite-like CuBiI4 ternary compounds. For CZTSSe, its primary/secondary phase structure is one of the most basic issues affecting the quality of the absorption layer, and it is also a key factor affecting the open circuit voltage and the final efficiency of solar cell devices, but researchers still lack a deep understanding of this complex system. Preliminary studies have shown that the precise construction and regulation of the primary phase/secondary phase is a key that needs to be resolved for further improving the efficiency of this type of solar cell. In the case of the new-type CuBiI4 compound, it has a perovskite-like structure and photoinduced carrier behavior. In addition, CuBiI4 has the advantages of high stability, simple preparation (room temperature), low cost, environment-friendly nature, high element abundance and long photoinduced carrier lifetime, which can be used as a photoelectric absorption material. At present, the research on the relationship between the photocurrent conversion efficiency of materials and the structural activity of devices is rare. Considering that the actual efficiency is 1.19%, there is still a lot of room to improve the efficiency of CuBiI4-based photovoltaic power generation. Therefore, the top priority is the improvement of the absorber layer quality, the search for suitable HTL and ETL, interface regulation, and the assembly and optimization of the device structure for improving the PCE as much as possible. In addition, the use of transient surface photovoltage (TSPV) and confocal Raman microscopy to determine the phase structure and its micro-area photo-generated carrier dynamics may provide strong technical support for development of environmental-friendly, high-performance next-generation copper-based thin-film solar cell materials and devices.
Author contributions
C. Xing reviewed the materials and wrote the original draft. Y. Lei, M. Liu and S. Wu contributed to reviewing & editing the manuscript. W. He and Z. Zheng contributed to conceptualization, supervision, reviewing & editing. All the authors contributed to the discussions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We sare grateful for the financial support provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52072327, 21673200), Zhongyuan Scholars Program of Henan Province (20210151004), the Program for Zhongyuan Leading Talents of Science and Technology Innovation in Henan Province (204200510016), the Program for Innovative Research Team (in Science and Technology) in University of Henan Province (19IRTSTHN026) and Youth Talents Lifting Project of Henan Province (No. 2018HYTP010).
References
R. David Prabu, S. Valanarasu, V. Ganesh, M. Shkir, A. Kathalingam and S. Alfaify, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 347, 164–172 CrossRef .
S. Goktas and A. Goktas, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 863, 158734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nakamura, K. Yamaguchi, Y. Kimoto, Y. Yasaki, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 9, 1863–1867 Search PubMed .
NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20200919.pdf.
M. Green, E. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2021, 29, 3–15 Search PubMed .
D. Shin, B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602366 CrossRef .
T. A. Berhe, W. N. Su, C. H. Chen, C. J. Pan, J. H. Cheng, H. M. Chen, M. C. Tsai, L. Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 RSC .

          G. F. Nordberg, B. A. Fowler and M. Nordberg, Toxicology of Metals: Overview, Definitions, Concepts, and Trends, Handbook on the Toxicology of Metals, ch. 1,  2015 Search PubMed .
G. Flora, D. Gupta and A. Tiwari, Interdiscip. Toxicol., 2012, 5, 47–58 CAS .
A. Goktas, F. Aslan and A. Tumbul, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 75, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
D. Papadaki, G. H. Mhlongo, D. E. Motaung, S. S. Nkosi, K. Panagiotaki, E. Christaki, M. N. Assimakopoulos, V. C. Papadimitriou, F. Rosei, G. Kiriakidis and S. S. Ray, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 16429–16440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goktas, Phys. E, 2020, 117, 113828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Xiao, L. Du, X. Liang and M. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 23121–23127 RSC .
A. Goktas, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 735, 2038–2045 CrossRef .
C. H. Lai, M. Y. Lu and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2011, 22, 1580–1581 Search PubMed .
W. Tian-Ran, Y. Qin, T. Deng, Q. Song, B. Jiang, R. Liu, P. Qiu, S. Xun and L. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 62, 1–17 Search PubMed .
W. L. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2012, 22, 7851–7855 RSC .
Z. Wang, F. Peng, Y. Wu, L. Yang, F. Zhang and J. Huang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3528 RSC .
B. R. Pamplin, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1964, 25, 675–684 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, C. He, J. Iocozzia, X. Liu, X. Cui, X. Meng, M. Rager, X. Hong, X. Liu and Z. Lin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 373002 CrossRef .
P. Sawicka-Chudy, M. Sibiński, E. Rybak-Wilusz, M. Cholewa, G. Wisz and R. Yavorskyi, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 010701 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Dong, S. Rehan, D. H. Yeon, S. M. Lee, S. J. Park, S. Ahn and Y. S. Cho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109963 CrossRef .
A. M. Kute and S. A. Waghuley, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 16199–16206 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y. Lei, R. Qi, H. Yu, X. Yang, T. Cai and Z. Zheng, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, X. Yang, L. Gu, H. Jia, S. Ge, P. Xiao, X. Fan and Z. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Whittles, T. D. Veal, C. N. Savory, P. J. Yates and V. R. Dhanak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27033–27047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Huang, Y. Chang, K. Sun and X. Hao, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 27, 37–43 Search PubMed .
T. Maeda, Y. Yu, Q. Chen, K. Ueda and T. Wada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 04CS12 CrossRef .
S. A. Vanalakar, P. S. Patil and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 182, 204–219 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chakraborty, K. M. Sim, M. Shrivastava, K. V. Adarsh, D. S. Chung and A. Nag, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3049–3055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, L. Gu, W. He, Z. Jia, X. Yang, H. Jia and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5474–5481 RSC .
Y. Lei, X. G. Yang, L. Y. Gu, H. M. Jia, S. X. Ge, P. Xiao, X. L. Fan and Z. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, Y. Lei, R. Qi, J. Liu, X. Yang, Z. Jia, R. Liu, Y. Xiang and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25211 RSC .
H. L. Yu, B. S. Zhang, R. J. Qi, N. N. Qu, C. L. Zhao, Y. Lei, X. G. Yang and Z. Zheng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2800–2807 RSC .
C. Zhang, L. G. Gao, S. Z. Hayase and T. L. Ma, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 1276–1284 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Shi, J. Guo, Y. H. Chen, Q. Li, Y. F. Pan, H. J. Zhang, Y. D. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605005 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang and J. H. Cho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 13347–13357 RSC .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646–2662 RSC .
X. P. Cui, K. J. Jiang, J. H. Huang, Q. Q. Zhang, M. J. Su, L. M. Yang, Y. L. Song and X. Q. Zhou, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
R. Willett, H. Place and M. Middleton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 8639–8650 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sawicka-Chudy, M. Sibiński, E. Rybak-Wilusz, M. Cholewa and R. Yavorskyi, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 010701 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sullivan, B. Zoellner and P. A. Maggard, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5999–6016 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Elfadill, M. R. Hashim, K. M. Chahrour and S. A. Mohammed, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 065001 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, S. C. Riha, E. Thimsen, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1868–1878 RSC .
M. Kumar and C. Persson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 2072 Search PubMed .
J. Li, X. Han, Y. Zhao, J. Li, M. Wang and C. Dong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 593–598 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Deshmukh and V. Kheraj, Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2017, 2, 15 CrossRef .
O. Y. Ramírez-Esquivel, D. A. Mazón-Montijo, Z. Montiel-González and F. S. Aguirre-Tostado, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 392–398 CrossRef .
Y. Rodrguez-Lazcano, M. T. S. Nair and P. K. Nair, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 223, 399–406 CrossRef .
Y. Kim and I. H. J. T. S. F. Choi, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 669, 351–354 CrossRef .
G. Jia, B. Liu, K. Wang, C. Wang, P. Yang, J. Liu, W. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhang and J. Du, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mise and T. Nakada, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5604–5609 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neiba, B. Sp and C. Yma, Sol. Energy, 2020, 204, 440–447 CrossRef .
S. Tobbeche, S. Kalache, M. Elbar, M. N. Kateb and M. R. Serdouk, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2019, 51, 284 CrossRef .
H. Feng, W. Lin, W. Meng and Y. Yan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4828–4834 RSC .
B. Duan, J. Shi, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2371–2396 CrossRef .
M. Grossberg, J. Krustok, C. J. Hages, D. M. Bishop, O. Gunawan, R. Scheer, S. M. Lyam, H. Hempel, S. Levcenco and T. Unold, J. Phys. Energy, 2019, 1, 044002 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jie and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 5, 2920–2928 Search PubMed .
D. Shin, T. Zhu, X. Huang, O. Gunawan, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606945 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Ye, H. X. Rao, Z. R. Zhao, L. J. Zhang, H. L. Bao, W. H. Sun, Y. L. Li, F. D. Gu, J. Q. Wang, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. Bian and C. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ye, H. X. Rao, W. B. Yan, Y. L. Li, W. H. Sun, H. T. Peng, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. Bian, Y. F. Li and C. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, Y. D. Jiang, J. Liu, Q. F. Pan, W. Zuo, X. Zhang, C. Liao and J. Mei, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12198–12204 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Haas and D. P. Birnie, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 2109–2116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. L. Wang, S. Wang, F. Wang, C. C. Xie, K. T. Butler and X. Fan, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 2850–2855 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, Z. Wang, G. Kapil, T. Ma, S. Likubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, T. Toyoda, Q. Shen and S. Hayase, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2930–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mittiga, E. Salza, F. Sarto, M. Tucci and R. Vasanthi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 163502 CrossRef .
Y. Alajlani, F. Placido, A. Barlow, H. O. Chu, S. G. Song, S. U. Rahman, R. De Bold and D. Gibson, Vacuum, 2017, 144, 217–228 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Rakhshani, Solid-State Electron., 1986, 29, 7–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dhaouadi, M. Jlassi, I. Sta, I. B. Miled and W. Dimassi, Am. J. Phys., 2018, 6, 43–50 Search PubMed .
R. Shabu, A. M. E. Raj, C. Sanjeeviraja and C. Ravidhas, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 68, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dhanasekaran, T. Mahalingam, R. Chandramohan, J. K. Rhee and J. P. Chu, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6608–6613 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. V. Prabu, S. Valanarasu, V. Ganesh, M. Shkir, S. Alfaify and A. Kathalingam, Surf. Interface Anal., 2018, 50, 346–353 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ooi, S. S. Ng, M. J. Abdullah, H. Abu Hassan and Z. Hassan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 140, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chen, L. Hua, X. Li, Y. Li and P. Lu, Vacuum, 2009, 83, 927–930 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujimoto, T. Oku, T. Akiyama and A. Suzuki, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2013, 433, 12024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. S. Jung, J. S. Hong and K. H. Kim, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2018, 677, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Ke, P. T. K. Loan, D. A. Tuan, H. T. Dat, C. V. Tran and L. V. T. Hung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 349, 100–107 CrossRef .
S. S. K. Jacob, I. Kulandaisamy, S. Valanarasu, A. M. S. Arulanantham, V. Ganesh, S. Alfaify and A. Kathalingam, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 10532–10542 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. K. Jacob, I. Kulandaisamy, S. Valanarasu, A. M. S. Arulanantham and S. Alfaify, Indian J. Phys., 2019, 94, 1527–1535 CrossRef .
B. Yan, Y. Wang, T. Jiang and X. Wu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 5389–5394 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dn, B. Tl, B. Ks and A. Acb, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 795, 187–196 CrossRef .
C. Ravichandiran, A. Sakthivelu, R. Davidprabu, K. Kumar and S. Alfaify, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 683, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Elfadill, M. R. Hashim, K. M. Chahrour and S. A. Mohammed, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 065001 CrossRef .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 052301 CrossRef .
D. Chua, B. K. Sang and R. Gordon, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 055203 CrossRef .
D. C. Reynolds, Phys. Rev., 1954, 96, 533–534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kemmler, M. Lazell, P. O'Brien, D. J. Otway, J. H. Park and J. R. Walsh, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2002, 13, 531–535 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bollero, M. Grossberg, B. Asenjo and M. T. Gutiérrez, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 204, 593–600 CrossRef CAS .
J. Podder, R. Kobayashi and M. Ichimura, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 472, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Dhasade, J. S. Patil, J. H. Kim, S. H. Han, M. C. Rath and V. J. Fulari, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 137, 353–358 CrossRef .
M. Adelifard, H. Eshghi and M. M. B. Mohagheghi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5733–5738 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Yildirim, A. Ates and A. Astam, Phys. E, 2009, 41, 1365–1372 CrossRef .
E. Güneri and A. Kariper, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 20–26 CrossRef .
R. Saraf, IOSR-JEEE, 2012, 2, 47–51 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, S. C. Riha, E. Thimsen, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1868–1878 RSC .
M. L. A. Aguilera, J. M. F. Márquez, A. R. Millan, Y. M. Kuwabara, M. A. G. Trujillo, C. H. Vasquez, J. R. A. Hernandez, M. A. H. Perez, M. Courel-Piedrahita and H. T. Y. Madeira, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 086410 CrossRef .

          D. T. Bernatowicz and H. W. Brandhorst, PVSC,  1970, 8th IEEE, PVSC.
A. T. Salih, A. A. Najim and A. D. Faisal, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2020, 30, 2258–2265 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yi, Q. Dong, H. Wei, Y. Ning, H. Sun, W. Tian, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9909–9916 CrossRef .
E. Buhks, Sol. Energy Mater., 1986, 13, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Garca, P. K. Nair and M. T. S. Nair, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 203, 113–124 CrossRef .
I. Grozdanov, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1994, 9, 1234 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pejjai, V. R. M. Reddy, T. R. R. Kottz and C. Park, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 112, 105013 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Bailey, H. Si, H. Xie, A. Olvera, P. F. P. Poudeu, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17225–17235 RSC .
K. Zhao, A. B. Blichfeld, H. Chen, Q. Song, T. Zhang, C. Zhu, D. Ren, R. Hanus, P. Qiu and B. B. Iversen, Copper Alloys, 2017, 29, 6367–6377 CAS .
F. Jia, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Peng and Y. Xiang, Chem., 2015, 20, 15941–15946 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Zhu, B. P. Zhang and Y. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 27664–27669 RSC .
Y. Jin, M. K. Han and K. Sung-Jin, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 8, 12 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Liu, N. Miao, Z. Jian and Z. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 772, 366–370 CrossRef .
B. Nmka and C. Hkk, Results Phys., 2019, 12, 645–651 CrossRef .
M. Fatemeh, J. S. Farid and Y. Ramin, Sol. Energy, 2018, 171, 508–518 CrossRef .
E. W. Nuffield, Am. Mineral., 1954, 39, 409–415 CAS .
P. K. Nair, L. Huang, M. T. Nair, H. Hu, E. A. Meyers and R. A. Zingaro, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 651–656 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mesa, V. Ballesteros and A. Dussan, Acta Phys. Pol., 2014, 125, 385–387 CrossRef .
H. Hu, O. Gomez-Daza and P. K. Nair, J. Mater. Res., 1998, 13, 2453–2456 CrossRef CAS .
V. Estrella, M. T. S. Nair and P. K. Nair, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, E. Gu, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1789–1792 RSC .
F. Mesa, G. Gordillo, T. Dittrich, K. Ellmer and R. Baier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 1–3 CrossRef .
D. Colombara, L. M. Peter, K. Hutchings, K. D. Rogers, S. SchFer, J. Dufton and M. S. Islam, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 5165–5171 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Aberle, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Han, Y. Zhao, J. Li, M. Wang and C. Dong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 593–598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, T. Gershon, T. K. Todorov, W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, M. Hopstaken, O. Gunawan and J. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600198 CrossRef .
A. Hussain, J. T. Luo, P. Fan, G. X. Liang, Z. H. Su, R. Ahmed, N. Ali, Q. P. Wei, S. Muhammad, A. R. Chaudhry and Y. Q. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 505, 144597 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mesa, A. Dussan, J. Sandino and H. Lichte, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–7 CrossRef .
T. Terasako, Y. Uno, S. Inoue, T. Kariya and S. Shirakata, Phys. Status Solidi, 2011, 3, 2588–2591 CrossRef .
I. Oja, M. Nanu, A. Katerski, M. Krunks, A. Mere, J. Raudoja and A. Goossens, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 82–86 CrossRef .
K. Siemer, J. Klaer, I. Luck, J. Bruns, R. Klenk and D. Braunig, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ahn, C. W. Kim, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. Jeong, B. H. Ryu and K. H. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8108–8113 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Huang, C. S. Lin and W. C. Chang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, S. Rehan, D. J. Moon, Y. J. Eo, S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, A. Cho and J. Gwak, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1268–1277 RSC .
S. Rehan, J. Moon, T. G. Kim, J. Gwak, J. Kim, J. W. Kim, W. Jo, S. K. Ahn and S. J. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 401–412 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rudmann, A. Cunha, M. Kaelin, F. Kurdesau, H. Zogg, A. N. Tiwari and G. Bilger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1129–1131 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. P. Salome, H. Rodriguez-Alvarez and S. Sadewasser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, D. Cahen and H. W. Schock, Adv. Mater., 2010, 10, 31–36 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, A. Rajagopal, J. A. Clark, A. Murray, T. Feurer, S. Buecheler, A. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801254 CrossRef .
L. Wan, C. Ma, K. Hu, R. Zhou, X. L. Mao, S. H. Pan and L. H. Wong, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 680, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
W. Septina, S. Ikeda, Y. Iga, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 700–704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bo, W. Liang, J. Han, Z. Ying and T. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3135–3143 CrossRef .
C. Garza, S. Shaji, A. Arato, E. P. Tijerina, G. A. Castillo, T. Roy and B. Krishnan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2001–2005 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banu, S. J. Ahn, S. K. Ahn, K. Yoon and K. Cho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 151, 14–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Welch, L. L. Baranowski, P. Zawadzki, S. Lany, C. A. Wolden and A. Zakutayev, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 082301 CrossRef .
Y. C. Choi, E. J. Yeom, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4077–4081 CrossRef .
L. P. Yu, R. S. Kokenyesi, D. A. Keszler and A. Zunger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vinayakumar, S. Shaji, D. Avellaneda, T. D. Roy, G. A. Castillo, J. Martinez and B. Krishnan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. Kondrotas and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11068–11084 RSC .
L. Fu, J. Yu, J. Wang, F. Xie and L. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 125906 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Gupta and A. Dixit, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 3724–3736 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kuku and O. A. Fakolujo, Sol. Energy Mater., 1987, 16, 199–204 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Guan, S. L. Shang, G. Lindwall, T. Anderson and Z. K. Liu, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 745–757 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, T. Maeda and T. Wada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 08RC20.1 Search PubMed .
D. Avellaneda, M. Nair and P. K. Nair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, D346–D352 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Berg, R. Djemour, L. Gutay, G. Zoppi, S. Siebentritt and P. J. Dale, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6291–6294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Su, K. Sun, Z. Han, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16346–16352 RSC .
Q. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Lin, P. Guo, S. Li, D. Pan and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 964–966 RSC .
F. Chen, J. Zai, M. Xu and X. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4316–4323 RSC .
R. Chierchia, F. Pigna, M. Valentini, C. Malerba, E. Salza, P. Mangiapane, T. Polichetti and A. Mittiga, Phys. Status Solidi, 2016, 13, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
V. Robles, J. F. Trigo, C. Guillén and J. Herrero, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 642, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, S. Nakamura and Y. Akaki, Phys. Status Solidi, 2015, 12, 765–768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onoda, X. A. Chen, A. Sato and H. Wada, Mater. Res. Bull., 2000, 35, 1563–1570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cazzaniga, S. Canulescu, N. Pryds and J. Schou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 336, 385–390 CrossRef .
Y. Zhai, S. Chen, J. Yang, H. Xiang, X. Gong, A. Walsh, J. Kang and S. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075213 CrossRef .
M. Umehara, S. Tajima, Y. Aoki, Y. Takeda and T. Motohiro, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 072301 CrossRef .
J. Wu, C. Gao, L. Han, S. Shen, M. Jia, L. Wang, L. Jiang and F. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 4378–4384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, J. He, L. Sun, Y. Chen, P. Yang and J. Chu, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 38, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Park, S. J. Park, J. S. Jeong, V. B. Chu, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 621, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Fan, H. Y. Yao, Y. L. Wang and Q. Y. Li, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 065031 CrossRef CAS .
G. Regmi, A. Ashok, P. Chawla, P. Semalti and H. Castaneda, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 7286–7314 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Liu, Y. Li, K. Zhang, B. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Lai, Z. Zhang, J. Li and Y. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2431–3434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Taunier, J. Sicx-Kurdi, P. P. Grand, A. Chomont, O. Ramdani, L. Parissi, P. Panheleux, N. Naghavi, C. Hubert and M. Ben-Farah, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 526–531 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Seol, S. Y. Lee, J. C. Lee, H. D. Nam and K. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 75, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, T. Nagatomo, D. Kawasaki, M. Nishio, Q. Guo, A. Wakahara, A. Yoshida and H. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1978–1981 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, A. Yoshida, D. Saiki, K. Saito, Q. Guo, M. Nishio and T. Yamaguchi, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, S29–S33 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katagiri, N. Sasaguchi, S. Hando, S. Hoshino, J. Ohashi and T. Yokota, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Han, S. Chen, C. Duan and J. Chu, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1140–1150 CrossRef .
K. J. Yang, D. H. Son, S. J. Sung, J. H. Sim, Y. I. Kim, S. N. Park, D. H. Jeon, J. S. Kim, D. K. Hwang and C. W. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10151–10158 RSC .
M. G. Gang, S. W. Shin, C. W. Hong, K. V. Gurav, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 700–711 RSC .
W. Yang, H. S. Duan, B. Bob, H. Zhou, B. Lei, C. H. Chung, S. H. Li, W. W. Hou and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6323–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaur, N. Kumar and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3069 RSC .
W. Wei, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 CrossRef .
J. Ge, J. Chu, J. Jiang, Y. Yan and P. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21118–21130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Cheng and S. W. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22130–22142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giraldo, Z. Jehl, M. Placidi, V. Izquierdo-Roca, A. Perez-Rodriguez and E. Saucedo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806692 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Nazligul, M. Wang and K. L. Choy, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 5138 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Guo, R. Hao, L. Wang, K. Gu, S. Sun and A. Aierken, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Haass, C. Andres, R. Figi, C. Schreiner, M. Bürki, A. N. Tiwari and Y. E. Romanyuk, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 015133 CrossRef .
S. G. Haass, C. Andres, R. Figi, C. Schreiner, M. Bürki, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1701760 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Han, L. Chang, J. Li, C. Dong, Y. Fang and J. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 427–434 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hernandez-Calderon, O. Vigil-Galan, M. Guc, A. Carrillo-Osuna, S. Ramirez-Velasco, F. J. Sanchez-Rodriguez, P. Vidal-Fuentes, S. Giraldo, E. Saucedo and Y. Sanchez, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2020, 3, 6815–6823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Li, H. Y. Zhao, X. Dong, T. Zheng and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 516, 145872 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Sun, J. Park, K. B. Cheon, S. W. Seo and Y. K. Jin, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 1345–1354 Search PubMed .
K. B. Cheon, K. H. Sun, S. W. Seo, J. H. Park and Y. K. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24088–24095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Seo, J. O. Jeon, J. W. Seo, Y. Y. Yu, J. H. Jeong, D. K. Lee, H. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. J. Son, H. W. Jang and J. Y. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 439–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tumbul, A. Göktaş, M. Z. Zarbali and F. Aslan, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 066408 CrossRef .
A. Tumbul, F. Aslan, A. Göktaş and I. H. Mutlu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 781, 280–288 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tumbul, F. Aslan, A. Goktas, M. Z. Zarbali and A. Kilic, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 258, 123997 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dn, B. Tl, B. Ks and A. Acb, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 795, 187–196 CrossRef .
A. Kaphle, E. Echeverria, D. N. Mcllroy and P. J. R. A. Hari, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 7839–7854 RSC .
Z. Liu, J. Han, K. Guo, X. Zhang and T. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2597–2600 RSC .
J. Tao, K. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, H. Cao, J. Liu, J. Jiang, L. Sun, P. Yang and J. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10337–10340 RSC .
D. Shin, B. Saparov, Z. Tong, W. P. Huhn and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4771–4780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, P. Koirala, C. R. Grice, P. J. Roland, Y. Yu, X. Tan, R. J. Ellingson, R. W. Collins and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601803 CrossRef .
Y. E. Romanyuk, S. G. Haass, S. Giraldo, M. Placidi and L. H. Wong, J. Energy Phys., 2019, 1, 044004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Huang, J. Huang, G. Liang and M. A. J. A. M. Green, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005268 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, Y. Zhang, E. Jedlicka, R. Giridharagopal, J. A. Clark, W. Yan, C. Niu, R. Qiu, J. Jiang, S. Yu, S. Wu, H. W. Hillhouse, D. S. Ginger, W. Huang and H. Xin, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 64, 52–60 CrossRef .
T. Gershon, Y. S. Lee, P. Antunez, R. Mankad, S. Singh, D. Bishop, O. Gunawan, M. Hopstaken and R. Haight, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502468 CrossRef .
S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik and Y. Shapira, Surf. Interface Anal., 2010, 31, 954–965 CrossRef .
L. Kronik and Y. Shapira, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1999, 37, 1–206 CrossRef CAS .
O. Jaramillo-Quintero, M. Elizabeth Rincon, G. Vasquez-Garcia and P. K. Nair, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 709–717 CAS .
J. Troughton, D. Bryant, K. Wojciechowski, M. J. Carnie, H. Snaith, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9141–9145 RSC .
O. A. Jaramillo-Quintero, M. E. Rincón, G. Vásquez-García and P. K. Nair, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 709–717 CAS .
A. L. Briseno, T. W. Holcombe, A. I. Boukai, E. C. Garnett, S. W. Shelton, J. J. M. Frechet and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 334–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chang, J. H. Rhee, H. I. Sang, H. L. Yong and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2609–2612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Savory, A. M. Ganose, W. Travis, R. S. Atri, R. G. Palgrave and D. O. Scanlon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12648–12657 RSC .
F. Mesa, A. Dussan, B. A. Paez and H. Rodriguez, Univ. Sci., 2015, 19, 99–105 Search PubMed .
F. Mesa and G. Gordillo, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2009, 167, 012019 CrossRef .
A. B. Kehoe, D. J. Temple, G. W. Watson and D. O. Scanlon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15477–15484 RSC .

          H. Du, M. J. Romero, I. Repins, G. Teeter and M. M. Al-Jassim, PVSC, 2011.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy level diagrams of Cu-based thin film solar cells (ETL, HTL,21 Cu2O, CuO,22 Cu2S, CuS,23,24 CuBiI4,25 Ag3CuS2,26 Cu3BiS3, CIGS, CZTS,27 CuSbS2,28 CuInS2, CuInSe2, CuGaS2,29 CFTS,30 and CBTS31).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Scheme for the inverted HTL free perovskite solar cells on ITO. (b) J–V curves of the perovskite devices using various thickness initial Cu films (forward scanning). (c) Fermi levels of the Cu-free and Cu doped perovskite films. (d) Variation in photon conversion efficiency on perovskite solar cells with different Cu contents.34	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CuBiI4. UPS measurements (b and c), UV-vis and PL (226 nm light excited) spectra (d), and experimental band energy level (e) of the resulting CuBiI4 thin films.25	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure of p-type copper oxide-based heterojunction thin film solar cell. Power conversion efficiency of p-copper oxide/n-Si heterojunction solar cell.77	 

 	Fig. 5  Potential effects of Cu diffusion, resulting in a higher carrier concentration in Cu2S and a change in the type of semiconductivity in the CdS:Cu layer.24	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of Cu2−xSe NP-based solar cell, (b) fabrication, (c) cross-sectional SEM image of Cu2−xSe NPs solar cell and (d) J–V characteristics.104	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic energy band diagram of (a) undoped Na and (b) doped Na samples showing mutation band bending at the junction of the undoped Na samples. The units of energy in all cases are electric vehicles.131	 

 	Fig. 8  Energy band structure analysis of CdS/CuSbS2 and CdS/Ag-substituted CuSbS2 heterojunction. (a) UPS spectra without substitution and 20% Ag-substituted CuSbS2 films. (b) Schematic diagram of band alignment at the CdS/CuSbS2 and CdS/Ag-substituted CuSbS2 heterojunction interface.147	 

 	Fig. 9  Process for the synthesis of CGSSe thin film.166	 

 	Fig. 10  Band alignment at CZTS/CdS and CZTS:Na/CdS interface with respect to vacuum.185	 

 	Fig. 11  Properties of solar cells. (a) Light current density–voltage characteristics and (b) EQE spectra with and without annealing in air. (c) Current density–voltage characteristics under light and dark. (d) EQE spectra of current champion air annealed Cu2BaSnS4−xSex (x = 3) solar cells with negative bias and zero bias.60	 

CuBiI4	n	1.8	>104	
	33.3–110	
	
25

CuO	p	1.0–2.1	105	1016–1018	0.48–2.03	
	
42

Cu2O	n/p	2.0–2.6	104	1 × 1015–1 × 1016	20–100	
	
43 and 44

CuxS	p	1.6–2.9	105	1019–1020	4	
	
45

Cu3BiS3	p	1.10–1.86	>1.5 × 105	1015–1016	4	VCu	
46–48

CuSbS/Se2	p	1.4–1.6	104–105	1016–1018	49	VCuVSCuSbVSe	
49 and 50

Cu2SnS3	p	0.8–0.9	>104	4 × 1016–6 × 1016	
	VCuSnCu + CuSn	
51

Ag3CuS2	n	1.25	–104	
	
	
	
33

Cu–In–Te	p	0.91–1.02	∼104	1019	
	
	
52 and 53

CIGS/Se	p	1.04–1.68	105	1 × 1016	25–100	VCu	
54 and 55

CZTS/Se	p	1.0–1.5	104–105	–1 × 1019	100–140	CuZnZnCuVCu	
56–58

CBTS	p	1.5–2.1	1 × 105–2 × 105	5 × 1014	∼10	VCu	
56, 59 and 60


CuBiI4	>17	1.19	ITO/CuBiI4/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Metal surface elemental reaction	
25 and 65

CuO	18	2.11	FTO/ZnO/CuO/MoO3/Au	Chemical bath deposition	
22, 84, 197 and 198

Cu2O	>20	8.1	MgF2/ZnO/Zn0.38Ge0.62−O/Cu2O:Na/Au	Thermal oxidation	
68, 69, 77 and 100

CuxS	
	10.9	SLG/Ag/CdS/Cu2S/Au	Spin coating technique	
23 and 87

Cu3BiS3	19.86	1.28	FTO/TiO2/Cu3BiS3/Pt	Solvothermal route	
115 and 121

CuSbS/Se2	22.9	3.22	SLG/CuSbS2/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al	Hybrid inks	
141–144

Cu2SnS3	30	6.7	Mo/Cu2Sn1−xGexS3/CdS/Ga–ZnO/Al	Co-sputtering deposition	
150 and 152

Ag3CuS2	30	2.01	ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt	Chemical conversion method	
33 and 199

Cu–In–Te	
	5.1	ZnO:Al/ZnO/CdS/CuIn3Te5/Mo/SLG	Co-evaporation	
52 and 53

CIGS/Se	33.5	23.35	Mo/CIGSSe/CsF/Zn(O,S,OH)x/Zn0.8Mg0.2O/ZnO:B/Al/MgF2	Sputtering, sulfurization-after-selenization (SAS)	
4 and 168

CZTS/Se	32.4	12.6	Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al/MgF2	Hydrazine pure-solution	
180 and 200

CBTS	22	5.2	Mo/CBTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	Vacuum-based techniques	
60, 201 and 202


 	Fig. 12  Diagram of transient surface photovoltage test system.	 
	(1)
L = Tt/Tr

 	Fig. 13  TSPV results of CuBiI4 fabricated with different molar ratios of Bi and Cu. (a) CuBiI4: organic thin films. (b) CuBiI4: Spiro-OMeTAD. (c) CuBiI4: P3HT, and (d) CuBiI4: PTB7.35	 

 	Fig. 14  Transient photovoltage curves: (a) of Ag3CuS2, P3HT and Ag3CuS2/P3HT, and inset is a scheme for the measurement and (b) Ag3CuS2, PTB7 and Ag3CuS2/P3HT. A single laser pulse (355 nm, 4 ns) was used for illumination.33	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Transient surface optical voltage curves of Al/Cu3BiS3 and (b) Al/Cu3BiS3/In2S3 samples excited by 40 ns pulse laser at different wavelengths (■ 800 nm, ○ 1000 nm, △ 1300 nm, and  1500 nm).216	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
