Electrocatalysis in microbial fuel  cells —from electrode material to direct electrochemistry  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B923503E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B923503E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 544-553Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsElectrocatalysis in microbial fuel cells—from electrode material to direct electrochemistry

        
          
            Yan 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shu-Juan 
            Bao
          
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Chang Ming 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, 637457 Singapore. E-mail: ECMLi@ntu.edu.sg;  Fax: +65 6791 1761;   Tel: +65 6790 4485
bCentre for Advanced Bionanosystems, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, 637457 Singapore
cInstitute of Applied Chemistry, Xinjiang University, Urumqi 830046, P. R. China
Received 
      11th November 2009
    , Accepted 3rd February 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      25th February 2010
    AbstractMicrobial fuel cells (MFCs) are promising clean energy sources for simultaneous recycling of organic waste while harvesting electricity. The electrocatalysis of the anode is crucial for improvement of the energy conversion efficiency, power density and energy density of MFCs, which is significantly related to the microbes, electrode and electron transfer scheme between the microbes and electrode. This paper reviews and discusses electrocatalysis in MFCs, particularly addressing the recent advances in anodic electrocatalysis with direct electrochemistry of genetically modified bacteria and novel electrode materials for performance improvement, and some remaining challenges to be overcome.Ms Yan QiaoMs Yan Qiao is a PhD candidate in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. Her research topic is electrocatalysis of a new strain bacteria and nanostructured anodes for high-performance microbial fuel cells. She has experience with the design and synthesis of mesoporous nanomaterials, bioengineering bacteria strains and electrochemical analysis of microbial fuel cells.Dr Shu-Juan BaoDr Shu-Juan Bao received an MSc and PhD in Materials Science from Lanzhou University (China) in 2003 and 2006. After completing a post-doctoral fellowship at the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, NTU, she is currently a professor at Xinjiang University, China. Her research interests include controllable synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials, and their important applications in nano-electronics, biomedical devices and energy systems such as fuel cell, battery and supercapacitor.Dr Chang Ming LiDr Chang Ming Li received his PhD from Wuhan University in 1986 followed by post-doctoral research in UIUC from 1988–1990, and currently is a professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems at NTU, Singapore. He worked with US Motorola as the Science Advisory Board Associate, Distinguished Technical Staff and senior manager for almost 10 years. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Motorola Master Innovator Award in 1999 and Nanyang Innovation and Research Award in 2008. His research includes fuel cells, solar cells and bionanotechnologies.

Broader context
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have become an attractive green energy source to produce electricity from organic fuels by microorganisms while recycling waste to protect the environment. MFCs can be made at low cost, but offer high energy efficiency under rather mild conditions, and thus have a great potential for broad applications, particularly in-home electrical generators, battlefield energy systems, electronic power sources for space shuttles and self-feeding robots. However, their low power density limits their practical applications. Electrocatalysis in MFCs is a phenomenon where the electrode associated with microbes under the imposed potential behaves as a catalyst for electrochemical reactions. The bottleneck of MFC electrocatalysis is the insulative nature of the microbes that can catalyze the oxidation of organic substrates, but find it very hard to transfer their received electrons to the electrode resulting in extremely high Faraday resistances, a large overpotential, low power density and poor energy conversion efficiency. This article reviews the recent fantastic advances in MFC electrocatalysis for significant improvement of the power density by bioengineering new strains of microbes associated with novel nanostructured electrode materials, which enable direct electron transfer from the microbes and hence high electrochemical reaction rate and low potential loss.

1 Introduction
In recent years, demand for sustainable alternative energy sources such as fuel cells and solar cells has dramatically increased. As a new type of fuel cells with high energy conversion efficiency, mild operation conditions and low cost substrates, microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have attracted substantial attention from research organizations. It has been around 100 years from the time of the first reported MFC,1 but only in recent years have several breakthroughs brought them closer to practical applications. Similar to the conventional fuel cell, the MFC consists of an anode, cathode and ion-exchange membrane. The main difference is that the anode in MFCs uses microbes rather than noble metals as catalysts to convert chemical energy into electricity. The microbes work as combinations of multiple enzymes to catalyze the oxidation of substrate such as glucose and pass electrons to the electrode. As the multiple steps of redox reactions partially happen in microbial cells, the operating conditions of MFCs are more mild than most chemical fuel cells. The microbes can self-regenerate and thus the cost of this kind of catalyst is much lower than platinum. Furthermore, no pollutants such as heavy metal ions, toxic gases or organic waste are generated during the operation of MFCs, thus rendering them environmentally friendly energy systems.
In spite of the various merits of MFCs, they are still distant from the conventional H2–O2 fuel cell due to their pretty low power densities. To date, MFCs can only produce power densities less than 6 W m−2 or 500 W m−3 while a single fuel cell like a DMFC (direct methanol fuel cell) can deliver 800 W m−2 when operated below 60 °C at atmospheric pressure.2 Many factors affect the power output of MFCs such as the anode and cathode, the metabolisms of the microbial species, the chemical species present in the electrolyte, the ion-exchange membrane, the fuel cell configuration and the operating conditions. Over the years, considerable effort has been made to improve the power density by modifying the anode, adding artificial electron mediators, discovering electroactive bacteria, fabricating novel cell structures etc. There are some recently published review papers with discussions on challenges and perspectives.3–12 These reviews mainly summarize the progress in biological or engineering work, of which some focus on the microorganisms and others discuss the methodology and configurations of MFCs. Electrocatalysis in MFCs is a phenomenon that the electrode associated with microbes under the imposed potential behaves as a catalyst for electrochemical reactions.13 This is particularly important in electrochemical energy conversion systems such as fuel cells, batteries, electrolytic cells etc., since it can greatly reduce the overpotential of electrochemical reactions and drive the reaction system close to the thermodynamic equilibrium status, resulting in high energy conversion efficiency and high power density. However, this phenomenon has not been addressed in the existing reviews.
In MFCs, except configuration optimization, significant efforts to improve performance have been specifically focused on the electrocatalysis of the anode or cathode. The electrocatalysis in MFCs is more complicated than the H2–O2 fuel cell since it involves a biocatalytic process, in which multiple steps of redox reactions happen inside and outside of the microbes with the final step on the electrode surface. It cannot be simply explained as a surface modification with a biocatalyst. Thus, the enhancement of the electrocatalysis in MFCs greatly relies on improvement of both the electrode material and the microbe. This review tries to bring out various novel approaches in these areas for the performance improvement of MFCs. As the redox reactions happening at the anode/cathode depend on what reductant/oxidant is used in the MFCs, the electrocatalysis should be discussed case by case. The purpose of this paper is not only to review the progress in individual cases, but also to elaborate the general principle of electrocatalysis and discuss different types of electrocatalysis in recent MFC studies.
2 Cathodic catalysis
2.1 Oxygen cathodes
In fuel cells, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is the most dominant electrochemical reaction at the cathode since oxygen is free to access and its standard redox potential is high (1.229 V vs. NHE for complete reduction13). There are two processes that can occur during cathodic oxygen reduction: a complete reduction in a four-electron pathway and an incomplete two-electron reduction reaction, which needs further reduction to H2O.
The sluggish kinetics of ORR are the main limitation of power output of low-temperature fuel cells. Thus the application of high-activity catalysts like platinum is necessary to enhance the ORR efficiency and strong pH conditions (acid or alkaline) are required. The mechanism of electrocatalysis for ORR is still not completely understood but the theory proposed by Damjanović14 has been mostly accepted. Proton transfer to O2 producing adsorbed HO2 or HO2−, occurs prior to cleavage of the O–O bond during the ORR on Pt-group metals.
To lower the cost of cathodes and simultaneously improve the ORR kinetics, extensive work has been done to explore noble-metal-free cathode catalysts for MFCs. Metal oxides including lead dioxide,15 manganese dioxide,16 metal porphyrins and metal phthalocyanines17,18 were examined for their ORR activity in an MFC cathode and exhibited comparable or higher performance than Pt cathodes. Other metals like cobalt that have lower cost and relative high catalytic activity19 have also been used as alternative catalysts in MFC cathodes.20 However, cobalt is not environmentally friendly therefore its toxicity should be considered especially in up-scaled MFCs.
2.2 Other oxidants in MFC cathodes
Since the reaction kinetics of ORR in MFCs is relative poor and oxygen can diffuse across the ion-exchange membrane to reduce the power by taking electrons from the anode,21 oxygen may not be the most desirable electron acceptor in MFC cathodes. Alternative electron acceptors were investigated more than twenty years ago. For example, the Fe(CN) 63+ ion is a good electron acceptor under anaerobic conditions and has been widely used in dual-chamber MFCs. The reduction kinetics of the Fe(CN) 63+ ion are much faster than the ORR and there is no need to use catalysts in ferricyanide cathodes. A 50–80% increase in maximum power using ferricyanide cathodes compared to that obtained with oxygen-dissolved cathodes has been reported.22 The open-circuit potential of the ferricyanide cathode (332 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) was higher than the oxygen dissolved cathode (268 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) and the former had greater mass transfer efficiency. Similar phenomena were also described by Ringeisen et al.23 and Liu et al.24 However the ferricyanide cathode is not suitable for up-scaled MFCs because it will cost more for the containment and regeneration of the Fe(CN) 63+ ion.
To further increase the cell voltage of MFCs (normally 0.5–0.8 V at open-circuit), You et al. applied permanganate as the cathodic electron acceptor25 because of its higher standard redox potential than that of oxygen. In acidic conditions, permanganate accepts three electrons and is reduced to manganese dioxide. The permanganate cathode (pH 3.6) increased the open-circuit voltage of an MFC to 1.382 V and yielded much higher power density than that produced by ferricyanide cathodes and oxygen cathodes (4.5- and 11.3-fold respectively).
2.3 Biocathodes
Microorganisms can also be used as catalysts in a cathode, similar to the function they serve in an anode.26 The first work on biocathodes was reported by Rhoads et al.27 who employed a cycle of Mn(IV) reduction on cathodea catalyzed by manganese-oxidizing bacteria (MOB). As oxygen is required for the bio-catalyzed reoxidation of Mn(II), manganese dioxide actually serves as mediator for the bacteria-catalyzed oxygen reduction. Similarly, iron compounds have also been used as mediators in biocatalyzed oxygen reduction in MFC cathodes. Heijne et al.28 designed an MFC with a ferric iron mediated biocathode that was catalyzed by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans.
Another kind of biocathode is mediator-less: the bacteria can grab electrons directly from cathode and catalyze the reduction of the oxidant. Geobacter metallireducens not only has superior electrocatalytic performance in an anode but also can catalyze the reduction of nitrate and fumarate in a cathode.29 Despite pure strains, mixtures of microorganisms such as sewage or waste water have also been used as biocatalysts in cathodes of MFCs.30 The oxidant often used in cathodes of these mixed-microbe-catalyzed MFCs is nitrate, which has a relatively high redox potential. Hence the denitrification function is the major interest of these bio-cathodes.31,32 An open-air biocathode using sludge and sediment as the innoculum has been reported.33 The long start-up period of this biocathode decreased with approximately 30% by using electrodeposited manganese oxide electrodes.
3 Anodic electrocatalysis in early MFCs
The MFC anode is a place where organic substrates are oxidized with microorganisms as biocatalysts. Three different types of anode have been demonstrated. Type I is one of the early-stage MFCs,34–36 which utilizes the metabolic products of microorganisms to generate electricity. Type II uses the anode to receive electrons through electron mediators.37–39 In type III, the electroactive microorganisms directly transfer the electrons from electron donors to the anode.40–42 Type I and type II anodes are mostly found in early MFC systems while type III is dominant in current MFCs. Since the electrocatalysis mechanism of the type III anode is much more complicated, it will be discussed in section 4. In this section, different developed approaches to improve the electrocatalytic performance of type I and type II anodes will be discussed.
3.1 Application of metal-based catalysts
Reducing the activation energy barrier is the key to improving the reaction kinetics of the anode. The use of noble metal catalysts can lower the activation energy in type I anodes and thus increase the power output. In type I anodes, Pt was widely used as the anode material due to its superior catalytic activity and stability in extreme environments. To increase the active surface area with a low-down cost, platinized Pt instead of bright platinum sheet or film was often used by deposition on the surface of a porous substrate such as a stainless steel net,43 graphite felt etc. Improving the loading process of Pt can enhance the catalytic efficiency and reduce the loading amount. A carbon paper anode with an e-beam deposited Pt thin layer (100 nm) delivered two-fold higher current density than that of a commercial Pt electrode in a dual-chamber MFC.44 Some researchers found that platinum black would be quickly deactivated by microbes' byproducts in an MFC anode.45 To solve this problem, a conducting polymer was employed, which not only slowed down the deactivation of platinum but also functioned as an electron mediator.46 MFCs with a polyaniline-modified platinum anode enhanced the current output up to 1.5 mA cm−2.
To lower the cost of MFC anodes, researchers also have made significant efforts to look for alternative catalysts to platinum. Rosenbaum et al.47,48 utilized tungsten carbide (WC) as an electrocatalyst for hydrogen oxidation in a soil-based-bacteria-catalyzed anode. Furthermore, WC also showed good electrocatalytic properties toward the oxidation of formate, which is one of the main fermentation products of bacteria. MFCs with WC anodes yielded an open-circuit potential (OCP) of 864 mV and a maximum power density of 5.85 W m−2.
3.2 Increasing the electrochemically activate surface area
To get a large active surface area, porous carbon materials have been used as the anode in different MFCs such as dual-chamber mode,49 continuous flow single-chamber MFCs,50 and tubular MFCs.51 The favorable materials are carbon cloth and carbon paper, both of which are carbon fiber based porous materials. Alternatively, reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) is used since it has an open network structure and a large surface area, allowing easy access of microorganisms to the electrode surface. A mini MFC23 (1.2 cm3) using an RVC anode and Shewanella oneidensis yielded a maximum power density of 24 mW m−2 and a current density of 44 mA m−2. RVC was also used in upflow microbial fuel cells (UMFCs),52 which continuously generate electricity together with simultaneous wastewater treatment, and yielded a maximum power density of 170 mW m−2 with a current density of 516 mA m−2. The RVC anode could be modified by electrodepositing a thin film of conducting polymer to further increase the active surface area and to improve the adhesion of bacteria.53 Logan et al.54 developed a new type brush electrode with bundles of high-surface-area graphite fibers in a central core. A cube MFC using this brush anode achieved a maximum power density of 2400 mW m−2 or 73 W m−3 based on liquid volume. This brush electrode is quite attractive as the brush architecture could be scaled up and be used in larger-size MFCs. In addition, anode pretreatment has also been proven to significantly increase the active surface area. When a non-porous graphite electrode was oxidized at high potential in a high concentration of sulfuric acid, its surface roughness was increased, which provided a larger surface area for bacteria colonization.55
3.3 Exogenous mediator-based anodic electrocatalysis
Generally, the cell wall and plasma membrane of bacteria are non-conductive and the electrons produced in cells need carriers to move them out and reach the electrode surface. Artificial electron mediators are diffusive small molecules that can access easily both the cell and electrode, working as external electron acceptors of the cell's electron transport chain (Fig. 1). Fast oxidation of mediators on the electrode surface enhances the kinetics of anodic reactions and thus increases the current density.39,56,57
 Fig. 1  A schematic of the electron transfer process from bacteria to the anode through mediators. 
The artificial mediators could be added directly into the anodic solution or be covalently linked on the anode. A graphite disc anode modified with anthraquinone-1,6-disulfonic acid (AQDS) yielded five times the power density than an unmodified graphite disc in a marine MFC.57 A similar result was also reported in an E. coli catalyzed MFC;58 the neutral red-linked woven graphite anode increased the power density from 0.44 to 1.2 mW m−2. It was noted that metal ions also could serve as electron mediators and even work better than organic mediators. A marine sediment MFC using a Mn2+ and Ni2+ modified graphite disc anode yielded a higher power density (∼105 mW m−2) than the AQDS modified one (∼98 mW m−2).
A good redox mediator should possess the following characters: 1) The potential of the redox mediator should be positive enough to provide fast electron transfer from the substrate, but should not be so positive as to affect the potential of the anode; 2) The oxidized and reduced states of the redox mediator should be able to easily move across the cell membrane; 3) The redox mediator should not interfere with the metabolism of the bacterial cell; 4) The redox mediator should have soluble properties for long microbial fuel cell run times.59–61 The mediators applied in MFCs have been summarized in several review papers62,63 and their performance at anodes has also been compared. However, there is very little understanding of the interface reaction mechanism like rate constants, diffusion process and effect of convection. Recently a kinetic study of a yeast-catalyzed MFC with methylene blue as the mediator was reported,64 in which electrochemical mechanisms and limitations for anodic currents with rotating disc electrodes were studied. The results indicate that both convection and mediator adsorption play important roles in determining the anodic current for microbial reactions.
4 Direct electrochemistry in mediator-less MFCs
As mentioned above, electron transfer between the biofilm and electrode is critical for the power enhancement of MFCs. Since the mediators employed in MFCs have inherent drawbacks, mediator-less MFCs24,41,65 are currently dominating this research area. The anodic direct electrochemical process is the key to improve the performance of mediator-less MFCs. Researchers have made great efforts to find the mechanisms behind the direct electrochemical behavior of the anode. Two ways of electron transfer are involved in this direct electrochemistry process: direct electron transfer and self-mediated electron transfer via metabolites.
4.1 Direct electron transfer
The direct electron transfer in MFC anodes, which is found in metal-reducing bacteria catalyzed anodes, actually means an extracellular electron transfer pathway without any diffusive electron mediators. Two kinds of metal-reducing bacteria strains, Geobacter sulfurreducens (G. sulfurreducens)66 and Shewanella putrefaciens (S. putrefaciens) MR-1,67 are widely used in mediator-less MFCs. It has been demonstrated68,69 that a lot of genes encoding outer membrane c-type cytochromes are involved in the electron transfer between those metal-reducing bacteria cells and solid electron acceptors but the detailed mechanism is still unclear as to how these cytochromes conduct the direct transfer.
It is well know that the cytochromes contain heme groups, which have a highly-conjugated porphyrin ring surrounding a metal ion, the active centre for redox reactions. Although the position of heme groups vary in different cytochromes, they are always located in a crevice deep inside the protein, surrounded by nonpolar amino acid residues. The unfavorable orientation of cytochromes on the electrode surface will block the direct electron transfer between the active centre and the electrode. To overcome this barrier, lots of researchers modified the bare electrode with a surfactant70,71 or with nanostructured materials72–75 to decrease the distance to the active centre of the protein and thus achieving a direct electron transfer by a tunneling pathway. However, most of the reported MFC anodes that possess “direct electron transfer” behavior are bulk carbon or graphite electrodes without any modification41 and no report indicates that these electrodes have appropriate microstructures for the tunneling electron transfer. More evidence may be required for the direct electron transfer process in MFC anodes.
A recent published work by Richter et al.76 proposed a new model for electron transfer between the G. sulfurreducens biofilm and the MFC anode. They investigated the electrochemical behavior of the biofilm by using cyclic voltammetry and their results indicate a conductive network of bound (non-diffusing) electron transfer mediators for transferring electrons across the biofilm/electrode interface. (Fig. 2). They also found that type IV pili were important in this electron transfer process, which agreed with the previous report that the electric conductive pili produced by G. sulfurreducens cells facilitated their extracellular electron transfer to the solid metal oxides.77,78 Similar phenomena were observed in Shewanella79 strains that could evolve electronically conducting pili allowing the organisms to use solid-phase iron and manganese oxides that are not in direct contacts with cells. The pili are like conductive nanowires that connect the membrane-bound cytochromes and metal oxides. The formation of such nanowires may allow the development of thicker electroactive biofilms and thus higher anode performances.77
 Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of electron transfer from a bacterium in the biofilm to the anode through a network of bound mediators. Reproduced from ref. 76 
Except the above mentioned cyclic voltammetry study of a G. sulfurreducens biofilm on MFC anodes, most of the direct electron transfer investigations are based on genetic analysis, which can prove whether or not a protein is involved in the electron transfer process, but cannot indicate how it is involved. On the other hand, the findings obtained from the studies on electron transfer between the biofilm and metal oxides cannot always be used to explain the electron transfer in MFC anodes. It has been confirmed that some outer membrane cytochromes required for optimal electron transfer to metal oxides are not required for electricity production.69 Therefore, more direct evidence is needed to further understand the direct electron transfer from the metal-reducing bacteria to the MFC anode.
The direct electron transfer phenomenon has also been discovered in other microorganisms like the thermophilic Gram-positive bacterium Thermincola ferriacetica,80 the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae,81 and the yeast cells Hansenula anomala.82 However, those papers just reported the phenomenon and proposed a potential mechanism. Further studies are required to identify what kind of biomolecules or cell organelles take part in the electron transfer process.
4.2 Self-mediated electron transfer
Microorganisms may produce low-molecular-weight, electron shuttling compounds through metabolic pathways to carry out the extracellular electron transfer. For example, Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1 was found to excrete a quinone-like molecule that served this purpose.83 The involvement of pyocyanin and phenazine-1-carboxamide, produced by Pseudomonas aerugionsa in the electron transfer to an MFC anode has been proven.84 A recent work demonstrated that phenazine-1-carboxamide produced by Pseudomonas sp. CMR12a could enable another kind of bacteria to achieve extracellular electron transfer.85
Several studies have reported that the extracellular electron transfer capacity of E. coli cells can be evolved in MFCs with different anode constructions. In general, E. coli has to be used in combination with suitable electron mediators in MFCs, or else the production of electricity will be rather low. Zhang et al. employed E. coli cells in a mediator-less single-chamber MFC with a carbon/PTFE composite film anode and a conventional air cathode.86 For the original bacteria, the initial cell voltage was only 0.4 V under a constant load of 1.98 kΩ and decreased to 0.1 V within a few hours. When using the bacteria that had been treated with repeated discharge cycles, the initial cell voltage increased to 0.6 V and formed an initial discharge plateau at 0.55 V for 2 h and second plateau at 0.25 V for 50 h. Similar phenomena were observed on the surface of a carbon felt anode. The E. coli cells growing under anaerobic conditions formed a biofilm on the carbon fibers and the anodic current increased with the development of the biofilm.87
The mechanism behind the electrochemical activation of E. coli cells is not very clear. Self-excreted mediators are possibly responsible for the direct electron transfer process. In our previous work,88 we found that the electrochemical behavior of E. coli cells on carbon cloth electrodes was similar to the quinone redox reaction and supernatant of cell cultures might contained quinone-like compounds. Other researchers also proposed some possible electron carriers isolated from the metabolites of E. coli cells.89 The production of electro-active mediators from E. coli cells might be induced by the electrochemical tension and/or specific growing environment in MFCs. Additionally, the surface morphology of E. coli cells was demonstrated to be changed after electrochemical activation (Fig. 3a and b). Evolved cells have a much rougher surface than original ones and there are some pores and clusters on the surface of evolved cells. This may increase the permeability of the cell wall and facilitate the diffusion of self-excreted mediators (Fig. 3c).88
 Fig. 3  Highly permeable cell surface for endogenerous mediators excretion. (a) Surface morphology of original E. coli cells. (b) Surface morphology of evolved E. coli cells. (c) Proposed mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 88. 
In our newly published work,90 microarray chips were used to analyze the genomes of the cells which could carry out the direct electrochemistry process. It was discovered that 107 genes of E. coli were significantly up-/down- regulated during 24 h of MFC discharging. The operon analysis revealed that the outer membrane porin genes and terminal oxidase genes were crucial for the direct electrochemistry process. This approach not only could help us to understanding the mechanisms of cell direct electrochemistry, but also could provide scientific insights into bioengineering new strains for a faster direct electron transfer process.
Recently we constructed a genetically engineered E. coli91 that also possessed direct electrochemical behavior. The engineered E. coli was constructed with recombinant plasmid containing an overexpressed gldA gene (encoding glycerol dehydrogenase). This enzyme has a broad substrate specificity and very likely resulted in products containing the endogenous redox mediator. The metabolic pathways that glycerol dehydrogenase participates in and where the mediators come from in more detail are still under investigation in our lab.
4.3 Challenges in mechanism explanation
Although the direct electrochemistry of the anode has been extensively studied and it effectively improves the electrocatalysis of MFCs, the mechanism is still not clear, thus greatly hindering the bioengineering of new superior bacterium strains with a very high direct electron transfer rate and thus would dramatically improve the power density for practical applications. For the direct electron transfer path, it is accepted that cytochrome-type outer membrane proteins participate in the electron transport but verification of the exact proteins is still very difficult. Genetic engineering technology may offer solutions that overexpress the specific proteins in engineered bacteria strains and check if they can improve the current generation. For the self-mediated path, the identification of the extracellular electron shuttling compounds is more complicated. It is a highly challenging work to isolate these small molecules from the mixture containing thousands of metabolites. Combining the technology of proteomics and electrochemistry may help researchers to find some clues and be closer to the detail mechanisms.
5 Power enhancement by nanostructured materials
For an MFC anode, the nature of the electrocatalytic mechanism is more complicated than conventional electrochemical energy converting systems since it involves both bio- and electrocatalytic process. An optimal nanostructure favorable for both catalytic processes could play a critical role in improving the MFC energy conversion efficiency and power density; such a structure needs to host the bacteria with high bioactivity while enhancing the electron-transfer rate. A broad variety of nanoscale materials with different sizes, shapes and compositions could provide different unique properties, such as higher active surface area, excellent conductivity, tailored nanostructure to home bacteria and prominent electroactivity, which are particularly essential to electrocatalyzed MFCs. In fact, nanomaterials have been extensively studied as the MFC anode to enhance their power and current density.
5.1 Carbon nanotubes
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as a catalyst support have been used in fuel cell applications due to their distinctive electrical and structural properties. The good biocompatibility and bioelectrochemical properties of CNTs also attract much research attention in MFCs. They have served as anode materials for enzymatic biofuel cells. The first attempt to use nanomaterials in MFCs was the use of a polyaniline (PANI)/multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) composite anode.92 The PANI/MWCNT composite with a cable-like structure (Fig. 4a) had a higher specific surface area than plain PANI, and the MWCNTs also increased the interface charge transfer rate of the anode. The E. coli-catalyzed MFC with a PANI/MWCNT nanocomposite anode enhanced the current and power density significantly and was superior to other similar MFC systems. Recently biocompatible MWCNT scaffolds have been designed to immobilize E. coli cells and to be used in MFCs.93 Self-supported monolithic MWCNT scaffolds were prepared by ice segregation induced self-assembly (ISISA). The long range microchannel structure (Fig. 4b) of the scaffolds could offer a large internal reactive surface for bacteria immobilization and proliferation.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM micrograph of a PANI/MWCNT composite. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission. Copyright Elsevier 2007. (b) Monolithic MWCNT scaffolds. Reproduced from ref. 93. 
5.2 Nanoporous materials
Nanoporous inorganic materials with a large specific surface area and a uniform pore distribution are excellent candidates for anode materials in MFCs. In our previous work, we prepared a unique nanostructured PANI/mesoporous TiO2 composite (Fig. 5a) and applied it to a E. coli catalyzed MFC.94 The PANI-coated mesoporous TiO2 with a high specific surface area and a uniform pore structure could provide fast interface charge transfer. The PANI in the composite increased the charge transfer rate but decreased the pore volume and the specific surface area at the same time. The performance of the PANI/TiO2 composite was optimized by tailoring the ratio of PANI to TiO2 for the best catalytic performance. As a result, the composite containing 30 wt% PANI exhibits the highest electrocatalytic activity. At the same time the composite is easy to attach to E. coli cells (Fig. 5b) and thus can deliver long-term discharge at high power output. The PANI/TiO2 anode enhances the power density of the E. coli MFC to 1495 mW m−2 that is two-fold the reported highest value. Considering both of the two components of the PANI/TiO2 composite are semiconductive materials, nanoporous materials with good electro-conductivity and higher active surface area could be further improved for a higher catalytic activity. Therefore we further employed ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) as the anode material in the E. coli MFC system to deliver higher power. The OMC was synthesized using a template-based method: sucrose was infiltrated into the pores of the ordered mesoporous silica (SBA-15) and then converted to a rigid carbon structure by pyrolyzing under flow of Ar to result in a silica–carbon composite. Finally the mesoporous carbon replica was obtained by treating the composite in HF solution to remove the silica template. The ordered porous structure could be observed from FESEM and TEM micrographs (Fig. 6a and b). The pore distribution was uniform and the average pore diameter was around 4–6 nm which was in agreement with nitrogen adsorption–desorption analysis (data not shown here). The specific surface area of the OMC was 844 m2 g−1, which was much higher than that of the PANI/TiO2 nanocomposite (150–350 m2 g−1).
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM micrograph of a 30 wt% PANI/TiO2 nanoporous composite MFC anode. (b) SEM micrograph of E. coli cells adhered to the electrode surface.94 Adapted from ref. 94 with permission. Copyright American Chemical Society 2008. 
 Fig. 6  Morphology, pore distribution and charge transfer behavior of OMC. (a) SEM micrographs with low and high (inset) magnifications. (b) TEM micrographs showing the ordered mesoporous structure. (c) Nyquist plots of OMC and carbon cloth indicating the charge transfer rate. (d) Power output and polarization curve of an MFC with a OMC anode. 
The electrocatalytic activity of OMC in an E. coli MFC was investigated with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The complex impedance (Z) vs. frequency, known as Nyquist plot was measured (Fig. 6c). The Nyquist plot of OMC presented a well defined semicircle over high frequencies followed by a straight line. The charge transfer resistance (Rct), which corresponded to the diameter of the semicircle, was much lower than that of carbon cloth and PANI/TiO2. The OCP of the MFC with an OMC anode was around 720 mV and the maximum power density achieved was 1600 mW m−2 at a current density of 0.4 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6d).
The physical characteristics and electrocatalytic performance of MFCs containing these reported nanostructured anode materials are summarized in Table 1. It is worthy of a note that increasing the surface area would enhance the current and power density while the open-circuit voltage of MFCs depends on the reaction potential at the anode. The increase in current density for the two nanoporous materials is not proportional to the increase in surface area. It is possible that the inner surface of the pore structure is not completed utilized or the inefficient electron transfer from bacteria to anode restricts the enhancement of current density.
Table 1 Physical characteristics and electrocatalytic performance of different nanomaterials




Materials
Specific surface area/m2 g−1
Pore size/nm
Open-circuit voltage/V
Current density/mA m−2
Power density/mW m−2





a Tested in mediator-less MFCs.





PANI/MWCNT
34
—
0.7
100
42


PANI/TiO2
248
6–8
0.88(0.82a)
3650(3390a)
1495(1300a)


OMC
844
4–6
0.72a
4000a
1600a




5.3 Outlook of using nanomaterials in MFCs
The investigations discussed above demonstrate that the use of nanostructured materials can significantly enhance the current density and power density of MFCs, which results from the increasing active surface area and fast charge transfer rate. Biocompatible nanomaterials are promising candidates for anode catalysis in MFCs, which should not only possess sound surface physicochemical properties for strong cell adhesion, but also need bacteria-favoring pore structures, allowing their growth without blocking the food (fuel) transport channels while still a rendering high specific surface area. Thus, the electrocatalytic activity can be further improved by tailoring the size or structure. On the other hand, the nanosized rod, tube or needle like materials can be much closer to the bacterial cell surface and even penetrate into the cell membrane. This will decrease the distance of electron transfer and subsequently enhance the kinetic activity of the anode.
The investigation of nanomaterials applied to MFCs is still in its infancy. More studies need to be carried out on possible applications of different unique nanomaterials or/and their composites in MFCs. The electrode fabrication process should also be optimized by using various supporting materials and binders.
6 Summary and future perspectives
Their improved performance together with their well-known environmental merits has made MFCs more promising than ever before. Many approaches have been used to enhance the electrocatalytic performance and increase the power density. As discussed above, precious metal catalysts have been widely employed to improve anodic or cathodic kinetics but the high cost make people to look for other alternatives such as metal oxides. Increasing the electrode surface area is a commonly used means to enhance the power generation, which has been demonstrated by the use of mesoporous nanomaterials. The discovery of metal-reducing bacteria and other electro-active microbes is an excellent solutions for achieving significant electrocatalytic enhancement.
In MFCs, the bottleneck is the insulating nature of the microbes that can catalyze the oxidation of substrates such as glucose but find it very hard to transfer their received electrons to the electrode resulting in extremely high Faraday resistances, a large overpotential, low power density and poor energy conversion efficiency. Introduction of artificial mediators into the reaction system can assist the electron transfer rate from the bacteria to the electrode, but the drawbacks of its potential toxicity to microbes and infeasibility for up-scaling MFCs limits its practical applications. The direct electron transfer and self-mediated electron transfer achieved by specific bacteria strains can greatly improve the anodic electrocatalysis resulting in a high power density and good energy conversion efficiency by significant reduction of Faraday resistance and overpotential. Thus, future research work should be conducted to further improve both electro- and biocatalysts by producing anode nanostructured materials with high conductivity, good biocompatibility and high specific surface area, and bioengineering new strains of bacteria with superior direct electrochemistry capability.
Future anode materials could be carbon nanomaterials with porous structures which provide a large active surface area and free access for nutrition. Single-walled or multi-walled carbon nanotubes can be fabricated as a nanoarray structure or a scaffold with micrometre size and mesoporous structure. Surface modification with functional groups is required to improve the hydrophilicity and biocompatibility of carbon nanotubes. Graphene nanoribbons, which are unrolled single-walled carbon nanotubes, are also a superior candidate for future MFC anode materials because of their high electrocatalytic capability, good biocompatibility and excellent conductivity. Fabrication using hard or soft templates will create new graphene materials with appropriate porous structures to increase its surface area. These carbon nanomaterials can also be modified with or incorporated into other materials like conducting polymers or metal oxides to construct nanostructured composites that take advantage of the merits of both of the components. This research work is currently ongoing in our lab.
Research into biocatalysis also needs more extensive investigation. Further understanding of the extracellular electron transfer mechanism for current electro-active microbes will help to increase energy conversion efficiency by optimization of MFCs operating conditions. Besides the searching of electro-active strains from nature, bioengineering new stains of bacteria with superior direct electron transfer capability will bring great breakthroughs in both the energy conversion efficiency and the power density of MFCs. Thus, knowledge of the mechanism of bacterial direct electrochemistry would provide deep biological insights to guide the bioengineering work for new types of strains. To enhance the catalytic capability of the new strains, the genes or proteins that are crucial for power generation can be overexpressed and other genes with a negative effect on power generation can be inhibited or even deleted. Furthermore, the functional genes can not only be expressed inside (in the cytoplasm) of the bacterial cells, but also in periplasm space or on the outermembrane, where the electro-active proteins are much closer to the electrode surface. With the help of advanced genetic engineering technology the modified strains will be the most superior biocatalyst for MFCs.
Future MFC development should also consider the conversion from lab-scale MFCs to practical power generation applications on a large scale. The scaling up will present great challenges to electrode design and fabrication. The supporting materials and catalyst loading processes also need further improvement when nanostructured anodes are utilized in up-scaled MFCs. In addition, the employment of materials in practical or industrial applications should be considered for the scale-up feasibility. Some materials are not suitable for scale-up because of their inherent lack of durability or structural strength, or their expense. Any design should be adaptable to a mass manufacturing process.
With advances of nano/bio- science and technology, there will be more strategies to significantly improve the power density and energy density of MFCs for their proposed practical applications. The capability of recycling organic waste and generating electricity simultaneously make MFCs a very attractive green energy resource, and this capability will definitely fascinate scientists and engineers working on this rapidly evolving technology in the coming decades.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Center for Advanced Bionanosystems, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
References
M. C. Potter, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1911, 84, 260–276 CrossRef .
J. H. Wee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497–508 Search PubMed .
D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2006, 17, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Du, H. R. Li and T. Y. Gu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2007, 25, 464–482 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 Search PubMed .
F. Zhao, R. C. T. Slade and J. R. Varcoe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1926–1939 RSC .
D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rismani-Yazdi, S. M. Carver, A. D. Christy and I. H. Tuovinen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 683–694 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schaetzle, F. Barriere and K. Baronian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 607–620 RSC .
Z. He and F. Mansfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 215–219 RSC .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods-Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. Damjanovic and V. Brusic, Electrochim. Acta, 1967, 12, 615–628 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Morris, S. Jin, J. Q. Wang, C. Z. Zhu and M. A. Urynowicz, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1730–1734 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Zhuang, W. Li, S. Zhou and J. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2825–2829 CrossRef CAS .
E. HaoYu, S. Cheng, K. Scott and B. Logan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 275–281 CrossRef .
E. H. Yu, S. Cheng, B. E. Logan and K. Scott, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 705–711 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, C. M. Li, J. Li and J. T. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18578–18583 CAS .
O. Lefebvre, W. K. Ooi, Z. Tang, M. Abdullah-Al-Mamun, D. H. C. Chua and H. Y. Ng, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 4907–4910 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Holzman, Environ. Health Perspect., 2005, 113, A754–A757 .
S. Oh, B. Min and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 4900–4904 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Ringeisen, E. Henderson, P. K. Wu, J. Pietron, R. Ray, B. Little, J. C. Biffinger and J. M. Jones-Meehan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 2629–2634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Liu and H. R. Li, Biochem. Eng. J., 2007, 36, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. You, Q. L. Zhao, J. N. Zhang, J. Q. Jiang and S. Q. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1409–1415 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 2009–2015 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rhoads, H. Beyenal and Z. Lewandowski, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 4666–4671 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ter Heijne, H. V. M. Hamelers, V. De Wilde, R. A. Rozendal and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5200–5205 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Gregory, D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2004, 6, 596–604 CrossRef CAS .
P. Clauwaert, K. Rabaey, P. Aelterman, L. De Schamphelaire, T. H. Ham, P. Boeckx, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 3354–3360 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lefebvre, A. Al-Mamun and H. Y. Ng, Water Sci. Technol., 2008, 58, 881–885 Search PubMed .
B. Virdis, K. Rabaey, Z. G. Yuan, R. A. Rozendal and J. Keller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 5144–5149 CrossRef CAS .
P. Clauwaert, D. Van der Ha, N. Boon, K. Verbeken, M. Verhaege, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7564–7569 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Bennetto, J. Stirling, G. Dellaney, S. Roller, C. S. Thurston and J. R. Mason, Process Biochem., 1983, 18, R17–R17 .
H. P. Bennetto, J. L. Stirling, K. Tanaka and C. A. Vega, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1983, 25, 559–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Stirling, H. P. Bennetto, G. M. Delaney, J. R. Mason, S. D. Roller, K. Tanaka and C. F. Thurston, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 1983, 11, 451–453 CAS .
S. D. Roller, H. P. Bennetto, G. M. Delaney, J. R. Mason, J. L. Stirling and C. F. Thurston, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., Biotechnol., 1984, 34, 3–12 Search PubMed .
N. Kim, Y. Choi, S. Jung and S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2000, 21, 44–48 CAS .
D. H. Park, S. K. Kim, I. H. Shin and Y. J. Jeong, Biotechnol. Lett., 2000, 22, 1301–1304 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Chaudhuri and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1229–1232 CrossRef .
G. C. Gil, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, M. Kim, J. K. Jang, H. S. Park and H. J. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 18, 327–334 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanisho, N. Kamiya and N. Wakao, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1989, 21, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Park, U. Mushtaq, D. Perello, I. Lee, S. K. Cho, A. Star and M. H. Yun, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2984–2990 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schröder, J. Nießen and F. Scholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2880–2883 CrossRef .
J. Niessen, U. Schroder, M. Rosenbaum and F. Scholz, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Zhao, U. Schroder and F. Scholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6658–6661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Zhao, M. Quaas, H. Wulff, U. Schroder and F. Scholz, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, Y. Choi, S. Jung and S. Kim, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2000, 70, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, H. Liu and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 2426–2432 CrossRef CAS .
K. Scott, C. Murano and G. Rimbu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 1063–1068 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, S. D. Minteer and L. T. Angenent, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 5262–5267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2008, 29, 168–172 CAS .
B. Logan, S. Cheng, V. Watson and G. Estadt, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 3341–3346 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Liu, D. A. Lowy, R. G. Baumann and L. M. Tender, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2007, 102, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Park and J. G. Zeikus, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2000, 66, 1292–1297 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Lowy, L. M. Tender, J. G. Zeikus, D. H. Park and D. R. Lovley, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 2058–2063 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Park and J. G. Zeikus, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2003, 81, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Allen and H. P. Bennetto, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1993, 39–40, 27–40 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Lee, Y. Choi, S. H. Jung and S. Kim, Bioelectrochemistry, 2002, 57, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6803–6813 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bullen, T. C. Arnot, J. B. Lakeman and F. C. Walsh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 2015–2045 CAS .
U. Schröder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2619–2629 RSC .
R. Ganguli and B. S. Dunn, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Jong, B. H. Kim, I. S. Chang, P. W. Y. Liew, Y. F. Choo and G. S. Kang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 6449–6454 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, J. F. Stolz, G. L. Nord and E. J. P. Phillips, Nature, 1987, 330, 252–254 CAS .
C. R. Myers and K. H. Nealson, Science, 1988, 240, 1319–1321 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bretschger, A. Obraztsova, C. A. Sturm, I. S. Chang, Y. A. Gorby, S. B. Reed, D. E. Culley, C. L. Reardon, S. Barua, M. F. Romine, J. Zhou, A. S. Beliaev, R. Bouhenni, D. Saffarini, F. Mansfeld, B. H. Kim, J. K. Fredrickson and K. H. Nealson, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 7003–7012 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, S. K. Chaudhuri, K. P. Nevin, T. Mehta, B. A. Methe, A. Liu, J. E. Ward, T. L. Woodard, J. Webster and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 8, 1805–1815 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shukla, E. M. J. Gillam and P. V. Bernhardt, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1845–1849 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, C. G. Hu, R. Cui and S. S. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9808–9813 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Bao, C. M. Li, J. F. Zang, X. Q. Cui, Y. Qiao and J. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, F. P. Hu, C. M. Li and P. K. Shen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 819–824 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu and C. M. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 767–772 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Liu, C. X. Guo, C. M. Li, Y. Y. Li, Q. B. Chi, X. T. Huang, L. Liao and T. Yu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 202–205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Richter, K. P. Nevin, H. F. Jia, D. A. Lowy, D. R. Lovley and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 506–516 RSC .
G. Reguera, K. P. Nevin, J. S. Nicoll, S. F. Covalla, T. L. Woodard and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 7345–7348 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Gorby, S. Yanina, J. S. McLean, K. M. Rosso, D. Moyles, A. Dohnalkova, T. J. Beveridge, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. E. Culley, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini, E. A. Hill, L. Shi, D. A. Elias, D. W. Kennedy, G. Pinchuk, K. Watanabe, S. Ishii, B. Logan, K. H. Nealson and J. K. Fredrickson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Marshall and H. D. May, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 699–705 RSC .
L. X. Zhang, S. G. Zhou, L. Zhuang, W. S. Li, J. T. Zhang, N. Lu and L. F. Deng, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1641–1643 CrossRef CAS .
D. Prasad, S. Arun, A. Murugesan, S. Padmanaban, R. S. Satyanarayanan, S. Berchmans and V. Yegnaraman, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 2604–2610 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Newman and R. Kolter, Nature, 2000, 405, 94–97 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rabaey, N. Boon, M. Hofte and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 3401–3408 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Pham, N. Boon, P. Aelterman, P. Clauwaert, L. De Schamphelaire, L. Vanhaecke, K. De Maeyer, M. Hofte, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 77, 1119–1129 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, C. Z. Cui, S. L. Chen, X. P. Ai, H. X. Yang, S. Ping and Z. R. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2257–2259 RSC .
Y. F. Wang, S. Tsujimura, S. S. Cheng and K. Kano, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 76, 1439–1446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, S. J. Bao, Z. S. Lu and Y. H. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1290–1292 RSC .
T. Zhang, C. Cui, S. Chen, H. Yang and P. Shen, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, Z. Lu, H. Ling, A. Kang and M. W. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6183–6185 RSC .
K. Xiang, Y. Qiao, C. B. Ching and C. M. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1593–1595 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, S. J. Bao and Q. L. Bao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gutiérrez, Z. Y. García-Carvajal, M. J. Hortigüela, L. Yuste, F. Rojo, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2992–2995 RSC .
Y. Qiao, S. J. Bao, C. M. Li, X. Q. Cui, Z. S. Lu and J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Ms Yan Qiao	Ms Yan Qiao is a PhD candidate in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. Her research topic is electrocatalysis of a new strain bacteria and nanostructured anodes for high-performance microbial fuel cells. She has experience with the design and synthesis of mesoporous nanomaterials, bioengineering bacteria strains and electrochemical analysis of microbial fuel cells.
Dr Shu-Juan Bao	Dr Shu-Juan Bao received an MSc and PhD in Materials Science from Lanzhou University (China) in 2003 and 2006. After completing a post-doctoral fellowship at the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, NTU, she is currently a professor at Xinjiang University, China. Her research interests include controllable synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials, and their important applications in nano-electronics, biomedical devices and energy systems such as fuel cell, battery and supercapacitor.
Dr Chang Ming Li	Dr Chang Ming Li received his PhD from Wuhan University in 1986 followed by post-doctoral research in UIUC from 1988–1990, and currently is a professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems at NTU, Singapore. He worked with US Motorola as the Science Advisory Board Associate, Distinguished Technical Staff and senior manager for almost 10 years. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Motorola Master Innovator Award in 1999 and Nanyang Innovation and Research Award in 2008. His research includes fuel cells, solar cells and bionanotechnologies.

Broader context
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have become an attractive green energy source to produce electricity from organic fuels by microorganisms while recycling waste to protect the environment. MFCs can be made at low cost, but offer high energy efficiency under rather mild conditions, and thus have a great potential for broad applications, particularly in-home electrical generators, battlefield energy systems, electronic power sources for space shuttles and self-feeding robots. However, their low power density limits their practical applications. Electrocatalysis in MFCs is a phenomenon where the electrode associated with microbes under the imposed potential behaves as a catalyst for electrochemical reactions. The bottleneck of MFC electrocatalysis is the insulative nature of the microbes that can catalyze the oxidation of organic substrates, but find it very hard to transfer their received electrons to the electrode resulting in extremely high Faraday resistances, a large overpotential, low power density and poor energy conversion efficiency. This article reviews the recent fantastic advances in MFC electrocatalysis for significant improvement of the power density by bioengineering new strains of microbes associated with novel nanostructured electrode materials, which enable direct electron transfer from the microbes and hence high electrochemical reaction rate and low potential loss.


 	Fig. 1  A schematic of the electron transfer process from bacteria to the anode through mediators.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of electron transfer from a bacterium in the biofilm to the anode through a network of bound mediators. Reproduced from ref. 76	 

 	Fig. 3  Highly permeable cell surface for endogenerous mediators excretion. (a) Surface morphology of original E. coli cells. (b) Surface morphology of evolved E. coli cells. (c) Proposed mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM micrograph of a PANI/MWCNT composite. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission. Copyright Elsevier 2007. (b) Monolithic MWCNT scaffolds. Reproduced from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM micrograph of a 30 wt% PANI/TiO2 nanoporous composite MFC anode. (b) SEM micrograph of E. coli cells adhered to the electrode surface.94 Adapted from ref. 94 with permission. Copyright American Chemical Society 2008.	 

 	Fig. 6  Morphology, pore distribution and charge transfer behavior of OMC. (a) SEM micrographs with low and high (inset) magnifications. (b) TEM micrographs showing the ordered mesoporous structure. (c) Nyquist plots of OMC and carbon cloth indicating the charge transfer rate. (d) Power output and polarization curve of an MFC with a OMC anode.	 


PANI/MWCNT	34	—	0.7	100	42
PANI/TiO2	248	6–8	0.88(0.82a)	3650(3390a)	1495(1300a)
OMC	844	4–6	0.72a	4000a	1600a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
