Energy-efficient, microwave-assisted hydro/solvothermal synthesis of hierarchical flowers and rice grain-like ZnO nanocrystals as photoanodes for high ...  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CE01438G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CE01438G
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8353-8367Energy-efficient, microwave-assisted hydro/solvothermal synthesis of hierarchical flowers and rice grain-like ZnO nanocrystals as photoanodes for high performance dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            R. 
            Krishnapriya
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Praneetha
          
        
       and 

        
          
            A. 
            Vadivel Murugan
          
        
      *
      Advanced Functional Nanostructured Materials Laboratory, Centre for Nanoscience and Technology, Madanjeet School of Green Energy Technologies, Pondicherry University (A Central University), Dr. R. V. Nagar, Kalapet, Puducherry 605014, India. E-mail: avmrajeshwar@gmail.com; avmurugan.nst@pondiuni.edu.in
Received 
      21st July 2015
    , Accepted 15th September 2015First published on 15th September 2015AbstractZnO nanoparticles with different morphologies including marigold flower-like (MGFL), multipod jasmine flower-like (MPJF), sea urchin-rod flower-like (URFL), calendula flower-like (CDFL) and rice grain shape-like (RGSL) were successfully synthesized by decomposing either the Zn(OH)42− or Zn(NH3)42+ precursor in different solvents such as H2O, ethylene glycol (EG) and ethanol (EtOH) via one-pot rapid microwave-assisted hydro/solvothermal (MW-HT/ST) methods. From the obtained ZnO, we have developed two types of innovative photoanode configurations such as the “nano-hybrid architecture” and the “bi-layer architecture” via integration and layer-by-layer coating of flower-like URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles, respectively, for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Interestingly, the URFL/RGSL-ZnO nano-hybrid architecture photoanode-based DSSCs showed remarkably enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 5.64% compared to DSSCs based on their individual components such as flower-like URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles which exhibited PCEs of 2.05% and 0.95%, respectively. In contrast, two types of “bi-layer architecture” photoanodes which were composed of an RGSL-ZnO layer on top of URFL-ZnO and vice versa exhibited PCEs of 1.74% and 2.26%, respectively. It is revealed that the “hybrid architecture” exhibits superior enhancement in PCE when compared to the “bi-layer architecture” assembly and their respective individual bare ZnO components, which was mainly attributed to the synergistic effect of the two different morphologies when blended together at a “nanoscale” level. Indeed, superior light-scattering ability and anchoring of more dye molecules were provided by URFL-ZnO. The fast electron transport through better inter-particle and electronic contacts with the fluorine-doped SnO2 glass (FTO) substrate was facilitated by RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles. Hence, the present investigation facilitates a promising way to enhance the efficiency of ZnO-based DSSCs by tuning different morphologies with innovative device architecture.
Introduction
Due to the rapid exhaustion of fossil fuels and increasing global energy demands, the development of alternative, sustainable and clean energy technologies has become a necessity to address these inevitable challenges. In this regard, finding a method to convert an enormous amount of sunlight into electrical energy happened to be appealing to satisfy the world energy demand. DSSC is a modern electrochemical energy conversion device that was inspired from nature by the breakthrough work of O'Regan and Gratzel in 1991.1 Considerable attention has been paid to the development of DSSCs, due to their simple fabrication procedures coupled with relatively high power conversion efficiency, eco-friendliness and low cost production.2–4 So far, DSSCs fabricated with TiO2 nanoparticles have achieved overall conversion efficiency above 13%.5 In the meantime, other n-type semiconducting oxides, such as ZnO, SnO2, etc., have been identified as promising photoanodes for DSSCs.6 Among them, ZnO with different nanostructured morphologies has been investigated intensively due to its comparable band gap of 3.37 eV and facile synthesis. Moreover, there are many significant advantages of ZnO over TiO2 such as higher electron mobility that would facilitate fast electron transport followed by reduced recombination loss.7,8 Typically, properties such as excellent light scattering, fast electron transport and high specific surface area play an important role in enhancing the light conversion efficiency of DSSCs. Worldwide, researchers have focused on the improvement in light utilization efficiency.9–11 Another approach has been used for narrowing the band gap of semiconducting metal oxides by imposing defects or impurities to promote visible light absorption.12–15 In addition, the Mie scattering effect (periodical perturbation in the electron cloud) of spherical micron-sized particles has also been demonstrated to elongate the path of the incident light to enhance the light harvesting efficiency.16,17 It is reported that the TiO2 photoanode made up of particles with a size of ≤20 nm and large surface area is beneficial for better dye loading.1,3 However, such nanosized particles are smaller than the wavelength of visible light and the transparent film shows inferior photoelectric conversion efficiency.10 Although improvement in efficiency was demonstrated by using ≥50 nm large particles due to better light scattering properties, further enhancement in efficiency was restricted because of the smaller surface area provided by the large particles that leads to inferior dye adsorption ability. To address these issues, a novel class of photoanode materials that could be made by tuning of micro to nanometer sizes and different morphologies is expected to provide specific advantages.18–22 Zheng et al. constructed bi-layered ZnO nanorod and nanocrystallite photoanodes for DSSCs and a high conversion efficiency of 4% was achieved.23 Puyoo et al. reported a photoconversion efficiency of 4.7% for a ZnO composite electrode which was much higher than that of a bare nanowire or nanoparticle-based DSSC due to the synergistic effects of the nanostructured particles with higher surface area for better dye loading and the nanowire which provides electron lifetime extension and promotes light harvesting.24 Recently, Zhu et al. fabricated DSSCs based on ZnO nanocrystals with different morphologies including hollow microspheres, microrods and hierarchical microspheres, which displayed efficiencies of 0.41, 0.79 and 1.42%, respectively.25 Over the past decades, considerable efforts have been devoted with great research interest to preparing different hierarchical ZnO nanostructured photoanodes by various physical and chemical methods that had been employed to promote the device performance, which is dependent on their structure and morphology.26–29 Jiang et al. and Cheng et al. have reported the fabrication of hierarchical nanoflowers by a hydrothermal method which showed an efficiency of 1.5%.30,31 Although various hierarchical ZnO microstructures were synthesized and reported by using a variety of organic additives, lower power conversion efficiencies were observed because the organic additive molecules were adsorbed on the surface of ZnO, thus decreasing the efficient surface area.32 Recently, Ko et al. reported a photoanode fabricated within 3–7 hours using an organic template-assisted hydrothermally grown ZnO nanoforest which showed a maximum efficiency of 2.63%.33
Therefore, it is necessary to develop suitable synthetic methods to prepare hierarchical micro/nanostructured ZnO assembled from nanosheets/rods/particles with a large number of unconventional planes that are desirable as they are responsible for the significant increase in the PCE of DSSCs. Particularly, microwave-assisted synthesis has gained greater importance in recent years and represents an eco-friendly process that may be considered as a comparatively low-cost, energy-efficient and clean method with short reaction time (many hours to few minutes).34 MW-HT/ST synthesis methods have been reported to accelerate the reaction rates and improve the product yield.35,36
Taking all these into consideration, we reported the controllable rapid synthesis of ZnO micro/nanostructures with different flower-like morphologies including marigold flower-like (MGFL), multipod jasmine flower-like (MPJF), urchin-rod flower-like (URFL), calendula flower-like (CDFL) and rice grain shape-like (RGSL) by facile, relatively low-temperature (50–180 °C) and low-cost, and energy-efficient MW-HT/ST processes within few minutes. The photovoltaic (PV) properties of ZnO-based DSSCs with various morphologies were investigated. The strong morphology-induced PV performance of the three-dimensional bare hierarchical ZnO flower photoanodes compared with that of the structures based on bare RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles was presented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the integration of different flower-like morphologies of ZnO with rice grain-like ZnO nanoparticles blended in with different mass ratios at the nanoscale level as “hybrid architectures” prepared via MW-HT/ST methods and their application to DSSCs have been reported. For comparison purposes, we also investigated the PV performance of flower-like ZnO on top of rice grain-like ZnO and vice versa fabricated as “bi-layer architectures”. It is revealed that the PV performance of ZnO photoanodes in “hybrid architecture” was greatly improved in comparison to the “bi-layer architecture” and individual bare flower-like as well as rice grain-like ZnO. The enhancement in the PV performance of ZnO in hybrid architecture is due to an increase in light scattering, anchoring of more dye molecules and the efficient electron transport properties of hybrid flower-like ZnO and rice grain-like ZnO nanoparticle aggregates mixed in an appropriate mass ratio. In addition, electron–hole recombination would be effectively suppressed as a consequence of fast interfacial charge transfer between the different structures in hybrid architecture.
Experimental section
Synthesis and structural characterization of ZnO
The microwave-assisted solution growth synthesis (MW-HT/ST) of ZnO was carried out by using Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, zinc metal powder, ethylene glycol, absolute ethanol, NaOH, and ammonium hydroxide which were purchased from SD Fine Chemicals, Fisher Scientific, Nice and HiMedia Chemicals, and used as-received without further purification. All the experiments were conducted with double distilled water, ethanol and ethylene glycol. [Zn(NH3)4]2+ precursor solution was prepared by mixing 0.5 mol L−1 zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O) and fresh ammonia solutions (volume ratio (v/v) 1:1, pH ~10), whereas the [Zn(OH)4]2− precursor was prepared by mixing 0.5 mol L−1 zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O) and 5 M NaOH (volume ratio (v/v) 1:1, pH ~14). The preparation of ZnO with different morphologies such as marigold flower-like (MGFL), multipod jasmine flower-like (MPJF), urchin-rod flower-like (URFL), calendula flower-like (CDFL) and rice grain shape-like (RGSL) was carried out through microwave-assisted hydrothermal (MW-HT) and solvothermal (MW-ST) processes as illustrated in Fig. 1 employing the Anton Paar (Multiwave PRO) microwave reaction system SOLV. First, either [Zn(NH3)4]2+ or [Zn(OH)4]2− precursor solution was mixed with different solvents such as water, ethanol, ethylene glycol and with and without zinc metal powder in quartz vessels which were then positioned on a turntable stage for uniform heating in the Anton Paar (Multiwave PRO) microwave reaction system SOLV. The microwave exposure time varying with respect to time and temperature was programmed with the Anton Paar Multiwave PRO software. The automatic pressure and temperature control system allowed incessant monitoring and control of the interior temperature (±1 °C). The preset profile (time, temperature and pressure) was monitored automatically by altering the applied power (0–900 W) and the pressure (up to 80 bar). The operating frequency of the system is 2.45 GHz under hydro/solvothermal conditions. After the MW-HT/ST reactions were over, the reaction vessels were cooled to room temperature using a built-in fast cooling fan system. The white ZnO precipitate deposited at the bottom of the quartz vessel was filtered and washed more than five times with distilled water, followed by absolute ethanol. Finally, the white ZnO precipitate was collected by centrifugation and dried under vacuum at 60–70 °C. The MW-HT/ST reaction parameters for each experimental series are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of ZnO with different hierarchical marigold flower-like (MGFL), multipod jasmine flower-like (MPJF), sea urchin-rod flower-like (URFL), calendula flower-like (CDFL) and rice grain shape-like (RGSL) morphologies synthesized by facile and rapid MW-HT/ST controlled heterogeneous nucleation processes by decomposing Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ precursor solutions in various solvents without requiring any organic structure-directing agents or templates. 
XRD characterization of the samples was carried out using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) produced at 40 kV and 30 mA to scan the diffraction angles from 20–80°. Phase identification was performed using standard ICDD (International Centre for Diffraction Data) for the obtained products. The morphology of the samples was observed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM SUPRA 55, Carl Zeiss, Germany), while transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were taken with a JEOL 3010. Raman and room-temperature photoluminescence spectra were recorded with a Renishaw inVia system using a laser with an excitation energy of 514 nm and a FluoroMax spectrofluorometer (Horiba), respectively. The diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO were measured by using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu, Japan). The specific surface area and average pore volume (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller, BET) were measured by using a Micromeritics Gemini VII 2390 series. Photovoltaic (PV) measurements were performed using a Newport® 150 W 96000 solar simulator set at 100 mW cm−2 full spectrum power using an AM1.5G filter. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were produced using a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter. By using a standard silicon photodiode, the light intensity of the xenon light source had been calibrated. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out using a BioLogic potentiostat–galvanostat (SP-150) under open circuit (Voc) and illumination. The frequency ranges from 0.1 Hz to 105 Hz with the magnitude of the alternating current (AC) signal being 10 mV.
DSSC device fabrication and physical characterization
0.5 g of the prepared ZnO sample was dispersed in 4 mL of ethanol by ultrasonication for 10 minutes. Then, 1.5 g of terpineol and 0.10 g of ethyl cellulose were added and the solution was again ultrasonicated to form a homogeneous viscous paste. The prepared paste was deposited on a clean fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate (a transparent electrode presents a typical square sheet resistance of 10 Ω sq−1 and an overall transmittance of about 85% in the visible range) by a doctor blade method to obtain a thickness of ~17–23 μm using 3M scotch tape over an area of 0.25 cm2 (with proper masking). After drying in air, the coated substrates were heated in a furnace (400 °C for 30 minutes). After attaining room temperature, the substrates were then immersed in a 0.5 mM solution of N719 dye (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 minutes (minimum sensitization time is used to avoid dye–Zn2+ complex formation). Eight ZnO nanohybrid-based DSSC devices were made from ZnO having four different flower-like morphologies (MGFL, MPJF, URFL and CDFL) with different mass ratios of 5, 20, 50 and 80 wt% mixed with rice grain shape-like ZnO (RGSL) by using a mortar and pestle to form a paste. The mixed hybrid samples were subsequently dispersed in ethanol and the photoanodes were fabricated as explained above.
To be specific, mixed RGSL/URFL hybrid photoanodes were blended at the nanoscale level and subsequently fabricated by a doctor blade technique. We adopted the same doctor blade technique to prepare the double layered ZnO photoanode-based DSSCs. To be specific, after coating one layer of a ZnO film on the FTO glass by using a doctor blade, the wet film was then exposed to air for 15 min and then kept inside a drying oven at 80 °C for 15 min. After that, a second layer was coated on top of the first layer. The first double layered DSSC device was fabricated by setting RGSL as an underlayer after the film was dried at room temperature, with the URFL layer coated on top of it. The second double layered DSSC device was fabricated vice versa as explained above. The double layered photoanode obtained as such was dried at room temperature, then sintered at 400 °C for 30 minutes and subsequently soaked in dye solution as explained above. The Pt counter electrode was fabricated by drop-casting 5 mM H2PtCl6 solution onto FTO and sintered at 400 °C for 20 min. The two electrodes were sandwiched together with a Surlyn film of 30 μm thickness as a spacer. The redox couple electrolyte consisting of 0.06 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M iodine solution (I2), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixed solvent of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (volume ratio, 85:15) was introduced into the DSSC. The quantity of adsorbed N719 dye for all ZnO photoanodes can be measured by analyzing the UV-visible absorption spectra of solutions containing the dye desorbed from the ZnO film. The dye desorption studies were conducted by placing the dye-loaded photoanodes into 3 mL of 0.1 M NaOH solution in a mixed solvent of water/ethanol (v/v ratio, 1:1), and the UV-visible absorption spectrum of the resultant solution was measured to estimate the adsorbed amount of dye. 0.5 mM dye was dissolved in 0.1 M NaOH as a reference. Ultimately, the dye was completely desorbed from the photoanodes, and the amount of dye molecules adsorbed was calculated according to Beer–Lambert's law:A = ε × c × lwhere ‘A’ is the absorbance, ε = 8.176 M−1 cm−1 is the maximum molar extinction coefficient of the dye at 500 nm, ‘l’ is the path length of the light and c is the concentration of the dye.
Results and discussion
Structure and morphology of ZnO

X-ray diffraction analysis. 
The XRD patterns of hierarchical ZnO with different morphologies, prepared via MW-HT and MW-ST controlled heterogeneous nucleation processes by decomposing the Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ precursor solutions within 20 min at a temperature from 70–180 °C, with a microwave power of 300–900 W in various polar solvents such as H2O, ethylene glycol and ethanol without requiring any organic structure-directing agents or templates, are shown in Fig. 2a–e. Significantly, all synthesized ZnO powders are of hexagonal phase with a wurtzite structure belonging to the space group P63mc. The XRD patterns of ZnO with different morphologies (Fig. 2a–e) denote that all the diffraction peaks are matched well to hexagonal phase ZnO diffraction peaks with lattice constants a = 0.3249 Å and c = 0.5207 Å, which is consistent with the reported values in the JCPDS card (no. 36-1451).
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of ZnO with different hierarchical morphologies including (a) MGFL, (b) MPJF, (c) URFL, (d) CDFL and (e) RGSL synthesized by MW-HT/ST controlled heterogeneous nucleation processes by decomposing Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ precursor solutions within 10 min at 70–180 °C, with a microwave power of 300–900 W in various solvents. 
The diffraction peaks clearly show no other impurities, thus suggesting that the product has high purity and a wurtzite structure. In addition, peak broadening which appears in the diffraction pattern is attributed to the fact that the obtained ZnO is a crystallite with small size. During the preparation of the precursor solutions such as [Zn(NH3)4]2+ and [Zn(OH)4]2− by mixing Zn2+ ions with NH4OH and NaOH, the Zn2+ ions are introduced into the OH− aqueous solution. When ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) was introduced into the reaction solution, the lone pair of electrons from nitrogen coordinates with the empty orbitals of Zn2+ ions that could generate metal–ammonium complexes such as [Zn(NH3)4]2+. On the other hand, when NaOH was introduced into the reaction system, the [Zn(OH)4]2− complex was formed.37 The soluble Zn(OH)42− precursor in H2O solvent decomposes in the MW-HT reaction. It is noticeable that the peaks ascribed to the (002) planes of MPJF, MGFL and URFL synthesized products were extremely strong in comparison with standard JCPDS data, revealing the oriented growth of these hierarchical structures along the (001) plane or c-axis direction.38 Interestingly, the oriented growth along the c-axis is substantiated by calculating the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (002) peak which is the narrowest when compared to the other peaks.39
The significant difference in the FWHM supports our implication that the ZnO crystals may lead to growth along the (001) plane (Table S1 in the ESI†), resulting in the formation of nano-rods/nano-petals and aggregates that served as the substrates to promote flower-like ZnO secondary heterogeneous nucleation. The phase structure and crystalline nature of ZnO play an important role in the PV conversion efficiency of DSSCs after hybridization of photoanode films with two different nanoparticle morphologies (flower-like and rice grain-like) coated on a FTO substrate. Fig. S1 (ESI†) illustrates the XRD patterns of the ZnO film photoanodes with different components and the FTO glass substrate. Apparently, six peaks attributed to SnO2 were observed for all XRD patterns. It is clearly revealed that the diffraction peaks of all four hybrid photoanodes including MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL illustrated the identical diffraction peaks of the powder samples despite minor differences in the intensities of the peaks and can be exactly indexed to the wurtzite ZnO structure with a hexagonal phase (JCPDS no. 36-1451), also indicating that the film was free from cracks and defects.

FE-SEM & TEM studies of ZnO
The morphology and size of the as-synthesized ZnO crystals were further characterized by FE-SEM. The summarized reaction conditions and morphologies are provided in Table S2 (ESI†). Fig. 3 shows the FE-SEM images of ZnO with spectacular hierarchical nano-flower and rice-like granular network morphologies at lower and higher magnifications. The SEM images of all samples revealed flower-like morphology that resembles jasmine, marigold, urchin and calendula as shown in Fig. 3a–h.
 Fig. 3  FESEM images of hierarchical ZnO flowers at different magnifications for (a, b) MGFL, (c, d) MPJF, (e, f) URFL, (g, h) CDFL and (i, j) RGSL prepared by MW-HT/ST methods. 
In contrast, Fig. 3i and j show a network of granular rice grain-like structures (RGSL). When viewed closely at higher magnifications, MPJF and URFL are found to have microrod-like petals making up the flower preferentially grown in the c-axis direction as discussed earlier in XRD. In the case of MPJF, the microrods have a length of 2–3 μm and a diameter of about 100–500 nm (Fig. 3d), while URFL exhibits a nanorod-like morphology with a diameter of 10–60 nm and a length of 300–600 nm as shown in the high-magnification images in Fig. S3b and c in the ESI,† most of which have been aligned together into a flower-like structure. It is also observed that the hierarchical MGFL flowers with a diameter of 10–40 μm are randomly aggregated into nanosized petals of 25–45 nm with porous structures (Fig. S3a†) but giving an overall morphological appearance of a spherical-shaped marigold-like structure as shown in Fig. 3a and b.
We found that the hierarchical flower-like morphologies of the as-synthesized microstructures provide them with further advantages such that they become strong enough to undergo ultrasonic treatment, indicating the presence of strong structural interaction among the nanorods and nanoflakes. Typically, ZnO crystal growth is influenced by internal and external factors such as intermolecular bonding preferences and other reaction parameters (precursor, nature of solvent, temperature, time and autogenous pressure developed inside the MW-reaction vessel), respectively. The most stable wurtzite ZnO is a polar crystal which consists of O2− ions in a hexagonal close-packed (HCP) arrangement, with each Zn2+ lying within a tetrahedral group of four oxygen ions as shown in Fig. 1.
The zinc and oxygen atoms are arranged alternately along the c-axis, demonstrating that the Zn2+-terminated ZnO (0001) polar plane is chemically active; however, the O2−-terminated negative (1000) polar plane is inert. Compared with other crystal planes, the velocities for growth under MW-HT conditions are reported to be in the order of (0001) > (0110) > (1000). Eventually, the ZnO crystal with the (0001) polar plane has a higher surface energy and a faster growth rate, and thus the inherent asymmetry along the c-axis promotes epitaxial crystal growth along the (0001) plane of 1D ZnO nanorods.40
Hence, our results are consistent with all the flower-like morphologies of ZnO which illustrate preferential growth along the c-axis as shown in Fig. 3a–f. Meanwhile, by decomposing soluble Zn(OH)42− in ethylene glycol (EG) under MW-ST conditions, calendula flower-like (CDFL) morphology was obtained and is shown in Fig. 3g and h. The growth mechanism of the CDFL-ZnO geometrical shape appears to be due to nucleation and epitaxial growth on the central bigger-rod core which was surrounded by side-branched nanorods of the (1010) central core. We found that the OH− ion concentration in the EG reaction solution plays an important role by influencing the different crystal faces and controlling the growth rate of anisotropic ZnO crystal formation. In contrast, when soluble Zn(OH)42− in ethanol (EtOH) was decomposed under MW-ST conditions, the “rice grain”-like morphology of ZnO was formed and its shape appears almost like a rice grain with spheroid body-like ZnO nanoparticles 20–40 nm in diameter as shown in Fig. 3i and j and in the ESI† (Fig. S3d). Thus, MW-HT and MW-ST methods offer attractive routes for synthesizing ZnO materials with different morphologies.
TEM and HRTEM analyses were performed to further understand the crystal structure and morphology of ZnO. Fig. 4 shows the typical TEM images of a number of individual ZnO micro/nanorods grown in solution without any surfactant or hard template. Fig. 4c, f and i also exhibit lattice fringes corresponding to the ZnO lattice related to a d-spacing value of 0.28 nm between two lattice fringes corresponding to the (100) planes of the ZnO hexagonal phase and also demonstrating the crystalline nature of flower-like ZnO consisting of many nanorods and petals. The crystalline nature of ZnO was also confirmed by selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) as illustrated in Fig. 4b, e and h, which reveals a diffraction ring pattern corresponding to wurtzite-structured crystalline ZnO.
 Fig. 4  HR-TEM images and SAED patterns of hierarchical ZnO nanoflowers at different magnifications for (a–c) MGFL, (d–f) MPJF with the inset figure showing the crystal growth direction along the c-axes, and (g–i) URFL prepared by MW-HT/ST methods. 
From these FESEM and TEM images, we can conclude that the hierarchical arrangements of the samples were able to provide higher surface area by forming different layers as well as macro to nano-porous structures, which is more desirable for high dye loading and also for better diffusion of an electrolyte for DSSCs.
Growth process of hierarchical ZnO under MW-HT/ST conditions
In our MW-HT/ST experiments, there are five different parameters such as polarity of solvents, temperature, time, microwave power and kinetic energy barrier that can influence the crystal growth and formation patterns under non-equilibrium kinetic growth conditions of the different ZnO morphologies in the microwave-assisted solution-based approach. Indeed, microwave irradiation induces heating through the mechanisms of dipolar polarization and ionic conduction. Whereas the dipoles in the reaction mixture (for example, polar solvents such as H2O, EG and EtOH) are involved in the dipolar polarization effect, the charged particles in a sample (Zn2+ ions) contribute to ionic conduction. When irradiated at microwave frequencies, the dipoles or Zn2+ ions of the sample align in the applied electric field. As the applied field oscillates, the dipole or ion field attempts to realign itself with the alternating electric field and, in the process, energy is lost in the form of heat through molecular friction and dielectric loss. The electric field present leads to orientation effects of dipolar molecules which then lower the activation energy according to the Arrhenius equation.34 Lower activation energy leads to rapid nucleation and growth of the reaction mixture.34 In either aqueous or non-aqueous solution, the growth of ZnO crystals is usually divided into two stages, nucleation followed by growth processes. It is noteworthy to mention here that during the nucleation process, the initial seeds formed are shape-determinant for the formation of the final secondary growth flower-like ZnO structure.
The primary structures of ZnO are formed with many crystalline boundaries and more defects, thus rendering them thermodynamically unstable and kinetically favoured. With rapid and uniform heating using a microwave synthesizer, the as-formed primary aggregates undergo an oriented growth mechanism resulting in the formation of numerous oriented ZnO nanoclusters.37,41 The oriented attachment of ZnO nanoclusters could effectively decrease the total surface energy of the system, which facilitates the fusion of adjacent ZnO clusters. Since hexagonal ZnO has an anisotropic character, the nanoclusters formed would rearrange themselves and get orientedly attached along the c-axis in the case of the nanorod-like flower morphologies.42,43 Such c-axis preferential growth is evident from the XRD, FESEM and TEM images.
Growth mechanism of CDFL-ZnO in EG and RGSL-ZnO in EtOH
In the growth mechanism of CDFL-ZnO in ethylene glycol (EG), the Zn2+ ions in Zn(CH3COO)2 could react with the EG molecules to form coordination complexes such as EG(Zn)2+, most probably depending on the concentration of EG.44 At elevated temperature (180 °C) and pressure, the EG(Zn)2+ complexes dissociated to produce ZnO seed crystals in the presence of dissolved oxygen in the solvent. These as-synthesized ZnO seeds guided by the crystal symmetry agglomerated together to form a hexagonal planar nucleus. As the microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction continues, the resulting structures undergo an attachment process due to the strong capping ability of EG.44 The surface energy of individual hexagonal structures is quite high due to the more exposed planar surfaces, and thus the formed structures are subject to fusion with each other which finally leads to the formation of rotor-shaped ZnO microstructures. Usually, hierarchical ZnO microstructures possessing negative polar planes are rich in oxygen and those having positive polar planes are rich in Zn. Hence, the positive polar plane (0001), being more reactive, can subsequently attract new ZnO species to its surface. Generally, ZnO with the (0001) growth plane bounded by six facets is formed.
On the other hand, the rice grain shape-like (RGSL) ZnO nanoparticles were formed from zinc acetate dehydrate and NaOH in ethanol as solvent. The growth process occurs through the formation of tetrahydroxozincate, [Zn(OH)4]2−. Since the zinc acetate dihydrate concentration is very low compared to the NaOH concentration, the self-assembly of sphere-like ZnO rather than rod/flower-like ZnO is accelerated.
Growth mechanism of MGFL, MPJF and URFL ZnO in H2O
When the reaction was carried out in H2O, the reaction precursor dissolved homogeneously compared to those dissolved in EG and EtOH, and subsequently the growth of the crystal nucleus was subject to less confinement in a boiling droplet of solvent as reported by Zhang et al.43 Therefore, H2O is responsible for the formation of spectacular marigold (MGFL) and jasmine (MPJF) flower-like morphologies rather than rotor-like (CDFL) and spherical rice-like RGSL-ZnO morphologies, which can be obtained in ethylene glycol and ethanol, respectively. In addition, the oriented growth of ZnO is more favourable in water and the size is slightly larger.
The effects of pH and reaction temperature are important reaction parameters for obtaining different morphologies of ZnO under microwave-assisted hydrothermal reaction conditions. When NaOH was added to the Zn2+ solution, the high reactant concentration led to the burst of initial homogeneous nucleation and the supersaturated ZnO nuclei aggregated together. When the microwave reaction proceeded, the concentration of ZnO22− monomers became less, and active sites on the surface of the initially formed ZnO aggregate were able to grow along the oriented direction as long as the reaction medium in the quartz vessel provides reactants. The preferential growth plane along (0001) and (010) directions within the (210) plane formed nanosheets on the initial ZnO nuclei. Subsequently, several nanosheets with a (210) plane surface intertwined and overlapped with each other and ZnO with a multilayered secondary microstructured marigold flower-like (MGFL) morphology was formed. Further, these results were also supported by Li et al. who recently reported the growth mechanism of flower-like ZnO microstructures.45
To explain the growth process of the sea urchin-like ZnO nanostructures, metallic zinc powders were first melted and aggregated to form micro-sized Zn droplets, which were combined with Zn(NO3)2 and Zn(OH)2 under MW-HT conditions at a high temperature of 180 °C to form nanosized ZnO nuclei. The nuclei thus play a crucial role in the growth of ZnO nanowires, which grow until the Zn source is almost used up. Thus from each zinc droplet, there is an origination of several ZnO nanorods which lead to the formation of sea urchin-like structures. Here, zinc metal powder plays a key role in nanorod formation, which is capable of accelerating further nucleation and growth processes besides the high reaction temperature, leading to the formation of URFL-ZnO. The grown nanorods are highly crystalline in nature with preferred orientation along the (0001) plane, and show that the lattice fringes have a spacing of 0.28 nm. When ammonia is used as the hydroxide-generating agent, Zn2+ ions readily react with hydroxide anions to form a stable tetrahedral complex [Zn(OH)4]2−. Other than [Zn(OH)4]2−, ammonia can also form a [Zn(NH3)4]2+ complex which thus generates more growth units around ZnO nuclei, leading to faster growth kinetics. Moreover, ZnO can easily form multipod structures consisting of several rods united at a common base, and a large number of available growth units ([Zn(OH)4]2− and [Zn(NH3)4]2+) and faster growth kinetics lead to the formation of jasmine flower shape-like ZnO due to preferential growth along the (0001) plane.
Hence, the solvents H2O, ethylene glycol and ethanol enable smooth control to achieve fractal patterns such as different flower and spherical rice-like morphologies, as shown in Fig. 3.43 Due to the lower saturated vapor pressure and higher boiling point of EG used in the MW-ST reaction, the amalgamation of the nucleus becomes less intense compared to that which occurred due to the lower boiling point and higher saturated vapor pressure of H2O used in the MW-HT reaction. MW-HT/ST methods are effective in achieving different morphologies of ZnO adequately crystallized at relatively low temperatures (50–125 °C) without requiring further calcination at high temperatures. In this synthesis strategy, we first obtained ZnO rods from a Zn(OH)2 precipitate by a hydrothermal process, and then produced calendula flower-like ZnO by using EG as a solvent, whereas spherical “rice grain” shaped ZnO particles were obtained by using EtOH as a solvent saturated with [Zn(OH)4]2− ions through epitaxial growth under solvothermal conditions.
Raman spectroscopy and optical properties of ZnO
To understand the molecular vibrational properties of MW-HT/ST-synthesized ZnO crystals, we carried out Raman spectroscopy analysis. Fig. S2a–i (ESI†) present the Raman spectra of individual flower-like ZnO and hybrid ZnO photoanodes which possess a hexagonal wurtzite structure and belong to the C1(P63mc) space group with two formula unit primitive cells where all atoms occupy the C3v sites. The presence of Raman active modes for ZnO such as A1 + 2E2 + E1 is predicted by group theory43 where A1 and E1 are infrared-active and can be split into transverse optical (TO) and longitudinal optical (LO) components. E2 is only Raman-active and nonpolar which consists of two modes with low and high frequencies. For all samples, four vibrations were detected which were located at 333, 386, 439 and 587 cm−1. The sharp and major peak at 439 cm−1 (E2) is attributed to hexagonal wurtzite ZnO.43 The high intensity and sharpness of the E2 peak demonstrate the formation of a hexagonal wurtzite phase with good crystallinity which was observed in individual ZnO and hybrid ZnO. The small vibration peak at 333 cm−1 belongs to second-order Raman scattering that originates from a multiphonon process (2E2). The peaks at 386 and 585 cm−1 correspond to the polar transverse (A1) and longitudinal (E1) optical phonon modes, respectively.45 The E1 peaks in the spectra originate from the development of defects in the structure such as oxygen vacancies and zinc interstitials. Compared to the E2 mode, the intensity of the E1 mode is much lower, explaining the formation of a wurtzite hexagonal ZnO phase of good crystal quality with less structural defects and impurities. We also observed that all the characterized peaks belonging to individual ZnO match with those of the hybrid ZnO photoanodes, except that the peak intensities are varied between them, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†).
We also examined how different morphologies could influence the photoluminescence (PL) properties of ZnO prepared by MW-HT/ST methods. The PL spectra of ZnO show different features, depending on its morphological variations, and the spectra were obtained with an excitation wavelength of 340 nm as shown in Fig. 5. The obtained spectra exhibit two bands, one ultraviolet emission (UV) peak at 384 nm (3.23 eV) and another weak and broad green-yellow emission peak at 550 nm (2.25 eV). We observed that defect emission in the visible region is detected due to the poor crystallinity of the nanostructured ZnO (particularly for the MGFL and MPJF samples) which is caused by quenching.43 The UV peak is attributed to the near band-edge emission (NBE) from the recombination of free excitons through an exciton–exciton collision process. The band emission at 550 nm recognized as deep level emission (DLE) is attributed to impurities and structural defects exhibited by green emission (singly ionized oxygen vacancies) or yellow emission due to interstitial oxygen ions that originate from the radiative recombination of a photon-generated hole with an electron occupying the oxygen vacancy. Devi et al. recently reported that the PL intensities of ZnO strongly depend on the crystallinity and surface defect formation upon increasing the annealing temperature.46 We found that the MGFL and MPJF samples exhibit very low PL peak intensities compared to RGSL, URFL and CDFL because both of these samples are prepared at a low temperature of ~90 °C, whereas the other three samples URFL, CDFL and RGSL show higher PL peak intensities due to their preparation at a higher MW-HT/ST reaction temperature of 180 °C.
 Fig. 5  Room-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of hierarchical ZnO flowers with various morphologies (RGSL, CDFL, MGFL, URFL and MPJF) prepared by MW-HT/ST methods, with the inset figure showing the UV near band-edge emission (NBE). The excitation wavelength used for all samples is 340 nm. 
These results also substantiate the XRD peak intensities of the URFL, CDFL and RGSL samples, which are higher compared to those of MGFL and MPJF as shown in Fig. 2. Rai et al. recently observed that there has been a blue shift in the PL emission of ZnO with respect to the small size effect.47 Indeed, we also observed that the blue shift in the UV emission of RGSL and CDFL ZnO is due to their smaller size as compared to the other morphologies, as the overall particle size calculated using Scherrer's formula for RGSL (18.4 nm) and CDFL (14.6 nm) is smaller than those for secondary microstructured MGFL (52.1 nm), MPJF (57.9 nm) and URFL (70.5 nm).
In order to examine the light scattering properties of ZnO with various morphologies synthesized by MW-HT/ST methods, UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were recorded and are shown in Fig. 6. We found that all ZnO samples relatively induce a strong scattering effect according to the Mie theory. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the incident light passes through the ZnO samples and is then significantly scattered, and the path length of the incident light is extended, which results in an enhanced reflectance of more than 83% in the case of the MGFL sample. In contrast, the reflectance of the MPJF and URFL samples are shown to be 78% and 80%, respectively, and their reflectance values are not much different. We hypothesize that the primarily formed nano-sheets and rods aggregated in the secondary hierarchical flower-like microstructures could induce effective light scattering.
 Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO with various morphologies (MGFL, MPJF, URFL, RGSL and CDFL) prepared by MW-HT/ST methods, showing more than 80% reflectance. 
The strong scattering effect is exhibited by the MGFL, MPJF and URFL samples, which is beneficial to incident light harvesting and enhancement of the PCE of DSSCs. When compared to the MGFL, MPJF and URFL samples, CDFL and RGSL samples showed lower reflectance due to their small size (10 to 25 nm) which was relatively low compared to the wavelength of visible light, hence the particles were transparent with little light scattering. Moreover, the band gap of the samples was determined from the Tauc plot in Fig. S4† by plotting (αhν)1/2vs. hν, which is derived from the diffuse reflectance spectra. The obtained values are provided in Fig. S4 (ESI,† inset table).
Photovoltaic characterization of DSSCs
Comparison of the PCE, that is the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves, of the DSSCs based on different hierarchical ZnO flower and rice grain-like nanoparticles and their “nanohybrid architecture” as well as “bi-layer architecture” photoanodes is illustrated in Fig. 7 and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters such as the open circuit photovoltage (Voc), the short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), the fill factor (FF), the overall energy conversion efficiency (η) and dye loading of the different photoanodes are summarized in Table S3 (ESI†) and Table 1. Interestingly, the MGFL-ZnO photoanode showed an open circuit photovoltage (Voc) of 538 mV, a fill factor of 70.2% and a short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 7.74 mA cm−2, representing an overall conversion efficiency of 2.92%. However, MPJF-ZnO exhibits a slight decrease in PCE of 2.58% and Jsc = 7.29 mA cm−2 compared to the MGFL-ZnO sample. The URFL-ZnO and CDFL-ZnO samples exhibit PCEs of 2.05% and 1.99%, respectively, which are shown in Fig. 7a; however, both samples show comparable Jsc, Voc and FF. In general, more photo-generated electrons and the photocurrent are strongly related to the dye loading on the photoanodes. Therefore, the RGSL-ZnO-based DSSC shows very low photocurrent density and a low efficiency of 0.95%, however it exhibits an improved voltage of 552 mV and an FF of 71.2%. The results clearly exhibit a remarkable increase in conversion efficiency for the sample with hierarchical flower-like morphology compared to the RGSL-ZnO sample, which may be ascribed to the more porous as well as open secondary microstructured hierarchical flower-like particles with large size and enhanced light scattering properties. The RGSL-ZnO sample showed a relatively large fill factor (FF = 71.2%) because of the highly interconnected granular structure which serves as an easy path for electron transport. However, it does not have sufficient photocurrent developed due to its poor scattering ability. Thus, our results show that hierarchical ZnO flowers are made up of densely packed primary oxide nanostructures (petals or rods) which can facilitate electron transport throughout the ZnO film. Moreover, the self-assembly of primary nanostructures occurs under MW-HT/ST conditions followed by submicrometer-scale secondary spherical flower structures which can induce effective light scattering since their particle size is comparable to the wavelength of light. Innovatively, we have developed DSSCs based on two types of photoanode configurations such as the “nano-hybrid architecture” and the “bi-layer architecture”. We prepared four different “nano-hybrid architecture”-based DSSCs by hybridization of different types of flower-like ZnO with RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles, namely URFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, MGFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL with PCEs of 5.64, 4.86, 4.16 and 4.11%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7b and the comparative PCEs were obtained for all samples which are listed in Table S3 (ESI†). The enhanced efficiencies of all devices made of the hybrid samples are attributed to the improved open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current density (Jsc). Among the four nanohybrid architectures, the DSSC based on the URFL/RGSL-based nanohybrid photoanode (Fig. 7e) showed a remarkably enhanced PCE of 5.64% which is higher than those of their individual components such as flower-like URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO which exhibit PCEs of 2.05% and 0.95%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7c. Moreover, high FF and increased Jsc are offered by a well-organized light scattering structure associated with efficient light scattering and higher dye loading which is related to the larger surface area (22.26 m2 g−1) of the URFL/RGSL-based nanohybrid device. In nano-hybrid architectures, the “size mismatching” of ZnO having different flower-like morphologies (such as MGFL, MPJF, URFL and CDFL) with rice grain shape-like ZnO (RGSL) offers too many open spaces with some macropores and mesopores between the ZnO flowers and nanoparticles in the photoanode film. This well promotes the dye adsorption and efficient transport of electrolyte molecules. Our results obtained from the BET surface area analysis (Table S3 in the ESI†) and dye loading measurements (Table S5 in the ESI†) well corroborate each other. The improved dye loading of the nano-hybrid samples facilitates the formation of more photo-generated electrons and thus a high Jsc compared to that of individual morphological ZnO is obtained. The rice grain shape-like (RGSL) nanoparticles in the nano-hybrid film offer better contact with FTO which improved the Voc and subsequently the FF, which can be deduced from the photovoltaic performance data in Table S3 (ESI†). Our results also corroborated those recently reported by Wang et al. who fabricated TiO2 nanosheet/nanoparticle gradient film photoanodes for DSSCs.48 Thus, to compare the performance of the URFL/RGSL nanohybrid-based DSSC as an example, we also fabricated “bi-layer architecture”-based DSSCs through layer-by-layer coating of flower-like URFL-ZnO on top of RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles and vice versa to produce an efficient DSSC as shown in Fig. 7g and f, respectively. In contrast, two “bi-layer architecture” photoanodes were made up of an RGSL-ZnO layer on top of the URFL-ZnO layer and a URFL-ZnO layer on top of the RGSL-ZnO layer of DSSCs which exhibited PCEs of 1.74% and 2.26%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7d.
 Fig. 7  Comparative plots of J–V curve behaviour of DSSCs fabricated with photoanodes made up of (a) ZnO with various morphologies (MGFL, MPJF, URFL, RGSL and CDFL), and (b) “nanohybrid architecture” made up of MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL. Comparative plots of (c) URFL, RGSL and URFL/RGSL hybrid structures, and (d) “bi-layer architectures” of URFL on top of RGSL and RGSL on top of URFL. (e) Schematic representations of the “nanohybrid architecture” of URFL/RGSL-ZnO-based DSSC and (f, g) DSSCs based on the “bi-layer architectures” of RGSL on top of URFL, and URFL on top of RGSL. (h) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of URFL/RGSL-ZnO nanohybrid photoanode architecture of the film as well as magnified FE-SEM image of the URFL/RGSL-ZnO hybrid layer, (i) top view of the URFL/RGSL film clearly showing the integrated URFL and RGSL ZnO hybrid architecture and (j) magnified cross-sectional image of URFL/RGSL-ZnO nanohybrid photoanode. 
Table 1 DSSC photovoltaic performance data determined by photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic analysis of different compositions of ZnO hybrid nanostructures having different hierarchical flower-like morphologies mixed with rice grain shape-like nanoparticles prepared by MW-HT/ST methods




Sample code of ZnO nanohybrids
Composition (wt%)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)




MGFL–RGSL
05:95
510
04.41
69.0
1.55


20:80
559
06.52
73.3
2.67


50:50
589
11.91
59.4
4.16


80:20
602
08.57
55.8
2.88


MPJF–RGSL
05:95
604
07.11
67.8
2.91


20:80
564
13.96
61.7
4.86


50:50
587
11.96
54.0
3.79


80:20
593
12.60
53.4
4.00


URFL–RGSL
05:95
566
11.68
62.6
4.13


20:80
575
07.43
68.4
2.93


50:50
579
14.33
68.0
5.64


80:20
612
06.77
62.9
2.60


CDFL–RGSL
05:95
503
09.73
62.5
3.06


20:80
573
10.83
63.8
3.97


50:50
629
08.39
61.4
3.24


80:20
604
10.72
63.5
4.11




It is revealed that the “hybrid architecture” exhibits superior enhancement in PCE compared to the “bi-layer architecture” assembly and their respective individual ZnO components. The bi-layer architecture is an inhomogeneous material which has a structure of ZnO with two different morphologies. The hybrid architecture provides the homogeneous photoanode film with the best advantages including those of both URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO on the nanoscale as shown in Fig. 7i. The thickness of the film with a coated layer estimated from Fig. 7h was about 22.3 μm and no obvious boundaries were observed for the coated layer, which facilitate the low charge recombination rate and fast electron transfer between the URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles.
The enhancement in PCE of the “nano-hybrid architecture” is mainly attributed to the synergistic effect when two different morphologies are blended together at the “nanoscale” level. URFL-ZnO nanorods may act as the bridges between nanocrystalline RGSL-ZnO aggregates to construct network interconnections within urchin-ZnO films and thus offer more pathways for electron transport. In addition, RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles facilitate the fast electron transport through better inter-particle and electronic contacts with the fluorine-doped SnO2 glass substrate. The comparative J–V curves of ZnO with different morphologies and their respective nanohybrids are illustrated in Fig. S5 of the ESI.† Hence, our results provide a promising way to enhance the PCE of ZnO-based DSSCs. It has been reported that the degree of dye anchoring on photoanode films was considerably determined by the PCE of DSSCs. We demonstrated dye desorption experiments in which the amount of dye adsorbed on the five films was obtained by measuring the UV-visible absorption spectra of solutions containing the dye desorbed from the films in aqueous NaOH solution. Fig. 8a and b show the optical absorption of the solutions containing the N719 dye desorbed from different sensitized ZnO films fabricated using the individual morphological components and hybrids of ZnO, respectively. The amount of dye loaded was determined by the molar extinction coefficient. It is observed that the dye loading on the MGFL-ZnO film (6.35 × 10−7 mol cm−2) is higher than those on MPJF-ZnO, URFL-ZnO, CDFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO (6.25 × 10−7 mol cm−2, 6.05 × 10−7 mol cm−2, 5.48 × 10−7 mol cm−2 and 5.25 × 10−7 mol cm−2, respectively), as provided in Table S3 (ESI†) which is well in agreement with the PCEs of DSSCs based on ZnO having different flower-like and rice grain-like morphologies, and ZnO with nanohybrid and bi-layer architectures. The hybrid structure will offer substantial surface area (20.18 m2 g−1, 21.48 m2 g−1, 22.26 m2 g−1 and 19.70 m2 g−1 for MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL, respectively) to adsorb more dye molecules and better particle–particle interconnection by RGSL-ZnO nanoparticles. Typical N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the RGSL and URFL/RGSL nanohybrid samples are given in Fig. S6 (ESI†). The surface area, pore volume and pore diameter obtained from BET surface area analysis for all hierarchical ZnO and nanohybrid samples are given in Table S5 (ESI†). The results clearly show the improved surface area for all nanohybrid samples compared to the individual hierarchical samples with flower-like morphologies.
 Fig. 8  UV-visible absorption spectra of N719 dye desorbed from different ZnO photoanode films of (a) MGFL, MPJF, URFL, CDFL and RGSL, and (b) MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL hybrids. 
Therefore, the hybrid structured photoanodes possess the characteristics including a better dye loading rate and enhanced absorption of light in the range of 400–800 nm which maximizes the Jsc. More interconnections between the particles provided by RGSL-ZnO help to improve the Voc and all these factors contribute to the enhancement in efficiency for all the hybrid structured photoanodes. Moreover, the DRS data obtained are well correlated with the photovoltaic performance of the samples.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis has been carried out to further comprehend the effect of the film structure on the PV performance of DSSCs. EIS is regarded as a powerful technique for studying the electron transport and recombination process during the photovoltaic process of DSSCs.49 EIS of the DSSCs was carried out to investigate the difference in the interfacial characteristics of the ZnO-based photoanodes under AM 1.5 illumination at an applied potential bias of Voc and frequency ranges from 10−1 Hz to 105 Hz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV. Fig. 9a and b present the EIS curves in the form of Nyquist plots and the corresponding Bode phase plots. In the equivalent circuit (inset in Fig. 9) generated by Z-fit software fitting, the circuit elements contain series resistance Rs, internal resistance R and capacitance or constant phase element (CPE). The electron-dynamic parameters evaluated from the fitted Nyquist plots and Bode phase plots are summarized in Table S4 (see the ESI†). In general, the Nyquist plot shows three semicircles at the high, middle and low frequency region which correspond to three characteristic frequency peaks in the Bode phase plot. The small semicircle in the high frequency region corresponds to the redox and electron transfer reaction at the Pt counter electrode–electrolyte interface. The middle frequency semicircle is associated with charge transfer and electron recombination resistance, and the low frequency region is associated with the resistance provided for diffusion of ions in the electrolyte. Fig. 9 illustrates the Nyquist plots of the DSSCs based on URFL/RGSL-ZnO nanohybrid photoanodes and their individual components such as URFL and RGSL. The impedance components of the interfaces in the DSSCs revealed in the frequency regions of 103 to 105 Hz, 1 to 103 Hz, and 10−1 to 1 Hz are related to the charge transport at the FTO/ZnO (Rs) and Pt counter electrode–electrolyte interfaces (R1), and the ZnO/dye/electrolyte interfaces (R2), as well as the ionic diffusion in the electrolyte (Nernstian diffusion, R3), respectively. The summarized results of EIS analysis were fitted by using an equivalent circuit containing capacitance and resistance (Fig. 9) as shown in Table S4 (ESI†). Mainly, the first gap (Rs) in the Nyquist plot is related to the FTO sheet resistance and the contact resistance between FTO and ZnO. The middle frequency in the Nyquist plot is assigned to the charge transport resistance and the charge recombination resistance of ZnO to tri-iodide in the electrolyte. However, under illumination, such as AM 1.5, the electron density in the conduction band of ZnO will be high, thus the middle frequency is reduced to a simple arc that is generated by the capacitance of ZnO paralleled with the charge recombination resistance. Thus, the second semicircle represents the charge recombination resistance. The larger charge recombination resistance implies the low recombination rate of photo-injected electrons with tri-iodide, which is favourable to achieve high cell performance.
 Fig. 9  EIS spectra of URFL, RGSL, URFL/RGSL hierarchical ZnO hybrid photoanode-based DSSCs (a) Nyquist plots and (b) Bode phase plots and equivalent circuit model. 
Among the three DSSC devices, namely URFL, RGSL and URFL/RGSL, the large semicircle at the middle frequency for the URFL/RGSL device is the smallest which indicates that the hybrid architectures accelerated the electron transfer in the DSSCs through reduction of charge transfer resistance leading to an increase in Jsc. Moreover, the middle semicircle is larger compared to the first and third semicircles, implying the lowest hole–electron recombination rate which is possibly due to the remarkable electron transport properties of the nanorod-assembled structure of URFL-ZnO.

Fig. 9b shows the Bode phase plots generated using the impedance results. From the Bode plots, the lifetime of the photo-injected electrons (τe) in the URFL, RGSL and URFL/RGSL hybrid ZnO can be calculated from the peak frequency (ƒmax) in the middle frequency region according to the equation:τe = 1/2πƒmaxwhere ƒmax is the maximum characteristic peak frequency in the middle frequency region.
The electron lifetime (τe) values of the DSSCs based on URFL, RGSL and URFL/RGSL hybrid photoanodes were calculated to be 3.4, 5.1 and 6.4 ms, respectively. The longer the τe, the lower the recombination rate of electrons during electron transfer across the ZnO film.50 Similar impedance results were reported by Puyoo et al. and Wang et al. for composite photoanode films of DSSCs.24,48 Although the URFL/RGSL hybrid device had a τe slightly higher than those of the URFL and RGSL devices, it exhibits the highest Jsc and PCE among all possible devices that we fabricated as shown in Tables S3 (ESI†) and 1. Therefore, the strong light scattering ability with higher dye loading, and lower recombination rates of photo-injected electrons as well as effective electron transport were facilitated by URFL-ZnO which contributes to the highest photovoltaic efficiency of the URFL/RGSL hybrid DSSC.
Conclusions
In summary, we have fabricated ZnO with different morphologies by facilely changing the solvents and precursors without requiring any templates and surfactants via rapid MW-HT/MW-ST methods. MW-HT/ST conditions induced a “hot surface” on the ZnO nuclei, speeding up the nanocrystal growth kinetics to make different forms of hierarchical structures of ZnO. It was observed that the final morphologies are tuned mostly by the highly anisotropic structure of ZnO as well as different polar solvents and precursor concentrations. Raman scattering and room-temperature PL studies exhibited reliable results with respect to the crystallinity enhancement during MW-ST reactions. The enhanced conversion efficiency (5.64%) of the “nano-hybrid architecture” can be mainly attributed to the “synergistic effects” of several factors. Firstly, in the URFL/RGSL-ZnO hybrid device, the assembly of nanorods with URFL morphology facilitates the strong light scattering effect which causes the incident light to be multi-reflected within the film, effectively extending the optical distance and improving the light harvesting and photocurrent density. Secondly, better electronic contact with the FTO glass was ensured by the assembly of nanoparticles with RGSL morphology which could provide lower contact resistance and higher photovoltage. Thirdly, the nanohybrid architecture of URFL/RGSL-ZnO provides the homogeneous photoanode film with the best advantages including those of both URFL-ZnO and RGSL-ZnO at the nanoscale level and the hybrid material fabricated by “size mismatched” URFL/RGSL combination can enhance the dye sorption, in contrast to the inhomogeneous bi-layer architecture. This present investigation is intended to open up a new avenue for the design and fabrication of novel DSSC architectures with higher PCE. Finally, the facile, rapid and cost-effective MW-HT/ST methods can produce various oxides and sulfides with controlled morphologies on a large scale for clean energy conversion and storage device applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors express their gratitude towards the following funding agencies: University Grants Commission (UGC), Government of India, New Delhi under development of dye-sensitized solar cells major project no. 41-376/2012, Pondicherry University Start-up grant no. PU/PC/Start-up Grant/2010-12/309 and DST-TSD grant no. PT/2011/178-G for providing the microwave-assisted synthesis facility in our lab. Ms. R. Krishnapriya specially thanks UGC for providing a research fellowship. We also thank the Central Instrumentation Facilities (CIF), Pondicherry University for materials characterization.
Notes and references
B. O'regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Jung and J.-K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-E. Ragoussi and T. Torress, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3957 RSC .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. CurchodBasile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, K. NazeeruddinMd and M. Gratzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cao and Q. Zhang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Anta, E. Guillen and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11413 CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Zhou and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Myers, J. Lan, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14982 RSC .
W. W. Sun, W. T. Peng, Y. M. Liu, W. J. Yu, K. Zhang, K. F. Mehnane, C. H. Bu, S. S. Guo and X. Z. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9144 CAS .
Y.-Z. Zheng, X. Tao, Q. Hou, D.-T. Wang, W.-L. Zhou and J.-F. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, M. Akiyama, E. Abe and I. Imai, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Peng, Z. Chen, H. Chen and L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19182 CAS .
X. Zhang, F. Liu, Q.-L. Huang, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12665 CAS .
H. Xu, X. Chen, S. Ouyang, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3833 CAS .
T. T. Chen, I.-C. Chang, M.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Chang, M.-H. Yang, P.-C. Chen, H.-T. Chiu and C.-Y. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3341 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, Y. Cui, X. Liu, L. Wang and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4765 CAS .
H.-L. Feng, W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. RaO, Q. Wan, L.-B. Li, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5199 CAS .
Y. Bai, Z. Xing, H. Yu, Z. Li, R. Amal and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 5, 12058 Search PubMed .
M. B. Qadir, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Arbab, B. J. Choi, S. C. Yi and S. H. Jeong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zheng, X. Tao, L.-X. Wang, H. Xu, Q. Hou, W.-L. Zhou and J. F. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 928 CrossRef CAS .
E. Puyoo, G. Rey, E. Appert, V. Consonni and D. Bellet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18117 CAS .
S. Zhu, X. Tian, J. Chen, L. Shan, X. Xu and Z. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16401 CAS .
J. Qiu, M. Guo and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2358 CAS .
W.-T. Jiang, C. T. Wu, Y.-H. Sung and J. J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 911 CAS .
C.-X. He, B.-X. Lei, Y.-F. Wang, C.-Y. Su, Y.-P. Fang and D.-B. Kuang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Memarian, I. Concina, A. Braga, S. M. Rozati, A. Vomicro and G. Sberveglieri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, G. O. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263501 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-M. Cheng, W.-H. Chiu, C.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Tsai and W.-H. Hsieh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16359 CAS .
C. Bae, H. Yoo, S. Kim, K. Lee, J. Kim, M. M. Sung and H. Shin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 756 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo and S. J. Hong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baghbanzadeh, L. Carbone, P. D. Cozzoli and C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Zhu and F. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Praneetha and A. VadivelMurugan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 224 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wen, Y. Huang and J. J. Boland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 106 CAS .
Q. Zhang, S.-J. Liu and S.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 191 RSC .
J. P. Cheng, X. B. Zhang, X. Y. Tao, H. M. Lu, Z. Q. Luo and F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Boppella, K. Anjaneyulu, P. Basak and S. V. Manorama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4597 CAS .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Masuda and K. Kato, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 275 CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Sun, J. Yin, H. Su, C. Liao and C. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4172 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ghoshal, S. Kar and S. Chaudhuri, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 136 CAS .
B. Li and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 890 CAS .
P. P. Das, S. A. Agarkar, S. Mukhopadhyay, U. Manju, S. B. Ogale and P. S. Devi, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rai, W.-K. Kwak and Y.-T. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3026 CAS .
W. Wang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, M. Feng and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2390 RSC .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table showing experimental data for different ZnO morphologies and their grain sizes calculated by using Scherrer's equation, and figures showing the XRD pattern of hybrid photoanode films coated on FTO, Raman spectra of individual and hybrid ZnO, magnified FE-SEM images of ZnO flowers and BET surface area measurements, the Tauc plot from the diffuse reflectance spectra of the different hierarchical ZnO flowers and the combined J–V curve of the different hierarchical individual ZnO flowers as well as hybrid photoanode films. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ce01438gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of ZnO with different hierarchical marigold flower-like (MGFL), multipod jasmine flower-like (MPJF), sea urchin-rod flower-like (URFL), calendula flower-like (CDFL) and rice grain shape-like (RGSL) morphologies synthesized by facile and rapid MW-HT/ST controlled heterogeneous nucleation processes by decomposing Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ precursor solutions in various solvents without requiring any organic structure-directing agents or templates.	 
A = ε × c × l

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of ZnO with different hierarchical morphologies including (a) MGFL, (b) MPJF, (c) URFL, (d) CDFL and (e) RGSL synthesized by MW-HT/ST controlled heterogeneous nucleation processes by decomposing Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ precursor solutions within 10 min at 70–180 °C, with a microwave power of 300–900 W in various solvents.	 

 	Fig. 3  FESEM images of hierarchical ZnO flowers at different magnifications for (a, b) MGFL, (c, d) MPJF, (e, f) URFL, (g, h) CDFL and (i, j) RGSL prepared by MW-HT/ST methods.	 

 	Fig. 4  HR-TEM images and SAED patterns of hierarchical ZnO nanoflowers at different magnifications for (a–c) MGFL, (d–f) MPJF with the inset figure showing the crystal growth direction along the c-axes, and (g–i) URFL prepared by MW-HT/ST methods.	 

 	Fig. 5  Room-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of hierarchical ZnO flowers with various morphologies (RGSL, CDFL, MGFL, URFL and MPJF) prepared by MW-HT/ST methods, with the inset figure showing the UV near band-edge emission (NBE). The excitation wavelength used for all samples is 340 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO with various morphologies (MGFL, MPJF, URFL, RGSL and CDFL) prepared by MW-HT/ST methods, showing more than 80% reflectance.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparative plots of J–V curve behaviour of DSSCs fabricated with photoanodes made up of (a) ZnO with various morphologies (MGFL, MPJF, URFL, RGSL and CDFL), and (b) “nanohybrid architecture” made up of MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL. Comparative plots of (c) URFL, RGSL and URFL/RGSL hybrid structures, and (d) “bi-layer architectures” of URFL on top of RGSL and RGSL on top of URFL. (e) Schematic representations of the “nanohybrid architecture” of URFL/RGSL-ZnO-based DSSC and (f, g) DSSCs based on the “bi-layer architectures” of RGSL on top of URFL, and URFL on top of RGSL. (h) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of URFL/RGSL-ZnO nanohybrid photoanode architecture of the film as well as magnified FE-SEM image of the URFL/RGSL-ZnO hybrid layer, (i) top view of the URFL/RGSL film clearly showing the integrated URFL and RGSL ZnO hybrid architecture and (j) magnified cross-sectional image of URFL/RGSL-ZnO nanohybrid photoanode.	 

MGFL–RGSL	05:95	510	04.41	69.0	1.55
20:80	559	06.52	73.3	2.67
50:50	589	11.91	59.4	4.16
80:20	602	08.57	55.8	2.88
MPJF–RGSL	05:95	604	07.11	67.8	2.91
20:80	564	13.96	61.7	4.86
50:50	587	11.96	54.0	3.79
80:20	593	12.60	53.4	4.00
URFL–RGSL	05:95	566	11.68	62.6	4.13
20:80	575	07.43	68.4	2.93
50:50	579	14.33	68.0	5.64
80:20	612	06.77	62.9	2.60
CDFL–RGSL	05:95	503	09.73	62.5	3.06
20:80	573	10.83	63.8	3.97
50:50	629	08.39	61.4	3.24
80:20	604	10.72	63.5	4.11

 	Fig. 8  UV-visible absorption spectra of N719 dye desorbed from different ZnO photoanode films of (a) MGFL, MPJF, URFL, CDFL and RGSL, and (b) MGFL/RGSL, MPJF/RGSL, URFL/RGSL and CDFL/RGSL hybrids.	 

 	Fig. 9  EIS spectra of URFL, RGSL, URFL/RGSL hierarchical ZnO hybrid photoanode-based DSSCs (a) Nyquist plots and (b) Bode phase plots and equivalent circuit model.	 
τe = 1/2πƒmax
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table showing experimental data for different ZnO morphologies and their grain sizes calculated by using Scherrer's equation, and figures showing the XRD pattern of hybrid photoanode films coated on FTO, Raman spectra of individual and hybrid ZnO, magnified FE-SEM images of ZnO flowers and BET surface area measurements, the Tauc plot from the diffuse reflectance spectra of the different hierarchical ZnO flowers and the combined J–V curve of the different hierarchical individual ZnO flowers as well as hybrid photoanode films. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ce01438g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
