A review of cost-effective black silicon fabrication techniques and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR06087F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR06087F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 4738-4761A review of cost-effective black silicon fabrication techniques and applications

        
          
            Jimmy 
            Soueiti
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rim 
            Sarieddine
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hind 
            Kadiri
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Akram 
            Alhussein
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gilles 
            Lerondel
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Roland 
            Habchi
          
        
      *a
aEC2M, Faculty of Sciences 2, Lebanese University, Campus Pierre Gemayel, Fanar, 90656, Lebanon. E-mail: rhabchi@ul.edu.lb
bL2n, Université de Technologie de Troyes, CNRS ERL 7004, 12 rue Marie Curie, 10000 Troyes, France
cUR LASMIS, Université de Technologie de Troyes, Pôle Technologique Sud Champagne, 52800 Nogent, France
Received 
      31st October 2022
    , Accepted 9th February 2023First published on 20th February 2023AbstractEver since the discovery of black silicon, scientists around the world have been trying to come up with novel, cost-effective methods of utilizing this super material in a variety of different industries due to its remarkably low reflectivity and excellent electronic and optoelectronic properties. In this review, many of the most common methods of black silicon fabrication are exhibited, including metal-assisted chemical etching, reactive ion etching, and femto-second laser irradiation. Different nanostructured silicon surfaces are assessed based on their reflectivity and applicable properties in both the visible wavelength range and the infrared range. The most cost efficient technique for the mass production of black silicon is discussed, as well as some promising contender materials ready to replace silicon. Also, solar cell, IR photo-detector, and antibacterial applications are looked into, along with their respective challenges to date.
1. Introduction
Black silicon is an ultra low reflective material produced by etching micro and nano structures on regular silicon wafer surfaces.1,2 These structures vary from spikes, needles, and pyramids to pores, holes and craters.3 As compared to normal silicon (grey in color), black silicon appears pitch black to the naked eye (Fig. 1), reflecting almost no visible light, hence the name black silicon. The underlying reason is due to the morphology that gradually changes the effective refraction index leading to the transmission of incident light and consequently a reflectivity that is almost zero.4–6 Regular silicon reflects light, while black silicon can absorb up to 99%, reflecting a mere 1% or so.7 Moreover, silicon is transparent to infrared light due to its band gap energy.8 However, black silicon tends to absorb wavelengths in the near-mid IR range fairly well,9,10 especially if coupled with some impurities in its band gap, such as sulfur. These mind-boggling numbers have prompted scientists to work on advancing a cost-effective black silicon fabrication scheme for its mass production around the globe.
 Fig. 1  Regular silicon wafer vs. Black silicon wafer. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
A multitude of different fabrication techniques have been tested in the last two decades, including, but not limited to, metal-assisted chemical etching,11,12,13 reactive ion etching,14,15 and femto-second laser irradiation.16,17 Each of the aforementioned etching processes results in different micro and nano structures, with varying optical and electrical properties.18,19
Moreover, some methods have been shown to be more complex and expensive than others, deeming them not so worthy when it comes to the grand plan of cost-efficiency and simplicity.
With all the staggering properties of black silicon, it became tempting to utilize such a new material in different fields. Most notably, the solar cell industry has benefited tremendously from this technology.20 Solar cells need to be made of highly light-absorbing materials to enhance photovoltaic conversion rates, and black silicon ticks that box.22,23,24 Another application comes in the form of photo detectors, as silicon-based detectors exhibit high responsivity,25 and nanostructured silicon has the ability to further enhance such properties, especially in the IR end of the spectrum.26,27 Moreover, the field of biomedicine has utilized black silicon as a possible antibacterial material.28,29
In this review paper, fabrication cost and complexity are evaluated for each etching method. Moreover, the most worthy applications for this super material are outlined, as well as the difficulties faced and the possible solutions presented.
2. Fabrication techniques
2.1 Metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE)
One of the most cost-effective and promising ways of increasing absorptance and decreasing reflectance of light is the use of a chemical etch with the assistance of noble metal nanoparticles such as platinum (Pt), gold (Au), palladium (Pd), and silver (Ag), to name a few.31 Metal-assisted chemical etching was first performed in 1997 by Malinovska et al., with the use of aluminum (Al) as the catalyst.32 In this process, metal micro or nano particles are deposited onto a semiconductor substrate (silicon etc.) by physical or chemical deposition, after which the wafer is immersed in a chemical bath (HF, H2O2, etc.). An oxidation–reduction reaction occurs at the surface of the metal where holes diffuse down to the substrate, or electrons diffuse up to the metal. Thus the semiconductor substrate underneath the metal will have an increased concentration of holes and will be the target for oxidation and dissolution. The only parts of the substrate that get etched are where metal is deposited.
Metal assisted chemical etching is a wet etch technique, but results in anisotropic, highly directional nanostructures with high aspect ratios just like a dry etch, without incurring as much surface damage to the semiconductor.33
In brief, the MACE is used as a very directional etching mechanism that uses metallic particles in the presence of H2O2 and HF to produce patterned silicon. When metals are deposited on the surface of silicon, they serve as reduction agents for oxidizers like H2O2 to produce some holes (h+). The presence of holes within the valence band of silicon helps the dissolution of the semiconductor in HF in a directional way. The oxidant and the acid in solution could be used in variable ratios in order to produce the desired pattern of a solid or porous silicon. The reaction is produced at the interface between the metal and silicon, so the metallic particles sink into the silicon to produce patterns such as pillars or holes. In some cases, the holes are not fully consumed so they diffuse into the semiconductor and produce porous silicon.

2.1.1 Platinum (Pt). 
In a paper by Yae et al., single crystal n-Silicon wafers were cleaned and chemically etched with the assistance of platinum (Pt) particles (Fig. 2).34 Using both electro and electroless deposition with an aqueous solution of H2PtCl6, two n-Silicon wafers were prepared. Afterwards, the wafers were submerged in an HF solution (7.3 mol dm3) for one day. Argon and oxygen gases were injected into the solution when repeating the experiment.
 Fig. 2  Representation of the optical path of light at the vicinity of a macrostructured silicon surface where geometrical optics applies reproduced from ref. 30 mdpi, copyright 2019 (open access). 
SEM images showed porous layers only on the Pt deposited areas just as predicted,35 with pores a couple hundred nanometers in depth. The wafers immersed in HF with oxygen gas bubbled in showed a large increase in pore size and depth (Fig. 3), indicating a higher etching rate. However, for the wafers immersed in HF solution with argon gas bubbled in, no change occurred. Argon inhibited etching all together. Also, wafers without Pt deposited particles showed no change in the HF solution.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of Pt-electroless-deposited silicon etched in 12% HF for 24hrs with oxygen gas bubbled in. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022 ref. 33. 
Electroless deposited wafers exhibited nano-pores, but with less thickness and depth than the their electrodeposited counterparts. As for the photovoltaic efficiency, both photocurrent density and open circuit voltage increased with the presence of the porous layer, creating a 13% efficient solar cell. Platinum is hardly used as the catalyst of choice since it is one of the rarest metals out there. This is unfortunate because platinum showed incredible stability on silicon compared to other metals, creating very high aspect ratio features and surfaces. The production of platinum silicide stabilizes the catalyst and allows for detailed etching in the high HF concentration bath.36 By adding alcohols such as methanol and isopropanol, while depleting the H2O2 concentration in the developer bath, the etching rate and direction can be controlled.


2.1.2 Gold (Au). 
In a study by L. Romano et al., gold was used as a catalyst for producing high aspect ratio structures on the surface of silicon.37 The gold was deposited as a layer in a self-assembly de-wetting technique onto oxygen terminated silicon that was cleaned with oxygen plasma. The usual photoresist step coupled with UV photolithography was used initially prior to the Au deposition. Afterwards, a lift-off process dissolved the photoresist leaving the Au pattern on the substrate. This was followed by etching of the substrate in an HF/H2O2 solution, resulting in the gold nanoparticles sinking into the silicon as it began to oxidize (Fig. 4). The results were high aspect ratio micro-pores, with optimal mechanical stability. This led to enhanced light trapping abilities. One thing to note is the supreme chemical stability of the gold catalyst, as well as its very fast etching rate.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of gold MACE before and after etching to produce nano and micro grooves. Adapted with permission from ref. 37 2022 copyright Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To further enhance cost reductions, Mousavi et al.38 proposed the elimination of the optical patterning steps (photolithography etc.), thus eliminating the need for photoresist lift-off. They cleaned p-type silicon (100) wafers and grew a silicon oxide layer on the surface by heating in an 850 °C furnace. The SiO2 layer served as an adhesive for the gold, which was sputtered onto the surface via a sputter coater (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Illustration of (a) gold deposition on the silicon surface and (b) the result after etching. Reproduced from ref. 39, SPIE digital Library, copyright 2017 (open access). 
The wafers were then chemically etched in the solution mentioned previously, and the different surface textures corresponding to the different gold layer thicknesses were observed. For thicknesses of 20 nm, the gold nanoparticles were not isolated, but rather clumped together as if they were a continuous layer, with some small areas uncoated. This resulted in nanowires. However, nano-pores were observed with thinner gold layers (3–10 nm), with the depths and diameters of such pores being linearly related to increasing thicknesses between 3 and 10 nm.38
This self-patterning mechanism proved to be as effective at producing the necessary surface textures such as nanowires and nano-pores, with the added cost reductions.
Duran et al., also demonstrated a method for fabricating silicon nanostructures with aspect ratios below 10 using gold as the catalyst for etching. By controlling the thickness of the gold film using PVD, and the addition of an oxide layer in between the silicon and the gold, it was shown that the determining factor for anisotropic etching and thus high quality nanostructures was in fact the geometry of the gold structure. The larger the gold nanoparticles or islands were, the higher the anisotropy. With small spherical nanoparticles, high amounts of undercutting were recorded, which is not ideal for the production of quality nanostructures.39
As expensive as gold might sound, one cannot disregard the quality and high aspect ratios of the silicon nanostructures produced. However, there is still a plethora of cheaper metals to choose from such as copper, nickel, or even silver.


2.1.3 Palladium (Pd). 
Another not so commonly used metal is palladium. In a study, Volovlikova et al., produced porous layers on p-type silicon wafers using Pd as a metal catalyst in the usual MACE process.40 The wafers were cleaned and dipped into a solution containing PdCl2 and HCl, whereby a palladium thin film was deposited. Then the wafers were etched in HF/H2O2 and the resulting porous surface emerged. Pd coated areas showed increased dissolution rates of the silicon substrate underneath, as expected. Pd managed to also create thicker pore sizes, with some reaching the 20–50 micron range. The porous silicon formed exhibited a very hydrophobic nature. Pd can also be used as a catalyst to form nanowires on silicon surfaces. Chen et al., deposited Pd on p-type silicon wafers by magnetically stirring a mixture containing Pd(CH3COO)2 and HF. The resulting Pd surfaced wafers were etched in the usual etching solution and formation of porous nanowires was observed. This was because Pd tended to form in clusters as shown in Fig. 6, and as the Pd cluster dug into the Si, its remnants scattered on the walls. This ensured a stable etching both laterally and vertically, which led to ideal nanowire formation.41 Pd Assisted chemical etching thus exhibited a new phenomenon, clustering on the sidewalls unlike other metals.
 Fig. 6  Pd nanoparticles tend to cluster on the walls of the silicon in the etching process. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022 ref. 41. 
Palladium remains the most valuable metal on earth (more valuable than Au, Ag, and Pt), which is why it isn't utilized as much. For a cost-effective MACE process, we need to look for other metals.


2.1.4 Silver (Ag). 
Silver is a very common metal catalyst used in MACE. As shown by Chartier et al., p-type single crystalline (100) silicon wafers doped with boron were covered with silver (Ag) nanoparticles by means of electroless and chemical deposition.42 Afterwards, the wafers were immersed in an HF/H2O2 solution for the etching process to take place. Different concentrations of the reactants produced different etch rates and structures. The most notable are the quick nano and micro pores that form on the surface of the silicon with high concentrations of HF relative to H2O2. Craters formed as the concentration of HF decreased and that of H2O2 increased. Remarkably, with high concentration levels of H2O2 and low HF, polished silicon surfaces were reported. Pore sizes resembled the silver nanoparticle diameters. Many other researchers used these results to fabricate their own Ag-catalyzed silicon wafers in order to decrease reflectance. The nanostructures produced were well suited for uses in the solar cell world. As reported by Geng et al.,43 the use of silver as a catalyst to the dissolution of silicon proved to decrease reflectance down to 10% in the 300 to 800 nm range, especially for the p-type (100) Si. Another use of Ag catalyst was used in the work of Abdulkadir et al.,44 where black silicon was fabricated by creating nanowires on the surface of the wafers. The ideal height of the wires was 2–2.9 microns with 100 nm diameters, and the ideal etch time was 80s. For etch times 90s and above, the nanowires started shortening and losing height due to over-etching. Weighted average reflectance dropped to just 6% for the 80s etch, resulting in low reflective black silicon in the range of 300–1000 nm wavelengths. Li et al., work showed that using an additive with biological enzymes (molecular protein catalysts) as well as Ag in a MACE method resulted in enhanced quantum efficiencies, light absorption, and solar cell performance of black silicon. The additive increased this efficiency by 0.65%.45
Ag nanoparticles are much better suited for redox reactions than copper and other cheaper metals. They produce highly directional features such as nanowires on black silicon with a fixed orientation relative to the surface directions and planes. Thus the resulting highly organized structures are in the seat for optimal absorption of photons (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (1) SEM images of silicon nano-wires and nano-cones produced by MACE using Ag as a metal catalyst (2) illustration of Ag MACE mechanism (3) Reflectance of the silicon wafers for different etching times. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 42–44. 


2.1.5 Copper (Cu). 
Unlike gold and sliver, copper has a different impurity level in the band-gap of Si. Cu impurities are not as damaging to the Silicon solar cell performance. In 2015, Toor et al., electrolessly deposited copper nano-particles onto p-type monocrystalline silicon wafers.46 Then, the wafers were etched in a mixture of hydrofluoric acid (HF) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) with different concentrations. By varying p (p was defined as the ratio of molar concentration of the reactants in this mixture), different nanoporous depths were achieved. Minimum spectrum-weighted reflectance was shown at an 80% ratio. Ratios higher than 90% produced deeper pores, however lateral feature sizes increased and thus promoted more short wavelength scattering, resulting in slightly increased reflectivity. A 17% efficient solar cell was thus created with Cu-catalyzed etching of Silicon wafers, comparable with gold and silver assisted etched cells. All that was needed was a high concentration ratio of reactants to significantly deepen the nano-pores for optimal light capture. Copper is more widely available and used than other noble metals, and is therefore a viable option to enhance solar cells.
Similarly to Toor et al.,'s 17% efficient cell, Yang et al.,'s cell showed an efficiency of 18.87%.47 Similar methods were used, with the same Cu-enhanced chemical etching technique, but an inverted pyramid texture was produced, as opposed to an upright pyramid texture. This was most likely due to the low redox potential of copper nanoparticles as well as the anisotropic etching.48 Inverted pyramids were shown to be much better at light trapping and absorption due to their geometrical features as shown in Fig. 8 and 9. Furthermore, this surface structure proved to decrease recombination rates, with very good surface passivation.
 Fig. 8  Optical path of light in inverted pyramid geometry. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 47. 
 Fig. 9  Electric field intensity distribution in (a) inverted pyramid structured Si and (b) upright pyramid structured Si. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 47. 
Another single-crystalline silicon cell with inverted pyramid texture was produced by Zhang et al., with a 20.9% efficiency.49 They used silver ions as their metal assistant with alkaline texturing, and showed an increase in reflectance with increase in etching time. For etching times above 5 min, reflectance dropped to almost 7% for wavelengths in both the visible and infrared ranges. The inverted pyramid structure was therefore shown to be superior to the upright structure in terms of enhanced quantum efficiencies and light absorption in both visible and infrared spectra (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (Left) Upright pyramid structures vs. inverted pyramid structures (right) SEM images of inverted pyramid structures on b-Si for different etching times using Cu catalyst (bottom) Illustration of Ag vs. Cu nanoparticle etching on Si (100). Adapted with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2022 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2014, the usual two-step process of metal deposition followed by chemical etching in a solution was merged into a one-step process by Lu & Barron et al.50 Both the deposition and the etching occur simultaneously, making it much more challenging to find the right concentrations and etching times. Previously, this was performed with Ag as the metal precursor of choice, showing remarkably low reflectivity for silicon (0.17%).51 However, with the increasing demand to cut down costs, copper was the obvious target. In this paper, H3PO3 was used as a reducing agent instead of the usual H2O2 to reduce the copper ions in the mixture (Cu2+) into Cu nanoparticles on the surface of the silicon wafer. By increasing the concentration of H3PO3, highly textured nano-pores were observed on the surface, albeit relatively shallow. Any further increase in concentration resulted in the pores merging and creating craters, which are not very suitable for light absorption. For the crystalline silicon (100) surfaces, etching took place primarily along the [100] and [110] directions because of the low reduction potential of copper ions, then stopping at the [111] planes. Therefore the nano-pores created were inverted pyramids, unlike the circular pores observed when using silver (mere projections of the nanoparticles).
With the addition of a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) antireflection coating, which has good light transmission properties, as well as the added benefit of providing photo-stability for decades, reflectivity decreased even further especially at longer wavelengths. This AR coating helps manufacturers heat treat the solar panels.


2.1.6 Is Copper the way to go?. 
Unlike silver, copper produced nanostructures that were randomly etched because of the low directionality disadvantage that Cu possesses. For instance, Lee et al., observed no specific orientation in the black silicon nanostructures that they etched.52 However, it was concurrently shown that Cu assisted etching works very well with crystalline silicon (110) and (100) planes, resulting in the infamous, highly competent inverted pyramid structure with a weighted average reflectivity of around 6.2%.53
Another drawback is Cu contamination, or copper-related light-induced degradation, and its resulting reduction in minority carrier lifespans in silicon, especially p-type Si. This may affect solar cell efficiencies negatively.54 Also, the process of etching with copper as a catalyst takes a longer time than other metals on average, and thus might require heating in some cases to accelerate the reactions.
Copper enhanced chemical etching was shown to be a viable method in increasing solar cell efficiencies. The advantage that copper has over other metals is its cost efficiency, and that it is used regularly in the semiconductor industry. However, Cu and Cu2+ have a very low redox potential compared to the Silicon valence band,55 creating the need to use other agents and catalysts in the etching process. This is part of the reason as to why it's not commercialized. Cao et al., attempted to solve this issue by varying the etching times along with the concentration ratios of the etchants. By increasing both the submergence time and the concentration of HF, deep nano-pores formed as a result of the oxide layer created at the silicon-copper interfaces, and low reflectivity was accomplished.56


2.1.7 Nickel (Ni). 
All the metals discussed so far have been classified as ‘noble metals’, i.e. metallic elements resistant to chemical reactions and thus highly suitable catalysts. However, a new, cost-effective, non-noble metal has emerged as a catalyst of choice in the MACE technique, proving to be up to par with the other metals. Copper had already proven to be an effective metal catalyst in the MACE process of silicon, although it was relatively slow when it came to etching times. To tackle this issue, Gao et al., introduced Nickel to the mix.57 The p-type multi-crystalline silicon wafers were etched in the usual HF/H2O2 with the addition of copper nitrate (Cu(NO3)2) and nickel sulfate (NiSO4). By varying the etch times and concentrations, an increase in pore size was observed with increases in concentration for 20 min etching times. Further increases in concentrations negatively affected the samples. After etching, the wafers were immersed in a solution to remove the metal nanoparticles. Ni2+ ions helped achieve the desired nanostructures on the surface at a far greater rate than Cu alone, around 3.5× faster. Also, reflectivity was minimized by as much as 50% with the addition of Ni in the same time interval of etching (Fig. 11). Inverted pyramid structures were separately obtained using an NSR (Nanostructure Rebuilding) method with the same etched wafers producing a lowest reflectivity of 10.3%.
 Fig. 11  (Left) Illustration of nickel nanoparticles coated with gold nanoparticles before and after etching (Ni disappears with etching unlike Au) (top right) SEM images of silicon nanowires formed by Ni MACE (Au nanoparticles can be seen dropping off as the nickel gets etched) (bottom right) reflectivity of the silicon wafers as a function of wavelength. Note that the sudden jump in reflectivity is a result of changing the light source from visible to IR. Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
Introducing nickel to aid other existing metals will surely result in increased costs though. This is why Gao et al., attempted a Nickel-only assisted chemical etch to produce black silicon with comparable properties.58 Using a chemical solution deposition to deposit the nickel nanoparticles on the surface of the wafers, it was observed that after etching in the HF/H2O2 with some water, most of the nickel had disappeared. It should be noted that the wafers were treated to become hydrophilic (attracted to water) in order to enhance contact between the wafers and the etching solution. The increase in HF solution concentration led to an increase in the dissolution of Ni nanoparticles due to corrosion. This was not observed with other metals. The lowest reflectivity achieved was 2.3%, a remarkable number indeed, being 8% lower than the Cu/Ni prepared silicon (10.3%).

2.2 No lift-off needed?
All the metals used so far have required an extra lift-off technique to remove the metal nanoparticles present. This extra step stands in the way of a mass produced, cost efficient solar cell world. Eliminating this step could take us one step further to accomplish this task. Nickel has the remarkable property of dissolving in the etching bath, requiring no lift-off step. Stafiniak et al., first suggested the idea of including Ni nanoparticles as the catalyst of choice, where they used them as seed particles on a ‘nickel island’, on the surface of Si.59 It was noticed that no marks were left on the black silicon surface, and Ni dissolution had taken effect. Kong et al., capitalized on this result, and developed a low-cost method for producing Si nanowire arrays using MACE with Nickel being, as they called it, the ‘sacrificial’ metal.60 The nickel nanoparticles were de-wetted (deposited as droplets) onto silicon dioxide from different thicknesses of Ni films (ranging from 10 nm to 20 nm), and a clear relation between the NW diameters and the thickness of the Ni film was observed. The SiO2 layer acted as a barrier to block the nickel from diffusing into the silicon substrate at high temperatures of annealing. Also, it helped with the de-wetting process as it reduced the surface energy of Si. Controllable pore sizes and interspacing were achieved by varying the etch times, initial Ni film thickness, and annealing temperatures.
All in all, nickel was used as a sacrificial mask template that would then disappear upon etching, eliminating the need for any lithography methods and lift-off steps. They also found that different Ni nanoparticle sizes contribute to different results. Large Ni nanoparticles for instance are responsible for forming the inverted pyramid structure, as well as forming nano-pores on top of these pyramids. As the dissolution and corrosion of large Ni nanoparticles begins, the inverted pyramid structure starts to form. Once these nanoparticles are small enough to fit on top of the pyramids, they too corrode and leave nano-pores behind, on the tips and tops of these pyramid structures. Han et al., found that these nano-pore/inverted pyramid structures, called rhombic nanostructures, are better light absorbers and lower light reflectors than regular inverted pyramids.33 The only downside to Ni assisted chemical etching is the slow etching time relative to Cu, Ag, Au, and others.

2.2.1 Which metal to choose?. 
Metal assisted chemical etching proved to be a viable method in regards to decreasing reflectance of silicon by etching its surface into a variety of different nano-structures, such as nanowires, nano-pores, pyramids, and inverted pyramids, resulting in a higher photoelectric conversion rate. Silver (Ag) based MACE created nanowires on the black silicon wafers with very high directionality and properly defined orientations, making the nanostructured layer homogenous and eliminating any randomness. This creates a very high certainty in Ag's capabilities for photon absorption and thus enhanced photoelectric efficiencies.
Palladium (Pd) was shown to produce both nanowires and nano-porous layers on silicon, in addition to making the surface hydrophobic. Although it can surely be used as a metal catalyst, its costs outweigh the benefits. Currently, Pd prices are as a much as 50% more than gold, making it a very costly choice.
Platinum (Pt) MACE produced incredibly high aspect ratio features on the substrate, with very high stability. Unfortunately, as previously stated, platinum is the rarest metal in the world, making it very expensive and limited, diminishing its use as an effective metal catalyst.
Gold (Au) was one of the fastest and most stable metals when it came to MACE. Using extremely thin layers of gold can help in cost reductions, however the high levels of isotropic etching that result from the small nanoparticles proved to be counterproductive. A hefty amount of gold must be used (relative to nanometer scales) in order to achieve the desired nano-porous surface textures. Gold still remains on the expensive side.
Copper (Cu) and nickel (Ni) based MACE processes were more suitable for producing pyramid structures, as well as inverted pyramid structures, which proved to be more light-absorbing than the upright ones. They also created nano-pores, both on the surface of black silicon as a nano-pore layer, and as an added feature on top of the pyramid structures. Cu etching times were fast in some cases relative to Ni etching times. This may be a harming factor when it comes to the nanostructures. Longer etching times with Cu as the catalyst may result in damaging the pyramid structures due to over etching. Ni on the other hand exhibited much slower etching times, giving it the upper hand in regards to structure preservation. Another added benefit of Ni over other metals is its unique ability to dissolve and disappear during etching, requiring no extra steps to clean it off the substrate.
In order to mass produce black silicon solar cells and meet the ever so increasing demands of cost reductions, an appropriate metal checking all the boxes must be selected. Cu and Ni are indeed cheaper than the other metals mentioned, and have proven to be just as effective. It is most likely that nickel is the best choice out of all the options,61 and will become heavily used and put into effect in the solar cell manufacturing industry.

2.3 Reactive ion etching
Another highly used etching technique for the production of black silicon is reactive ion etching (RIE). It was first performed by Jansen et al., in 1995.62 The main process is the following: a gas is ionized by an external RF power supply in a chamber with a top and bottom plate (the wafers are placed on the bottom plate) (Fig. 13). Free electrons travelling to the top plate are grounded, while the electrons travelling to the bottom plate accumulate to form a large negative charge. Thus the heavy, positively charged ions in the plasma are accelerated to the bottom plate and collide with the wafer, reacting chemically with it. Sputtering also occurs whereby material is knocked off the wafers. RIE is a highly anisotropic etching technique due to the extremely vertical etching directions (Fig. 12). It is both a chemical and a physical type of etching process, but is much more suitable for quality nanostructures than wet etching. The profile, and aspect ratio (height/width) of these structures depend on different parameters such as plasma gas type, gas flow rate, pressure, RF power, substrate bias, temperature and also patterned density on the wafer. Hight aspect ratio can be achieved when these parameters are in the correct balance.
 Fig. 12  (Left) Highly isotropic etching, and (right) Highly anisotropic etching. 
 Fig. 13  (Top) Reactive ion etching chamber components (down) Illustration of SF6 impact on silicon substrate with a polymer wall passivation. Reproduced from ref. 64, AVS, copyright 2001 (open access). 
As for the type of gases used in the chamber, it is highly common to include gases that contain halogens (group VII), some of which are chlorine, bromine, fluorine, and iodine, since they are highly reactive and possess large electronegativity. When these halogens react with the substrates, they produce halides. The most common gases being used for the etching of silicon are SF6 and CF4.
In a paper by Kumaravelu et al., three different nanostructured silicon surfaces (hole–column–pyramid) were fabricated using wet and dry etching followed by reactive ion etching (RIE).14 For the first two textures (hole-column), photolithography techniques accompanying photoresists and masks were used to pattern the silicon wafer surfaces. After developing the photoresists, wet etching and lift-off techniques were applied to the hole and column type structures respectively. They were both followed by a reactive ion etch with SF6 and O2 gases. To achieve anisotropic structure and to increase the etch rate the addition of O2 is necessary. O* radicals were produced and used to passivate the walls of the nanostructures, creating the desired textures.
For the black silicon pyramid structures, no exterior mask was needed. An oxide mask that keeps forming in the chamber was sufficient. It was then perforated or pierced so as to expose the silicon below, which was etched. Pyramid-like nanostructures were formed on the surface as a result, with their walls being adsorbed by SixOyFz.
The fluorine free radicals (F*) etch, while the oxygen free radicals (O*) passivate the walls,62 so by controlling the flow rate of the gases, the preferred structure was realized, and black silicon with pyramid nanostructures was successfully fabricated. The column texture showed 0.4% reflectance for 400–1000 nm wavelengths. The hole texture achieved 6.8% reflectance for the same wavelength range. Pyramid textures achieved reflectance less than 1.4%.For context, untreated Silicon wafers show 40% reflectance.
These results were very promising, since no antireflective coating was needed. By playing with the texture of the silicon wafer surfaces at the nano-scale, Kumaravelu et al., remarkably reduced the reflectance of Silicon in the visible range. For wavelengths higher than 1000 nm, the wafers became transparent and thus the reflectance depended on the material behind the wafer. Because of the high reactivity and volatility of silicon fluoride,63 anisotropic etching of silicon could only be achieved by some sort of surface and sidewall passivation to protect it from destruction.64 This can be done in two ways65 (Fig. 14): either by a one-step continuous sidewall passivation, or by a multi-step cyclical passivation technique.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of the ordered structures on silicon, etching with extremely high anisotropy using RIE. Reproduced from ref. 65, mdpi, copyright 2021 (open access). 
2.4 Cryogenic deep RIE
In this method, SF6 gas creates fluorine free radicals used to etch the substrate, while oxygen gas (O2) is injected into the chamber. The oxygen gas then produces oxygen radicals that oxidize the surface of the silicon (produces a thin film of silicon oxide) and thus protects it from the highly destructive fluorine radicals. CDRIE requires low temperatures (173 Kelvin), which are obtained by cooling the chamber and substrate with liquid nitrogen. These low temperatures reduce the amount of oxygen needed for passivation, while also reducing the risk of losing passivation on the sidewalls. The low temperatures are one of the main disadvantages of this technique. This is an example of a continuous passivation process.
2.5 Bosch deep RIE
A cyclical passivation technique example is the Bosch DRIE. In this process, the passivation and etching steps are split into two different cycles, alternating between the two.65 Plasma etches the silicon, then an etch resistant material is deposited on the sidewalls. This allows us to control each step independently. Also, polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) is used instead of silicon oxide for passivation, as it is not as hard. Thus it requires less ion energy during bombardment to come off.
2.6 Honeycomb structures
In 2020, Z. Zhang et al., managed to fabricate “ordered-disordered” honeycomb (Fig. 15) structured black silicon using a two-step process.66 First, mask-assisted RIE or Bosch RIE was used to produce ordered micro-pores. The second step was continuous plasma etching with SF6/O2 that resulted in disordered nano-pores. Light trapping properties were significantly enhanced in the visible range. To extend these properties to near-IR, gold was deposited as a final step. It was shown that the gold particles resonated with the plasma and increased light absorption in the 1000 to 1700 nm wavelength spectrum.
 Fig. 15  SEM images of the silicon honeycomb structures. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 66. 
2.7 Ultra-black silicon
In 2014, Steglich et al., fabricated what they deemed as “ultra-black silicon”.67 P-type (100) silicon wafers were etched in SF6/O2 gas in a vacuum chamber using inductively coupled plasma RIE, or ICP-RIE for short, while the substrate was kept at −30 °C. This continuous passivation RIE method successfully resulted in needle like features (100 nm–4000 nm) on the silicon surface. Afterwards, a 30 nm Al2O3 coating was deposited using plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD). The ultra-black silicon obtained exhibited more than 99.5% absorbance of light, in the wide range of 350 nm to 2000 nm, spanning into the near-infrared domain. No lithography or masks were needed, as the silicon oxide provided protection and passivation.
RIE has shown many advantages over other etching techniques for the production of low reflectance silicon and black silicon, including high anisotropy (very vertical etching) with low lateral etching, good mask selectivity (etch rate of the substrate relative to the etch rate of the mask), the ability to create high aspect-ratio nano and microstructures, good etch depths, low chemical waste, and being a relatively clean process. However, the costly equipment necessary for using the RIE technique cannot be disregarded. If our aim is to lower costs, RIE is not a suitable option.
2.8 Masked and mask-less reactive ion etching (RIE)
As discussed above, plasma etching using RIE technique can be done with or without an exterior mask. Many researchers have been using the mask-less RIE etching which is also called the self mask etching in order to have sub-wavelength silicon structures.68–70 It is well known that the presence of the plasma in the RIE technique and its interaction with the gases lead to the formation of polymers that can be deposited onto the surface of the sample during processing which allows the creation of self masking.68 However, in this case, knowing the geometry and the dimensions of the patterns that have to be transferred into the Si surface is not trivial as it is challenging to control the deposition process of the so called micro etch-mask.71 This can be a major issue for some application, specially where the reproducibility is required. Another well known method consists in using an exterior mask. The aim of this technique is to copy the pattern on the mask into the substrate. Whilst this methodology is not as low cost as the maskless RIE due to the need for patterning, previous works have demonstrated the effectiveness of this method in the fabrication of black silicon with good surface quality.71,72 Hence, it is worth mentioning that for the masked-RIE, the choice of both the mask and the patterning technique plays a major role in the pattern transfer process. This section will thus be split into two parts in order to discuss the influence of the masking steps on the final structure profile.

2.8.1 The choice of the etch mask. 
For the structuring of black silicon with masked-RIE, it is essential to choose a suitable mask material. According to the state of the art, the etch masks can be classified into two categories: soft masks and hard masks.73 When using a soft mask, such as photo-resist, a lithography process for the creation of the patterning profile is needed. One of the major advantages of the photo-resist mask is the simplicity in its deposition technique where the mask can be simply deposited by spin or dip coating. However, the photo-resist in general, does not have a high etching resistance with respect to Si. The selectivity of the photo-resist decreases during the process due to the presence of oxygen and fluorine in the plasma. Moreover, during the etching an exothermic reaction occurs, and as the temperature increases, the selectivity decreases. These issues can be avoided by regulating the parameters of the RIE technique, namely substrate temperature, gas mixture and bias voltage.74 As for deep etching, a hard mask is always recommended and is usually employed to prolong the etching time through augmenting the selectivity.75 Metals such as Cr, Ni and Al in addition to metal oxides such as Al2O3 and SiO2 are the most common hard mask materials. Some elements such as Cr and Al are heavily used, due to the simplicity of deposition through sputtering or evaporation. However, these metals have an influence on the plasma chemistry as they are not as resistant to the chlorine-etching as compared to Ni and SiO2. As a result, a fluorine based-etching should be implemented when these metals are used.76 Although zinc oxide (ZnO) is a semiconductor, it is also used as a good hard mask. Gwiazda et al.77 has developed a new method called MUZ technique which is a combination of a soft and hard mask using a photo-resist and ZnO respectively. This approach leads to the creation of structured Si with high aspect ratio and high selectivity (Si:ZnO up to 60:1). Accordingly, while using the masked-RIE, it is important to study the influence of the mask on the etching results and as a function of the application, the fitted mask has to be chosen.


2.8.2 The patterning technique. 
Generally, in order to produce periodic or quasi-periodic black silicon structures, a lithography process follows the plasma etching by RIE. Lithography is the technique used for patterning. Several strategies in this technique have emerged for the fabrication of micro and nano structured black silicon such as photo-lithography, electron beam lithography, focused ion beam, nanoimprint lithography, colloidal or nano-sphere lithography and interference lithography.78 Based on the literature, the etching rate during the RIE process is sensitive to the pattern geometry which is related to the employed lithography technique and the way of patterning.79,80 In this review, the influence of each technique on the structure profile is out of scope. Although it is worthy to note that the photo-lithography approach, E-beam and Ion-beam lithography are often limited to the associated complex and expensive steps. This makes them incompatible for large scale fabrication. However, the other techniques called lithography free masking are best suited for large scale and industrial application as they offer different pitches and profile surfaces at a lower cost. Nonetheless, a major limitation of these approaches is linked to scattering caused by the defect inherent to the self assembled pattern (grain boundaries as an example) and particularly by using the colloidal lithography.81 Such defects can be avoided by combining self-assembly with top-down lithography techniques as demonstrated by Hind and et al.82 Such combination allows for s single crystal colloidal formation and hence grain boundaries formation and light induced scattering. Such method will be more suited for antireflection treated lenses with very high direct transmissivity (as the one used for imaging).
To summarise, the patterning step has a significant influence on the RIE technique and the quality of the black silicon. The aforementioned advantages and limitations of the lithography process have to be taken into consideration while using the etching technique by a masked-RIE.

3. Femtosecond laser irradiation
In this process, femtosecond and/or nanosecond laser pulses directed onto the wafers are used for etching. The wafers are placed on a programmable and movable device situated in the X–Y plane (taking the laser pulse to be moving along the Z direction and thus perpendicularly incident to the wafer plane). The etching position of the laser can therefore be changed and made periodic in order to create uniform quality micro and nano-structures. The laser effectively melts the silicon in very small time intervals, where it re-solidifies in the desired shapes.
The production of black silicon using fs-laser Gaussian pulses (800 nm) was first performed by Her et al., in the presence of SF6 and Cl2 gases.16 By irradiating the silicon surface, conical cones or spikes were observed under SEM (Fig. 16), with heights reaching 40 microns. One thing to note is the striking difference in cone shape and size in the presence of these gases as opposed to their shape and size in vacuum. The spikes were narrower, sharper, and taller in the presence of gases. Also, the spikes produced with the gases present exhibited spherical caps on top of the spike. Rinsing in an aqueous solution of 2% HF did not remove these caps, signifying that they are not oxides, and are in fact a re-solidification of a drop of liquid silicon before it slid down the spike.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of the conical cones produced by fs-laser irradiation with presence of SF6. Adapted with permission from Applied Physics Letters, 2022 copyright ref. 16. 
3.1 Femto-second vs. nano-second pulses
For comparison, Crouch et al., used silicon wafers with SF6 gas presence in the chamber, irradiated with an fs-laser (800 nm) and an ns-laser (248 nm) for surface etching.83 The height of the created cones using the fs-laser reached 8 microns, with a 4-micron distance between each cone. The ns-laser produced 40-micron long cones (5× the height), with a 20-micron distance between adjacent cones. Also, ns-laser pulses produced very smooth structures, while the fs-laser created spherical structures on top of the cones, as if they had been deposited there.16 Even though some differences were noticed, both types of laser irradiation managed to produce silicon with low reflectivity and excellent electrical and optical properties.
As aforementioned, fs and ns laser irradiation etching processes seem to require the presence of a gas in the chamber, most commonly SF6. The reason is because the gas (specifically the sulfur found in SF6) forms an impurity band in the Si band, thus reducing the band gap energy to around 0.4ev, effectively expanding into both higher and lower wavelength regions. To study the effects of different gases in fs-laser etching of silicon, Michael et al., conducted multiple experiments with a variety of different gases such as H2S, SiH4, H2, Ar, and SF6.84 They found that sulfur was an important addition, allowing the silicon to absorb wavelengths in the 250nm-2500 nm range, well into the infrared. Also, sulfur presence meant the microstructures were as sharp as can be. Although the addition of gases can significantly help in decreasing the weighted average reflectance of Si, we can still obtain such results without them. Vorobyev et al., demonstrated the fabrication of nano-cavities and micro-cavities on the surface of n-type Si wafers using fs-laser pulses (800 nm) in open air.85 The resulting wafers showed only 3–4% reflectance in the visible range, which continued on to the 1000 nm mark, a very good result indeed. In addition, Y. Su et al., were able to eliminate the need of external gases by simply depositing an Al film on the Si surface. After fs-laser etching (800 nm), the reflectivity came out to around 5% in the visible range, showing no apparent difference with the Al film inclusion. However, absorptance in the near-IR up into the IR surprisingly increased, resulting in a much better silicon wafer, with appreciable optical and electronic properties.
All in all, fs-laser irradiation for the etching and fabrication of black silicon is a great option in regards to the structures and properties produced, especially with the use of gases in the chamber for enhanced absorption of light in wider wavelength ranges. With that said, this method is still very expensive, and requires the use of costly equipment. It is therefore not a viable option when it comes to the mass production of cost-efficient low reflective silicon. Other issues lies in large scale structuring and homogeneity.
4. Applications in industries
4.1 Solar cells and IR photodetectors
With the ever so increasing demands for energy, people began to look for alternatives to the finite energy sources (i.e. fossil fuels) found on earth. The answer was always right in front of us, the Sun. The Sun provides us with what seems to be a continuously infinite amount of energy, day after day, year after year. With the discovery of the photovoltaic effect in 1839 by Becquerel, the race began to invent the world's first solar cell, capable of converting incident sun light into electrical energy. The first attempt at manufacturing a solar cell was reported by Charles Fritts with Selenium substrates coated with gold as the primary material, with a 1–2% efficiency. However it wasn't until the 1950s that a silicon based functional solar cell with 6% efficiency was created. The semiconductor industry was booming, so it was a no-brainer to take advantage of silicon in photovoltaics. Current silicon based solar cells achieve conversion efficiencies of around 15–20%, with the higher end of this range requiring more complex and costly manufacturing processes to be achieved.
To further enhance efficiencies while reducing costs, a call for black silicon must be made. Changing the surface texture of Silicon wafers on the micro and nano scale by etching creates the infamous Black Silicon (b-Si). This type of Silicon requires no anti-reflective coating to achieve similar efficiencies and light trapping abilities as Silicon with AR coatings, making it an extremely affordable option. Nano-graded silicon can reach up to 99% absorbance of light. The nanostructures on the surface of the silicon enhance light entrapment and significantly reduce reflectivity. However, a new problem arose due to an increase in photo-carrier recombination as discovered by Oh et al.86 With this increase comes a decrease in photovoltaic efficiency. Typical industrial silicon cells are 15–21% efficient. Nano-structured black-silicon falls below this range unless coated with an anti-reflective coating. The increase in surface area of nano-graded silicon promoted surface recombination of carriers, which is not efficient. Also, heavily doped nanostructured silicon showed higher rates of Auger recombination, in part due to the larger surface area, limiting carrier flow (Fig. 17). In their paper, Oh et al., fabricated nanostructured silicon using a 2-method metal enhanced etching technique, and then etched with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) to reduce surface area. They achieved an 18.2% efficiency under simulated AM 1.5G light by exploiting their carrier recombination data. No antireflective coating was needed to achieve this. These results can lower the capital used for the coatings, making this type of silicon more cost-efficient. Although the results were promising, the efficiency is still on the lower end, and can be enhanced further. Sarkar et al.,87 have demonstrated that a surface doped BSi, using phosphorus in their case, increased the absorptivity by 98% in the range of 1 to 5 μm. The use of ion implantation for the doping could make a very versatile device for many applications such as photovoltaics and IR detectors, relying on a variable concentration profiles. Other research teams88 proposed the doping of silicon by different chalcogens using a femtosecond laser. They managed to reduced the infrared absorption after annealing the dopants so they can better diffuse into the silicon. A diffusion path of about 50 nm was enough to deactivate the absorption.
 Fig. 17  (Left) Schematic of surface and auger recombination due to excess carriers on the surface of nanostructures silicon (right) SEM image of the nanostructured black silicon used for the 22.1% efficient cell. Adapted with permission from Springer Nature, Nature Technology, copyright 2022 ref. 86–89. 
The use of plasmon to enhance the absorption have also been reported by Song et al.89 Benefiting from the plasmonic nature of gold nanoparticles, they successfully designed an absorber in the 350–2500 μm range without any type of lithography. An RIE process followed by Au nanoparticles deposition in a cost effective way produced a high absorbant BSi (96.5%) that could be used in photo detectors, and solar energy harvesting. Recently, Sarkar et al.,90 produced a broadband absorber (over 20 μm range) using highly doped BSi bulk obtain through cryogenic plasma processing. An absorbance of 99.5% was achieved up to 8 μm while it remained higher than 90% at 20 μm. Their obtained data along with numerical calculations showed that a high doped silicon is very useful for obtaining high levels of absorbance, while moderate doping was more useful for broadband absorbance. Hence, a compromise is needed in order to optimize the sample for each application. The etching time, consequently the depth of the conical structure, was also found influential.
4.2 (V-shaped) fold
To improve the efficiencies of such solar cells, Tvingstedt et al., proposed exploiting the geometrical shape of the cell, having it in the shape of a V (Fig. 18).91,92 This heavily promotes the use of lost light during reflection. The light that is lost on one plate has a high chance of being absorbed by the second plate. This showed an almost 2× increase in some photovoltaic properties such as quantum efficiencies. Also, having two different activation layers for different band gap absorptions on each side can enhance overall absorption in wider wavelength ranges. By enhancing and increasing the optical path length of light, it was shown that solar cells were given a nearly free upgrade.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of the V-shaped folded solar cell. Adapted with permission from Journal of Applied Physics, 2022 copyright ref. 91. 
Auger and surface recombination of photo-carriers remained the biggest drawback of black silicon solar cell efficiency. As previously discussed, Auger recombination can be heavily suppressed by using an interdigitated back contact (IBC) design. However, surface recombination remained an issue. By using the cost-efficient cryogenic deep reactive ion etching technique, Savin et al., were able to fabricate black silicon, and then coated it with an Al2O3 layer (20 nm) using atomic layer deposition to passivate the silicon surface and tackle the recombination issue.93 Uncoated black silicon already showed very low reflectance, yet the thin layer of Al2O3 further enhanced the absorption to more than 99% for wavelengths in the range of 300–1000 nm. Surface recombination velocities were shown to be low, reducing unnecessary waste of photo-carriers. A 22.1% efficiency was thus achieved. This efficiency can be maintained for a multitude of incident light angles, because of the powerful surface features of the black silicon. Conventional silicon cells require a near perpendicular incidence of light to exhibit their usual efficiencies (15–20%). Savin et al., were able to fabricate a p-type black silicon cell with efficiency higher than conventional cells (more than 3% higher), along with the promising additional property of incident angle independence. Sunray angles fluctuate in a wide range throughout the days and years. This was not an issue for this solar cell. This 22.1% efficiency is a significant boost to conventional cells. To further enhance conversion rates, we should look more into different wavelengths of the spectrum, especially the IR range.
4.3 Infrared-absorbing silicon
Silicon is transparent to energies in the far infrared regions of the spectrum (>1000 nm) due to its band gap energy of around 1.12ev. This limits its uses to visible and near-infrared energies, especially in photo detection. The reliance on more “band-gap friendly” semiconductors for IR detection has therefore increased, such as indium arsenide (InAs) and indium antimonide (InSb) just to name a few. Currently, the best photo detectors are being manufactured using many of these aforementioned crystals by interfacing them to silicon pixel arrays (flip chip). This alone is a very costly process, not to mention the cost of the crystals as compared to cheap silicon. Using silicon as an IR photo detector can drastically reduce costs and revolutionize the world with new, consumer-available, cheap equipment. For instance, cars could be equipped with short wave IR imagers to enhance visibility in foggy and hazy weather conditions. In addition, mid wave IR detectors could make it easier to quickly spot objects (humans, animals, etc.) on roads and increase safety in general. Drones with IR imagers can also detect greenhouse gas emissions in our atmospheres and advance environmental sciences in hopes of reversing global warming effects. IR photo detectors and spectrometers have a wide range of applications and can fit into civilizations easily. However, they must be enhanced to become cost efficient, lightweight, and less power consuming. Silicon checks all these boxes. Recent developments have been made in regards to CQDs (colloidal quantum dots) and their ability to fine-tune materials such as silicon for better IR photo detection.94 They are cheap to manufacture, and can be coated right onto silicon for a performance boost.
Detectivity, speed, responsivity, and sensitivity are all determining factors of a good photo detector, and are dependent on the materials used and their respective energy band gaps. For example, InGaAs gives responses in the orders of gigahertz,95 whereas PbS is slower,96 in tens of kilohertz. CQD implementation can significantly boost most of these properties. HgTe CQDs were also shown to decrease Auger recombination rates, further increasing photo conversion efficiencies. Even mixtures of CQDs such as HgSe and HgTe form meta-materials by combining the intra-band absorption in the mid wave infrared, lowering dark current and enhancing responsivity.97 Although promising, mercury is toxic and may not pass the health requirements to be commercialized on silicon and other materials.94 Ag2Se QCDs (Fig. 19) were experimented with as a means of reducing mercury and thus overall toxicity.98 This non-metallic colloidal material proved to be a competent photoconductor, however the stability was a major issue, especially in IR ranges. This was likely due to the oxidation–reduction rates of Ag+ ions.
 Fig. 19  (a) Infrared spectra (b) X-ray diffractogram of different Ag2Se CQD sizes (small-large-extra large) (c) TEM image of small Ag2Se CQDs (d) TEM image of extra large Ag2Se CQDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Semiconductor nanowires for improved IR photoconduction
1D semiconductor nanowires have been shown to possess remarkable optical and electrical properties due to their huge surface to volume ratios. They have tunable band-gaps with high carrier mobility, allowing a lot of room to play with for enhanced photoconduction. As reported by Miao et al.,99 an InAs 1D nanowire photodetector achieved 1500 nm wavelength detection, on the far IR side. Also, Li and others fabricated a 1D GaAsSb nanowire photodetector that reached IR detection and responsivity far beyond 1000 nm (up to 1550 nm) by fine-tuning its band-gap energy.100 As promising as 1D NW may sound, they do exhibit complicated photoresponse mechanisms, limiting their performance, applications, and advancements. In a 2019 study by X. Zhang et al., a ferroelectric dielectric layer was coated onto an InAs NW.101 This ferroelectric polymer (P(VDF-TrFE)) created a static electric field with an external bias voltage applied, changing the electron–hole pair concentrations on the surface of the polymer and the corresponding band structure of the NW. This results in an ‘ultrasensitive’ photoresponse, especially in the mid wave IR. This highly polarized Electric field has the added benefit of readjusting the defect states on the InAs NW and subsequently filling them with electrons. This effectively increases carrier mobility and decreases surface recombination in the NW, creating a high detectivity, ultrasensitive IR photodetector.

4.4.1 Maximum efficiency?. 
Silicon solar cells are getting close to reaching their maximum theoretical efficiency of around 29.4%. In order to further enhance the efficiency, other parts of the sun spectrum can be used for absorption, such as infrared. A new way to achieve this is to combine more than one solar cell to create a multijunction cell, allowing light to be absorbed in different energies, as proposed by Mazzarella et al., in 2019.102 One of the simplest multijunction cells is constructed by connecting a ‘top’ cell with a wide band-gap (usually silicon) to a ‘bottom’ cell with a narrow band-gap (metal halide perovskites).103 A thin layer of non-crystalline silicon oxide was deposited in between the perovskite cell and the silicon heterojunction cell by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition. By varying the index of refraction (2.6), oxygen levels, as well as the thickness of this layer (110 nm), a notable increase in photocurrent density was observed in the bottom cell, as well as increased IR absorption. This increased the cell's efficiency to 25.2%, one of the highest recorded efficiencies.

4.5 Perovskites over silicon?
With the increasing demands on reducing costs and increasing efficiencies of solar cells, researchers are constantly seeking different materials to meet these requests. Recently, perovskites have caught our attention due to their low costs (even compared to silicon), very low carbon footprint, and reliable properties.104 Single-junction perovskite solar cells (PSC) have shown efficiencies close to the theoretical limit.105 With proper surface passivation and multijunction utilization, PSCs may be the future of the photoelectrical industry. In a recent paper by Mahmud et al., chemical passivation of defects, specifically on the surface and interface of the 3D polycrystalline perovskite layer was reduced, creating a reduction in recombination, and increasing efficiency to 22.6%.106 The n-BAI (butylammonium iodide) surface modification allowed for an improved energy band-gap alignment and passivation between the perovskites and the neighboring charge transport layers. Another passivation technique with the use of Al2O3 shells dry etched on InAsSb NWs (Fig. 20) with an InP substrate was utilized by Ren et al.107 to limit non-radiative recombination (auger-surface) on the surfaces of the NWs and thus enhance photodetectivity at room temperatures in the mid wave IR range. With perovskite cells however, we face a new problem in regards to stability and scaling up for commercial uses.108 Most PSCs are subject to degradation on the interface layers. TiO2 is commonly used in such cells, but is UV sensitive and thus causes photo-degradation.109 Using other UV-supporting materials like BaSnO3 may resolve this issue. Another challenge is the necessary use of toxic solvents to prepare the perovskite films, specifically the traces of lead (Pb).110 By strengthening the stability of PSCs for outdoor use, and increasing their shelf life, they will become more reliable and readily available for mass production and use in the photovoltaic industry. With the constant issue of having to pass toxicity requirements, M. Han et al. were able to manufacture a lead-free competent photodetector using inorganic perovskite NW arrays [CsSnX3 (X = Cl, Br, I)] on a mica substrate using chemical vapor deposition.111 Since the mica substrate is chemically inert and highly directional for nanostructure growth, the NW epitaxially grew to form equilateral triangles in the (102) direction. This high directionality and crystallinity eliminated randomness. The CsSnI3 NW array had a band-gap energy of 1.34 eV, entering into the realm of near infrared. It was tested as a room temperature near IR photodetector and showed remarkable stability and responsivity. These results showed that the toxicity challenge caused by lead could be eliminated to further enhance perovskite uses in the optoelectronics industry. Indium has been extensively used as the semiconductor of choice in photodetection due to its narrow band-gap energy, as well as its high photocarrier mobility. When compounded with antimony, indium antimonide (InSb) is produced with one of the narrowest band gaps of 0.163ev, making it a great material to use in 1–5 micron wavelength ranges (IR).
 Fig. 20  Illustration of InSb NW preparation for the flexible IR photodetector. 
As promising as it sounds, one issue that has not been dealt with is mechanical stress. Wearable detectors, for example, need to be flexible and continue to operate normally under such stress.
All of the semiconductors produced up until now have some form of rigidity, making them not so good for this type of application. In a recent study, Shafa et al., grew InSb nanowires on a silicon substrate coated with a thin layer of gold acting as a seeding layer112. By controlling the flow rate of the precursors during the vapor–liquid–solid technique, as well as utilizing the gold seeding, InSb NWs with diameters as low as 30 nm and below (classified as quantum wires) were successfully grown. The NWs were later dispersed from the silicon substrate and immersed in alcohol. The wires were then drop-cast onto the flexible poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) by means of a pipet. Gold was then deposited as a contact electrode, and the NWs formed a sort of nano-bridge (Fig. 20). EDS analysis confirmed that the nanowires were purely InSb with gold tips. Another PDMS flexible layer was deposited on top of the wires, which passivated them from external environments. Detectivity and response times were shown to be excellent in the IR range (5882 nm wavelength), as well as sensitivity. These results have shown very favorable IR detection properties under flexible conditions, making it easier to enhance wearable devices and similar technologies.
5. Conclusion
The semiconductor industry is booming, and silicon is shaping up to be one of the most globally used materials to date due to its low-cost, amazing properties, and reliability. However, silicon does have some drawbacks, in particular its high reflectivity. By using nanotechnology, silicon has received a major upgrade, allowing it to reduce its reflectivity down to almost 1%, and changing its band-gap energy. This incredible enhancement can revolutionize certain industries such as the solar cell and photo detector industries. Thus cheap, reliable black silicon fabrication techniques are at an all time high demand. Metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE), reactive ion etching (RIE), and femto-second laser irradiation have all been reviewed as potentially cost-efficient black silicon fabrication methods for its mass production, and MACE seems to be the best choice. Although RIE and fs-laser etching have proven to be effective candidates, they remain relatively complicated and expensive processes. MACE, however, is as simple and cost-effective as possible, especially with the use of nickel as a sacrificial metal catalyst. It was shown to produce high aspect ratio nanostructures such as pyramids on the silicon surfaces, creating highly absorbing black silicon materials, with remarkable optical and electrical properties, ready to be used in solar cells, photo detectors, or even antibacterial materials.
Black silicon is the material of the future, and its applications are limitless. The direction of research in the next decade or two will most likely be focused on improving IR responsivity, as well as enhancing antibacterial applications. Also, perovskites might become a popular choice in the solar cell industry. A lot of research is still needed to expand the applications of black silicon further, in hopes of developing technology to new heights.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
References
B. Zheng, W. Wang, G. Jiang, K. Wang and X. Mei, Research status and application prospects of manufacturing technology for micro–nano surface structures with low reflectivity, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part B, 2014, 229(11), 1877–1892,  DOI:10.1177/0954405414542113 .
X. Liu, P. R. Coxon, M. Peters, B. Hoex, J. M. Cole and D. J. Fray, Black silicon: fabrication methods, properties and solar energy applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(10), 3223–3263,  10.1039/C4EE01152J .
H. M. Branz, V. E. Yost, S. Ward, K. M. Jones, B. To and P. Stradins, Nanostructured black silicon and the optical reflectance of graded-density surfaces, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(23), 231121,  DOI:10.1063/1.3152244 .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultralow Broadband Reflectivity in Black Silicon via Synergy between Hierarchical Texture and Specific-Size Au Nanoparticles, Adv. Opt. Mater, 2020, 8(19), 2000668,  DOI:10.1002/ADOM.202000668 .
M. Kroll, 
            et al., Optical modeling of needle like silicon surfaces produced by an ICP-RIE process, Proc. SPIE, 2010, 7725, 36–45,  DOI:10.1117/12.854596 .
A. M. Gouda, N. K. Allam and M. A. Swillam, Efficient fabrication methodology of wide angle black silicon for energy harvesting applications, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(43), 26974–26982,  10.1039/C7RA03568C .
F. Atteia, 
            et al., Morphologies and optical properties of black silicon by room temperature reactive ion etching, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 131, 110973,  DOI:10.1016/J.MATERRESBULL.2020.110973 .
R. Soref, Mid-infrared photonics in silicon and germanium, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4(8), 495–497,  DOI:10.1038/nphoton.2010.171 .
P. Zhang, 
            et al., Near-infrared optical absorption enhanced in black silicon via Ag nanoparticle-induced localized surface plasmon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9(1), 1–5,  DOI:10.1186/1556-276X-9-519/FIGURES/4 .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Strong infrared absorber: surface-microstructured Au film replicated from black silicon, Opt. Express, 2011, 19(21), 20462–20467,  DOI:10.1364/OE.19.020462 .
H. Zhong, A. Guo, G. Guo, W. Li and Y. Jiang, The Enhanced Light Absorptance and Device Application of Nanostructured Black Silicon Fabricated by Metal-assisted Chemical Etching, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 1–6,  DOI:10.1186/S11671-016-1528-0/FIGURES/6 .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. De Boor and U. Gösele, Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching of Silicon: A Review, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(2), 285–308,  DOI:10.1002/ADMA.201001784 .
M. Li, 
            et al., Metal-assisted chemical etching for designable monocrystalline silicon nanostructure, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 76, 436–449,  DOI:10.1016/J.MATERRESBULL.2016.01.006 .
G. Kumaravelu, M. M. Alkaisi and A. Bittar, Surface texturing for silicon solar cells using reactive ion etching technique, Conf. Rec. IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 2002, 258–261,  DOI:10.1109/PVSC.2002.1190507 .
M. Steglich, T. Käsebier, I. Höger, K. Füchsel, A. Tünnermann and E.-B. Kley, Black Silicon nanostructures on silicon thin films prepared by reactive ion etching, Chin. Opt. Lett., 2013, 11, S10502,  DOI:10.3788/COL201311.S10502 .
T. H. Her, R. J. Finlay, C. Wu, S. Deliwala and E. Mazur, Microstructuring of silicon with femtosecond laser pulses, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73(12), 1673,  DOI:10.1063/1.122241 .
S. Kontermann, T. Gimpel, A. L. Baumann, K. M. Guenther and W. Schade, Laser Processed Black Silicon for Photovoltaic Applications, Energy Procedia, 2012, 27, 390–395,  DOI:10.1016/J.EGYPRO.2012.07.082 .
K. Chen, T. P. Pasanen, V. Vähänissi and H. Savin, Effect of MACE Parameters on Electrical and Optical Properties of ALD Passivated Black Silicon, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9(4), 974–979,  DOI:10.1109/JPHOTOV.2019.2917787 .
M. Steglich, T. Käsebier, M. Zilk, T. Pertsch, E. B. Kley and A. Tünnermann, The structural and optical properties of black silicon by inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116(17), 173503,  DOI:10.1063/1.4900996 .
M. Otto, 
            et al., Black Silicon Photovoltaics, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3(2), 147–164,  DOI:10.1002/ADOM.201400395 .
D. Qi, 
            et al., Simple approach to wafer-scale self-cleaning antireflective silicon surfaces, Langmuir, 2009, 25(14), 7769–7772,  DOI:10.1021/LA9013009/SUPPL_FILE/LA9013009_SI_001.PDF .
C. H. Hsu, J. R. Wu, Y. T. Lu, D. J. Flood, A. R. Barron and L. C. Chen, Fabrication and characteristics of black silicon for solar cell applications: An overview, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 25, 2–17,  DOI:10.1016/J.MSSP.2014.02.005 .
Y. Liu, 
            et al., Nanostructure Formation and Passivation of Large-Area Black Silicon for Solar Cell Applications, Small, 2012, 8(9), 1392–1397,  DOI:10.1002/SMLL.201101792 .
M. Kroll, 
            et al., Black silicon for solar cell applications, Proc. SPIE, 2012, 8438, 248–258,  DOI:10.1117/12.922380 .
Y. Su, 
            et al., High responsivity MSM black silicon photodetector, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16(3), 619–624,  DOI:10.1016/J.MSSP.2012.11.008 .
F. Hu, 
            et al., Black silicon Schottky photodetector in sub-bandgap near-infrared regime, Opt. Express, 2019, 27(3), 3161–3168,  DOI:10.1364/OE.27.003161 .
Y. Peng, 
            et al., Annealing-insensitive ‘black silicon’ with high infrared absorption, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116(7), 073102,  DOI:10.1063/1.4893584 .
E. P. Ivanova, 
            et al., Bactericidal activity of black silicon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(1), 1–7,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms3838 .
D. P. Linklater, H. K. D. Nguyen, C. M. Bhadra, S. Juodkazis and E. P. Ivanova, Influence of nanoscale topology on bactericidal efficiency of black silicon surfaces, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(24), 245301,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/AA700E .
A. Amalathas and M. Alkaisi, Nanostructures for Light Trapping in Thin Film Solar Cells, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 619,  DOI:10.3390/mi10090619 .
X. Li, Metal assisted chemical etching for high aspect ratio nanostructures: A review of characteristics and applications in photovoltaics, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16(2), 71–81,  DOI:10.1016/J.COSSMS.2011.11.002 .
D. Dimova-Malinovska, M. Sendova-Vassileva, N. Tzenov and M. Kamenova, Preparation of thin porous silicon layers by stain etching, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 297(2), 9–12,  DOI:10.1016/S0040-6090 .
H. Han, Z. Huang and W. Lee, Metal-assisted chemical etching of silicon and nanotechnology applications, Nano Today, 2014, 9(3), 271–304,  DOI:10.1016/J.NANTOD.2014.04.013 .
S. Yae, Y. Kawamoto, H. Tanaka, N. Fukumuro and H. Matsuda, Formation of porous silicon by metal particle enhanced chemical etching in HF solution and its application for efficient solar cells, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5(8), 632–636,  DOI:10.1016/S1388-2481 .
A. Prasad, S. Balakrishnan, S. K. Jain and G. C. Jain, Porous Silicon Oxide Anti–Reflection Coating for Solar Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129(3), 596–599,  DOI:10.1149/1.2123931 .
L. Romano, J. Vila-Comamala, K. Jefimovs and M. Stampanoni, High-Aspect-Ratio Grating Microfabrication by Platinum-Assisted Chemical Etching and Gold Electroplating, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22(10), 2000258,  DOI:10.1002/ADEM.202000258 .
L. Romano, M. Kagias, K. Jefimovs and M. Stampanoni, Self-assembly nanostructured gold for high aspect ratio silicon microstructures by metal assisted chemical etching, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(19), 16025–16029,  10.1039/C5RA24947C .
B. K. Mousavi, M. Behzadirad, Y. Silani, F. Karbasian, A. K. Mousavi and S. Mohajerzadeh, Metal-assisted chemical etching of silicon and achieving pore sizes as small as 30 nm by altering gold thickness, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2019, 37(6), 061402,  DOI:10.1116/1.5112776 .
J. M. Duran and A. Sarangan, Fabrication of ultrahigh aspect ratio silicon nanostructures using self-assembled gold metal-assisted chemical etching, J. Micro/Nanolithogr., MEMS, MOEMS, 2017, 16(1), 014502,  DOI:10.1117/1.JMM.16.1.014502 .
O. V. Volovlikova, S. A. Gavrilov, G. O. Silakov, A. V. Zheleznyakova and A. A. Dudin, Preparation of Hydrophobic Porous Silicon by Metal-Assisted Etching with Pd-Catalyst, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2020, 55(12), 1186–1195,  DOI:10.1134/S1023193519120188 .
J. M. Chen, C. Y. Chen, C. P. Wong and C. Y. Chen, Inherent formation of porous p-type Si nanowires using palladium-assisted chemical etching, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 498–502,  DOI:10.1016/J.APSUSC.2016.09.048 .
C. Chartier, S. Bastide and C. Lévy-Clément, Metal-assisted chemical etching of silicon in HF–H2O2, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53(17), 5509–5516,  DOI:10.1016/J.ELECTACTA.2008.03.009 .
X. Geng, M. Li, L. Zhao and P. W. Bohn, Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching Using Tollen’s Reagent to Deposit Silver Nanoparticle Catalysts for Fabrication of Quasi-ordered Silicon Micro/Nanostructures, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 2480–2485,  DOI:10.1007/s11664-011-1771-1 .
A. Abdulkadir, A. bin Abdul Aziz and M. Zamir Pakhuruddin, Optimization of etching time for broadband absorption enhancement in black silicon fabricated by one-step electroless silver-assisted wet chemical etching, Optik, 2019, 187, 74–80,  DOI:10.1016/J.IJLEO.2019.05.019 .
X. Li, 
            et al., High-efficiency multi-crystalline black silicon solar cells achieved by additive assisted Ag-MACE, Sol. Energy, 2020, 195, 176–184,  DOI:10.1016/J.SOLENER.2019.11.045 .
F. Toor, J. Oh and H. M. Branz, Efficient nanostructured ‘black’ silicon solar cell by copper-catalyzed metal-assisted etching, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2015, 23(10), 1375–1380,  DOI:10.1002/PIP.2562 .
L. Yang, 
            et al., 18.87%-efficient inverted pyramid structured silicon solar cell by one-step Cu-assisted texturization technique, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 121–126,  DOI:10.1016/J.SOLMAT.2017.03.017 .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Maskless inverted pyramid texturization of silicon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–6,  DOI:10.1038/srep10843 .
C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Zhu and Z. Guan, Fabrication of 20.19% Efficient Single-Crystalline Silicon Solar Cell with Inverted Pyramid Microstructure, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13(1), 1–8,  DOI:10.1186/S11671-018-2502-9 .
Y. T. Lu and A. R. Barron, Anti-reflection layers fabricated by a one-step copper-assisted chemical etching with inverted pyramidal structures intermediate between texturing and nanopore-type black silicon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(30), 12043–12052,  10.1039/C4TA02006E .
Y. T. Lu and A. R. Barron, Nanopore-type black silicon anti-reflection layers fabricated by a one-step silver-assisted chemical etching, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(24), 9862–9870,  10.1039/C3CP51835C .
J. P. Lee, S. Choi and S. Park, Extremely superhydrophobic surfaces with micro- and nanostructures fabricated by copper catalytic etching, Langmuir, 2011, 27(2), 809–814,  DOI:10.1021/LA1045354/SUPPL_FILE/LA1045354_SI_001.PDF .
Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Regulation of surface texturization through copper-assisted chemical etching for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 461–468,  DOI:10.1016/J.SOLENER.2020.03.013 .
H. Vahlman, A. Haarahiltunen, W. Kwapil, J. Schön, A. Inglese and H. Savin, Modeling of light-induced degradation due to Cu precipitation in p-type silicon. II. Comparison of simulations and experiments, J. Appl. Physiol., 2017, 121(19), 195704,  DOI:10.1063/1.4983455 .
K. Q. Peng, 
            et al., Fabrication of Single-Crystalline Silicon Nanowires by Scratching a Silicon Surface with Catalytic Metal Particles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16(3), 387–394,  DOI:10.1002/ADFM.200500392 .
Y. Cao, 
            et al., Progress and Mechanism of Cu Assisted Chemical Etching of Silicon in a Low Cu 2+Concentration Region, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2015, 4(8), P331–P336,  DOI:10.1149/2.0191508JSS/XML .
K. Gao, 
            et al., Enhanced etching rate of black silicon by Cu/Ni Co-assisted chemical etching process, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2018, 88, 250–255,  DOI:10.1016/J.MSSP.2018.08.023 .
K. Gao, 
            et al., Fabrication of black silicon by Ni assisted chemical etching, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5(1), 015020,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/AAA1FB .
A. Stafiniak, J. Prażmowska, W. Macherzyński and R. Paszkiewicz, Nanostructuring of Si substrates by a metal-assisted chemical etching and dewetting process, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(54), 31224–31230,  10.1039/C8RA03711F .
L. Kong, S. Y. Chiam and W. K. Chim, Metal-Assisted Silicon Chemical Etching Using Self-Assembled Sacrificial Nickel Nanoparticles Template for Antireflection Layers in Photovoltaic and Light-Trapping Devices, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(11), 7025–7031,  DOI:10.1021/ACSANM.9B01528 .
M. Y. Arafat, 
            et al., Fabrication of Black Silicon via Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching A Review, Sustain, 2021, 13(19), 10766,  DOI:10.3390/SU131910766 .
H. Jansen, M. de Boer, R. Legtenberg and M. Elwenspoek, The black silicon method: a universal method for determining the parameter setting of a fluorine-based reactive ion etcher in deep silicon trench etching with profile control, J. Micromech. Microeng., 1995, 5(2), 115,  DOI:10.1088/0960-1317/5/2/015 .
D. L. Flamm, V. M. Donnelly and J. A. Mucha, The reaction of fluorine atoms with silicon, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 52(5), 3633,  DOI:10.1063/1.329098 .
M. A. Blauw, T. Zijlstra and E. van der Drift, Balancing the etching and passivation in time-multiplexed deep dry etching of silicon, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2001, 19(6), 2930,  DOI:10.1116/1.1415511 .
M. Huff, L. Romano and K. Jefimovs, Recent Advances in Reactive Ion Etching and Applications of High-Aspect-Ratio Microfabrication, Micromachines, 2021, 12(8), 991,  DOI:10.3390/MI12080991 .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Black silicon with order-disordered structures for enhanced light trapping and photothermic conversion, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 103992,  DOI:10.1002/LPOR.201300142 .
M. Steglich, 
            et al., An ultra-black silicon absorber, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8(2), L13–L17 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Xu, M. R. Gartia, D. Whitlock, Y. Lian and G. L. Liu, Ultrahigh throughput silicon nanomanufacturing by simultaneous reactive ion synthesis and etching, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(10), 8002–8012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Inomata, K. Fukui and K. Shirasawa, Surface texturing of large area multicrystalline silicon solar cells using reactive ion etching method, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 48(4), 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ruby, S. Zaidi, S. Narayanan, B. M. Damiani and A. Rohatgi, Rie-texturing of multicrystalline silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 74(4), 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
D. Macdonald, A. Cuevas, M. J. Kerr, C. Samundsett, D. Ruby, S. Winderbaum and A. Leo, Texturing industrial multicrystalline silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76(3), 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sreejith, A. K. Sharma, P. K. Basu and A. Kottantharayil, Etching methods for texturing industrial multi-crystalline silicon wafers : A comprehensive review, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 238, 111531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, A. Sandoughsaz, K. J. Owen and K. Najafi, Ultra deep reactive ion etching of high aspect-ratio and thick silicon using a ramped-parameter process, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2018, 27(4), 686–697 CAS .
H. Jansen, M. de Boer, J. Burger, R. Legtenberg and M. Elwenspoek, The black silicon method ii : The effect of mask material and loading on the reactive ion etching of deep silicon trenches, Microelectron. Eng., 1995, 27(4), 475–480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Henry, S. Walavalkar, A. Homyk and A. Scherer, Alumina etch masks for fabrication of high-aspect-ratio silicon micropillars and nanopillars, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(25), 255305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Dey, H. Ekinci and B. Cui, Effects of mask material conductivity on lateral undercut etching in silicon nano-pillar fabrication, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2020, 38(1), 012207 CAS .
A. Gwiazda, A. Rumyantseva, A. Gokarna, K. Nomenyo, C. Chevalier-César and G. Lérondel, Simple and versatile high aspect ratio nanostructuring via zinc oxide masking, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2(9), 1700107 CrossRef .
J. Bingi and V. M. Murukeshan, Speckle lithography for fabricating gaussian, quasi-random 2d structures and black silicon structures, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Kiihamäki and S. Franssila, Pattern shape effects and artefacts in deep silicon etching, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1999, 17(4), 2280–2285 CrossRef .
C.-K. Chung, Geometrical pattern effect on silicon deep etching by an inductively coupled plasma system, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2004, 14(4), 656 CrossRef CAS .
L. O. Le Cunff, H. Kadiri and G. Lérondel, Microscopic defects as the limiting factor in the direct transmission of nanocoatings obtained through self-assembly, Nano Sel., 2021, 2(1), 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kadiri, 
            et al., Topology assisted self-organization of colloidal nanoparticles: application to 2D large-scale nanomastering, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 1203–1209 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Crouch, J. E. Carey, J. M. Warrender, M. J. Aziz, E. Mazur and F. Y. Génin, Comparison of structure and properties of femtosecond and nanosecond laser-structured silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84(11), 1850,  DOI:10.1063/1.1667004 .
M. A. Sheehy, L. Winston, J. E. Carey, C. M. Friend and E. Mazur, Role of the Background Gas in the Morphology and Optical Properties of Laser-Microstructured Silicon, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(14), 3582–3586,  DOI:10.1021/CM049029I .
A. Y. Vorobyev and C. Guo, Direct creation of black silicon using femtosecond laser pulses, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257(16), 7291–7294,  DOI:10.1016/J.APSUSC.2011.03.106 .
J. Oh, H. C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, An 18.2%-efficient black-silicon solar cell achieved through control of carrier recombination in nanostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(11), 743–748,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.166 .
S. Sarkar, E. Nefzaoui, G. Hamaoui, F. Marty, P. Basset and T. Bourouina, Wideband Mid Infrared Absorber using surface Doped Black Silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2022, 121, 231703 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tull, M. Winkler and E. Mazur, The role of diffusion in broadband infrared absorption in chalcogen-doped silicon, Appl. Phys. A, 2009, 96, 327–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, 
            et al., A plasmon-enhanced broadband absorber fabricated by black silicon with self-assembled gold nanoparticles, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 4696–4701 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, 
            et al., Black Silicon Revisited as an Ultrabroadband Perfect Infrared Absorber over 20 μm Wavelength Range, Adv. Photonics Res., 2022, 2200223 Search PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, V. Andersson, F. Zhang and O. Inganäs, Folded reflective tandem polymer solar cell doubles efficiency, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(12), 123514,  DOI:10.1063/1.2789393 .
V. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt and O. Inganäs, Optical modeling of a folded organic solar cell, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103(9), 094520,  DOI:10.1063/1.2917062 .
H. Savin, 
            et al., Black silicon solar cells with interdigitated back-contacts achieve 22.1% efficiency, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10(7), 624–628,  DOI:10.1038/NNANO.2015.89 .
P. Guyot-Sionnest, M. M. Ackerman and X. Tang, Colloidal quantum dots for infrared detection beyond silicon, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151(6), 060901,  DOI:10.1063/1.5115501 .
Q. Yang, Q. Wu, W. Luo, W. Yao, S. Yan and J. Shen, InGaAs/graphene infrared photodetectors with enhanced responsivity, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6(11), 116208,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/AB4925 .
C. Venettacci, B. Martín-García, M. Prato, I. Moreels and A. De Iacovo, Increasing responsivity and air stability of PbS colloidal quantum dot photoconductors with iodine surface ligands, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(40), 405204,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/AB2F4B .
C. Livache, 
            et al., A colloidal quantum dot infrared photodetector and its use for intraband detection, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–10,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-10170-8 .
J. Qu, 
            et al., Intraband Mid-Infrared Transitions in Ag 2 Se Nanocrystals: Potential and Limitations for Hg-Free Low-Cost Photodetection, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(31), 18161–18167,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b05699 .
J. Miao, 
            et al., Single InAs Nanowire Room-Temperature Near-Infrared Photodetectors, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 3628–3635,  DOI:10.1021/NN500201G .
Z. Li, 
            et al., Room temperature GaAsSb single nanowire infrared photodetectors, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26(44), 445202,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/26/44/445202 .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultrasensitive Mid-wavelength Infrared Photodetection Based on a Single InAs Nanowire, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(3), 3492–3499,  DOI:10.1021/ACSNANO.8B09649/SUPPL_FILE/NN8B09649_SI_001.PDF .
L. Mazzarella, 
            et al., Infrared Light Management Using a Nanocrystalline Silicon Oxide Interlayer in Monolithic Perovskite/Silicon Heterojunction Tandem Solar Cells with Efficiency above 25%, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(14), 1803241,  DOI:10.1002/AENM.201803241 .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Stability of Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(20), 1500963,  DOI:10.1002/AENM.201500963 .
M. L. Petrus, 
            et al., Capturing the Sun: A Review of the Challenges and Perspectives of Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(16), 1700264,  DOI:10.1002/AENM.201700264 .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart | Photovoltaic Research | NREL. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed Nov. 05, 2021).
M. A. Mahmud, 
            et al., Double-Sided Surface Passivation of 3D Perovskite Film for High-Efficiency Mixed-Dimensional Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(7), 1907962,  DOI:10.1002/ADFM.201907962 .
D. Ren, 
            et al., Room-Temperature Midwavelength Infrared InAsSb Nanowire Photodetector Arrays with Al 2 O 3 Passivation, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(5), 2793–2802,  DOI:10.1021/ACS.NANOLETT.8B04420/SUPPL_FILE/NL8B04420_SI_001.PDF .
Y. Rong, 
            et al., Challenges for commercializing perovskite solar cells, Science., 2018, 361(6408), eaat8235,  DOI:10.1126/SCIENCE.AAT8235 .
A. Farooq, 
            et al., Spectral Dependence of Degradation under Ultraviolet Light in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(26), 21985–21990,  DOI:10.1021/ACSAMI.8B03024 .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Prospects for low-toxicity lead-free perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–4,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-08918-3 .
M. Han, 
            et al., Controllable Growth of Lead-Free All-Inorganic Perovskite Nanowire Array with Fast and Stable Near-Infrared Photodetection, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(28), 17566–17573,  DOI:10.1021/ACS.JPCC.9B03289/SUPPL_FILE/JP9B03289_SI_001.PDF .
M. Shafa, D. Wu, X. Chen, N. Ul Hassan Alvi, Y. Pan and A. Najar, Flexible infrared photodetector based on indium antimonide nanowire arrays, Nanotechnol., 2021, 32(27), 27LT01,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/ABE965 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Regular silicon wafer vs. Black silicon wafer. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representation of the optical path of light at the vicinity of a macrostructured silicon surface where geometrical optics applies reproduced from ref. 30 mdpi, copyright 2019 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of Pt-electroless-deposited silicon etched in 12% HF for 24hrs with oxygen gas bubbled in. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022 ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of gold MACE before and after etching to produce nano and micro grooves. Adapted with permission from ref. 37 2022 copyright Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of (a) gold deposition on the silicon surface and (b) the result after etching. Reproduced from ref. 39, SPIE digital Library, copyright 2017 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 6  Pd nanoparticles tend to cluster on the walls of the silicon in the etching process. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022 ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 7  (1) SEM images of silicon nano-wires and nano-cones produced by MACE using Ag as a metal catalyst (2) illustration of Ag MACE mechanism (3) Reflectance of the silicon wafers for different etching times. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 42–44.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optical path of light in inverted pyramid geometry. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electric field intensity distribution in (a) inverted pyramid structured Si and (b) upright pyramid structured Si. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 10  (Left) Upright pyramid structures vs. inverted pyramid structures (right) SEM images of inverted pyramid structures on b-Si for different etching times using Cu catalyst (bottom) Illustration of Ag vs. Cu nanoparticle etching on Si (100). Adapted with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2022 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (Left) Illustration of nickel nanoparticles coated with gold nanoparticles before and after etching (Ni disappears with etching unlike Au) (top right) SEM images of silicon nanowires formed by Ni MACE (Au nanoparticles can be seen dropping off as the nickel gets etched) (bottom right) reflectivity of the silicon wafers as a function of wavelength. Note that the sudden jump in reflectivity is a result of changing the light source from visible to IR. Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (Left) Highly isotropic etching, and (right) Highly anisotropic etching.	 

 	Fig. 13  (Top) Reactive ion etching chamber components (down) Illustration of SF6 impact on silicon substrate with a polymer wall passivation. Reproduced from ref. 64, AVS, copyright 2001 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of the ordered structures on silicon, etching with extremely high anisotropy using RIE. Reproduced from ref. 65, mdpi, copyright 2021 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of the silicon honeycomb structures. Adapted with permission from Elsevier, 2022 copyright ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of the conical cones produced by fs-laser irradiation with presence of SF6. Adapted with permission from Applied Physics Letters, 2022 copyright ref. 16.	 

 	Fig. 17  (Left) Schematic of surface and auger recombination due to excess carriers on the surface of nanostructures silicon (right) SEM image of the nanostructured black silicon used for the 22.1% efficient cell. Adapted with permission from Springer Nature, Nature Technology, copyright 2022 ref. 86–89.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of the V-shaped folded solar cell. Adapted with permission from Journal of Applied Physics, 2022 copyright ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Infrared spectra (b) X-ray diffractogram of different Ag2Se CQD sizes (small-large-extra large) (c) TEM image of small Ag2Se CQDs (d) TEM image of extra large Ag2Se CQDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Illustration of InSb NW preparation for the flexible IR photodetector.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
