A monolithic and standalone solar-fuel device having comparable efficiency to photosynthesis in nature   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA06495J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA06495J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5835-5842A monolithic and standalone solar-fuel device having comparable efficiency to photosynthesis in nature†

        
          
            Hyo Sang 
            Jeon
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jai Hyun 
            Koh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Se Jin 
            Park
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael Shincheon 
            Jee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Doo-Hyun 
            Ko
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yun Jeong 
            Hwang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Byoung Koun 
            Min
          
        
      *abd
aClean Energy Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Hwarangro 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: bkmin@kist.re.kr; yjhwang@kist.re.kr;  Fax: +82 2 958 5809;   Tel: +82 2 958 5853 (Dr. Byoung Koun Min)  Tel: +82 2 958 5227 (Dr. Yun Jeong Hwang)
bKorea University of Science and Technology, 176 Gajung-dong, 217 Gajungro Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-350, Republic of Korea
cCenter for Opto-Electronic Convergence Systems, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Hwarangro 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea
dGreen School, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-713, Republic of Korea
Received 
      27th November 2014
    , Accepted 10th December 2014First published on 10th December 2014AbstractThe need for developing sustainable energy sources has generated academic and industrial attention in artificial photosynthesis, inspired by the natural process. In this study, we demonstrate a highly efficient solar energy to fuel conversion device using CO2 and water as feedstock. We developed a thin film photovoltaic technology for the light absorbing component using a low cost, solution based Cu(InxGa1−x)(SySe1−y)2 (CIGS) module fabrication method to provide sufficient potential for the conversion reactions. Our solar-fuel device uses cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanoparticle thin film deposited with a low temperature coating method as the water oxidation catalyst and nanostructured gold film as the CO2 reduction to CO generation catalyst. We demonstrated that the integrated monolithic device operated by energy only from sunlight, in an absence of any external energy input. The individual components showed the following abilities: solar-to-power conversion efficiency of 8.58% for the CIGS photovoltaic module photoelectrode, overpotential reduction of water oxidation with the Co3O4 catalyst film by ∼360 mV at 5 mA cm−2, and Faradaic efficiency of over 90% by the nanostructured Au catalyst for CO2 reduction to CO. Remarkably, this is the first demonstration of a monolithic and standalone solar-fuel device whose solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency from CO2 and H2O is 4.23%, which is comparable with that of photosynthesis in nature.
1. Introduction
World energy production still depends heavily on traditional fossil fuels, which are to blame for global climate changes because of greenhouse gas emissions, and uneven global distribution of fossil fuels is responsible for international conflicts.1,2 To resolve these issues, tremendous efforts have been put into developing sustainable energy resources to replace fossil fuels. Among various energy production methods, fuel production from solar energy is one of the most promising approaches because solar energy is abundant and can be stored as fuels.3 Such a conversion system is often called “artificial photosynthesis”, mimicking the photosynthesis in plants to produce hydrocarbon fuels from sunlight, CO2, and water, where the products are deemed “solar-fuels”.4 A variety of attempts to produce solar fuels artificially have been suggested using multi-functional photocatalysts4–6 or photoelectrochemical devices.7–10 However, none of these solar-fuel generating systems showed promising efficiency, even performing more poorly than natural photosynthesis. The efficiency of photosynthesis in nature can be diverse dependent on the specific system. For example, C3 plants producing three-carbon sugars, which include algae, reach 3.5% efficiency under optimal conditions during their growing season; and C4 plants producing four-carbon compounds, which include angiosperms, can reach 4.3%.11 However, photosynthesis efficiencies of common plant leaves are known to be lower than 1% because of inconsistent insolation and limited CO2 concentration in the atmosphere.11–13 The first challenge is to make an artificial solar-fuel device with efficiency comparable to those in nature.
To design an efficient solar-fuel device, it may be reasonable to revisit solar-water splitting systems because tremendous research has been done in the 40 years since their first demonstration by Fujishima and Honda.14 Several representative results of photo-water splitting systems are summarized in Table S1, ESI.† Rigid material requirements for solar-water splitting make high solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiencies unachievable solely using metal oxide photocatalytic materials, in spite of the beneficial aspects of their low cost. On the other hand, solar-water splitting systems with photovoltaic (PV) technology incorporated within photoelectrodes have revealed relatively high efficiencies. For example, when triple junction amorphous Si PV technology was incorporated within catalytic electrodes, STH efficiency of 4.7% was achieved (see Fig. 1a).15 Over 15 years ago, in a case with III–V compound, PV technology was incorporated into a tandem structure with p-type GaInP2 photocatalytic material, and achieved over 12% STH efficiency, although cost as well as stability issues still remain (see Fig. 1b).16
 Fig. 1  Designs for solar-fuel devices. (a) Schematic diagram of a representative PEC water-splitting cell developed by Nocera's group with Co-OEC|3jn-a-Si|NiMoZn cell configuration (adapted from ref. 15). (b) Schematic diagram of a representative PEC water-splitting cell developed by Turner's group with GaAs PV within p-GaInP2 photo-cathode (adapted from ref. 16). Schematic diagrams to illustrate the enhancement operating current of a solar-fuel device by incorporating (c) electrocatalysts (EC) of low overpotentials, or (d) photocatalysts (PC). 
When PV technology is incorporated, the operating current and consequential STH efficiency are determined by the intersecting point between the I–V curves of the PV cell and catalytic electrodes.17 Then, there are two approaches that can be applied to enhance the STH efficiency. The operating point can be shifted to a higher current (short circuit current, Isc, is the maximum) and lower voltage (minimizing input-energy) by (i) reducing overpotentials for overall water-splitting on either anode or cathode with highly efficient electrocatalyst (EC) (see Fig. 1c),18 or (ii) combining photocatalyst (PC) materials to (photo)anode or (photo)cathode to utilize the charge separation at the photocatalyst/electrolyte junction (see Fig. 1d).19 Notably, the use of PC is preferable over EC as water-splitting at zero bias (in the absence of PV) is theoretically possible,20 and this triggered tremendous efforts in development of semiconductor PC materials, despite the technical difficulty with tandem integration. The structure shown in Fig. 1b is limited to a system in which the band gap of the semiconductor in the PV cell is smaller than that of the PC materials for efficient light absorption, as light passes through the PC layer first. However, a wide band gap material is more favorable to obtain a large open circuit potential in the PV part. Therefore, structures of the efficient solar-fuel device have to be designed deliberately to be applicable for both systems (PV cell integrated with EC or PC) with a variety of material choices.
After closely reviewing the representative solar-water splitting systems mentioned above, we found that the PV part (p–n junction of semiconductors) and photocatalyst or electrocatalyst films ohmically connected in the electrolyte by a transparent conducting film (e.g. ITO layer) were in common as described schematically in Fig. 2a. If the substrate (e.g. glass) has conductive properties on both sides, the substrate itself can be used as an ohmic contact between PV and photocatalytic or electrocatalytic film rather than the thin layer of a conducting material, deriving the idea that the PV part is placed out of the electrolyte, while still maintaining ohmic connection with photocatalytic or electrocatalytic film through the conductive substrate (e.g. glass with ITO layer on both sides, see Fig. 2b and c). This configuration has merit in terms of durability of the PV part because it is not in direct contact with the electrolyte. In general, semiconductor materials such as silicon and GaAs used in PV are vulnerable in aqueous electrolyte environments.21 In addition, the incident light can reach the PV and PC films without absorption or scattering loss by the aqueous electrolyte,22 minimizing the efficiency loss of each integrated component.
 Fig. 2  (a) Solar-fuel device with photocatalytic film (P.C.F.) and internal PV. (b) Solar-fuel device with photocatalytic film (P.C.F.) and external PV. (c) Solar-fuel device with electrocatalytic film (E.C.F.) and external PV. 
To test the proposed configuration for solar-fuel devices, in this study, Fig. 2c was used as a model system that incorporates PV technology with EC. We demonstrate a solar-fuel device with parallel series connection of single junction PV cells (i.e. module) using a well-established module fabrication process to supply high enough energy for both water-splitting and CO2 reduction in the device, although there is some photocurrent loss caused by reduction of the active area of absorber film compared with vertical series connection of single cells.
In our long journey to realize a highly efficient, low cost, outstandingly stable monolithic and standalone solar-fuel device, we demonstrate a first model of solar-fuel device which has comparable solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency with that of photosynthesis in nature. In this device, Cu(InxGa1−x)(SySe1−y)2 (CIGS) thin film solar cell technology was applied in the PV part. Unlike commercialized CIGS thin film solar cell technology (a vacuum-based method), we adapted a low cost solution-based method for fabricating the CIGS absorber film, which is expected to be beneficial in terms of cost, throughput, and scale-up.23 As a single junction CIGS cell cannot provide sufficient photovoltage for thermodynamic energy to compensate for the water-splitting/CO2 reduction overpotential, CIGS module was fabricated on a single glass substrate. On the reverse of this PV module, electrocatalytic film (Co3O4) for water oxidation was monolithically prepared using a low temperature coating method so as not to damage the performance of the pre-made PV part. Nanostructured gold was applied as the electrocatalyst for selective reduction of CO2 to CO, as it requires relatively low overpotential with a high Faradaic efficiency for CO2 reduction in aqueous media. Each component was successfully incorporated into a standalone solar-fuel device, with only ∼5% coupling efficiency loss. We demonstrate that the actual model device has 4.23% solar to CO chemical conversion efficiency, which is comparable with or even higher than the conversion efficiency of photosynthesis in nature.
2. Experimental
2.1. CIGS module fabrication
CIGS module was fabricated on a patterned molybdenum (Mo) layer. The Mo layer (∼1 μm) was sputtered on a soda lime glass, and the first pattern, P1 (see Fig. S1, ESI†), was scribed by nanosecond pulsed laser with 532 nm wavelength. The laser beam was incident from the soda lime glass side to avoid any thermal damage of Mo back contact by laser scribing. A solution processed CIGS absorber layer was then spin-coated onto the patterned Mo. A precursor mixture solution was prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of Cu(NO3)2·xH2O (Aldrich, 0.82 g), In(NO3)3·xH2O (Aldrich, 1.12 g), and Ga(NO3)3·xH2O (Alfa Aesar, 0.41 g) in methanol (10.0 mL), followed by adding a methanol solution (7.0 mL) with polyvinyl acetate (PVA) (Aldrich, 1.0 g). The mixture was stirred thoroughly for 30 min prior to spin coating of the precursor solution, and the deposited film was annealed at 300 °C for 30 min. To obtain the desired thickness of the film (∼1.2 μm), the aforementioned process was repeated about six times (generally ∼200 nm thick film was obtained for each spin coating process). Then, the film was selenized/sulfurized at 470 °C to form a CIGS absorber layer. Later, a 60 nm thick CdS buffer layer was deposited onto the CIGS film using a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method, and the top contact layer of i-ZnO (50 nm)/Al-doped n-ZnO (500 nm) was deposited by the radio frequency magnetron sputtering. The second (P2) and third (P3) patterns were scribed mechanically before and after deposition of Al-doped n-ZnO, respectively. The whole module area exposed to light illumination was 2.1 cm2 with five single cells having a respective area of 0.42 cm2.
2.2. Preparation of Co3O4 film
After the CIGS module was fabricated, 30 nm of Ti thin film followed by 50 nm of Pt thin film were sputtered onto the rear side of the module for contact of the oxidation catalyst particles. Subsequently, Co3O4 (∼50 nm, Aldrich) catalyst film was deposited on the Ti/Pt film by a doctor blade coating method. Co3O4 catalyst was dispersed in iso-propanol (J. T. Baker) and a Nafion solution (20 wt%, DuPont) was added to prepare a paste. After the Co3O4 was pasted, the sample was placed on a hotplate at 70 °C in air.
2.3. Preparation of nanostructured Au
Nanostructured Au was prepared by an electrochemical method adapted from ref. 24. Polycrystalline gold foil (99.99%, Dasom RMS) was cleaned in aqua regia, and amorphous Au oxide was fabricated by pulsed anodization. 1.2–3.5 V vs. a Hg/Hg2SO4 reference electrode (CHI151, CH Instruments, Inc) was applied for 65000 cycles in aqueous 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte with a potentiostat (Ivium, Iviumtechnology), and a platinum counter electrode was used. The gold oxide was reduced to gold catalysts at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 15 min prior to CO2 reduction in aqueous 0.5 M NaHCO3 solution saturated with CO2.
2.4. Electrochemical measurements
All electrocatalytic measurements were conducted using a potentiostat (Ivium, Iviumtechnology) in a two compartment electrochemical cell made of polyether ether ketone (PEEK), and a proton exchange membrane (Nafion®, 117) was used to separate the anode and cathode sides. 0.5 M KHCO3 (≥99.99%, Aldrich) electrolyte was saturated with CO2, the pH of which was 7.03 after saturation. A platinum counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode were used in a three-electrode configuration to characterize the catalytic activities of the Co3O4 nanoparticle film and the nanostructured Au film for water oxidation and CO2 reduction, respectively. All potential values were converted in terms of reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using E (vs. RHE) = E (vs. Ag/AgCl) + 0.197 + 0.059V × pH. Steady-state current density was measured using a chrono-amperometry technique with respect to each fixed potential.
2.5. Product analysis for CO2 reduction
CO2 reduction experiments coupled with water oxidation were conducted in both two- and three-electrode configurations. While the three-electrode configuration was performed in a gas-tight two compartment electrochemical cell as described above, the gas products (i.e. H2 and CO) were quantified by gas chromatography (Younglin 6500 GC) equipped with a pulsed discharge detector (PDD) using ultra high purity (UHP) He (99.9999%) as the carrier gas. GC was directly connected to the electrochemical cell and the gaseous samples were injected by a six-port valve. Each compartment of the electrochemical cell contained 38 mL of electrolyte and 34 mL of headspace, and CO2 gas was bubbled through the electrolyte at an average rate of 120 mL min−1. The Faradaic efficiencies (F.E.) of H2 and CO production were calculated from the areas of GC chromatogram as below, as both are two-electron reactions: (1)where VH2 or CO is the volume concentration of H2 or CO based on calibration of the GC, and flow rate (mL min−1) was measured by a universal flow meter (ADM 2000, Agilent Technologies) at the exit of the electrochemical cell. itotal (mA) is a steady-state current, F = 96485 A s mol−1, p0 = 1.013 bar, T0 = 273.15 K, and R = 8.314 J mol−1 K−1. Formate concentration was analyzed by ion chromatography (IC, DIONEX IC25A) with a conductivity detector. To account for headspace equilibration time, the F.E. of gas products was normalized.
In the case of a two-electrode measurement (Fig. 5b), the nanostructured Au film was connected in the cathodic side and the Co3O4 nanoparticle film was connected in the anodic side without any reference electrode. The products from the cathodic compartment were analyzed in a same way as described above.
2.6. Characterization of solar-fuel device
After preparation of all electrodes and acrylic spacer, each component was assembled with epoxy resin, as shown in Fig. 5a. The photocurrent was measured using the two-electrode configuration under AM-1.5G illumination conditions (100 mW cm−2), facing the CIGS module to incident light outside of the cell. GC was directly connected to the solar-fuel device and chemical products were quantified following the same procedure as described above. A solar simulator (ABET, Sun 2000) equipped with a 300 W Xe lamp and air mass (AM) 1.5 filter was used to generate simulated solar light. A 13C isotope experiment was carried out with a gas chromatograph (GC, 6890N network, Agilent Technologies) equipped with a mass-selective detector (MSD, 5973 network, Agilent Technologies).
2.7. Characterizations
The surface morphologies were imaged by field emission gun scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM, Inspect F, FEI).
3. Results and discussion
One of the most important components in the solar-fuel device is the photoelectrode that is capable of producing power by absorbing light. In this study, we employed a photoelectrode that was a combination of PV and electrocatalytic film on a single conducting glass substrate; one side formed the CIGS module for light absorption, the other side made the anode with Co3O4 nanoparticle catalyst for water oxidation (see Fig. 3a). Moreover, to realize cost-effective fabrication of CIGS film, we adapted a paste coating method, which was developed by our lab.25,26 To achieve the high single CIGS thin film solar cell voltage, a unit in the module, a selenization process was modified with addition of elemental sulfur (S/Se + S = 40%) to increase the band gap of the CIGS absorber material. The average open circuit voltage (Voc) of a single solar cell was measured to be 550 mV, and five single cells in parallel achieved a Voc of over 2.70 V. The CIGS module was fabricated on a laser-patterned Mo substrate (see Fig. S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Monolithic CIGS module and Co3O4 anodic catalyst for photoelectrode. (a) Schematic diagram and photograph of a monolithically stacked photoelectrode with CIGS PV module and Co3O4 film on each side of the glass substrate. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a CIGS PV cell (scale bar is 1 μm). (c) Typical I–V characteristic of a CIGS module. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of Co3O4 film on the glass/Ti/Pt substrate (scale bar is 1 μm). (e) Typical J–V characteristic with and without Co3O4 catalyst films. 
As shown in the cross-sectional SEM image (see Fig. 3b), a CIGS layer with a very low degree of porosity was observed with a conventional Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/Al–ZnO structure, even via the solution-based process. Interestingly, the CIGS layer exhibits two layers with small-sized grains at the interfacial region of the Mo substrate and large-sized grains on the small-sized grain layer (see Fig. S2, ESI†). The formation of two layers was found to be attributable to the difference in distribution of sulfur and selenium during the selenization process. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristic of the CIGS module had an efficiency of 8.58%, with an open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Isc), and fill factor of 2.77 V, 9.74 mA, and 66.9%, respectively (Fig. 3c), implying that the Voc of the individual single CIGS cell was successfully maintained in the module configuration.
Next, electrocatalytic film for water oxidation was monolithically integrated with the prepared CIGS module. Catalytic function of the anode side for oxygen evolution is important to achieve a highly efficient reaction because there is a large overpotential required for a four-electron water oxidation process.27 A low temperature coating method is required to deposit the catalyst at the reverse side, to protect the pre-made CIGS module on the obverse side. We developed the catalyst film on glass/Ti/Pt substrate using a doctor blade coating method with Co3O4 nanoparticles as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst and Nafion solution as the binder material, and heat treatment at 70 °C.28,29 A film approximately 2 μm thick of agglomerated Co3O4 nanoparticles of ∼50 nm was observed in the cross-sectional SEM image (see Fig. 3d), which had a porous morphology with high surface area. To investigate OER catalytic performance, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was performed in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte (see Fig. 3e). Apparent enhancement in water oxidation activity by incorporating Co3O4 catalyst was observed at current response of the whole potential region compared with that of the conducting substrate (Ti/Pt thin film). The overpotential corresponding to 5 mA cm−2 was decreased by 360 mV in the presence of the Co3O4 nanoparticle catalysts (from 2.30 V to 1.94 V vs. RHE). Oxygen evolution on the Co3O4 anode was confirmed with Faradaic efficiency of 97.6% (±14.3), and slow desorption of oxygen bubbles from the anode surface caused a relatively large standard deviation. Moreover, we confirmed that performance of the CIGS module was not damaged even after Co3O4 catalyst deposition (see Fig. S3, ESI†).
A cathode for CO2 reduction was fabricated by nanostructured gold foil, which was synthesized based on a method developed by Chen et al.24 The synthesized nanostructured Au morphology was characterized by SEM, as shown in Fig. 4a. We confirmed surface layer formation with agglomerated tens of nanometer-sized Au particles. Fig. 4b and c shows Faradaic efficiencies for H2, CO, and HCOO−, and steady-state current densities of nanostructured Au with respect to potential from −0.39 V to −0.84 V vs. RHE in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. Faradaic efficiency for CO had an optimal potential window from −0.44 V to −0.69 V, maintained at around 90–94%, but this started to decrease from potentials higher than −0.70 V. Considering the thermodynamic equilibrium potential for CO2 reduction to CO is −0.10 V vs. RHE, the overpotential at 5 mA cm−2 was 400 mV. In contrast, Faradaic efficiency of H2 showed the opposite phenomenon. Observation of the partial current densities for H2 and CO (see Fig. 4c) shows that, under highly biased potential (<−0.7 V vs. RHE), the production rate of H2 dramatically increases while production rate for CO remains almost constant. This may be a result of mass transfer limitations of CO2 at the high potential region.30 In addition, we confirmed that the formate ion had <1% F.E. for most of the potential region with the exception of 5.8% F.E. at −0.39 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 4  Nanostructured Au for cathodic catalyst. (a) SEM images of nanostructured Au cathodic catalyst. (b) Faradaic efficiency of H2, CO, and formate at varying potential on nanostructured Au cathode for CO2 reduction. (c) Total and partial current densities of H2, CO, and formate at varying potential on nanostructured Au cathode for CO2 reduction. 
Photoanode (CIGS PV + Co3O4 OER catalyst) and cathode (nanostructured Au) were then put together to be a monolithic solar-fuel device (see Fig. 5a). Nafion membrane was installed between the anode and cathode to separate products from both electrodes and also to transfer protons from anode to cathode. CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 solution was used for both anolyte and catholyte. The acrylic spacer was customized to hold the solution, and the spacer and electrodes were assembled with epoxy resin so that the produced gases could be collected. The device was directly connected to a gas chromatograph (GC) to determine the device's performance in generating products. When a two-electrode experiment was carried out to confirm the CO2 reduction performance, we confirmed similar I–V behavior to that of the three-electrode test with the nanostructured Au (see Fig. 5b). Also, we confirmed that the I–V curve of the two-electrode test was divided into three regions. In the first region, no chemical reaction occurred because of a non-Faradaic process below 2.0 V. The production rate of CO was dramatically increased from 2.0 V to 2.5 V, while the production rate for H2 began to increase from 2.5 V. Thus, a very narrow region for CO generation must be matched with the CIGS module to obtain highly efficient solar to CO production efficiency. When the current was matched to determine the operating point of the prepared CIGS module and H2O/CO2 electrolysis, we confirmed that the operating point was 7.12 mA at 2.34 V (see Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  Solar-fuel device performance. (a) Photograph of illuminated solar-fuel device in operation, in which the CIGS module was incorporated at the external side of the PEC cell. (b) Steady-state I–V curves of two-electrode measurement composed of the Co3O4 nanoparticle film anode and the nanostructured Au cathode showing that 2.0 V of a minimum external potential was required to initiate the overall reactions. (c) I–V characteristics of CIGS module and two-electrode test where the intersection is the operating point for the solar-fuel device without any external bias potential. (d) The operating current of the solar-fuel device under chopped light illumination. 
To confirm the performance of the solar-fuel device, the photocurrent was measured as a function of time with no external bias by connecting with an external conducting material at the device. As shown in Fig. 5d, a current spike at the moment of illumination and subsequent decrease in current was observed. This behavior is attributed to charging of the double layer and conversion of reaction adsorbates on the electrode surfaces.21 After stabilization of the photocurrent, we could observe a slight lowering caused by bubble formation on the EC films. Based on these data, an average photocurrent of about 7.32 mA with 91.2% CO F.E. was directly measured with the actual device, which indeed corresponds to the operating current with the operating voltage of 2.33 V. From these data, solar to fuel conversion efficiency (ηSTF) was calculated by the following equations:31,32 (2) (3)where Pin is the incident solar power intensity (100 mW cm−2), area is the illuminated electrode area (2.10 cm2), Iop is the operating photocurrent (mA), ΔE is the thermodynamic potential difference which is 1.33 V for CO generation, ξ is the F.E. for CO generation (%), and Vop is the operating potential (V). Alternatively, STF efficiency also can be calculated by multiplying the efficiency of the PV part with the electrochemical conversion efficiency and their coupling efficiency, as shown in eqn (3). The first term of the product is a power conversion efficiency of the CIGS module, the second term is the efficiency of an electrochemical process for CO generation, and the final term is the coupling efficiency between the PV part and electrochemical system. Here, the power conversion efficiency of the CIGS module was 8.58%, as mentioned above, and electrochemical conversion efficiency was 52%. Notably, the coupling efficiency was 94.5%, indicating that efficiency loss by incorporation of PV and electrochemical cell was not an issue because the operating point of our device remained close to the maximum power point of the PV module.
From both calculations, solar to CO conversion efficiency of 4.23% was achieved, which means that CO gas was produced at a rate of 0.4 μL s−1 cm−2. The operating current density of the device slowly decreased, and thus the solar to CO conversion efficiency decreased to 2.67% after 5 h. Finally, to confirm whether CO really originated from CO2 reduction, a 13C-isotope test was carried out (see Fig. S4, ESI†). The result clearly verified that the origin of 13CO was reduced from 13CO2.
Our artificial solar-fuel generator demonstrated a solar to fuel conversion efficiency of 4.23% without external bias potential application, which is comparable with photosynthesis of microorganisms and even much higher than in most plants in nature. Moreover, it is a remarkably high value compared with previous reports. Arai et al.33 first reported solar to carbon based fuel conversion efficiency of 0.2% with two semiconductor photoelectrodes in 2013, and White et al.34 reported efficiency of 1.8% using a commercial Si solar panel and In-based CO2 reduction catalyst in 2014.
One of the important advantages of our device is that it is possible to obtain any desired fuel just by changing the cathode material, which determines the selectivity of CO2 reduction. For example, by simply replacing nanostructured Au cathode with Pt, only pure hydrogen was obtained with a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 4.37% (see Fig. S5 and S6, ESI†).
Our solar-fuel model device also suggests future research directions and considerations to solve current engineering problems for realization of higher efficiency. From the STF calculation equation, we know that the final efficiency (4.23%) of solar-fuel devices is almost half of the power conversion efficiency (8.58%) of the CIGS module, which implies that developing the performance of components other than the PV part can almost double the efficiency. We found that most of the efficiency loss was attributed to electrolysis efficiency (52% in our device) because the decrease in coupling efficiency was only about 5%. Our device has potential loss of close to 1 V, which can be determined by comparing the operation voltage of 2.33 V with the thermodynamic potential for full reaction of CO generation of 1.33 V. The main sources of the potential loss are overpotentials for oxidation and reduction, potential drop across the membrane, and IR drop because of solution resistance. Based on individual three-electrode tests for the anode (see Fig. 3e) and cathode (see Fig. 4c), we found that most of the potential loss occurred from the overpotentials, and other sources of potential loss in comparison are not as significant.
Potential losses of approximately 650 mV and 340 mV were attributed to overpotential for OER and CO2 reduction, respectively. Therefore, to obtain high conversion efficiency, developing catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction is crucial to reduce the overpotential of the anode side, especially in neutral pH solution. Although the thermodynamic reduction potential vs. RHE for CO2 reduction does not depend on pH, hydrogen evolution overcomes CO2 reduction in acidic solution and CO2 molecules find it hard to exist in basic solution.35 Therefore, most CO2 reduction studies have been carried out in a neutral electrolyte, as we have used in this study. However, most of the best performing electrocatalysts with low overpotential for water oxidation have been developed in basic solution such as 1 M KOH and their overpotential significantly increases in neutral solution, which is the reason for the large overpotential in our solar-fuel system. This result emphasizes the need for developing optimized oxidation catalysts for solar-fuel devices, and how this could greatly contribute to achieving higher STF efficiency.
Beyond the catalytic activity issues, the evolved gas bubbles attached to the electrode surface may increase the overpotential (see slow desorption of oxygen bubbles from anode in Movie S1, ESI†), which can be resolved by engineering processes such as channel formation on the solar-fuel devices.36
As discussed, decrement of the overpotential for the oxidation and reduction is important as it can increase the electro-conversion efficiency by reducing potential loss. Or, we can also expect that increasing the power conversion efficiency of the PV module will enhance the overall STF efficiency, from eqn (3). However, this does not always guarantee increased efficiency for solar-fuel devices because the Faradaic efficiency of CO2 conversion depends on the applied potential (i.e. ξ(Vop)), as shown in Fig. 5b. For the given solar-fuel system, when the overpotential for the water oxidation decreases, the operating point at the intersection of the I–V curve of PV part can be shifted to a higher operating current as discussed earlier (see Fig. 1c); and if the operating current exceeds a certain level, the Faradaic efficiency for CO2 reduction on the cathode can decrease (see Fig. 5b). To be specific, our model device showed that the Faradaic efficiency for CO2 reduction decreased when the total current density was larger than ∼10 mA (or when the applied bias potential surpassed 2.5 V in the two-electrode system); and, consequentially, the final solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency would decrease. This may occur by mass transfer limitation of CO2 under high current density or by a change in the active sites preferring hydrogen evolution depending on the applied potential. Similarly, if the performance of the PV part increases and enhances the operating potential, the applied potential on the cathode side increases, which will affect the Faradaic efficiency for CO2 to CO production. The dependence of the Faradaic efficiency on the applied potential at the cathode makes it more complicated to realize efficient solar-fuel devices with a target product. To minimize this effect and produce the targeted fuel, there is a need for a CO2 electrocatalyst with Faradaic efficiency that is less dependent on the overpotential. However, from a different perspective, the dependence can be advantageous as the product ratio between CO/H2 can be tuned by changing the photovoltage output from the PV module.
4. Conclusions
In brief, using a low cost, solution-processed CIGS thin film solar cell module technology, a low temperature, paste-coating method of electrocatalytic film for water oxidation, and nanostructured Au cathode for CO2 reduction, we developed a single solar-fuel device operating only by sunlight with solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of over 4%. This demonstration is just our first step to achieving a highly efficient monolithic and standalone solar-fuel device, as higher efficiency is expected by reducing the overpotential for the water oxidation in the electrolyte. In addition, enhanced performance could be achieved by applying tandem architecture between the PV and PC film rather than EC. Vertical series connection of PV rather than parallel series, in an aim to further reduce photocurrent loss for high solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency, is now under investigation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the program of the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) and partly by the University-Institute cooperation program of the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning.
Notes and references
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2673–2678 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bensaid, G. Centi, E. Garrone, S. Perathoner and G. Saracco, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 500–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Won, C. H. Choi, J. Chung and S. I. Woo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 217–223 CrossRef .
X.-G. Zhu, S. P. Long and D. R. Ort, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2010, 61, 235–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Walker, J. Appl. Phycol., 2009, 21, 509–517 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Surendranath, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15617–15621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 567–569 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Minggu, W. R. Wan Daud and M. B. Kassim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5233–5244 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Sahlberg, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3676–3683 CAS .
H. Doscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 CAS .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Park, J. W. Cho, J. K. Lee, K. Shin, J.-H. Kim and B. K. Min, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 122–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Park, Y. Cho, S. H. Moon, J. E. Kim, D.-K. Lee, J. Gwak, J. Kim, D.-W. Kim and B. K. Min, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 135105 CrossRef .
D. G. H. Hetterscheid, J. I. van der Vlugt, B. de Bruin and J. N. H. Reek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8178–8181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, W. Park, J. Kim, H. Kim, W. Kim and B. K. Min, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 1924–1929 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jeon, A. Nugroho, J. Kim, H. Kim and B. K. Min, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 10587–10592 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hatsukade, K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13814–13819 RSC .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Winkler, C. R. Cox, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E1076–E1082 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arai, S. Sato, T. Kajino and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1274–1282 CAS .
J. L. White, J. T. Herb, J. J. Kaczur, P. W. Majsztrik and A. B. Bocarsly, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 7, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. Vayenas, R. White and M. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer, New York,  2008, vol. 42, ch. 3, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .
M. J. Cheah, I. G. Kevrekidis and J. B. Benziger, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9918–9934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta06495jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Designs for solar-fuel devices. (a) Schematic diagram of a representative PEC water-splitting cell developed by Nocera's group with Co-OEC|3jn-a-Si|NiMoZn cell configuration (adapted from ref. 15). (b) Schematic diagram of a representative PEC water-splitting cell developed by Turner's group with GaAs PV within p-GaInP2 photo-cathode (adapted from ref. 16). Schematic diagrams to illustrate the enhancement operating current of a solar-fuel device by incorporating (c) electrocatalysts (EC) of low overpotentials, or (d) photocatalysts (PC).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Solar-fuel device with photocatalytic film (P.C.F.) and internal PV. (b) Solar-fuel device with photocatalytic film (P.C.F.) and external PV. (c) Solar-fuel device with electrocatalytic film (E.C.F.) and external PV.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Monolithic CIGS module and Co3O4 anodic catalyst for photoelectrode. (a) Schematic diagram and photograph of a monolithically stacked photoelectrode with CIGS PV module and Co3O4 film on each side of the glass substrate. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a CIGS PV cell (scale bar is 1 μm). (c) Typical I–V characteristic of a CIGS module. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of Co3O4 film on the glass/Ti/Pt substrate (scale bar is 1 μm). (e) Typical J–V characteristic with and without Co3O4 catalyst films.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nanostructured Au for cathodic catalyst. (a) SEM images of nanostructured Au cathodic catalyst. (b) Faradaic efficiency of H2, CO, and formate at varying potential on nanostructured Au cathode for CO2 reduction. (c) Total and partial current densities of H2, CO, and formate at varying potential on nanostructured Au cathode for CO2 reduction.	 

 	Fig. 5  Solar-fuel device performance. (a) Photograph of illuminated solar-fuel device in operation, in which the CIGS module was incorporated at the external side of the PEC cell. (b) Steady-state I–V curves of two-electrode measurement composed of the Co3O4 nanoparticle film anode and the nanostructured Au cathode showing that 2.0 V of a minimum external potential was required to initiate the overall reactions. (c) I–V characteristics of CIGS module and two-electrode test where the intersection is the operating point for the solar-fuel device without any external bias potential. (d) The operating current of the solar-fuel device under chopped light illumination.	 
	(2)
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta06495j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
