Novel back-reflector architecture with nanoparticle based buried light-scattering microstructures for improved solar cell performance  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR00259E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR00259E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12035-12046Novel back-reflector architecture with nanoparticle based buried light-scattering microstructures for improved solar cell performance

        
          
            Derese 
            Desta
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sanjay K. 
            Ram
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Rita 
            Rizzoli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michele 
            Bellettato
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Caterina 
            Summonte
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Bjarke R. 
            Jeppesen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pia B. 
            Jensen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yao-Chung 
            Tsao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Hartmut 
            Wiggers
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Rui N. 
            Pereira
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Balling
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Arne Nylandsted 
            Larsen
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics and I3N, University of Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago 3810-193, Aveiro, Portugal
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy-iNANO, Aarhus University, Gustav Wieds Vej 14, DK-8000, Aarhus, Denmark. E-mail: sanjayk.ram@gmail.com
cIMM-Consiglio Nationale delle Ricerche, via Gobetti 101, 40129, Bologna, Italy
dDepartment of Physics and Nanotechnology, Aalborg University, Skjernvej 4A, DK-9220 Aalborg East, Denmark
eInstitut für Verbrennung und Gasdynamik, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Lotharstr 1, 47048 Duisburg, Germany
fWalter Schottky Institute and Physik Department, Technische Universität München, Am Coulombwall 4, 85748 Garching, Germany
Received 
      11th January 2016
    , Accepted 25th May 2016First published on 26th May 2016AbstractA new back-reflector architecture for light-management in thin-film solar cells is proposed that includes a morphologically smooth top surface with light-scattering microstructures buried within. The microstructures are pyramid shaped, fabricated on a planar reflector using TiO2 nanoparticles and subsequently covered with a layer of Si nanoparticles to obtain a flattened top surface, thus enabling growth of good quality thin-film solar cells. The optical properties of this back-reflector show high broadband haze parameter and wide angular distribution of diffuse light-scattering. The n–i–p amorphous silicon thin-film solar cells grown on such a back-reflector show enhanced light absorption resulting in improved external quantum efficiency. The benefit of the light trapping in those solar cells is evidenced by the gains in short-circuit current density and efficiency up to 15.6% and 19.3% respectively, compared to the reference flat solar cells. This improvement in the current generation in the solar cells grown on the flat-topped (buried pyramid) back-reflector is observed even when the irradiation takes place at large oblique angles of incidence. Finite-difference-time-domain simulation results of optical absorption and ideal short-circuit current density values agree well with the experimental findings. The proposed approach uses a low cost and simple fabrication technique and allows effective light manipulation by utilizing the optical properties of micro-scale structures and nanoscale constituent particles.
1 Introduction
Effective utilization of weakly absorbed photons is key to enhancing the efficiency of thin-film solar cells. The most commonly used approach to improve light absorption in thin-film solar cells is to use textured front or back surfaces as light scattered from a textured surface/interface has a longer path length.1–5 If the scattering angle is large enough, the light is trapped within the absorber layer of the solar cell leading to enhanced photocurrent.6 The desirable sizes for the light-trapping features are often determined by the bandgap of the absorber layer material. In the case of silicon thin-film solar cells, feature sizes in the range of 600 to 1100 nm are of interest, depending on whether the material is hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) or microcrystalline silicon (μc-Si:H). Various approaches, like randomly textured transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), periodic gratings (2D and 3D), and nanoscale features of various sizes and shapes of dielectrics or metals, have been used to enhance light absorption in thin-film solar cells by utilizing the phenomena of scattering, diffraction, wave guides or plasmonics.7–14 Aside from near-bandgap wavelength scale features, even much larger features can be useful for enhancing light absorption by making use of multiple reflections at the cell surface.15,16
The use of textured surfaces can have a detrimental effect on the electrical performance of thin-film solar cells, as the morphologically rough surfaces of the underlying substrates induce cracks and voids in the photoactive layers.15,17,18 Growth of good quality semiconductor material and layers thereof is influenced not only by the sizes of the underlying features, but also by factors like the spacing, steepness, and in general, the 3D configuration of the features.19 Thus, many features or patterns that show good optical properties in theoretical studies may be untenable for actual solar cell fabrication. Consequently, separating the textured light-scattering surface from the semiconductor growth surface can be useful to avoid the detrimental effect of the surface roughness. The introduction of a suitable dielectric medium between the textured top surface and the semiconductor back surface can create such a spatial separation while preserving the optical benefit obtained from the scattering or multiple internal reflection of light. The spacing medium with a refractive index different from that of the underlying textured structures would, in essence, result in the optical interface to get buried under a flat semiconductor growth interface. Chemical and mechanical flattening of a light-scattering back-reflector composed of ZnO nanostructures filled with a-Si:H for use in μc-Si:H cells has been reported.20,21
A flattened light-scattering substrate can be an industrially viable solution to reconcile the requirements of effective light scattering and high quality absorber material, if the fabrication is simple and scalable. In this work, we demonstrate a new method to obtain flat-topped substrates with buried light-scattering microstructures, using optically dissimilar TiO2 and Si nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs, Si-NPs). TiO2-NPs have a wide energy bandgap and a refractive index lower than that of the Si-NPs. The bandgap of the Si-NP can be tuned to match the silicon solar cell material by varying the NP diameter. In the present approach, pyramid shaped microstructures using TiO2-NPs were fabricated on top of a planar reflector and subsequently covered with Si-NPs to obtain a flat light-scattering back-reflector (BR). Fig. 1 shows the proposed scheme of the light-scattering substrate as a 2D view of the features made of nanoparticles. The TiO2-NP/Si-NP layer and the light-trapping concept envisioned are shown in Fig. 1, with the possible paths of scattered light rays depicted with lines as visual aids. A simple and rapid fabrication technique, that does not require sophisticated technology, was developed to favor wide adaptability and commercial feasibility. We demonstrate the light-scattering effectiveness of these BRs in a wide spectral range with large oblique angles and the enhancement of current density and efficiency of the a-Si:H solar cells deposited on them. Finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) simulation studies were used to understand and support the experimental findings of such optically textured but physically flat molded TiO2-NP/Si-NP BRs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of the back-reflector architecture based on buried light-scattering microstructures made of nanoparticles for light-trapping in a-Si:H solar cells. The solid red line shows the optical path of an incident long-wavelength photon. The dashed lines represent possible diffuse scattering arising from the interfaces created by nanoparticles aggregates. 
2 Methods
2.1 Si nanoparticle synthesis
To use as a molded material, Si-NP with a mean diameter of 4.9 nm as measured by Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) method,22 were synthesized by microwave assisted decomposition of silane (SiH4) in a low pressure flow reactor. The reactor consists of a quartz tube into which a gas mixture of SiH4, H2, and Ar are injected. The microwave energy is coupled into the gas flow forming a flame-like plasma torch. The microwave power generator was driven at 550 W and the plasma pressure was kept at 50 mbar. A SiH4 precursor gas concentration of 1061 ppm was used.
A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of Si-NP used in this work is shown in Fig. 2(a). The TEM image shown in Fig. 2(b) is obtained with energy filtering and corresponds to the same location as the image in Fig. 2(a). In Fig. 2(b) we can see the maps of the crystalline silicon (purple) core and amorphous silicon dioxide (green) shell of the Si-NP, which is formed upon exposure of the as-grown Si-NP (H-terminated) to air. The details of Si-NP synthesis have been described elsewhere.23
 Fig. 2  (a) High resolution TEM image of Si-NP showing a crystalline core covered with an oxide shell that is formed upon exposure of the as-grown hydrogen terminated Si-NP to air, and the image in (b) corresponds to the same location as the image in (a) obtained using energy filtering. 
2.2 Nanoparticle paste preparation
The Si-NPs (2.5 wt%) were first dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonication (for 30 min) and magnetic stirring (at 700 rpm for 6 h). Then, as an organic binder, ethyl cellulose solution in ethanol (10 wt%) was added to the Si-NPs dispersion and the resulting paste was stirred at 700 rpm for 1 h. A viscous Si-NP paste was obtained after heating the paste at 70 °C for 20 min under vigorous stirring. The paste was diluted with a-terpineol to achieve optimized solution concentration and viscosity for our spin-coating or dispensing purpose. In a similar manner, a viscous paste containing TiO2-NPs (having an average diameter of 20 nm, from Sigma Aldrich) was also prepared.5
2.3 Fabrication of light-scattering back-reflectors
To create micro-sized structures for the BR, we utilized random pyramid array features obtained on a silicon wafer by a wet etching process. A random pyramid master was produced by etching a pre-cleaned silicon wafer in an alkaline solution, which consists of de-ionized water, potassium hydroxide, and isopropyl alcohol. The surfaces of textured and smooth Si wafers were first modified with vapor phase deposited 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (from Sigma Aldrich) anti-sticking monolayer. For fabrication of soft molds, we used polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) prepared by mixing the elastomer base in a curing agent (ratio of 10:1) followed by degassing in vacuum. The PDMS pre-polymer was poured on the textured Si master to obtain the negative of the pyramidal texture and on a smooth Si wafer to obtain flat molds. After detaching, the molds were treated with an antisticking monolayer for future reuse.
The planar back-reflectors (Flat-BRs) used in this work were fabricated by e-beam deposition of Ti (10 nm) on pre-cleaned borosilicate Schott glass substrates followed by deposition of Ag (120 nm) layer. The Ag layer was then coated with 100 nm thick TiO2 layer using an AJA ATC Orion rf-magnetron sputtering system. The role of TiO2 thin-film is to prevent the Ag layer from any oxidation in subsequent steps involving elevated temperatures. The steps involved in the fabrication of pyramid BR (PBR) and buried pyramid BR (BP-BR) using TiO2-NPs and Si-NPs are schematically shown in Fig. 3. To fabricate P-BR structure, TiO2-NP paste was spin-coated onto the planar reflector at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds. The negative pyramid mold was immediately placed atop the paste and pressed using clamps, followed by baking at 80 °C for an hour (step a). The mold remains in contact with the paste during the entire baking period. During this process, the solvent slowly evaporates from the paste through the semi-permeable PDMS mold without deformation or the formation of any visible cracks. After baking, the PDMS mold was detached, leaving behind solidified TiO2-NP pyramidal structures on top of planar reflector. The layer was sintered at 400 °C for 1 h (step b) to remove the organic components of the paste, and to enhance the compactness and robustness of the layer.5 In order to fabricate the BP-BR, the substrate with sintered pyramidal structures of TiO2-NP obtained from previous step (b) was spin-coated with Si-NP paste and then pressed using a flat PDMS mold so as to flatten the surface of the Si-NP layer (step c). The resulting sample was baked at 80 °C for 1 h and then sintered at 400 °C for 1 h to obtain a flattened back-reflector with buried TiO2-NP pyramids (step d).
 Fig. 3  The steps involved in the fabrication of pyramidal (P) and buried pyramidal (BP) structures on top of planar reflectors are shown schematically in (a, b) and (c, d), respectively. 
2.4 Fabrication of a-Si:H solar cells
To provide back electrical contact to the solar cells a 100 nm thick indium tin oxide (ITO) layer was sputtered followed by deposition of a 10 nm Al doped ZnO (AZO) layer. The deposition of a-Si:H solar cells on the above described P-BR and BP-BR was carried out using a multi chamber cluster radio frequency plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) system. A reference solar cell was also made on a Flat-BR (Glass/Ti(10 nm)/Ag(120 nm)/AZO(30 nm)). All solar cells were fabricated in the same run to ensure identical deposition conditions. The layers of n–i–p solar cell devices were deposited using specific gas mixtures in each layer to obtain the required optical and electrical properties in the following sequence: (1) a 30 nm thick n-type a-Si:H layer using a SiH4, H2 and PH3 mixture, (2) an intrinsic a-Si:H layer of 250 nm using a SiH4 and H2 mixture, (3) ∼3 nm thin intrinsic a-Si:C:H buffer layer using a SiH4, CH4 and H2 mixture, and (4) a 10 nm p-type a-Si:C:H window layer using SiH4, H2, B2H6 and CH4 gases. Finally, a 100 nm thick ITO layer was sputtered atop the solar cells using a shadow mask having 3 mm diameter holes to provide front electrical contacts to the devices. The cross-sectional schematic illustrations of the n–i–p a-Si:H solar cells grown on Flat-BR (Flat-SC), P-BR (P-SC) and BP-BR (BP-SC) are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  The cross-sectional schematic illustrations of the n–i–p a-Si:H solar cells grown on Flat-BR (Flat-SC), P-BR (P-SC) and BP-BR (BR-SC). 
2.5 Characterization techniques
Morphological characterization of the BRs was performed using atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Dimension Edge) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Magellan 400). A focused ion beam instrument (FIB, FEI VERSA 3D) was used to make samples for cross section observations of a-Si:H thin-film solar cells grown on the BP-BR. The optical properties of the BRs and solar cell devices were studied using a spectrometer equipped with a 150 mm integrating sphere (Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050). The Si thin-films and individual nanoparticle layers were studied by reflection and transmission measurements and spectroscopic ellipsometry (Sentech 850 PV) technique to obtain their respective structural compositions and optical parameters such as refractive indices. The refractive indices of the nanoparticle layers were obtained from modelling the ellipsometry data using the Bruggeman effective medium approximation (BEMA) approach by considering a mixture of nanoparticles and voids.24 The angular distribution of the scattered light from the BRs was characterized by measuring the intensity of the reflected light as a function of scattering angle using a photo multiplier tube (PMT), which was scanned between 10° and 90° from the surface normal in steps of 0.5°.25 The current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cell devices were measured using a calibrated Oriel solar simulator with a Xenon arc lamp under one sun illumination (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed using a setup containing a stable white light lamp, interference filters, a bias light, a chopper and a lock-in amplifier. The chopped monochromatic light impinges on the whole sample area and a bias light is added, which is adjusted to obtain the same short circuit current density (Jsc) of the solar cell as measured under the solar simulator. In this way, the current signal is measured at each wavelength by means of the lock-in amplifier at approximately the real Jsc condition.
2.6 FDTD simulations
Two-dimensional simulations were performed using the Lumerical FDTD solution software, which is based on the finite-difference- time-domain method.26 For performing the simulations, the AFM data of the BR was imported into the simulation to model the realistic solar cell architecture. For simplicity, a conformal coating with the consecutive TCOs and doped and intrinsic a-Si:H layers was considered. The thickness of the TiO2-NP and Si-NP layers was taken from the cross-sectional SEM images of the fabricated devices. A periodic boundary condition with a period of 4 μm was used in the x-direction and perfectly matched layer boundary conditions were applied in the y-direction. A broadband plane wave (400–800 nm) was injected into the simulation region in the negative y-direction. The refractive indices of all layers except the Ag were obtained from spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements. The optical data for Ag was taken from literature.27 To understand the experimental results, we used the FDTD method to calculate the absorbed power per unit area (P) from the divergence of the pointing vector26 (1)where |E(r,ω)| is the magnitude of the electric field, ε′′(r,ω) is the imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity, r is the position vector and ω is the angular frequency of the incident light. The simulated fraction of absorbed light in the a-Si:H (i) layer was calculated to obtain a solar-spectrum-weighted optical generation rate (G).26 Assuming that each absorbed photon generates an electron–hole pair, the generation rate is calculated using (2)where ℏ is the reduced Planck's constant. The net AM1.5 solar spectrum-weighted generation rate of the solar cells is determined using (3)where ISource is the light source intensity, and IAM1.5 is the intensity of the solar AM1.5 spectrum. Then, the ideal Jsc is calculated using (4)where e is the free electron charge and A is the solar cell area.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Structural characterization of BRs and solar cells

Fig. 5(a) and (b) show AFM images of the surface topography of P-BR and BP-BR, respectively. The AFM image of the P-BR shows randomly placed upright pyramidal features (with lateral feature sizes in the range of 1–5 μm) with square bases, having root mean-square roughness (σrms) value of ∼561 nm. The AFM image of the BP-BR reveals an almost flat surface with σrms value of ∼18.7 nm when the valleys between the pyramidal features of TiO2-NP are filled with Si-NP. In Fig. 5(c) the SEM image of the FIB milled cross-section of an a-Si:H solar cell deposited on BP-BR is shown.
 Fig. 5  AFM images of surface morphology of (a) P-BR and (b) BP-BR, and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of an a-Si:H thin-film solar cell grown on BP-BR (BP-SC). 
The smoothness of the substrate surface is crucial for the growth of good quality solar cells.20 The high degree of roughness with the pyramidal structures in the P-BR is consistent with the large dimensions of the structures. The top surface of the BP-BR shows shallow and gentle waves over a large-scale (>15 μm) in Fig. 5(c), as would be expected with the manual one-step flattening technique used.
3.2 Light-scattering properties of nanoparticles based BRs

Fig. 6(a) shows the wavelength dependence of total reflectance (RT) and diffuse reflectance (RD) of Flat-BR, P-BR and BP-BR. Such measurements were carried out to detect the scattering capability of the microstructures made of low refractive index material when they are buried beneath a different high index material, the top surface of the latter being flat. The black solid curve (Flat-BR), which is close to 100% for almost the entire spectrum, indicates that there is no transmitted component, and that negligible absorption takes place in the Ag layer. This allows us to interpret the missing signal as absorption in the successive layers. The very high reflectance of P-BR illustrates, as expected, the excellent reflecting and scattering properties of the pyramidal structures, indicated respectively by total reflectance almost equal to that of Flat-BR, and by a diffused component representing almost 90% of the reflected signal. Some absorption is detected in the 400–600 nm wavelength range, due to absorption in TiO2-NP, which however is not detrimental, since such spectral range is completely absorbed by the active layer of the n–i–p device.
 Fig. 6  Total reflectance (RT) and diffuse reflectance (RD) (a), haze spectra of Flat-BR, P-BR, and BP-BR (b), and angle resolved scattering measurements of P-BR and BP-BR (c–d). The inset in (d) shows the setup for angle resolved scattering measurements. 
In the case of BP-BR, we observe reflecting properties very similar to the P-BR case, apart from some additional absorption for wavelengths up to 600 nm. This loss in total reflectance for λ < 600 nm can be ascribed to light absorption in the Si-NPs layer. The difference in RT and RD of P-BR and BP-BR in this region exists because the BP-BR, besides TiO2-NPs which have absorption onset at about 320 nm, also incorporates Si-NPs, which have absorption onset at 500 nm approximately. On the other hand, for λ > 600 nm both P-BR and BP-BR have very close RT and RD values till λ ∼ 1400 nm, beyond which the diffuse reflectance of BP-BR shows a slight fall. The result is noteworthy, because it confirms that highly scattering properties do not necessarily imply a rough surface morphology, which is extremely promising in view of preserving the optoelectronic properties of the device. The scattering of long wavelength light is influenced by the large pyramid structures, and the fall in diffuse reflectance at λ > 1400 nm in the BP-BRs occurs possibly because of a slight blunting of the peaky features during the application of the Si-NPs paste on the pyramids which are wet and somewhat pliant at the coating stage.
The calculated spectral haze factors, H (RD/RT), of the different BRs are shown in Fig. 6(b). The BP-BR shows haze values higher than 90% up to the infrared region, similar to what is observed for the P-BR since we still have the buried pyramid microstructures in the BP-BR. The pyramidal structures can result in high haze values due to two reasons. Firstly, multiple reflections of light may occur at the oblique interfaces. Secondly, omnidirectional scattering of light may take place at the nanotextured surfaces arising from the component nanoparticles and within the optically inhomogenous structures comprising of voids and variably sized nanoparticles and their clumps. In spite of the flat top surface of the Si-NP layer, the optical properties of the BP-BR are not degraded with respect to the P-BR. We attribute this to the multiple light reflections, and the abundant light-scattering taking place at the buried textured interfaces.
It is noteworthy that attaining very high haze is a necessary but not sufficient condition for enhancing light absorption in thin-film solar cells.28 By noting that only light travelling at large oblique angles within the active layer of the n–i–p device will be efficiently trapped, and that, when entering into the a-Si:H layer, the light beam will be deflected toward the normal to it, it derives that an ideal BR should maximize the scattering at large angle. The angular distribution of the diffusely reflected light from the P-BR and BP-BR is shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d) for s- and p-polarized light (λ = 633 nm) incident normal to the surface. For both s- and p-polarizations, the P-BR and BP-BR exhibit scattering over a broad angular range with a significant part of scattering occurring at large oblique angles.
The choice of the nanoparticles pairs can also significantly affect the way light can be manipulated in back reflectors based on nanoparticles. The refractive index of Si-NPs ∼2.8 at λ = 500 nm prevents the bending of light towards the normal in the presence of the high index a-Si:H solar cell atop it, and serves to trap the light that is scattered by the textured back reflector. Si-NPs in this study have mean diameters of ∼4.9 nm (with a larger bandgap ∼1.6 eV due to quantum confinement) to ensure that the Si-NPs layer is less absorbing while maintaining the good light scattering properties of the underlying textured layer.29 While smaller sized Si-NPs with a higher band-gap would lead to less parasitic losses, the refractive index would also decrease.
3.3 a-Si:H solar cells performance

Fig. 7 shows the J–V characteristics measured under illumination for solar cells fabricated on Flat-BR, P-BR and BP-BR, and Table 1 summarizes the average performance parameters of five typical solar cells from each device type. The open circuit voltages (Voc) of all devices are comparable, being in the range of 801–815 mV. Noticeable improvements in the short circuit current density can be seen for both P-SC and BP-SC devices, showing enhancement of 13.1% and 15.6%, respectively, relative to the Flat-BR solar cell (Flat-SC) reference. Although the enhancement in Jsc is expected in view of the excellent optical properties of the P-BR and BP-BR, the Jsc of the BP-SC surpassing that of the P-SC, suggests that the flat growth interface does not diminish the light-trapping benefit. These significant improvements in Jsc should contribute to improvements in device efficiencies η, but as it can be seen, only the BP-SC shows a 19.3% enhancement in efficiency with respect to the Flat-SC, while the η in P-SC deteriorates markedly and reduces to nearly half of that of the Flat-SC. The significant difference in the performance of these two BRs is due to the fill factor (FF) values of P-SC and BP-SC, 27.6% and 61.5%, respectively. This difference is brought out mainly because of the distortion in the J–V curve of the P-SC device, where the inflection point close to the Voc creates an S-shaped behavior. More than the absolute values of the Voc and Jsc, the shape of the J–V curve is important here, being a sign of non-optimal carrier collection in the device.
 Fig. 7  
J–V characteristics of n–i–p a-Si:H thin-film solar cells made on Flat-BR, P-BR, and BP-BR. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic characteristics of n–i–p a-Si:H thin-film solar cells grown on Flat-BR, P-BR and BP-BR. The enhancements in Jsc and η are calculated using ΔJsc = [(Jsc-P(BP)-SC − Jsc-Flat-SC)/Jsc-Flat-SC] × 100% and Δη = [(ηP(BP)-SC − ηFlat-SC)/ηFlat-SC] × 100% respectively




Device

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)

η (%)
Δη (%)

J
sc (mA cm2)
ΔJsc (%)

J
sc-FDTD (mA cm2)
ΔJsc-FDTD (%)




Flat-SC
815 ± 1
59.0 ± 0.5
5.87
—
12.2 ± 0.1
—
12.3
—


BP-SC
801 ± 1
61.5 ± 0.1
7.00
19.3
14.1 ± 0.1
15.6
14.7
19.5


P-SC
812 ± 1
27.6 ± 0.2
3.10
−47.2
13.8 ± 0.2
13.1
—
—




The S-shaped behavior of the J–V curve has been reported in many inorganic and organic photovoltaic devices.30–34 The main cause of this behavior is understood to be the presence of barriers at the interfaces in the transport paths of photocarriers (electrons and holes) before being collected by electrodes. As an example, at the p/i-layer interface a barrier originates due to the band offsets and a spike-like discontinuity in the valence band is formed, where the photogenerated holes accumulate.35,36 The presence of a highly doped p-layer and a buffer layer in between the p- and the i-layer, along with optimum optoelectronic properties and thicknesses of these layers help in reducing the spike and facilitate the collection of holes at the front contact.37 In our case, where the conditions are not optimized for the P-BR substrate, we ascribe the occurrence to the non-conformal film growth resulting from the distribution of the layers overlying the textures over an increased surface area, leading to non-optimal film thickness. This, given the very limited thickness, may lead to chances of discontinuities in the layer conforming to the pyramid contour.
The results of electrical studies emphasize the benefit of morphologically smooth interfaces for the growth of device quality semiconductor materials, and along with the optical properties, establish the advantage of the BP-BR over the Flat-BR. To further scrutinize the origin of the enhancements in Jsc in the BP-SC devices, we measured their total optical absorption and compared it to that of the Flat-SC, see Fig. 8(a). In the wavelength region between 400 nm–550 nm, the absorption of both Flat-SC and BP-SC is comparable, which is expected due to the flat front surfaces of both devices. At wavelengths above ∼550 nm, at which the TiO2-NP/Si-NP scattering structures need to be useful, BP-SC devices show a remarkable improvement in absorption with respect to the absorption in the Flat-SC devices. This absorption enhancement is attributed to the increased optical path length in the a-Si:H i-layer of the solar cell as a result of the efficient light-scattering by the TiO2-NP/Si-NP BR, which was explained above. The BP-BR has minimal parasitic absorption (7%–15%) in the wavelength region that is of interest for light-trapping in a-Si:H solar cells (600 nm to 800 nm), as can be seen in Fig. 8(a) (dashed line). For an absorption as high as α ∼ 1 × 105 cm−1 in the i-layer of these solar cells, it follows that the penetration depth of the light at λ ∼ 500 nm is ∼100 nm. The onset of absorption in the Si-NP layer occurs mainly around at λ ∼ 500 nm, which therefore has no effect on the performance of the solar cells since this light is completely absorbed by the 250 nm thick a-Si:H i-layer before it reaches the TiO2-NP/Si-NP BR.
 Fig. 8  (a) Total optical absorption by Flat-SC, and BP-SC devices (solid lines), and parasitic absorption by the BP-BR (dashed line); (b) measured EQE (left-hand side y-axis) spectra of Flat-SC and BP-SC devices and EQE ratio (right-hand side y-axis). 
To understand further the factors underlying the observed enhancements in Jsc and η, we measured the external quantum efficiency curves for Flat-SC and BP-SC devices. EQE measurements allow one to differentiate between light absorption by the a-Si:H i-layer and the parasitic absorption in the other layers of the solar cells. Although we have carried out absorption measurements at different stages of the solar cell growth to provide information on the optical absorption occurring in the different layers, the EQE measurements provide greater insight into the influence of light-trapping on the actual carrier generation in the solar cell. The results of EQE measurements of the Flat-SC and BP-SC are shown in Fig. 8(b). At wavelengths below 550 nm, both solar cells show similar EQE values due to the complete absorption of light by the absorber layer as explained above. A significant improvement in the EQE of the BP-SC over the Flat-SC becomes visible at wavelengths above 550 nm, consistent with the behavior of the observed optical absorption for these solar cells. The observed performance of the BP-SC can thus be attributed to a significant improvement in trapping of the light in that part of the spectrum where the absorption is typically low in silicon thin-films. The EQE ratio (EQEBP-SC/EQEFlat-SC), plotted on the right y-axis of Fig. 8(b), reaches a value of 5 for light wavelengths above 700 nm.
It is evident by now that the optical surfaces of the buried TiO2 microstructures within the Si-NP layer lead to light trapping resulting in an enhancement of the solar cell performance. However, it is important to explore whether the surface features of the Si-NP layer itself play a role in improving the absorption of the incident light. If we consider the surface roughness σrms of the as-prepared BP-BR, the already unremarkable value of σrms = 18.7 nm is possibly further lowered after the complete solar cell deposition process. Any significant light-trapping arising from features with σrms ∼ 18.7 nm, would result in an increase in the EQE in the light wavelength range below 500 nm in Fig. 8(b), which is, however, not seen. Fig. 8(a) shows that for wavelengths < 500 nm, absorption is higher, implying that the top surface reflectivity (R = 1 − A) is lower for the BP-SC. The reflectivity damping toward the blue is considered to arise from anti-reflection action of the surface roughness. However, a roughness of 18.7 nm should have produced a much larger damping than this, which is not observed in our study.
In Fig. 5(c), the surface morphology is not seen to consist of regularly or densely spaced peaks. Surfaces can have the same height distributions or σrms values and yet differ markedly in the surface morphology due to different spatial properties of the surface features. The surface features must have certain lateral dimensions with respect to each other to result in effective scattering of light. Therefore, correlating the light absorption and current enhancement in the solar cells with only the underlying surface roughness value can be erroneous.38,39 A more effective way to understand the effect of the surface morphology on the current enhancement is to consider the σrms roughness along with lateral dimensions of the features.39 The autocorrelation function (ACF) expresses how the surface is correlated to itself at a certain distance.40 The physical significance of the ACF reaching zero for a specific distance, means that at this distance the heights become independent.40 This distance is known as the autocorrelation length (or autocorrelation distance). The deduced autocorrelation lengths from the AFM images for P-BR and BP-BR in our study are 1.5 μm and 460 nm, respectively. The σrms roughness in the BP-BR is small while the autocorrelation length is very large, thus implying that there is no significant anti-reflection or light trapping effect arising from the surface morphology of the Si-NP layer39 and the enhancement in the photocurrent in BP-SC is completely attributable to the light trapping from the buried textures.
3.4 FDTD calculations of optical absorption in the a-Si:H solar cells
A theoretical optical modeling study of the solar cells (Flat-SC and BP-SC) is important to improve and substantiate our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for improved light absorption and efficiency. The FDTD method was used to estimate the optical absorption in each layer enclosed within the simulation area, at a particular wavelength value, to examine the absorption profile within the photoactive region of the solar cells. The simulations took into account a full solar cell structure on BP-BR: glass/Ti (10 nm)/Ag (120 nm)/TiO2 thin-film (100 nm)/stack of TiO2-NP and Si-NP/ITO (70 nm)/AZO (30 nm)/n-type a-Si:H (30 nm)/intrinsic a-Si:H (250 nm)/p-type a-Si:H (10 nm)/ITO (100 nm). Simulations were also carried out for a solar cell made on top of a Flat-BR: glass/Ti (10 nm)/Ag (120 nm)/AZO (30 nm)/n-type a-Si:H (30 nm)/intrinsic a-Si:H (250 nm)/p-type a-Si:H (10 nm)/ITO (100 nm). The cross-section of optical models of the device structures are shown in Fig. 9. The colors correspond to the refractive indices of the different layers in the solar cell structure with values indicated in the scale bar. To validate the correctness of our constructed model and selected parameter values, we reproduced the experimentally obtained total absorption of Flat-SC and BP-SC devices shown in Fig. 8(a). The total light absorption by each solar cell was calculated by integrating P (eqn (1)) over the simulation area of each device and normalizing the result to the source power. Fig. 10 compares the simulated and measured light absorption spectra of Flat-SC and BP-SC devices. Considering the non-idealities in the simulation parameters, the simulated and the measured absorption curves of the different solar cell types agree reasonably well. The simulated absorption result of the a-Si:H solar cell grown on BP-BR shows a number of peaks arising from the interference of light within the thick TiO2-NP/Si-NP stack.
 Fig. 9  Cross-sectional FDTD simulation models constructed for Flat-SC and BP-SC devices. The color bar represents the refractive indices of the materials in the solar cell structures at λ = 450 nm. 
 Fig. 10  Comparison of calculated (dashed lines) and measured (solid lines) absorption of a-Si:H solar cells grown on Flat-BR and BP-BR (Flat-SC and BP-SC devices, respectively). 
The simulated optical absorption distribution acquired at various light wavelengths of 450 nm, 550 nm, 650 nm, and 750 nm are shown along the y-axis in Fig. 11. The color scale corresponds to absorbed power density in units of W μm−2. The short wavelength light (λ = 450 nm) is completely absorbed within the top layer of the a-Si:H solar cell. At longer wavelengths (>550 nm), the Flat-SC device shows regions of high and low optical absorptions due to Fabry-Perot resonances within the film. The optical absorptions in the BP-SC are different from those found in the Flat-SC device, showing propagation of trapped light within the solar cell. At light wavelength of 650 nm, the absorption profile of the Flat-SC shows an overall low absorption. A considerable amount of the small absorption that does occur in this solar cell, is confined to the n-doped region of the solar cell, which does not contribute to the actual carrier generation. In contrast, the absorption profile of BP-SC shows diffuse high absorption spots distributed throughout the a-Si:H thin-film which can contribute to effective photo carrier generation. Even in the case of 750 nm light wavelength, a substantial absorption is still taking place in the BP-SC while the absorption in Flat-SC is dropped to negligible values. This explains the observed improvements in absorption in experimental and theoretical results of BP-SC.
 Fig. 11  The calculated optical absorption distribution at wavelength values of 450 nm, 550 nm, 650 nm and 750 nm for a-Si:H thin-film solar cells on Flat-SC, and BP-BR. The dotted lines are added to demarcate the a-Si:H thin-film. 

Fig. 12 shows the simulated electron generation rate profiles across the 250 nm thick a-Si:H i-layer of the solar cells on Flat- BR and BP-BR calculated using eqn (3). The scale is in units of electrons per m3 per s and is logarithmic. The generation rate profile for Flat-SC exhibits a region of high and low electron distributions due to Fabry-Perot resonances similar to those observed in Fig. 11. Moreover, the generation rate profile for BP-SC shows high electron distribution extending over the entire region of the absorber layer due to improved light-trapping. The optical absorption in the i-layer of the solar cells was considered to calculate the short circuit current density using eqn (4). The calculated Jsc for Flat-SC and BP-SC are 12.3 mA cm−2 and 14.7 mA cm−2, respectively. As can be seen in Table 1, these calculated values are very close to the experimentally measured Jsc values.
 Fig. 12  Solar-spectrum-weighted electron generation rate profile calculated across the a-Si:H layer of the Flat-SC, and BP-SC devices. The scale is in units of electrons per m3 per s and is logarithmic. 
3.5 Solar cell performance at oblique angles of illumination
The device performance studied for the solar cells on the BP-BR using normal incident light showed good gain in photocurrent and efficiency with respect to the flat device, Fig. 7. An important consideration regarding the field performance of solar cells is how the electrical parameters change with varying the incidence angles of sunlight during the day. To assess the incident angle dependence of the solar cell performance, we measured the J–V curve at different angles of light incidence on the surface of the solar cells by rotating the sample holder stage by certain angles (angle of incidence = 90° − angle of rotation). We studied this angular dependence for two wavelengths of light, 650 nm and 750 nm, which are typically less absorbed by the a-Si:H thin-films and the results are shown in Fig. 13(a) and (b) respectively. The use of the longer wavelengths (650 and 750 nm) of light is to gather more information about the light scattering occurring at the back of the cell.
 Fig. 13  The Jsc angular dependence of the BP-SC and the Flat-SC devices for two wavelengths of unpolarized light, 650 nm and 750 nm, is shown in the left y-axes of the (a) and (b) parts respectively. The right y-axes of these graphs show the angular dependence of the Jsc ratio (Jsc-BP-SC/Jsc-Flat-SC) for these two wavelengths of light. 
The Jsc angular dependence of the BP-SC and the Flat-SC devices is reported on the left y-axes of Fig. 13(a) and (b). The right y-axes of these graphs show the angular dependence of the Jsc ratio (Jsc-BP-SC/Jsc-Flat-SC) for the two wavelengths of light. The Jsc in the BP-SC is seen to be consistently higher than the Jsc of the Flat-SC device. At 40° incidence of light, the Jsc of the BP-SC is 1.7 times the Jsc of the Flat-SC device for λ = 650 nm and 3.5 times for λ = 750 nm. It can be recalled that the angular distribution of diffuse light in the BP-BR in Fig. 6 also demonstrated significant scattering of light at large oblique angles. When we consider these results, we must differentiate two possible sources optical influences in the back reflector: the effect of the BP-BR if viewed as an anti-reflecting graded layer, and the effect of the geometrical scattering within the BP-BR. According to (not reported) calculations, the anti-reflecting contribution due to the gradient of refractive index is not sufficient to explain the observed effect. While some of the large angle incident rays may be lost due to reflection at the front surface of the solar cells, the loss is presumably the same for both the flat solar cell and the BP-SC, as no front side anti-reflecting strategy is used in either of these cells.41 The long wavelength light is poorly absorbed in silicon thin film solar cells. However, with effective light trapping strategies, the path lengths of photons can be manipulated to generate more carriers. The excellent electrical performance of the solar cells on BP-BR for a wide distribution of light incidence angle can find its application in building integrated devices where consistent high energy conversion is desirable for a range of illumination angles through the day. The effectiveness of light-trapping textures under varying incidence light angles is not explored in detail in literature, but our proposed light-trapping architecture brings out its usefulness for enhancing the overall diurnal performance of the thin-film solar cell.
The results of our study bring out the feasibility of light manipulation using nanoparticles in solar cells. It is also possible to improve the solar cell efficiency in the P-SC structure by further optimization of the p, i and n layers. However, after fabricating the same n–i–p solar cell on the two P-BR and BP-BR types of substrates, the marked difference between the obtained results (J–V characteristics) evidences better electrical robustness of the thin film device on a flattened substrate. The overall successful results of the solar cell performance bring out the feasibility of fabrication of a-Si:H solar cells on a surface made of nanoparticles, without the need for mechanical flattening or smoothening of the surface.20,21 The design proposed in this study would also be suitable for tandem (microcrystalline and amorphous silicon) or single junction microcrystalline Si solar cell or thicker (∼400–500 nm thick absorber layer) a-Si:H solar cells, although we have demonstrated effective improvement in a significantly thinner a-Si:H solar cell of 250 nm.
The TiO2 and Si nanoparticles used in this study are cheap, environmentally friendly and easy to fabricate. Nanoparticles of a wide range of materials are commercially available in a variety of sizes. Further, the surfaces and optical properties of appropriate pairs of nanoparticles and nano- or microstructures made of their ensembles can be used to manipulate light in a variety of ways. A varying proportion of nanoparticles having different refractive indices can also be utilized to create a medium with graded effective refractive indices.41,42 We have used a combination of TiO2-NP/Si-NP for our study, but other combinations of nanoparticles could be used for making similar microstructures or layers according to the intended solar cell application. As in the case of light-trapping microstructures, interface roughness can also create a challenge for semiconductor film growth when an inherently rough unconventional substrate like metal foil or building tile is used.43–45 The applicability of nanoparticles to enable the fabrication of defect-free solar cells on such rough substrates needs to be explored.
4 Conclusion
A new, inexpensive and simple technique is demonstrated for the fabrication of light-scattering layers using micrometer sized pyramid shaped agglomerates of TiO2-NPs and Si-NPs on top of planar reflectors. The proposed light-management scheme exploits the optical properties of such large features while avoiding the detrimental effect of a rough interface by burying the features under a suitable dielectric medium to obtain a flat top surface on which defect-free solar cells can be deposited. The flat topped, buried pyramid TiO2-NP/Si-NP light-scattering BR shows very high broadband haze parameter and scattering over wide angular distributions of diffuse light. We attribute the effective light trapping in the BP-SC to the large sized features with optically inhomogeneous composition and facets, where multiple light reflections and significant light-scattering takes place. The a-Si:H thin-film solar cells grown on such a BR shows enhanced light absorption and external quantum efficiency values compared to those of solar cells deposited on a Flat-BR, with resultant gains in short-circuit current density and efficiency up to 15.6% and 19.3%, respectively. In addition to these improvements, the BP-SC also exhibits significantly improved current generation when irradiated at large oblique angle of incidence. For example, the Jsc of BP-SC for light wavelength of 650 nm at incident angle of 40° is 1.7 times higher when compared to the Flat-SC device, which is corroborated to effective light-scattering in the BP-BR for large oblique angles of light. FDTD simulation results of optical absorption and ideal Jsc values agree well with the experimental findings. The molding technique in our study shows the effectiveness and practicality of using TiO2 and Si nanoparticles for easy fabrication of micro-sized features while the nanoparticles themselves provide additional nanoscale textures as an alternative to sophisticated lithographic nanotexturing. Our approach offers a high yield and scalable route to improve the short circuit current and fill factor without deteriorating the overall performance of thin-film solar cells, which happens when micro-sized features or rough light-scattering interfaces are used for light-management.
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by the Danish Strategic Research Council under the project “Thin-film solar cell based on nanocrystalline silicon and structured backside reflectors (THINC)”. D. D. and R. N. P. also acknowledge the financial support of the FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, Portugal) via projects PTDC/FIS/112885/2009, PTDC/CTM ENE/2514/2012, PEst-C/CTM/LA0025/2013, and RECI/FIS-NAN/0183/2012 (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-027494).
References
H. T. Huang, L. F. Lu, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. F. Leung, Y. Q. Wang, D. Chen, X. Y. Chen, G. Z. Shen, D. D. Li and Z. Y. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3790–3790 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. G. Zheng and X. Y. Li, Optik, 2013, 124, 2531–2534 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bottler, V. Smirnov, J. Hupkes and F. Finger, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 2474–2477 CrossRef .
F. J. Haug and C. Ballif, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 824–837 CAS .
S. K. Ram, R. Rizzoli, D. Desta, B. R. Jeppesen, M. Bellettato, I. Samatov, Y.-C. Tsao, S. R. Johannsen, P. T. Neuvonen, T. G. Pedersen, R. N. Pereira, K. Pedersen, P. Balling and A. N. Larsen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 365101 CrossRef .
H. W. Deckman, C. R. Wronski, H. Witzke and E. Yablonovitch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1983, 42, 968–970 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Gordon, J. Proscia, F. B. Ellis and A. E. Delahoy, Sol. Energy Mater., 1989, 18, 263–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muller, B. Rech, J. Springer and M. Vanecek, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 917–930 CrossRef .
H. H. Li, Q. K. Wang, J. Chen, J. Krc and W. J. Soppe, Opt. Commun., 2012, 285, 808–815 CrossRef CAS .
M. van Lare, F. Lenzmann and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 20738–20746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, M. C. van Lare, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4239–4245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. T. Li, E. Verhagen, R. J. Walters, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A237–A245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, C. M. Hsu, Z. F. Yu, S. H. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Wang, T. H. Yoo, J. W. Lim, B. I. Sang, D. S. Lim, W. K. Choi, D. K. Hwang and Y. J. Oh, Small, 2015, 11, 1905–1911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. de Jong, P. J. Sonneveld, J. Baggerman, C. J. M. van Rijn, J. K. Rath and R. E. I. Schropp, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 540–547 CAS .
J. Escarré, K. Söderström, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, C. Battaglia, G. Bugnon, L. Ding, F. Meillaud, F.-J. Haug and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 185–190 CrossRef .
H. B. T. Li, R. H. Franken, J. K. Rath and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 338–349 CrossRef CAS .
T. Soderstrom, F. J. Haug, V. Terrazzoni-Daudrix and C. Ballif, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 114509 CrossRef .
Y. Nasuno, M. Kondo and A. Matsuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2, 2001, 40, L303–L305 CAS .
H. Sai, Y. Kanamori and M. Kondo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113502 CrossRef .
K. Soderstrom, G. Bugnon, F. J. Haug, S. Nicolay and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 193–199 CrossRef .
R. N. Pereira, S. Niesar, W. B. You, A. F. da Cunha, N. Erhard, A. R. Stegner, H. Wiggers, M. G. Willinger, M. Stutzmann and M. S. Brandt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20120–20127 CAS .
A. Gupta, M. T. Swihart and H. Wiggers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bruggeman, Ann. Phys., 1935, 24, 636–664 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Tsao, C. Fisker and T. Garm Pedersen, Opt. Commun., 2014, 315, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
Lumerical Solutions, inc., http://www.lumerical.com/tcad-products/fdtd/.

Handbook of optical constants of solids, ed. E. D. Palik, Academic press,  1998 Search PubMed .
P. B. D. Dominé, J. Bailat, A. Billet, A. Feltrin and C. Ballif, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2008, 2, 163–165 CrossRef .
V. G. Kravets, Opt. Spectrosc., 2013, 114, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. M. van Cleef, F. A. Rubinelli, R. Rizzoli, R. Pinghini, R. E. I. Schropp and W. F. van der Weg, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, 3926–3932 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ecker, H. J. Egelhaaf, R. Steim, J. Parisi and E. von Hauff’, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16333–16337 CAS .

Organic Solar cells, ed. W. Tress, Springer,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. S. Hegedus, W. A. Buchanan and E. Eser, IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 1997, 603–606 CAS .
C. Battaglia, S. M. de Nicolas, S. De Wolf, X. T. Yin, M. Zheng, C. Ballif and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 113902 CrossRef .
A. Belfar, Sol. Energy, 2015, 114, 408–417 CrossRef CAS .
A. Belfar and H. Ait-Kaci, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 525, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Rath and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 53, 189–203 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Franken, R. L. Stolk, H. Li, C. H. M. van der Werf, J. K. Rath and R. E. I. Schropp, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 014503 CrossRef .
P. Kowalczewski, M. Liscidini and L. C. Andreani, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, A808–A820 CrossRef PubMed .

          http://gwyddion.net/documentation/user-guide-en/statistical-analysis.html
        .
X. Yan, D. J. Poxson, J. Cho, R. E. Welser, A. K. Sood, J. K. Kim and E. F. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Fang, Y.-L. Liu, Y.-C. Lee, H.-L. Chen, D.-H. Wan and C.-C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1412–1421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guha, J. Yang and B. J. Yan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Hu, Z. T. Song, W. L. Liu, F. Qin, Z. F. Zhang and H. B. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5798–5802 CrossRef CAS .
H. Aguas, S. K. Ram, A. Araujo, D. Gaspar, A. Vicente, S. A. Filonovich, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and I. Ferreira, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4620–4632 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of the back-reflector architecture based on buried light-scattering microstructures made of nanoparticles for light-trapping in a-Si:H solar cells. The solid red line shows the optical path of an incident long-wavelength photon. The dashed lines represent possible diffuse scattering arising from the interfaces created by nanoparticles aggregates.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) High resolution TEM image of Si-NP showing a crystalline core covered with an oxide shell that is formed upon exposure of the as-grown hydrogen terminated Si-NP to air, and the image in (b) corresponds to the same location as the image in (a) obtained using energy filtering.	 

 	Fig. 3  The steps involved in the fabrication of pyramidal (P) and buried pyramidal (BP) structures on top of planar reflectors are shown schematically in (a, b) and (c, d), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  The cross-sectional schematic illustrations of the n–i–p a-Si:H solar cells grown on Flat-BR (Flat-SC), P-BR (P-SC) and BP-BR (BR-SC).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  AFM images of surface morphology of (a) P-BR and (b) BP-BR, and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of an a-Si:H thin-film solar cell grown on BP-BR (BP-SC).	 

 	Fig. 6  Total reflectance (RT) and diffuse reflectance (RD) (a), haze spectra of Flat-BR, P-BR, and BP-BR (b), and angle resolved scattering measurements of P-BR and BP-BR (c–d). The inset in (d) shows the setup for angle resolved scattering measurements.	 

 	Fig. 7  
J–V characteristics of n–i–p a-Si:H thin-film solar cells made on Flat-BR, P-BR, and BP-BR.	 

Flat-SC	815 ± 1	59.0 ± 0.5	5.87	—	12.2 ± 0.1	—	12.3	—
BP-SC	801 ± 1	61.5 ± 0.1	7.00	19.3	14.1 ± 0.1	15.6	14.7	19.5
P-SC	812 ± 1	27.6 ± 0.2	3.10	−47.2	13.8 ± 0.2	13.1	—	—

 	Fig. 8  (a) Total optical absorption by Flat-SC, and BP-SC devices (solid lines), and parasitic absorption by the BP-BR (dashed line); (b) measured EQE (left-hand side y-axis) spectra of Flat-SC and BP-SC devices and EQE ratio (right-hand side y-axis).	 

 	Fig. 9  Cross-sectional FDTD simulation models constructed for Flat-SC and BP-SC devices. The color bar represents the refractive indices of the materials in the solar cell structures at λ = 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison of calculated (dashed lines) and measured (solid lines) absorption of a-Si:H solar cells grown on Flat-BR and BP-BR (Flat-SC and BP-SC devices, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 11  The calculated optical absorption distribution at wavelength values of 450 nm, 550 nm, 650 nm and 750 nm for a-Si:H thin-film solar cells on Flat-SC, and BP-BR. The dotted lines are added to demarcate the a-Si:H thin-film.	 

 	Fig. 12  Solar-spectrum-weighted electron generation rate profile calculated across the a-Si:H layer of the Flat-SC, and BP-SC devices. The scale is in units of electrons per m3 per s and is logarithmic.	 

 	Fig. 13  The Jsc angular dependence of the BP-SC and the Flat-SC devices for two wavelengths of unpolarized light, 650 nm and 750 nm, is shown in the left y-axes of the (a) and (b) parts respectively. The right y-axes of these graphs show the angular dependence of the Jsc ratio (Jsc-BP-SC/Jsc-Flat-SC) for these two wavelengths of light.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
