A study of trap and recombination centers in MAPbI 3 perovskites   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP06261J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP06261J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 32862-32867A study of trap and recombination centers in MAPbI3 perovskites†

        
          
            G. 
            Gordillo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C. A. 
            Otálora
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            A. A. 
            Ramirez
          
        
      c
aDepartamento de Física, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia
bDepartamento de Química, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia. E-mail: caotalorab@unal.edu.co
cDepartamento de Ingeniería Química, Universidad Nacional, Bogotá, Colombia
Received 
      10th September 2016
    , Accepted 15th November 2016First published on 15th November 2016AbstractTrapping and recombination processes in thin films of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) were studied by means of transient photoconductivity measurements and theoretical simulations of the relaxation curves resulting from the photocurrent measurements; in particular, the influence of temperature as well as of the sample temperature and intensity of illumination and pressure inside the measurement system on the photoconductivity response, were studied. The experimental curves of photocurrent were analyzed using the real part of the Fourier transform. The study revealed that the photocurrent of the MAPbI3 films, measured at atmospheric pressure, is mainly governed by surface related processes induced by chemisorption and desorption of oxygen, whereas the photocurrent resulting from measurements performed in a vacuum is mainly governed by bulk related processes. It was found that, in general, the photocurrent response is affected by both trap assisted fast recombination processes and traps whose activation process is delayed, with the contribution in the intensity of the photocurrent of the first process being greater that of the second one. Evidence that the MAPbI3 film exhibits a deep trap state at around 459 meV attributed to trap assisted recombination was found; furthermore, the MAPbI3 films present shallow trap states at 129 and 24 meV that correspond to trap states whose activation process is delayed.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite materials as light absorbers are currently among the most promising candidates for thin-film photovoltaic applications. Great advances in terms of efficiency have been achieved with these types of devices;1–5 however, there are still many doubts regarding their electrical transport properties and the relationship of these with the device efficiency. Recently, methylammonium lead halide (CH3NH3PbX3, X = halogen; CH3NH3: MA) and its mixed-halide crystals, have been used as light harvesters for solar cells.6–8 These devices are cost-effective due to their simple fabrication process. As a result, these cells have attracted a special attention from researchers in the field.
Perovskite solar cells have shown a rapid efficiency improvement (from 2.2% in 2006 to 20.1% in 20149). In December 2015 – Dyesol Limited (ASX: DYE) announced that a research team, headed by Professors Michael Grätzel and Anders Hagfeldt at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), established a new world record efficiency for its Perovskite Solar Cells, with a certified conversion efficiency of 21.02% at the laboratories of Newport Corporation.10
Among the factors that limit inorganic solar cell efficiency, bulk recombination induced by a high density of defect states, have been identified as one of the hurdles for reaching high solar cell performances.11 Defects may introduce recombination centers, which have a direct influence on the transport phenomena of the charge carriers.
The physical properties of inorganic photovoltaic materials are in general influenced by the presence of trap and recombination states in the forbidden gap, arising from chemical impurities and/or structural defects. Therefore, it is important to study the parameters characterizing such states. An adequate knowledge of trap and/or defect properties in perovskite based compounds could help to improve electrical and optical properties of the material and thus solar cell efficiency. Unfortunately, there is no experimental report about defect characterization in hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite materials. However, transient photoconductivity measurements as a function of temperature are relatively easy to perform and could provide information on trap and/or recombination states.12
In this work, trapping and recombination processes in those films were studied by means of photoconductivity measurements. Special emphasis was placed on understanding the mechanisms affecting the trapping and recombination processes of carriers, through theoretical simulations of the relaxation curves resulting from the photocurrent measurements. In particular the influence of the pressure inside the system of measurement, as well as of the sample temperature and intensity of illumination on the photoconductivity response was studied. In addition, the activation energy of trapping centers of MAPbI3 thin films were determined by means of transient photocurrent measurements as a function of temperature. By fitting the photocurrent curves simulated theoretically to the one obtained experimentally it was possible to determine the values of the corresponding time constants (τi).
2. Experimental
MAPbI3 films were deposited on glass slides by spin-coating at 3000 rpm of a mixed halide precursor solution composed of CH3NH3I (MAI) and PbI2 0.4 M in DMSO. The solution was prepared using commercial PbI2 (Sigma Aldrich) and MAI synthesized in our laboratory as precursors. The MAI precursor was synthesized from a mixture of 5 mL of hydroiodic acid to 67%, 15 mL of solution 2.0 M of methylamine in methanol and 20 mL of water, kept at 0 °C for 2 hours. The obtained solid was purified by washing it with diethylether until the pure and dry compound was obtained.
The samples were deposited inside a glove box connected to a nitrogen generator that provides a permanent flow of nitrogen; the prepared films are kept inside a vacuum chamber (10−2 mB) and subsequently nitrogen is introduced.
To reduce the moisture content present in the air and being able to attribute the observed surface related recombination processes basically to adsorption and desorption of oxygen, photocurrent measurements were made in a vacuum chamber into which was introduced dry air which was made to go through an extensive line filled with zeolite.
It is worth mentioning that analysis of XRD performed in the perovskite films before and after temperature-dependent photocurrent measurements revealed that the crystalline structure of these is tetragonal and does not change with the temperature in the studied range (between 35 and 75 °C). It was found in addition that the morphology of the perovskite films does not change significantly with temperature. In the ESI† are given XRD spectra and SEM images (see Fig. S2 and S3) that support this affirmation.
Electrical characterization of the MAPbI3 films was carried out through photocurrent measurements using electrical contacts of silver deposited on the sample surface by evaporation, with 1 cm of distance between them. The sample was illuminated using a 250 W halogen lamp whose intensity was changed by varying the sample–lamp distance; the intensity of the lighting (in W m−2) was determined using a Pyranometer Kipp & Zonen, model CM3.
The photocurrent curves were obtained through a system that allowed automatic measurements of transient photocurrent, developed using the virtual instrumentation concept. The system is controlled using a virtual instrument (VI) which includes facilities to perform measurements of transient photocurrent maintaining the temperature of the sample and the pressure of the chamber of measurements as well as the real time display of the Iphvs. t curves. In the ESI† is described in detail the equipment implemented to study the influence of sample temperature, as well as of the sample temperature and intensity of illumination and pressure inside the chamber on the photocurrent response.
3. Theoretical considerations
The amplitude, time constants, and delayed time (escape time from the traps) have been determined simulating the rise and decay curves of the photocurrent, using the method proposed by N. V. Joshi et al.,13 that assumes that the form of the relaxation curves can be expressed by multiexponential terms. In this case the rise and decay curves can be expressed by:14  where u(λ) is a step function defined as:u(λ) = 0 for t < τ0j,u(λ) = 1 for t > τ0j.Here, the summation in the first term of eqn (1) corresponds to recombination processes and goes up to M, where M is the number of contributing components and the summation for delayed terms goes from 1 to K, where K is the number of types of traps which hold charge carriers for a certain time, thus, contributing to a delayed signal.
The typical rise and decay curves of photocurrent obtained from measurements carried out in a vacuum (2 mB) at temperatures less than 35 °C, could be simulated quite well with two non-delayed and one or two delayed time constants. However the curves of photocurrent measured under vacuum at temperatures greater than 35 °C show an anomalous behavior, characterized by the appearance of an additional photocurrent in the first seconds after the lighting, which decreases rapidly (see Fig. 4). These types of photocurrent curves were simulated by adding a decreasing exponential function of the form IAde−t/τAd to the eqn (1).
Equations corresponding to the real and imaginary parts of the Fourier transform of eqn (1) (see the details in ref. 8) provide sufficient information in order to obtain the values of Ii, Ij, τi, τj and τ0j uniquely and precisely without ambiguity, in contrast to numerical or curve fitting approaches. Using values of Ii, Ij, τi, τj and τ0j obtained from the solution of the equations resulting for the real part of the fast Fourier transform with the help of a conventional Cooley–Tukey algorithm, the photocurrent curves were constructed and compared with the experimental one.
4. Results
Intensity dependence of steady state photocurrent has been studied to know the nature of recombination processes. It is observed in Fig. 1a that the form of the rise curves of photocurrent (measured under pre-vacuum ambient) and the time required to reach the saturation are not affected by the increase in the intensity of the lighting, indicating that there is no generation of traps by photoinduction mechanisms. The curve of ln(Iph) vs. ln(Φ) shown in Fig. 1b is a straight line, which indicates that the photoconductivity follows a power law (Iph∼ Φγ). For γ = 0.5, the recombination is predominantly bimolecular, for γ = 1.0, the recombination is monomolecular in nature and for 0.5 ≤ γ ≤ 1.0, the value of γ can be interpreted by assuming the existence of continuous distribution of trap levels in the band gap.15 The value of γ obtained for the studied MAPbI3 films is 0.909 (see Fig. 1b), indicating that the generation and recombination processes could be attributed to a combination of monomolecular and bimolecular traps, predominating the processes through the first one.
 Fig. 1  (a) Increase curves of photocurrent at different illumination intensities of a typical MAPbI3 film and (b) intensity dependence of photocurrent. 
In Fig. 2 is compared a curve of photocurrent (during rise and decay) of a typical MAPbI3 film obtained from measurements performed under normal conditions of temperature (20 °C) and pressure (680 mB) under constant bias of 50 V and excitation power density of 500 W m−2, with a curve simulated theoretically assuming one non-delayed time constants (τi) associated with a trap assisted recombination process and two delayed time constants (τj) associated with the trap processes. It was found that the major contribution to the total photocurrent comes from the trap assisted recombination process and the contribution from the traps whose activation process is delayed is significantly less.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of an experimental curve of photocurrent (during increase and decay) obtained for a typical MAPbI3 thin film, with the theoretical simulated one using eqn (1). 

Fig. 3 shows rise curves of photocurrent obtained from measurements carried out at pressures varying between 2 and 680 mB, applying a bias of 40 V and lighting of 500 W m−2. From these results it can be observed that the shape of the photocurrent curves is affected by the pressure at which the photocurrent is measured. When the pressure inside the measuring chamber is increased, the steady-state photocurrent as well as the time required to reach its saturation increases. It is also observed that the time constants of the delayed and non-delayed processes increase when the pressure inside the measuring chamber increases. This behavior could be explained by assuming that the photocurrent of the MAPbI3 films measured at atmospheric pressure (680 mB) is mainly governed by surface related processes induced by adsorption and desorption of the chemisorbed oxygen at the surface of the MAPbI3 (1/2O2(g) + 2e− → O(ad)−2), whereas the photoconductivity in a vacuum is governed by bulk related processes. The initial fast increase in the photocurrent may be attributed to the bulk related process taking into account the fact that the bulk related process is considered to be fast in comparison to the surface related process.16 The slow photoresponse of the MAPbI3 films, observed when the photocurrent is measured at atmospheric pressure, seems to be caused by shallow traps generated by chemisorbed oxygen.
 Fig. 3  Increase curves of photocurrent of MAPbI3 thin films, measured under different pressures. 
As can be seen from Fig. 3, the steady state value of photocurrent when this is measured at atmospheric pressure is significantly higher than the photocurrent in a vacuum. This behavior may be attributed to two different mechanisms; the first one is related to the fact that the oxygen absorbed gives rise to traps close to the minority-carrier band edge that primarily trap minority carriers and release them at a later time, causing a delay in the increase of the photocurrent but without significantly reducing its intensity. In contrast, the photocurrent measured in a vacuum is mainly affected by processes of recombination in the volume with the participation of deep recombination centers associated with defects and/or structural defects. In this case the energy to reach the band edge and release the minority carrier is large enough that the state captures a majority carrier before releasing the minority carrier, giving rise to a rapid increase of the photocurrent (non-delayed process) characterized by a strong reduction of the intensity of the photocurrent (in the steady state).
The second mechanism could be attributed to the fact that upon illumination, the photoexcitation induce desorption of oxygen molecules (O(ad)−2 → 1/2O2(g) + 2e−), giving rise to the release of electrons and consequently to an increase of the photocurrent.
Besides the effect of the pressure, we also studied the effect of temperature on the photoconductivity of the MAPbI3 films. Fig. 4 shows the increase of photocurrent obtained from measurements in a vacuum (2 mB) at different temperatures under an illumination of 1500 Lux.
 Fig. 4  Increase curves of photocurrent measured in a vacuum at temperatures ranging from 20 to 70 °C. The inset shows the photocurrent curve measured at 70 °C where the red line represents the fit with eqn (1a), modified by adding a decreasing exponential function of the form IAde−t/τAd. 
It is also observed that the photocurrent obtained from measurements carried out at temperatures greater than 35 °C, exhibits an anomalous behavior consisting in a very fast increases of the photocurrent when the light is switched on, due to the quick generation of electron and hole pairs as a result of absorption of photons. However, after attaining a peak, the photocurrent started to decrease very fast even during illumination. This anomalous behavior may be attributed to thermally induced traps characterized by having a very large capture cross-section and a very small decay time τd (∼1 s). The increase of the steady-state photocurrent when the temperature is increased can be attributed to a reduction in the height of the potential barrier in the grain boundaries caused by thermal excitation of electrons trapped in states of the grain boundaries.
In Fig. 5a are compared the decay curves of photocurrent of MAPbI3 film obtained from measurements performed under vacuum (2 mB). This was carried out varying the sample temperature between 35 and 70 °C, with simulated curves obtained taken into account the theoretical considerations described in Section 3, and assuming that the decay curves of photocurrent can be expressed by the sum of three exponential terms, each one with a constant τi associated with the average life time of the carriers in a trap state. On the other hand, the curves of ln(Iph) vs. t displayed in Fig. 5b reveal the presence of three regions where the curve decreases linearly, indicating that in these types of materials participate in three trap states. In Table 1 are listed values of τi estimated from the fitting of simulated curves to experimental curves of MAPbI3 films measured at different temperatures.
 Fig. 5  (a) Decay curves of photocurrent of a typical MAPbI3 film measured in a vacuum at temperatures ranging from 35 to 65 °C, where the black solid line represents the fit with eqn (1b) and (b) curves of ln(Iph) vs. t obtained from measurements carried out at different temperatures. 
Table 1 Values of τi estimated from the fitting of simulated curves to experimental curves of MAPbI3 films




Temperature (°C)
MAPbI3



τ
1 (s)

τ
2 (s)

τ
3 (s)




25
0.09
30.1
402


35
0.12
35.5
382


45
0.16
42.0
370


55
0.26
54.4
401


70
1.01
69.1
450




The results of Table 1 show that the time constants τ1 corresponding to the first exponential term of the photocurrent decay is much smaller than those of the time constants τ2 and τ3 of the second and third exponential terms of the photocurrent decay, indicating that the first process could be associated with trap assisted recombination and the other two to delayed trap processes.
Using the values of τi obtained previously from the theoretical simulations of the curves of photocurrent decay measured at different temperatures, the activation energy EA of the three traps identified were estimated from the slope of the Arrhenius plots [τ = τ0exp(−EA/kT)]. In Fig. 6 are shown Arrhenius plots of the characteristic decay time of MAPbI3 films, indicating the values of the activation energy corresponding to each one of the traps that are characterized by a different τi.
 Fig. 6  Arrhenius plot of the extracted time constants τ of a typical MAPbI3 film as a function of temperature. 
It is clear from Fig. 6 that the MAPbI3 film exhibits a rather deep trap states at around 459 meV, which confirm that this process can be attributed to trap assisted recombination. The presence of rather deep trap states at around 508 meV were also found in MAPbI3 films from thermally stimulated current (TSC) measurements.17 In addition, the MAPbI3 films present shallow trap states at 129 and 24 meV, which allows the inference that these shallow states correspond to trap states.
A deep defect state (at 0.16 eV above the valence band) has been identified in MAPbI3 films using admittance spectroscopy.18 According to density functional calculations19 this defect energy could potentially be ascribed to iodine interstitials.
It is also observed that the decay time of photocurrent increases with the increasing temperature, indicating that the MAPbI3 films under different temperatures show the persistent photocurrent (PPC) effect. It is also noted that the PPC is more pronounced at high temperatures, although the photocurrent relaxed very fast and the PPC was considerably weakened at low temperatures. Clearly, the MAPbI3 films exhibited a shorter τ at low temperatures, which is a characteristic of the random local potential fluctuation (RLPF) model.20 In the RLPF model, local potential fluctuations arise either because of intrinsic disorders in the materials or extrinsic charged impurities. Therefore, low-energy electrons and holes become localized in potential minima and are spatially separated, resulting in a long recombination lifetime. The thermal excitation of carriers to higher energy states above the mobility edge produces a photocurrent after the radiation is terminated, resulting in the PPC effect. At low temperature, the carriers are well-confined inside charge traps and therefore, negligible PPC is observed.
5. Conclusions
By using the real part of the Fourier transform, the photocurrent response of MAPbI3 thin films has been analyzed. In particular, the influence of the pressure inside the measurement system as well as of the sample temperature and intensity of illumination on the photoconductivity response was studied. The study revealed that the photocurrent of the MAPbI3 films measured at atmospheric pressure is mainly governed by surface related processes induced by adsorption and desorption of the chemisorbed oxygen at the surface of the MAPbI3 films, whereas the photoconductivity in a vacuum is mainly governed by bulk related processes. It was found that in general the photocurrent response is affected by one trap assisted fast recombination process and two traps whose activation process is delayed, with the contribution that the first process makes to the intensity of the photocurrent being much greater than that of the second one. The initial fast photocurrent rise and decay, characteristic of these types of samples is attributed to a bulk related trap assisted recombination process and the slow photoresponse, observed when the photocurrent is measured at atmospheric pressure, seems to be caused by shallow traps generated by chemisorbed oxygen. The activation energy of the identified traps, which where estimated from the slope of the Arrhenius plots [τ = τ0exp(−EA/kT)] indicated that the MAPbI3 films exhibit a rather deep trap states at around 459 meV, which confirm that this process can be attributed to trap assisted recombination. In addition, the MAPbI3 films present shallow trap states at 129 and 24 meV what allows the inference that these shallow states correspond to trap states.
The photocurrent measured at temperatures greater than 35 °C exhibit an anomalous behavior consisting in a very fast increase of the photocurrent when the light is switched on, followed by a very fast decrease of its maximum, even during illumination. This anomalous behavior may be attributed to thermally induced traps characterized by having a very large capture cross-section and a very small decay time. The studies also allowed concluding that the MAPbI3 films show the persistent photocurrent effect attributed to random local potential fluctuations and that the persistence increases with the increasing temperature of the sample.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Colciencias (Contract #038/2013 and 184-2016) and Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Ciencias, Grupo GMS&ES, Bogotá DC, Colombia (Proy. 20287 supported by DIB).
References
L. Mingzhen, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef PubMed .
N. G. Park, Organometal Perovskite Light Absorbers Toward a 20% Efficiency Low-Cost Solid-State Mesoscopic Solar Cel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Perovskite as light harvester: A game changer in photovoltaics, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, 18.1% hysteresis-less inverted CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
C. H. Chiang and Ch. G. Wu, Bulk heterojunction perovskite – PCBM solar cells with high fill factor, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Lead Iodide Perovskite Sensitized All-Solid-State Submicron Thin Film Mesoscopic Solar Cell with Efficiency Exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591–597 Search PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. H. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Chemical Management for Colorful, Efficient, and Stable Inorganic–Organic Hybrid Nanostructured Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
National Center for Photovoltaics at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Research cell efficiency records, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/.

          http://www.dyesol.com/media/wysiwyg/Documents/2015-asx-announcements/2015-12-08-DYE0397_-http://_EPFL_achieves_21_efficiency.pdf.
S. Siebentritt, Why are kesterite solar cells not 20% efficient?, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535(1), 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
M. Courel, O. Vigil-Galán, D. Jiménez-Olarte, M. Espíndola-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, Trap and recombination centers study in sprayed Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 134503 CrossRef .
A. Serfaty and N. V. Joshi, Fourier-transform analysis of multiexponential curves observed in photoconductivity studies, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41(12), 8545–8548 CrossRef .

          J. P. McKelvey, Solid State Semiconductors Physics, Harper and Row, New York,  1966 Search PubMed .

          A. Rose, Concepts in Photoconductivity and Allied Problems, Interscience, New York,  1963 Search PubMed .
D. H. Zhang, Fast photoresponse and the related change of crystallite barriers for ZnO films deposited by RF sputtering, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1995, 28, 1273–1277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baumann, S. Väth, Ph. Rieder, M. C. Heiber, K. Tvingstedt and V. Dyakonov, Identification of Trap States in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(12), 2350–2354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sh. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, L. Song, T. B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, The identification and characterization of defect states in hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 112–116 RSC .
M. H. Du, Efficient carrier transport in halide perovskites: theoretical perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091 CAS .
H. X. Jiang and J. Y. Lin, Percolation transition of persistent photoconductivity in II–VI mixed crystals, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 64, 2547–2550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, SEM and XRD data. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp06261jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 		 
u(λ) = 0 for t < τ0j,
u(λ) = 1 for t > τ0j.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Increase curves of photocurrent at different illumination intensities of a typical MAPbI3 film and (b) intensity dependence of photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of an experimental curve of photocurrent (during increase and decay) obtained for a typical MAPbI3 thin film, with the theoretical simulated one using eqn (1).	 

 	Fig. 3  Increase curves of photocurrent of MAPbI3 thin films, measured under different pressures.	 

 	Fig. 4  Increase curves of photocurrent measured in a vacuum at temperatures ranging from 20 to 70 °C. The inset shows the photocurrent curve measured at 70 °C where the red line represents the fit with eqn (1a), modified by adding a decreasing exponential function of the form IAde−t/τAd.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Decay curves of photocurrent of a typical MAPbI3 film measured in a vacuum at temperatures ranging from 35 to 65 °C, where the black solid line represents the fit with eqn (1b) and (b) curves of ln(Iph) vs. t obtained from measurements carried out at different temperatures.	 


25	0.09	30.1	402
35	0.12	35.5	382
45	0.16	42.0	370
55	0.26	54.4	401
70	1.01	69.1	450

 	Fig. 6  Arrhenius plot of the extracted time constants τ of a typical MAPbI3 film as a function of temperature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, SEM and XRD data. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp06261j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
