On the way to biomimetic dye aggregate solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01053K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01053K
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2366-2378Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOn the way to biomimetic dye aggregate solar cells†

        
          
            Peter L. 
            Marek
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Horst 
            Hahn
          
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Teodor Silviu 
            Balaban
          
          
        
      *d
aKarlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Nanotechnology, Postfach 3640, D-76021, Karlsruhe, Germany
bJoint Research Laboratory Nanomaterials, Technische Universität Darmstadt and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
cCenter for Functional Nanostructures (CFN), Wolfgang-Gaede-Str. 1a, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
dUniversité “Paul Cézanne” Aix-Marseille III, Institut de Sciences Moléculaires de Marseille, UMR 6263, Chirosciences, Ave. Escadrille Normandie Niemen, St. Jérôme, Marseille CEDEX 20, France. E-mail: ts.balaban@univ-cezanne.fr
Received 
      16th January 2011
    , Accepted 28th February 2011First published on 31st March 2011AbstractEfforts for building hybrid solar cells which have an antenna system similar to the chlorosomes of green photosynthetic bacteria are reviewed and discussed in the context of the current state-of-the-art.Peter L. MarekPeter Marek was born 1978 in Bielawa, Poland, moved in 1984 to Langen, Germany, and studied materials science at the Technische Universität Darmstadt (TUD), where he specialized in solar cells and bionics. Peter graduated in 2005 with a diploma thesis already dealing with the biomimetic self-assembling porphyrins, supervised by Dr Balaban and Prof. Hahn. He then pursued PhD studies, under the same supervision, at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) on self-assembling porphyrins for solar cells. He will defend his PhD thesis in 2011.Horst HahnHorst Hahn studied materials science at the Universität des Saarlandes in Saarbrücken, Germany, and obtained a Dr Ing. Degree from the Technische Universität Berlin. He then established a research programme on nanocrystalline ceramics and diffusion phenomena in disordered systems as a research associate at Argonne National Laboratory in USA. Between 1987 and 1992 he held professorships in materials science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and at Rutgers—the State University of New Jersey. He was appointed full professor at the TUD in 1992 and as executive director of the INT in 2004. His main interests are related to the synthesis and processing of nanoparticles, thin films and nanocrystalline materials and nanostructures, especially for energy related research.Teodor Silviu BalabanSilviu Balaban was born 1958 in Bucharest, Roumania, in a family of chemists and studied chemistry at the University “Politehnica” Bucharest. After obtaining his PhD in organic chemistry in 1990 under the supervision of Ecaterina Cioranescu-Nenitzescu he moved to Germany as an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow. He had temporary research positions at the former Max-Planck-Institute for Radiation Chemistry (Mülheim an der Ruhr) in Strasbourg and since 1999 he had a permanent position at the INT within the former Research Center Karlsruhe, now KIT. He habilitated on self-assembling chromophores in 2000, under the guidance of Jean-Marie Lehn. In 2007 he was appointed full professor at the University Paul Cézanne Aix-Marseille III in France where he holds the Chair for Supramolecular Organic Assemblies. One of his research themes focuses on mimicking photosynthetic processes.

Broader context

            Silicon solar cells represent a functioning technology but despite increased production capacities their relative high costs have not dropped significantly in the past years. Although they have longevities of over twenty years, one of their disadvantages is that their efficiency sinks considerably under low light illumination, as typically encountered in northern countries with fewer than 1000 h of sunshine per year. Replacing silicon solar cells with other materials is a feverishly pursued research area. Our efforts consist in equipping solid state solar cells with an antenna system for efficient light-harvesting which should enable their functioning also under dim light, for instance indoors or at dusk and dawn. The blueprint for the light-harvesting unit is taken from green photosynthetic bacteria that live in deep waters and even at 100 m under the surface they can trap very scarce photons thanks to a special organelle called chlorosome due to its green sac nature. Within chlorosomes, bacteriochlorophyll molecules self-assemble forming dye aggregates with extremely long exciton diffusion lengths enabling efficient trapping of the light energy within the reaction centers. We have replicated the self-assembly algorithm operating for bacteriochlorophylls with fully synthetic porphyrins and we could photosensitize nanocrystalline titania, assembling a novel type of dye aggregate solar cells.

Introduction
Improving solar energy conversion and its storage is currently a major scientific challenge.1 Less than 0.2% of the world's electricity is produced using sunlight, although in one hour, in full sunshine, more energy strikes the Earth than the whole annual consumption of mankind.2 Plants and especially photosynthetic bacteria have had time to optimize light-harvesting over more than two billion years. Presently, as energy resources wane, scientists and engineers are in a hurry to provide alternative solutions. Mimicking photosynthesis, as it functions in nature, should be possible. This could end the present energy crisis with the prospect of sustaining in 25 years, when oil resources will be mostly depleted, a world population of 10 billion. Additionally, the climate change problem forces us to reduce our CO2 emissions. Excellent recent reviews by Nocera,3 Nozik,4 and Kamat5 have put in perspective the essential role chemical sciences will play in solving this, probably most important, problem of the 21st century.

        Silicon based solar cells represent a functioning technology but their high production costs, in spite of increased capacities, presently make solar electricity several folds more expensive than conventionally generated current.6,7 Industrial single crystal silicon cells reach 22% power conversion efficiencies.8 Laboratory efficiencies of even 25% have been reported.9 Another big advantage of these silicon solar cells is their long term stability and service-free longevity. However, their efficiency is drastically diminished at low light intensities.10 Especially for indoor applications or for their use at latitudes commonly encountered in most developed countries where consumption is also peaking, solar cells should also be able to operate efficiently under dim or diffuse light. The energy intense manufacturing of crystalline silicon solar cells makes them less suited for consumer electronics, which are mostly used indoors and have a relatively short lifetime. Hence the invested energy for manufacturing such solar cells may not even get paid back in this application field.
We propose a novel approach for solar cells by using an antenna system which could improve light capture and photon management. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), also called dye solar cells or Grätzel cells,11 reach 11% power conversion efficiency in the laboratory but so far, field tests show efficiencies under 5% due especially to difficulties in handling and sealing a liquid electrolyte.12 All-solid-state Grätzel cells (ss-DSSCs) use a hole transporting material instead of the electrolyte and these reach around 4% efficiencies.13,14 Organic, or plastic solar cells, use a (donor–acceptor) bulk heterojunction and have the advantage of cheap fabrication using roll-to-roll processes known from the printing and packaging industries. Being cast on flexible substrates, entirely new applications and markets can be envisaged, such as for powering mobile telephones or laptop computers. In these cells the most efficient electron donors consist of a conductive polymer which is intimately blended with an electron acceptor, usually a fullerene derivative.15–18 Record efficiencies of 8% have been recently reported.19,20 By controlling the nanomorphology and by using an antenna system we hope to improve this performance. Other strategies presently feverishly pursued are planar heterojunctions in multijunction cells. In tandem solar cells, individual photon to current converting units can be serially coupled leading to an increased efficiency, but due to the lack of suitable complementary absorbers for the near infrared region, the highest efficiencies are still reached with a single dye.
In order to enhance the efficiency, a light-harvesting system able to absorb a broad wavelength range of the solar spectrum up to the near-infrared region (1000 nm) should be developed. Simultaneously, the high morphological order in such hybrid cells should provide efficient pathways for the photoinduced charge carriers to their electrodes, preventing energy losses by charge recombination or high serial resistance. By tuning the redox levels of the chromophoric units, the driving force for the charge separation at the hybrid interface can be optimized allowing fast electron injection, but without losing excess energy. In addition, one has to address the stability and longevity problem, a key issue when organic components are assembled within solid state devices. Organic and hybrid solar cell research is still an emerging field and is in a development stage where organic light emitting diodes were a decade ago. The problems then encountered with the stability of displays have been solved in the course of the past few years so that flat displays based on organics are now commonplace. We consider that similar breakthroughs can be achieved for the solar cell field. Ideally, hybrid solar cells functioning with over 10% power conversion efficiencies also under dim or diffuse illumination conditions should be attainable.
How do we know that an antenna or light-harvesting system can be coupled to a power generating unit? Natural photosynthesis provides blueprints which could serve for assembling functional man-made devices. Most light-harvesting systems of plants, algae and purple photosynthetic bacteria are composed of (bacterio)chlorophyll-protein complexes where the protein matrix ensures a precise orientation of the chromophores for funnelling the radiant energy to the reaction center where charge separation occurs.21 To mimic such complex, proteinaceous architectures is a daunting task but which has been successfully accomplished with polypeptidic maquettes.22,23 For practical purposes a much simpler approach is needed as the synthesis of such maquettes is too costly. Green photosynthetic bacteria provide a possible solution by using self-assembly as the way to build antenna systems with a large photon capture cross section. These bacteria have developed organelles which are appended on the inner side of the cytoplasm and which agglomerate bacteriochlorophyll (BChl) c, d or e as the main self-assembling pigments.24,25 The “green sack” resemblance of these oblong, cigar-shaped organelles is reflected in their denomination as “chlorosomes”.26,27Chlorosome expressing bacteria are real photon sponges, being able to capture light in deep waters where other forms of life cannot rely on photosynthesis. In the Black Sea, a BChl e containing bacterium was found at 100 m under the water surface.28 Most extraordinarily, near a volcanic vent in the Pacific Ocean, a chlorosomal microbe containing BChl c was identified at a depth of 2390 m, being thus an obligatory photosynthetic species harvesting infrared radiation in the complete absence of solar radiation.29
The chlorosome appears thus to be the most efficient natural antenna system and because it is formed by self-assembly, it has a very simple construction principle. We have been successful in mimicking the chlorosomal self-assembly algorithm with fully synthetic pigments such as porphyrins and chlorins.30–33 Tamiaki in Japan34–41 and more recently Würthner in Germany42,43 have employed semisynthetic methods, mainly starting from Chl a, for endowing cyclic tetrapyrroles with self-assembling properties. Very recently, the group of Jonathan Lindsey in the USA has prepared various porphyrins and chlorins which also have self-assembly potential.44 All these studies have used the same recognition groups as in the natural BChls, namely a hydroxy group, a carbonyl group and a central metal atom such as magnesium, zinc or even cadmium.45Fig. 1 shows a few representative examples. Other recognition groups are capable of ensuring the same chlorosomal self-assembly algorithm as our group,46,47,48 Matano et al.49,50 and Klein Gebbink et coll.51 have shown recently. These newer compounds are summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 1  The natural self-assembling BChls c, d, and e together with synthetic mimics with hydroxy(m)ethyl substituents in the upper half and carbonyl substituents in the lower half. Heterogeneity is assured by different long chain alcohols R'OH such as farnesol, phytol, geranyl-geraniol, stearol, cetol, etc., and different R7 and R8 substituents such as methyl, ethyl, n-propyl and isobutyl. Compounds 1–7 were synthesized by Balaban et al.,30,318 and 9 were synthesized by Tamiaki et al.39 while 10 and 11 were synthesized by Lindsey et coll.44 (Tol stands for p-tolyl). 
 Fig. 2  Self-assembling porphyrins which do not have hydroxy(m)ethyl substituents and which still self-assemble. Compounds 12–14 were synthesized by Balaban et al.46,4715 and 16 were synthesized by Matano et al.49,50 
The main optical features of chlorosomal type self-assemblies are (i) a red-shifted and somewhat broadened absorption spectrum in comparison with the monomeric chromophore, and (ii) a non-quenched fluorescence with a relatively long lifetime of the order of 50 ps to 1 ns. Usually aggregated chromophores, such as phthalocyanines, lead to a strong quenching of their fluorescence, making them unsuitable as antennas which should be able to efficiently transfer the radiant energy. These two special optical features are most probably due to the very ordered manner in which the chlorosomal-type chromophores are arranged. We could crystallize several of our assemblies and these show extended stacks of off-setted tetrapyrroles held together by the central metal atom which interacts with two recognition groups, one above and one below the molecular plane. Similar stacks, or “staircase architectures”, as Lindsey has called them, have been found in other crystal structures.32,44,47,48Fig. 3 shows an example of such an assembly for 1 which is based on two crystal structures obtained for the isomeric zinc porphyrin 3 combined with molecular modelling using PM3 semiempirical calculations. Due to the stacked, in-line orientation of the transition dipole moments, a red-shift of the absorption is encountered just as in J-aggregates.52 H-aggregates which have parallel transition dipole moments and strongly quenched fluorescence display a columnar stacking mode which is typical for phthalocyanines.
 Fig. 3  Model of a self-assembled stack of 1 based on the crystallographic data derived for 3 and PM3 semiempirical calculations (Program Package HyperChem® 8, Gainesville, Florida). The stacks extend by a strong Zn–O ligation (1.9 Å long) indicated by red dashed lines. The inset shows the amount of π-overlap within a dimer. Note that the 13-carbonyl group is positioned exactly beneath the Zn atoms (with a Zn–O distance of 3.8 Å) with which it can interact electrostatically. 
One currently debated issue is how the chlorosomal BChl stacks are “glued” together? Previous models for the chlorosome architecture all involve a strong hydrogen bond between the 31-hydroxy group in one stack and the 131-carbonyl in adjacent stacks. Modelling studies have put forth a cylindrical model53 or even two or more concentrical cylinders.54,55Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies and cryo-transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies could not reconcile the data with cylindrical models and have proposed a lamellar model composed of hydrogen-bonded dimers.56,57,58A similar hydrogen-bonded dimer based model but with cylindrical geometry has been recently proposed based on solid state 13C-NMR studies.59,60 We favour an undulated, tubular architecture with frequent defects where the stacks are held together by hydrophobic and dispersive forces alone33 as none of our BChl mimics, in spite of having hydroxy and carbonyl groups, show hydrogen bonds in the crystal. Recently, Linnanto and Korppi-Tommola have investigated theoretically by molecular mechanics and exciton theory various chlorosomal architectures, including tubes, lamellas and spiral-type aggregates.61 Presently, the most extensive study was by the groups of de Groot, Holzwarth and Bryant who combined cryo-HR-TEM with distance constraints obtained from solid state 13C-NMR spectra on a mutant which expressed only one BChl homologue which was uniformly 13C-labelled.55 These authors advocate concentrical cylinders with disordered α- or β-ligations of the magnesium atoms by the hydroxy groups. Due to this disordered nature, obtaining single crystals that diffract X-rays, even from synchrotrons, has so far been unsuccessful in spite of three decades of work and trials by several groups in Europe, US and Japan. Another structural investigation, which when combined with molecular modelling could give more definitive proof for the exact nature of the self-assembly mechanism, is small angle neutron scattering which has been successfully applied to other soft-matter structures.62
As such the hydrophobic interaction is key to the chlorosomal architecture. It is important to note that the chlorosomes are engulfed by an unusual monolayer membrane which probably forms a bilayer by pairing with the long chain fatty alcohol esterifying the BChl 17-propionic acid residue. Without this hydrophobic environment the magnesium chelation in staircase architectures would be highly unfavourable. Alcohols and water which can bind to the central metal atom completely disrupt the chlorosomal BChls as well as all (semi)synthetic mimics to the monomeric forms displaying characteristic monomeric-type absorption with a sharp Soret band and fluorescence properties.
We chose racemic 1 for our studies because the 31-racemate self-assembles readily into long, oblong shaped structures, very similar to some chlorosomal preparations.32 Furthermore, the anchoring substituents, 3-hydroxyethyl and 13-acetyl, which function as recognition groups, are on the main diagonal passing through the zinc atom in a similar orientation as in the natural BChls along the Qy transition dipole moment. Upon self-assembly, clear red-shifts of the Soret and Q bands are encountered as in J-aggregates. Compounds 2 and 9 with off-diagonal recognition groups give upon self-assembly stacks with less π-overlap and do not give rise to major changes in the absorption spectra.30,39
The self-assembly of 1 occurs in nonpolar solvents and can be easily followed by the appearance of red-shifted maxima at ∼480 and 635 nm. Dilution or addition of a polar solvent which can compete for the ligation of the central zinc atom leads to complete disassembly as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Green trace: absorption spectra of 1 dissolved in dry dichloromethane which is diluted in a 60-fold excess of dry n-heptane; at the same time a thin film is formed on the walls of the quartz cuvette; magenta trace: 1 redissolved by addition of a suprastoichiometric amount of methanol and a few additional drops of dichloromethane in order to assure a homogeneous solution within the same cuvette. 
According to the model of Hunter and Sanders for the π–π interaction,63 which postulates an attractive interaction between the σ and π-orbitals and a repulsive π–π interaction, two closely spaced porphyrins will tend to overlap in an off-set geometry. In Fig. 3, the center-to-center Zn–Zn distance is 7.0 Å with a slight edge-to-edge overlap. The inset in Fig. 3 shows this off-set geometry within a dimer, in agreement with the Hunter–Sanders model. The stronger interaction in our assemblies is the Zn–31–O ligation which also dictates the amount of π–π overlap. Additionally, on the other side of the macrocycle, the 13-CO group can contribute to a weak electrostatic interaction with the Zn atom. Thus π-stacking is the recessive interaction which might not be in the optimal geometry in the absence of Zn–O ligation and the Zn⋯OC< interaction.
For assembly in a hybrid solar cell, such a chlorosomal-type biomimetic antenna should have suitable energy transfer ability for trapping its energy and for injecting an electron into the conduction band of a wide band gap semiconductor, for instance nanocrystalline titanium dioxide. If a match in energies and band levels occurs, optimization of the nanomorphology so that the exciton diffusion lengths are not surpassed should allow for high power conversion efficiencies.
The present perspective describes first attempts to include in all solid state Grätzel-type cells (ss-DSSCs) the self-assembling BChl c mimic (1).
Consequences for biomimetic hybrid solar cells
Conventional solar cells of the first generation are based on a p-n homojunction, induced by doping silicon single crystals. Solar cells of the second and third generation, the so-called thin film solar cells, are based on a heterojunction of two different semiconductors of which the light absorbing one is p- and the other n-type. Due to the direct band gap of the used semiconductors, like copper-indium-gallium selenide (CIGS), cadmium telluride (CdTe) or amorphous silicon, they harvest the full sunlight intensity in layers as thin as a few micrometres, which increases their mechanical flexibility. Even thinner and more flexible solar cells can be achieved with organic semiconductors, as these can reach around 10 times higher absorption coefficients. They can be used in hybrid solar cells, where the n-type semiconductor is inorganic, or in organic (or plastic) solar cells, where also the n-type semiconductor is organic, like the common fullerene derivative phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Within organic light absorbers the excited charges do not split automatically, but form bound electron hole pairs (excitons), which split at the interface by injecting the excited electron into the n-type material. The corresponding semiconductors are thus a donor and an acceptor. Beside the light absorption the donor needs to transport the holes through the entire thickness of the solar cell whereas the acceptor transports the electrons to the opposite side. Both charge carriers are then injected into the electrodes. One electrode is a transparent conductive oxide (TCO), commonly used materials being indium tin oxide (ITO) or fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO). The counter electrode is usually a metal layer.‡ This dual functionality of the dye, the combined high absorption coefficient and the high hole mobility, requires compromises in order to optimize both properties.
The crucial part of light energy conversion in such systems is to achieve an efficient transport of the excitons to the interface with the acceptor. To adjust this dimension, which should not exceed twice the specific exciton diffusion length of the donor material, typically in the order of a few (<5) nanometres, both materials are blended to form an interpenetration of such mesoscopic domains. This so-called bulk heterojunction ensures a bicontinuous pathway for both charge carriers through the active layer of at least 100 nm thickness, which is needed to absorb the full sunlight intensity, while maintaining a much shorter pathway for the exciton diffusion. The donor in such donor–acceptor blends can be either a printable conjugated polymer like the poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) or a vaporizable small molecule, like a zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc). As acceptors, C60-fullerenes are typically co-evaporated, whereas for the solution based processing a fullerene derivative with increased solubility, like PCBM, is spin-coated or screen-printed simultaneously with the polymer dye. This photovoltaic active blend is commonly applied onto a spin-coated electron blocking layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) on ITO. The non-transparent electrode is normally applied by evaporation of a thin calcium layer with an aluminium layer on top to prevent oxidation. These elements have the desired high work function, allowing for a high voltage output of the solar cell. However, such non-noble metals are very reactive and require evaporation in ultra-high vacuum conditions and a good encapsulation which significantly increase their production costs. The application of the donor–acceptor blend is typically done under inert gas using glove-box techniques.
The highest efficiency of organic bulk heterojunction solar cells based on evaporated small molecules was achieved in 2010 by the company Heliatek GmbH with a tandem cell reaching 7.7% efficiency.64 The record efficiency for printable organic bulk heterojunction solar cells was achieved in 2010 by the company Solarmer Inc., reaching 8.13%.65 This high efficiency was possible by using a new donor polymer class, poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-benzodithiophene) (PTB), which was developed in 2009 by Yongye Liang et al.66 and which replaced the more common polymer dye P3HT. Additionally, by substituting the C61 core of PCBM with C71 the efficiency could be increased by this research group to 7.4%, due to a complimentary light absorption by this new acceptor.66
Berson et al. reported that P3HT forms nanofibers in certain solvents like p-xylene, which cause gelation at room temperature.67 This allowed improvement of the efficiency without the common thermal post-treatment. As these P3HT nanofibers have a red-shifted absorption spectrum,68 we can assume that these polymers also self-assemble to the ordered structure of J-aggregates. Nüesch et al. have recently achieved record incident photon to electron conversion efficiencies (IPCE) of 80% with cyanine dyes as electron donors and C60 as acceptors, in solar cells that attained 2.0% power conversion efficiencies under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation.69Cyanine dyes are notorious for building J-aggregates.70 Thus, self-assembly could play a key role for dyes used in highly efficient solar cells. Especially important is that after exciting one molecule in the singlet excited state, charge separation occurs and the electron and hole (i.e. exciton) have the ability to delocalize over large distances. Within such supramolecular architectures this is certainly possible and it has been proven that one can efficiently funnel the collected energy by a large antenna into a red-shifted energy trap covalently bound to one of the self-assembling tectons (i.e. bricks within the architecture).71
The distinctive feature of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) is the implementation of a third material to take over the hole transport. The use of different materials for the dye, the electron and the hole conductor enables a modular setup of specialized materials with independently tailored properties, which offers the possibility for economical manufacturing. As conventional dyes do not self-assemble to ordered structures, which are essential for an efficient exciton or charge transport, they are used only for the absorption of light. Hence, they need to be contacted on the molecular scale by two different materials, which selectively accept both charge carriers. The contact to the electron transport material is typically realized by functionalizing the dye for chemisorption as monolayer onto a mesoporous TiO2 network. Carboxylic or phosphoric acid groups are excellent binding groups (mordants) which have been extensively used. A good contact with the hole transport material can be achieved with a liquid electrolyte, which is commonly based on the iodide/triiodide couple (I−/I−3) dissolved in a low viscous solvent or an ionic liquid. Despite the highest efficiency of all solar cells based on organic materials, this classical Grätzel cell has the disadvantages of a heavy weight, no mechanical flexibility and a reduced lifetime, due to sealing and leakage problems. Furthermore, the ruthenium-based dye is expensive and non-ecological should large area devices be envisioned. Therefore much effort has been put into research to develop efficient solid-state hole transport materials (HTMs) with the prospect of realizing light, flexible and cheap all solid state dye-sensitized solar cells (ss-DSSC). However, many problems have since then been encountered. One problem is a difficult infiltration of a solid HTM into the tiniest pores, needed to establish a proper contact with the dye. Beside a suitable HOMO energy level matching and a high hole mobility the HTM needs to have also a very high solubility within a solvent with good wetting properties of the stained mesoporous semiconductor such as nanocrystalline TiO2 (usually anatase). This limits the scope of possible HTMs, of which a spiro bifluorene derivative, the so-called spiro-MeOTAD,13 performs the best. The charge recombination rate however, is almost a hundred times higher than with a liquid electrolyte.72 The reason for this is twofold: firstly, the higher electrostatic attraction of electrons within the TiO2 towards the positively charged spiro-MeOTAD in contrast to the negatively charged iodide (I3−) ions of the electrolyte,73 and secondly, the recombination is a less probable two electron process compared to the one electron recombination process with spiro-MeOTAD.74 Other possible reasons for the efficiency decrease in ss-DSSCs, beside the enhanced recombination at the TiO2/spiro-MeOTAD interface, are (i) the worse pore-filling with spiro-MeOTAD and (ii) an enhanced exciton quenching within the dye monolayer. Schwanitz et al. showed by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) measurements on Ru-dye monolayers on TiO2 that the ordering within the monolayer decreases in the absence of the common electrolyte solvent acetonitrile.75 An unorderly overlap of the dye molecules within the monolayer may significantly quench the excitons. The solvent in DSSCs is supposed to penetrate the dye monolayer and prevent direct contacts between the dye molecules.
These problems encountered with solid HTMs mean that, as a consequence, the mesoporous TiO2 surface needs to be reduced to maximize the efficiency. This is typically done by reducing the TiO2 layer thickness to reach the maximum efficiency at around 2 μm, compared to 10–14 μm in the version with the liquid electrolyte. As the latter thickness is required to absorb the full sunlight intensity solid-state DSSCs reach only around 4–5% efficiency compared to 11% of their analogues with the liquid electrolyte.76–80 Also an extensive usage of light scattering techniques, like additional layers of micrometer-sized TiO2 particles or voids within the layers did not help to raise the efficiency significantly beyond 5%.
A promising way to solve the problems encountered in ss-DSSCs is the usage of biomimetic highly ordered dye aggregates instead of monolayers. This would increase the absorption coefficient in a smaller volume or on a smaller surface area and thus allow reduction of this highly recombination affected area. Additionally the TiO2 layer could be coarsened by the usage of thicker TiO2 particles, which would allow an easier infiltration of a solid HTM and increase the light scattering. Furthermore no solvents would be necessary to support the order of the dye layer, as the dye aggregates already self-assemble. Such solar cells would be somewhere between hybrid or organic solar cells and ss-DSSCs, as they have a mesoscopic HTM-donor–acceptor structure. The advantage of DSSCs for our self-assemblies is their rigid mesoscopic structure predefined by the TiO2 network, in contrast to the soft bulk heterojunction in organic solar cells, which may not confine the growth of self-assembling dye aggregates. Additionally, this predefined electron percolation path helps establish a continuous pathway for holes in a three material system by using a separate HTM. Due to the inertness of the TiO2 in contrast to calcium, ss-DSSCs can be manufactured without ultra-high vacuum and glove-box techniques. This allows not only cheaper manufacturing but may also increase the lifetime of these cells due to less stringent encapsulations.

        Titania (TiO2) has already been used as replacement for the calcium layer between the active blend and the aluminium electrode in organic polymer-fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells, reaching an efficiency of 6%.81 Mesoporous TiO2 structures could not be used efficiently as acceptor material for polymer dyes, because they can not be infiltrated into such a predefined structure. Trials to polymerize the monomers already in the TiO2 network, led to rather low efficiencies.82 Conventional dyes based on small molecules, however, tend to form disordered aggregates within mesoporous TiO2.83 The sophisticated biomimetic self-assembly instead, may allow for a well-defined J-aggregate formation and should allow such an infiltration. Thus, the fusion of the concepts already applied for hybrid, organic and dye sensitized solar cells, may lead to synergy. Such cells might be called dye aggregate solar cells (DASC).
For a proper interplay of the three components, i.e. an efficient energy selective charge transfer, their energy levels must match each other with a proper offset. Electrons are injected to adjacent materials when the accessible energy level is lower than their current one. Holes behave oppositely and cross the interface towards higher energy levels. Hence, it is of importance to determine the energetic levels of newly designed materials to find a proper material combination. Fig. 5 illustrates schematically the exciton and hole transport through the J-aggregates of 1 and the energy selective electron transfer at the interfaces with both charge transport materials.
 Fig. 5  The dye aggregate absorbs a photon, forming an exciton, which diffuses through the aggregate until it reaches the interface with an electron conductor, e.g.TiO2. After dissociation of the exciton and injection of the electron into its conduction band the remaining hole can also diffuse through the aggregate to an interface with a hole transporting material, e.g.spiro-OMeTAD,13 into which it gets injected. A prerequisite is that the aggregate does not exceed the exciton diffusion length at least within one dimension (x). 

Fig. 6 compares the energy levels of the material combination of Grätzel cells (left hand side) with the typical solid state version, in which we replaced the ruthenium dye monolayer (N719) by the aggregates of 1 (on the right hand side).
 Fig. 6  Energy levels of the materials used for conventional DSSCs and the DASC with 1 as an antenna. Left hand side: DSSC with the standard ruthenium-dye N719, where the Fermi-level of one FTO electrode is pinned to the iodide/triiodide redox couple of the electrolyte (denoted by iodide). The right half of the graph shows the solid-state version (ss-DSSC) together with J-aggregates of 1 and the solid hole transport material spiro-MeOTAD, which also correlates well to the Fermi-level of the gold electrode in this particular case. 
The HOMO and LUMO levels of monomers of 1 could be determined by cyclic voltammetry measurements in benzonitrile as 0.39 V and −1.67 V vs.ferrocene (Fc), corresponding to −5.2 eV and −3.1 eV versus the vacuum level, respectively.84 As J-aggregates of 1 have a HOMO–LUMO gap, which is about 0.1 eV smaller than that of monomers and because only the LUMO splits due to the exciton coupling, we can estimate the HOMO and LUMO levels of the 1 J-aggregates to −5.2 and −3.2 eV, respectively. The LUMO of 1 J-aggregates is thus comparable with that of the standard ruthenium dye N719 (−1.79 vs.Fc or −3.0 eV85) and fits well to the conduction band-edge of TiO2, which is at about −4.2 eV.86 The energy distance between these two levels of 1 eV offers a sufficient energy and driving force to efficiently split the excitons at this interface by an electron injection into the conduction band of TiO2. This photosensitization of TiO2 has indeed been observed by time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements.87 Hence the aggregates of 1, spin-coated on a compact TiO2 layer on quartz, were excited wavelength-resolved within their absorption bands by a pulsed laser, while the number of electrons, injected into the TiO2 conduction band, was measured contactlessly by microwave absorption. The HOMO level also matches one of the hole transport materials, spiro-MeOTAD, which is at about −4.8 eV.77
In order to maximize the internal quantum efficiency the aggregate size should not exceed the exciton diffusion length, at least in one dimension. Whereas the natural BChl aggregates are limited in size by the chlorosomal envelope in which they grow, our mimics tended to grow over one order of magnitude larger. With a two step process we found a way to significantly reduce the aggregate size of 1 and homogenize its distribution. In the first step the self-assembly is suppressed completely by dissolution within tetrahydrofuran (THF) which coordinates the central zinc atom and thus blocks the self-assembly. This allows the application of a smooth amorphous film of 1, e.g. by spin-coating or spraying. By a thermal post-treatment around 110 °C using anhydrous n-heptane (or its vapor phase), a reorganization to rod-shaped aggregates with reduced length and diameter can be achieved within a few hours. Fig. 7 compares the aggregates of 1 deposited by this two step process with those freely grown by drop-casting from dichloromethane.
 Fig. 7  
          SEM micrographs of J-aggregates of 1 deposited by two different techniques. A: Drop-casting a 2.1 mM solution of 1 in anhydrous dichloromethane (DCM) onto a silicon substrate (no metal coating, 10 kV acceleration voltage). B: Deposition by a two step process, where first an amorphous film of 1 was spin-coated onto glass from a 6 mM solution in THF at 3000 rpm and afterwards annealed within n-heptane vapor in a pressure tube at 110 °C for 4 h. The rough substructure originates from a 6 nm thick coating with Au to avoid charging. 
A further size reduction of the aggregates could be achieved by inducing the self-assembly within macropores of a coarse-porous TiO2 layer (T300 from Solaronix sintered at 500 °C). However, within mesoporous TiO2 layers with a mean particle size of 37 nm (T37 from Solaronix), no self-assembly to J-aggregates could be observed viaSEM and absorption spectroscopy. This means that the pore-size of the semiconductor has an important influence on the self-assembly process. This may be the reason why to date only very few publications exist describing dye aggregates for DSSCs. In 1996 Nüesch et al. reported that they also had problems controlling the self-assembly of merocyanine dyes within mesoporous TiO2 layers.88 Whereas no J-aggregates could be grown within pristine mesoporous alumina and zirconia these authors identified the aggregation within TiO2 to be very sensitive to the surface roughness, charge and humidity, which often led only to the formation of mixtures of H- and J-aggregates.
Due to the high aspect ratio of the aggregates of 1 we could also make use of a larger pore size. Because the aggregate diameter remained small, i.e. within the order of the expected exciton diffusion length, a large growth in direction of the long axis was tolerable. The aggregates within a coarse-porous TiO2 layer are shown in Fig. 8 in comparison to a blank coarse-porous TiO2 layer. Whereas the blank layer was prepared on a conductive substrate, the course-porous layer which was infiltrated by 1 was prepared on a glass substrate in order to also allow characterization by absorption spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 9. For the SEM investigation, the same sample was sputtered with gold which formed a nanopattern on the surface. However, the rod-shaped J-aggregates can be clearly distinguished from the more spherical TiO2 particles (Fig. 8B).
 Fig. 8  
          SEM micrographs of J-aggregates of 1 deposited within a coarse-porous TiO2 layer. A: The blank coarse-porous TiO2 layer on a conductive substrate (no metal coating, 10 kV). B: A 6 mM solution of 1 in THF was spin-coated at 3000 rpm onto a similar coarse-porous TiO2 layer on a glass substrate, which was annealed afterwards within a pressure tube with n-heptane vapor at 110 °C for 4 h. The nanopattern on the surface originated from a 27 nm thick Au film sputtered after the absorption measurements in order to avoid charging in the SEM. 
 Fig. 9  
Absorption spectra of 1 as deposited from THF and after post-treatment in n-heptane. Absorption spectra of the samples, which are shown in Fig. 7B and 8B (greenish curves) in comparison with the corresponding absorption spectra before the n-heptane treatment, right after spin-coating from a 6 mM THF solution (reddish curves). All measurements were done without the gold layer in an integrating sphere. 

Fig. 9 shows the corresponding absorption spectra of this sample before and after the treatment in n-heptane in comparison with the flat sample (fig. 7B), before the gold layers have been sputtered.
The absorption spectra prove that the initial amorphous films of 1 as deposited from THF could be successfully reorganized to J-aggregates by the thermal post-treatment in the n-heptane vapor. This reorganization could not be observed on mesoporous TiO2 layers sintered from 37 and 13 nm sized TiO2 particles as shown in Fig. S4 of the Supporting Information.† The morphology of amorphous 1 and its ability to infiltrate mesoporous TiO2 layers was investigated earlier by SEM on cross-sections of such layers, which were equipped with additional macropores.84b There it has been shown that 1 can be successfully infiltrated through the mesoporous TiO2 network from THF solutions, but it does not tend to segregate significantly within the macropores until its concentration is high enough to fill a major fraction of the mesopores too. Within the mesopores, however, it remains amorphous and unaffected by the thermal post-treatment in n-heptane, as judged from the absorption spectra. Thus, in mixed layers which contain meso- and macropores, the reorganization of 1 to J-aggregates will not be complete as some part will remain amorphous within the mesopores. Even when J-aggregates of 1 were precast from dichloromethane solutions onto mesoporous TiO2 layers they diffused into the mesopores and became amorphous upon the thermal post-treatment in n-heptane vapor and thus behaved differently than on flat or coarse-porous TiO2 layers (Fig. S4†). Beside the fact that a coarse-porous TiO2 layer is needed to allow a complete reorganization of 1 to J-aggregates, an additional benefit of such a layer is that it scatters light, leading to a significant increase in the absorbance.

Assembly of solar cells with aggregates of 1 as a light-harvesting unit
As the reorganization from the amorphous layer of 1 to J-aggregates was possible on flat and within coarse-porous layers, both structures have been prepared for solar cells. For a better comparison they have been prepared on a single substrate by coating only one half with a ca. 3 μm thick coarse-porous TiO2 layer (T300). This allowed all parameters to be kept constant and only the effect of the additional TiO2 layer was compared. A compact 25 nm thick TiO2 hole blocking layer was grown in advance onto the whole FTO substrate by atomic layer deposition (ALD). As a reference several ss-DSSCs were made with the conventional ruthenium bipyridine dye N719 on a mesoporous TiO2 layer.
We tried building solar cells under ambient conditions, without using glove-box techniques, which should allow for low manufacturing costs.
The reference ss-DSSC with N719 showed a strong kink in the I–V characteristic (Fig. 10) for the illumination with simulated sunlight and with a 60 W incandescent lamp, which should represent indoor illumination conditions. This kink is probably due to the high doping level, i.e.oxygen vacancy concentration of the TiO2 underlayer. This is a result of the oxygen deficient vacuum and inert gas conditions of the ALD process. The oxygen depletion could not even be significantly changed by annealing the sample in pure oxygen at 500 °C for 1 h. The high doping level is supposed to cause the formation of a Schottky barrier at the interface to the FTO layer as the Fermi level is assumed to rise above that of the FTO (relative to the vacuum level), as described by Snaith and Grätzel89 and previously modelled by Rühle and Cahen.90 The former authors observed the formation of a similar kink in conventional ss-DSSCs, when nitrogen was used as the carrier gas in the common spray pyrolysis deposition process, which is commonly used to apply the hole blocking layer. Such a kink can normally be diminished by the irradiation with UV light, what is also known as the UV-effect of DSSCs. By using pure oxygen as carrier gas for the precursor solution, which is being sprayed on the 450 °C hot FTO substrate, Snaith and Grätzel observed a significant improvement of the fill factor.87 However, also with such optimized hole blocking layers, a small kink still remains in the I–V curve of conventional ss-DSSCs, when they are illuminated in the absence of UV light.
 Fig. 10  
I–V curves of the reference ss-DSSC with the ruthenium bipyridine dye N719 under illumination with a 60 W incandescent lamp from 10 cm distance (red) and a solar simulator (green). The inset shows a magnification of the origin of the graph. The corresponding solar cell is marked by an arrow in the photo. The FTO substrate was contacted over a spot of silver paint (bright spot on the left hand side), which was applied after scratching the substrate underneath. 
The dye aggregate solar cells were prepared by spraying the solution of 1 in THF onto a similar FTO substrate with the ALD grown TiO2 layer, but being partly coated with a coarse-porous TiO2 layer. The substrate was then annealed in n-heptane at 110 °C for 4 h. In order to avoid washing off of 1 by spin-coating the spiro-MeOTAD solution, this hole transport material was sprayed briefly onto the substrate first and then also spin-coated as a second layer on top. The I–V characteristic of the flat and coarse-porous DASC is shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  
I–V curves of a flat and a coarse-porous DASC under our simulated indoor illumination conditions (60 W incandescent lamp from 10 cm distance). The corresponding cells are marked by arrows in the photo. The inhomogeneity, spreading over four cells in the bottom right corner, originated by spin-coating the spiro-MeOTAD layer. It made no significant difference over which of the two opposed silver paint spots the FTO was contacted. 
Under indoor illumination conditions simulated by a standard 60 W incandescent lamp, no such pronounced kink is visible in the I–V curve compared to the reference cell. However, the current density maximum is also shifted towards negative potentials, but the fill factor is larger than 25%, which would represent a I–V curve progression in quadrant IV (positive potential, negative current). The fill factor of the reference cell with N719, however, is clearly smaller than this 25% threshold. Under simulated sunlight, however, a kink occurs also for the coarse porous DASC (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Comparison of the flat and coarse-porous DASC under simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2AM1.5). See the experimental section and the Supporting Information† for details and a comparison with the ruthenium-based dye N719. 
For the flat DASC, however, also under the high intensity of simulated sunlight, no such kink was present. Additionally the open circuit potential was with 0.632 V significantly larger than that of the DASC with the coarse-porous TiO2 layer (0.365 V). The photocurrent, however, was significantly higher on that half of the substrate with the coarse porous TiO2 layer, especially when measured beyond the kink around −1 V. This current could be even higher if a higher concentration of 1 would have been infiltrated, as the cells absorbed only about one fifth of the incident light. The relatively large drop in the open circuit potential may have been caused by a band bending within the large TiO2 particles.
Additional stability tests showed no significant degradation of the DASCs during the I–V measurements and after half a year storage in the dark. Similar coarse porous solar cells have been prepared without the thermal post-treatment of 1 in n-heptane, i.e. with amorphous 1. They showed an open circuit current, which was over 7 times lower than after the n-heptane post-treatment.
Challenges that remain and possible improvements
These are first, preliminary examples and not fully optimized solar cells. The main reason for the low fill-factors and efficiencies of all investigated solar cells is the high doping level of the dense TiO2 hole blocking layer that needs to be replaced in future. It is expected that the efficiency of not only the N719 reference cells can be increased significantly by using low doped TiO2 hole blocking layers. Additionally, the absorbance in the visible wavelength range of our solar cells was not maximized and reached only about one fifth of the incident light. A higher pore-filling with aggregates of 1, or alternatively, a reduction of the coarse-porous TiO2 layer thickness below 3 μm is supposed to rise the efficiency too.
Further improvements may be achieved by optimizing the TiO2 particle size, which may be closer to the threshold at which the reorganization to J-aggregates is not possible anymore, i.e. somewhere in between 200 nm and 37 nm. Additionally, the coarse porous TiO2-layer may also allow the infiltration and thus usage of other HTMs, which might have better electrical properties.
Further investigations will also include action spectra to determine the quantum efficiency. The wavelength-resolved sensitization of a flat TiO2 layer by J-aggregates of 1 has been shown earlier by time-resolved microwave conductivity measurements.87 Also, efficiency measurements at different illumination intensities should be performed in future, as well as stability tests under accelerated aging conditions.
Conclusions
It could be shown that biomimetic self-assemblies may be used for solar cells in a combined architecture of hybrid solar cells and solid-state dye sensitized solar cells. The mean pore-size, adjusted by the TiO2 particle size, needs to be large enough to allow the self-assembly. The synergy effects of the exciton transport ability of hybrid solar cells and the additional hole transport material of ss-DSSCs may help to improve the performance of low cost, light weight and environmental friendly solar cells. We call this type dye aggregate solar cell (DASC).
The aggregates of 1 show a reasonable open circuit potential on the bare TiO2 hole blocking layer on FTO, but a low photocurrent. This could be increased by using an additional mesoporous TiO2 layer composed of 37 nm particles and further increased by coarsening this layer using TiO2 particles with sizes around 200 nm. These large pores were essential to allow the reorganization of amorphous 1 into J-aggregates, what could be achieved by a post-annealing in n-heptane. However, due to the coarse-porous TiO2 layer the open circuit potential decreased. As shown in Fig. 1 and 2, a large variety of self-assembling porphyrins and chlorins should allow a fine tuning of the redox potentials so that there is a good match to the semiconductor conduction band.
Conventional sensitizers for DSSCs, especially porphyrins91 and phthalocyanines,92 suffer from a disordered aggregation even within one chemisorbed monolayer.83 Instead of struggling against this aggregation we demonstrated the possibility of learning from nature and force aggregation in a sophisticated way, making use of self-assembly to highly ordered aggregates, which should not disturb solar cell functionality, but rather improve it. By using a self-assembled antenna system with these versatile and full synthetic chromophores we hope to improve the light-harvesting ability for a high efficiency even under low light illumination conditions.
Experimental

Zinc porphyrin
1 was prepared as previously described.30 Careful column chromatography neatly separated the 3,13- and 3,17-diacetyl-substituted free base porphyrins which were then separately monoreduced and metallated with anhydrous Zn(OCOCH3)2 in a chloroform–methanol (4:1, v/v) mixture.
The solar cells were prepared on 1.1 mm thick borosilicate glass substrates coated with an about 550 nm thick fluorine doped tin oxide layer (FTO, 10 Ω/square from Solaronix SA). They were cleaned prior to use by sonication within an aqueous solution of the alkaline detergentDeconex 24 forte from Borer with subsequent sonication in distilled water and ethanol, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 1 h as the final cleaning step. A dense 25 nm thick TiO2 hole blocking layer was applied by atomic layer deposition (ALD) from titanium isopropoxide with water under medium vacuum with nitrogen as carrier gas. Afterwards the samples were annealed in pure oxygen at 500 °C for 1 h in order to replenish the deficient oxygen content, and thus reduce the doping concentration.
The coarse porous TiO2 layer was then applied by doctor-blading the T300 paste from Solaronix. After sintering at 500 °C for 1 h the substrate was treated with a 50 mM aqueous solution of titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) at 80 °C for 3 h. This treatment is known to improve the TiO2 surface by the growths of an additional 1–2 nm thick TiO2 layer.93,94 Afterwards the sample was annealed again at 500 °C for 1 h. For the reference ss-DSSC a mesoporous TiO2 layer (T series, 13 nm particle size from Solaronix) was applied by doctor-blading onto a similar prepared FTO substrate with the ALD grown TiO2 blocking layer.
Onto the partly coarse-porous substrate 100 μL of a 0.1 mM solution of 1 in THF were sprayed homogeneously with subsequent post-annealing in a pressure tube with n-heptane at 110 °C for 4 h. The mesoporous reference substrate was stained in a 0.5 mM solution of N719 from Solaronix in a 1:1 mixture of tert-butanol and acetonitrile at 60 °C for 2 h. It was dried in advance and put into the staining solution at about 80 °C. After the staining it was rinsed with the pure solvent mixture to remove any agglomerates.
The solid hole transport material spiro-MeOTAD from Merck was dissolved in chlorobenzene to a concentration of 0.17 M with the addition of 0.12 M tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and 13 mM bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (TFSI-Li, predissolved in acetonitrile: 170 mg mL−1) according to the literature.79,95,96 This is one of the most employed compositions of additives used for the HTM matrix in conventional ss-DSSCs. A small overview about different fabrication methods and additive concentrations for ss-DSSCs and DSSCs is given in the supporting information.†
As the aggregates of 1 were also soluble in the spiro-MeOTAD solution we could not simply spin-coat it onto our coarse porous sample, because this step would have washed out a significant amount of 1. Therefore we sprayed the spiro-MeOTAD solution onto this sample. A short spin-coating step was done additionally at the end after spraying a large amount, as this improved the solar cell performance by smoothing out and closing the sprayed overlayer of the spiro-MeOTAD matrix. Onto the reference ss-DSSC the spiro-MeOTAD solution was spin-coated directly, without the spraying step in advance.
Finally, a 50 nm thick gold layer was sputtered through a mask forming 16 individual solar cells of 7 mm2 area each. Four of these cells were on the flat and twelve on the porous part of the substrate. They have been contacted simultaneously by a contacting device with 18 golden spring probes pictured in the supporting information.† Two spring probes could be used to contact the FTO substrate over a spot of silver paint, which was painted onto a scratched part of the substrate. The solar cells could be addressed individually by two rotary switches which had an internal resistance below 50 mΩ, which could be neglected. The contacts were very reproducible and did not require etching away of the underlying FTO in advance, because the spring probes did not short-circuit the cells.
The I–V measurements were done under two illumination conditions: 1) under a 60 W incandescent lamp, which had a reflecting coating on the backside of the bulb, from 10 cm distance, and 2) under a solar simulator (model 81150) from LOT-Oriel with 100 mW cm−2 intensity and an AM1.5 spectrum. The measurements under the solar simulator were done with the SourceMeter 2400 from Keithley. The measurements under the 60 W lamp, which should represent indoor illumination conditions, were performed with the potentiostat PGSTAT10 from Metrohm.
Acknowledgements
The experiments using the Solar Simulator were performed in collaboration with the group of Prof. Jägermann in Darmstadt, Germany which we gratefully acknowledge. We are thankful to Dr Jean-Paul Gisselbrecht and Youssef El Khoury in Strasbourg, France, for performing the electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry on 1 and its self-assemblies which will be published separately.
References
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
DOE Report Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization,  September 2005, http://www.sc.doe.gov/bes/reports/files/SEU_rpt.pdf Search PubMed.
J. L. Dempsey, A. J. Esswein, D. R. Manke, J. Rosenthal, J. D. Soper and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6879–6892 CrossRef CAS  , and further references therein.

  (a) 
            A. J. Nozik and M. D. Archer (ed.), Photochemical and Photoelectrochemical Approaches to Solar Energy Conversion, Vol. 4 in Photoconversion of Solar Energy, Imperial College Press: London,  2005 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) I. Paci, J. C. Johnson, X. Chen, G. Rana, D. Popovic, D. E. David, A. J. Nozik, M. A. Ratner and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16546–16553 CrossRef CAS  , and further references therein.
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree and N. S. Lewis, Phys. Today, 2007, 60, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 61–67 Search PubMed .

          http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/sunpower-announces-efficiency-record-is-the-end-near/
        .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 320–326 Search PubMed .
J. F. Randall and J. Jacot, Renewable Energy, 2003, 28, 1851–1864 Search PubMed .

  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Würfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 1–18 Search PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreizer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef .
L. Schmidt-Mende, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013504 CrossRef .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carrol, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124903 CrossRef .

  (a) 
            http://www.ad-hoc-news.de/solarmer-energy-inc-breaks-psychological-barrier-with--/de/News/21506335. For a previously published bulk heterojunction polymer solar cell with 7.4% power conversion efficiency see:   Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Yue Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, E135–E138 Search PubMed .
For an earlier review on organic solar cells see:   H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 Search PubMed .

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, Blackwell: Oxford,  2002. See also DOE Report 96007867 (1996) Search PubMed .
D. Noy, C. C. Moser and P. L. Dutton, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2006, 1757, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Solladié, A. Hamel and M. Gross, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 6075–6078 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Aubert, V. Troiani, M. Gross and N. Solladié, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 8405–8408 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Hasobe, P. V. Kamat, V. Troiani, N. Solladié, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Kongkanand, S. Kuwabata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19–23 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Fujitsuka, M. Hara, S. Tojo, A. Okada, V. Troiani, N. Solladié and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 33–35 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Hasobe, K. Saito, P. V. Kamat, V. Troiani, H. Qiu, N. Solladié, K. S. Kim, J. K. Park, D. Kim, F. D'Souza and S. Fukuzumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 39, 4160–4170 Search PubMed .

          N.-U. Frigaard and D. A. BryantChlorosomes: Antenna Organelles in Photosynthetic Green Bacteria In Microbiol. Monogr.Vol. 2, Complex Intracellular Structures in Prokaryotes, ed. J. M. ShivelySpringer Verlag: Berlin 2006, pp. 79–114 Search PubMed .

          T. S. Balaban, H. Tamiaki and A. R. Holzwarth, Chlorins Programmed for Self-assembly in Supramolecular Dye Chemistry, ed. F. Würthner, Topics Curr Chem, 2005, 258, Springer Verlag: Berlin,  2006, pp. 1–38 Search PubMed .
G. Cohen-Bazire, N. Pfennig and R. Kunisawa, J. Cell Biol., 1964, 22, 207–225 Search PubMed .
L. A. Staehelin, J. R. Golecki, R. C. Fuller and G. Drews, Arch Mikrobiol., 1978, 119, 269–277 CrossRef .
A. K. Manske, J. Glaeser, M. M. M. Kuypers and J. Overmann, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 8049–8060 Search PubMed .
J. T. Beatty, J. Overmann, M. T. Lince, A. K. Manske, A. S. Lang, R. E. Blankenship, C. L. Van Dover, T. A. Martison and F. G. Plumley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 9306–9310 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Balaban, A. D. Bhise, M. Fischer, M. Linke-Schaetzel, C. Roussel and N. Vanthuyne, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2139–2144 Search PubMed .
T. S. Balaban, M. Linke-Schaetzel, A. D. Bhise, N. Vanthuyne and C. Roussel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 3919–3930 Search PubMed .
T. S. Balaban, M. Linke-Schaetzel, A. D. Bhise, N. Vanthuyne, C. Roussel, C. E Anson, G. Buth, A. Eichhöfer, K. Foster, G. Garab, H. Gliemann, R. Goddard, T. Javorfi, A. K. Powell, H. Rösner and Th. Schimmel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2267–2275 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. S. Balaban, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 612–623 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            T. S. Balaban, Self-assembling Porphyrins and Chlorins as Synthetic Mimics of the Chlorosomal Bacteriochlorophylls in Handbook of Porphyrin Science with Applications to Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science, Engineering, Biology and Medicine, K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, ed., World Scientific: Singapore,  2010, Vol. 1, pp. 221–306 Search PubMed .
T. S. Balaban, H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 3424–3431 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyatake, H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 69, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamiaki, M. Kubo and T. Oba, Tetrahedron, 2000, 56, 6245–6257 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyatake, T. Oba and H. Tamiaki, ChemBioChem, 2001, 335–342 Search PubMed .
H. Tamiaki, M. Amakawa, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Photosynth. Res., 2002, 71, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamiaki, S. Kimura and T. Kimura, Tetrahedron, 2003, 59, 7423–7435 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyatake, S. Tanigawa, S. Kato and H. Tamiaki, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 2251–2254 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sasaki, T. Mizoguchi and H. Tamiaki, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 4566–4569 CrossRef CAS .
V. Huber, M. Katterle, M. Lysetska and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Röger, M. Müller, M. Lysetska, Y. Miloslavina, A. R. Holzwarth and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6542–6543 CrossRef .
M. Ptaszek, Z. Yao, D. Savithri, P. D. Boyle and J. S. Lindsey, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 12629–12638 Search PubMed .
I. de Boer, J. Matysik, M. Amakawa, S. Yagai, H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and H. J. M. de Groot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13374–13375 Search PubMed .
M. C. Balaban and T. S. Balaban, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 277–286 Search PubMed .
M. C. Balaban, A. Eichhöfer, G. Buth, R. Hauschild, J. Szmytkowski, H. Kalt and T. S. Balaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 5512–5521 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jochum, M. C. Reddy, A. Eichhöfer, G. Buth, R. Hauschild, J. Szmytkowski, H. Kalt, D. Moss and T. S. Balaban, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 12736–12741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matano, K. Matsumoto, Y. Terasaka, H. Hotta, Y. Araki, O. Ito, M. Shiro, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh and H. Imahori, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 891–901 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matano, T. Shinokura, K. Matsumoto, H. Imahori and H. Nakano, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 1417–1429 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. J. M. Suijkerbuijk, D. M. Tooke, A. L. Spek, G. van Koten and R. J. M. Klein Gebbink, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 889–903 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Dähne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12855–12860 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. A. Castriciano, A. Romeo, V. Villari, N. Micali and L. M. Scolaro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8765–8771 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Fujii, Y. Hasegawa, S. Yanagida and Y. Wada, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3065–3067 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Egawa, R. Hayashida and J. I. Anzai, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 13146–13150 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) X. Li, L. Zhang and J. Mu, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 311, 187–190 Search PubMed .
A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Photosynth. Res., 1994, 41, 225–233 CAS .
B. J. van Rossum, D. B. Steensgaard, F. M. Mulder, G.-J. Boender, K. Schaffner, A. R. Holzwarth and H. J. M. de Groot, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ganapathy, G. T. Oostergetel, P. K. Wawrzyniak, M. Reus, A. G. Maqueo Chew, F. Buda, E. J. Boekema, D. A. Bryant, A. R. Holzwarth and H. J. M. de Groot, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 8525–8530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pšenčik, T. P. Ikonen, P. Laurinmäki, M. C. Merckel, S. J. Butcher, R. E. Serimaa and R. Tuma, Biophys. J., 2004, 87, 1165–1172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pšenčik, J. B. Arellano, T. P. Ikonen, C. M. Borrego, P. Laurinmäki, S. J. Butcher, R. E. Serimaa and R. Tuma, Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 1433–1440 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Ikonen, H. Li, J. Pšenčik, P. Laurinmäki, S. J. Butcher, N.-U. Frigaard, R. E. Serimaa and R. Tuma, Biophys. J., 2007, 93, 620–628 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kakitani, H. Nagae, T. Mizoguchi, A. Egawa, K. Akiba, T. Fujiwara, H. Akutsu and Y. Koyama, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 7574–7585 Search PubMed .
A. Egawa, T. Fujiwara, T. Mizoguchi, Y. Kakitani, Y. Koyama and H. Akutsu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 790–795 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Linnanto and J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 96, 227–245 Search PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 5051–5066 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Hunter and J. K. M. Sanders, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 5525–5534 CrossRef CAS .
Heliatek and IAPP achieve record efficiency levels for organic solar cells, Heliatek GmbH,/ 2010, http://www.heliatek.com/news-13.

          Solarmer Energy, Inc. Breaks Psychological Barrier with 8.13% OPV Efficiency, ad-hoc-news,  07/2010, http://www.ad-hoc-news.de/solarmer-energy-inc-breaks-psychological-barrier-with--/de/News/21506335 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792–7799 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Liang and L. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1227–1236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. De Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377–1384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, S. Cecioni, M. Billon, Y. Kervella, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 699–708 Search PubMed .

  (a) B. Fan, F. Araujo de Castro, J. Heier, R. Hany and F. Nüesch, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 583–588 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) For solar cells using polyaniline see:   B. Fan, F. Araujo de Castro, B. T.-T. Chu, J. Heier, D. Opris, R. Hany and F. Nüesch, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2952–2955 Search PubMed .
A. Mishra, R. K. Behera, P. K. Behera, B. K. Mishra and G. B. Behera, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1973–2011 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Tamiaki, T. Miyatake, R. Tanikaga, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Angew. Chem., 1996, 108, 810–812 ; 
  (b) V. I. Prokhorenko, A. R. Holzwarth, M. G. Müller, K. Schaffner, T. Miyatake and H. Tamiaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5761–5768 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 558–562 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cahen, G. Hodes, M. Grätzel, J. F. Guillemoles and I. Riess, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2053–2059 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kron, T. Egerter, J. H. Werner and U. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3556–3564 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schwanitz, E. Mankel, R. Hunger, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, Chimia, 2007, 61, 796–800 Search PubMed .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, L. Schmidt-Mende, C. Orizu, S. D. Ogier, K. Carr, M. Grätzel and J. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1832–1838 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, P. Chen, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 699–707 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. Xu, D. Shi, R. Li, F. Gao, G. Zhang, Z. Yi, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4460–4463 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 500, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, U. Bach, R. Humphry-Baker, T. Horiuchi, H. Muira, S. Ito, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 813–815 CrossRef .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
For “in situ photo-electrochemical polymerization” see:   S. Yanagida, Y. Yu and K. Manseki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1827–1838 Search PubMed .
M. V. Martínez-Díaz, M. Ince and T. Torres, Monatsh. Chem., 2011, 142, 1–9 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            P. Marek, Y. El Khoury, J.-P. Gisselbrecht and T. S. Balaban, unpublished results; 
  (b) For infiltration of mesoporous titania with aggregates of 1 see also:   P. Marek, H. Sieger, T. Scherer, H. Hahn and T. S. Balaban, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 3708–3713 Search PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral, 2000, 85, 543–556 CAS .
A. Huijser, P. L. Marek, T. J. Savenije, L. D. A. Siebbeles, T. Scherer, R. Hauschild, J. Szmytkowski, H. Kalt, H. Hahn and T. S. Balaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11726–11733 CrossRef .
F. Nüesch, J. E. Moser, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5420–5431 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1910–1914 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rühle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17946–17951 Search PubMed .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem., 2007, 111, 11760–11762 Search PubMed .
J.-J. Cid, J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Martinez-Ferrero, E. Palomares, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8358–8362 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, S. E. Koops, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1126–1136 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, S. A. Haque and J. R. Durrant, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034510 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01053k‡ We avoid using anode or cathode for designating the two electrodes as this naming is not consistent for ss-DSSCs and organic solar cells in the literature, which may lead to confusion.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Peter L. Marek	Peter Marek was born 1978 in Bielawa, Poland, moved in 1984 to Langen, Germany, and studied materials science at the Technische Universität Darmstadt (TUD), where he specialized in solar cells and bionics. Peter graduated in 2005 with a diploma thesis already dealing with the biomimetic self-assembling porphyrins, supervised by Dr Balaban and Prof. Hahn. He then pursued PhD studies, under the same supervision, at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) on self-assembling porphyrins for solar cells. He will defend his PhD thesis in 2011.
Horst Hahn	Horst Hahn studied materials science at the Universität des Saarlandes in Saarbrücken, Germany, and obtained a Dr Ing. Degree from the Technische Universität Berlin. He then established a research programme on nanocrystalline ceramics and diffusion phenomena in disordered systems as a research associate at Argonne National Laboratory in USA. Between 1987 and 1992 he held professorships in materials science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and at Rutgers—the State University of New Jersey. He was appointed full professor at the TUD in 1992 and as executive director of the INT in 2004. His main interests are related to the synthesis and processing of nanoparticles, thin films and nanocrystalline materials and nanostructures, especially for energy related research.
Teodor Silviu Balaban	Silviu Balaban was born 1958 in Bucharest, Roumania, in a family of chemists and studied chemistry at the University “Politehnica” Bucharest. After obtaining his PhD in organic chemistry in 1990 under the supervision of Ecaterina Cioranescu-Nenitzescu he moved to Germany as an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow. He had temporary research positions at the former Max-Planck-Institute for Radiation Chemistry (Mülheim an der Ruhr) in Strasbourg and since 1999 he had a permanent position at the INT within the former Research Center Karlsruhe, now KIT. He habilitated on self-assembling chromophores in 2000, under the guidance of Jean-Marie Lehn. In 2007 he was appointed full professor at the University Paul Cézanne Aix-Marseille III in France where he holds the Chair for Supramolecular Organic Assemblies. One of his research themes focuses on mimicking photosynthetic processes.

Broader context

            Silicon solar cells represent a functioning technology but despite increased production capacities their relative high costs have not dropped significantly in the past years. Although they have longevities of over twenty years, one of their disadvantages is that their efficiency sinks considerably under low light illumination, as typically encountered in northern countries with fewer than 1000 h of sunshine per year. Replacing silicon solar cells with other materials is a feverishly pursued research area. Our efforts consist in equipping solid state solar cells with an antenna system for efficient light-harvesting which should enable their functioning also under dim light, for instance indoors or at dusk and dawn. The blueprint for the light-harvesting unit is taken from green photosynthetic bacteria that live in deep waters and even at 100 m under the surface they can trap very scarce photons thanks to a special organelle called chlorosome due to its green sac nature. Within chlorosomes, bacteriochlorophyll molecules self-assemble forming dye aggregates with extremely long exciton diffusion lengths enabling efficient trapping of the light energy within the reaction centers. We have replicated the self-assembly algorithm operating for bacteriochlorophylls with fully synthetic porphyrins and we could photosensitize nanocrystalline titania, assembling a novel type of dye aggregate solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  The natural self-assembling BChls c, d, and e together with synthetic mimics with hydroxy(m)ethyl substituents in the upper half and carbonyl substituents in the lower half. Heterogeneity is assured by different long chain alcohols R'OH such as farnesol, phytol, geranyl-geraniol, stearol, cetol, etc., and different R7 and R8 substituents such as methyl, ethyl, n-propyl and isobutyl. Compounds 1–7 were synthesized by Balaban et al.,30,318 and 9 were synthesized by Tamiaki et al.39 while 10 and 11 were synthesized by Lindsey et coll.44 (Tol stands for p-tolyl).	 

 	Fig. 2  Self-assembling porphyrins which do not have hydroxy(m)ethyl substituents and which still self-assemble. Compounds 12–14 were synthesized by Balaban et al.46,4715 and 16 were synthesized by Matano et al.49,50	 

 	Fig. 3  Model of a self-assembled stack of 1 based on the crystallographic data derived for 3 and PM3 semiempirical calculations (Program Package HyperChem® 8, Gainesville, Florida). The stacks extend by a strong Zn–O ligation (1.9 Å long) indicated by red dashed lines. The inset shows the amount of π-overlap within a dimer. Note that the 13-carbonyl group is positioned exactly beneath the Zn atoms (with a Zn–O distance of 3.8 Å) with which it can interact electrostatically.	 

 	Fig. 4  Green trace: absorption spectra of 1 dissolved in dry dichloromethane which is diluted in a 60-fold excess of dry n-heptane; at the same time a thin film is formed on the walls of the quartz cuvette; magenta trace: 1 redissolved by addition of a suprastoichiometric amount of methanol and a few additional drops of dichloromethane in order to assure a homogeneous solution within the same cuvette.	 

 	Fig. 5  The dye aggregate absorbs a photon, forming an exciton, which diffuses through the aggregate until it reaches the interface with an electron conductor, e.g.TiO2. After dissociation of the exciton and injection of the electron into its conduction band the remaining hole can also diffuse through the aggregate to an interface with a hole transporting material, e.g.spiro-OMeTAD,13 into which it gets injected. A prerequisite is that the aggregate does not exceed the exciton diffusion length at least within one dimension (x).	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy levels of the materials used for conventional DSSCs and the DASC with 1 as an antenna. Left hand side: DSSC with the standard ruthenium-dye N719, where the Fermi-level of one FTO electrode is pinned to the iodide/triiodide redox couple of the electrolyte (denoted by iodide). The right half of the graph shows the solid-state version (ss-DSSC) together with J-aggregates of 1 and the solid hole transport material spiro-MeOTAD, which also correlates well to the Fermi-level of the gold electrode in this particular case.	 

 	Fig. 7  
          SEM micrographs of J-aggregates of 1 deposited by two different techniques. A: Drop-casting a 2.1 mM solution of 1 in anhydrous dichloromethane (DCM) onto a silicon substrate (no metal coating, 10 kV acceleration voltage). B: Deposition by a two step process, where first an amorphous film of 1 was spin-coated onto glass from a 6 mM solution in THF at 3000 rpm and afterwards annealed within n-heptane vapor in a pressure tube at 110 °C for 4 h. The rough substructure originates from a 6 nm thick coating with Au to avoid charging.	 

 	Fig. 8  
          SEM micrographs of J-aggregates of 1 deposited within a coarse-porous TiO2 layer. A: The blank coarse-porous TiO2 layer on a conductive substrate (no metal coating, 10 kV). B: A 6 mM solution of 1 in THF was spin-coated at 3000 rpm onto a similar coarse-porous TiO2 layer on a glass substrate, which was annealed afterwards within a pressure tube with n-heptane vapor at 110 °C for 4 h. The nanopattern on the surface originated from a 27 nm thick Au film sputtered after the absorption measurements in order to avoid charging in the SEM.	 

 	Fig. 9  
Absorption spectra of 1 as deposited from THF and after post-treatment in n-heptane. Absorption spectra of the samples, which are shown in Fig. 7B and 8B (greenish curves) in comparison with the corresponding absorption spectra before the n-heptane treatment, right after spin-coating from a 6 mM THF solution (reddish curves). All measurements were done without the gold layer in an integrating sphere.	 

 	Fig. 10  
I–V curves of the reference ss-DSSC with the ruthenium bipyridine dye N719 under illumination with a 60 W incandescent lamp from 10 cm distance (red) and a solar simulator (green). The inset shows a magnification of the origin of the graph. The corresponding solar cell is marked by an arrow in the photo. The FTO substrate was contacted over a spot of silver paint (bright spot on the left hand side), which was applied after scratching the substrate underneath.	 

 	Fig. 11  
I–V curves of a flat and a coarse-porous DASC under our simulated indoor illumination conditions (60 W incandescent lamp from 10 cm distance). The corresponding cells are marked by arrows in the photo. The inhomogeneity, spreading over four cells in the bottom right corner, originated by spin-coating the spiro-MeOTAD layer. It made no significant difference over which of the two opposed silver paint spots the FTO was contacted.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of the flat and coarse-porous DASC under simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2AM1.5). See the experimental section and the Supporting Information† for details and a comparison with the ruthenium-based dye N719.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01053k
‡ We avoid using anode or cathode for designating the two electrodes as this naming is not consistent for ss-DSSCs and organic solar cells in the literature, which may lead to confusion.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
