Recent progress in organic photovoltaics: device architecture and optical design  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00260A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00260A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2123-2144Recent progress in organic photovoltaics: device architecture and optical design

        
          
            Weiran 
            Cao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jiangeng 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. E-mail: jxue@mse.ufl.edu
Received 
      22nd January 2014
    , Accepted 14th March 2014First published on 17th March 2014AbstractResearch on organic photovoltaic (OPV) materials and devices has flourished in recent years due to their potential for offering low-cost solar energy conversion. With a deepened understanding on the fundamental photovoltaic processes in organic electronic materials and the development of tailored materials and device architectures, we have seen a rapid increase in the efficiency of OPV devices to over 10%, which attracts tremendous commercial interests for further development and manufacturing. Here, we review recent progress in the field of organic photovoltaics, particularly on various innovative device architectures and optical designs to maximize the power conversion efficiency of OPV cells for a given set of photoactive donor and acceptor materials. Following an introduction of the basic device operation of organic photovoltaic cells and the advances in active materials, we firstly present different device architectures that have been used to optimize the charge generation and collection characteristics within the OPV devices. We then discuss various methods to manage and manipulate the light wave propagation in OPV devices for more complete absorption of the incident light, an important area that has been underexplored so far.Weiran CaoWeiran Cao received his B.S. degree in materials science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2008 and his Ph.D. degree in materials science and engineering from the University of Florida in 2013. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Jiangeng Xue's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Florida. His current research work mainly focuses on novel optical designs for organic light-emitting devices and photovoltaic devices.Jiangeng XueJiangeng Xue is a University of Florida Research Foundation Professor and Associate Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Florida. He received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Princeton University in 2005. His research interests are broadly on the physics and processing of organic and hybrid organic–inorganic electronic materials and their applications in lighting, displays, photovoltaics, photodetection and circuitry.

Broader context
Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices based on π-conjugated organic molecules or polymers offer great opportunities for low-cost solar energy conversion, due to several technological advantages of organic semiconductors. These advantages include low material cost, easy and high-throughput manufacturing processes, compatibility with flexible substrates and tunable material properties via chemical structure modification. In recent years, the performance of OPV devices, including the efficiency and stability, has steadily improved, resulting from the development of new active materials and material processing/treatment methods, novel device architectures and internal/external optical structures to manage the light. The state-of-the-art power conversion efficiency of laboratory cells has reached over 10%, attracting tremendous commercialization interests.

1 Introduction
Finding clean and renewable energy sources has become one of the greatest challenges for our modern society, due to the rapidly increasing energy demand and the limited reserve of traditional fossil fuel sources (coal, oil and natural gas).1–4 Technologies that harvest the clean, renewable and abundant solar power are among the most attractive methods to solve this energy challenge. Among those technologies, photovoltaic (PV) cells, or solar cells, which directly convert solar energy to electricity, have emerged as a promising candidate. Since the invention of the first modern silicon solar cell in the 1950's,5 we have seen tremendous advances in solar cell research and development. With the use of improved and new materials and the introduction of new device architectures,6 the power conversion efficiency (PCE, ηP), arguably the most important scientific figure of merit for solar cells, has steadily increased over the years from about 6% to 44%.7 On the commercialization side, the PV industry has also grown tremendously, especially in the last two decades. The worldwide PV cell/module production capacity steadily increased by 35–40% per year from 1996 to 2003.8 Since 2006, the global annual PV installation has risen at an even faster pace of an approximately 70% increase per year,9 although there is some volatility in the growth in the last few years as influenced by the overall economic and financial environment in the world. The annual PV installation in the world first exceeded 1 GW in 2003, and by the end of 2012 the world's cumulative installed PV capacity has surpassed 100 GW.9 PV now covers 2.6% of the overall electricity demand (and 5.2% of the instantaneous electricity demand when the PV generation reaches peak at mid-day) in Europe, which represents approximately 70% of the world's cumulative PV capacity.9
Existing commercial PV devices are mostly based on crystalline silicon wafers or ribbons.8 Other inorganic semiconductors such as amorphous silicon, CdTe, and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 have been used to fabricate thin-film solar cells to reduce material consumption and manufacturing cost; however, generally these thin-film cells have lower efficiency than crystalline Si cells.10 GaAs and other III–V compound semiconductors have been used to fabricate the highest efficiency solar cells, in both single-junction and multi-junction architectures.7 While the refinement of processes has led to the decrease of PV module prices to $1 per W today,11 the price of solar electricity is still several times higher than the electricity generated from coal,12 which has been the limiting factor for a larger scale adoption of the PV technologies.8,10,13 Despite the tremendous growth, PV still only accounts for less than 1% of the world's energy supply. Costs associated with various materials used in the modules and the cell/module manufacturing processes are the major contributors to the relatively high costs of solar electricity.11
Organic photovoltaic devices, based on π-conjugated small molecules or polymers, offer great opportunities for low-cost solar energy conversion, due to several technological advantages of organic materials.13–20 The π-conjugation in these organic molecules and polymers results in typical energy gaps of 1 to 3 eV between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), leading to semiconducting behavior and strong interactions with visible and near-infrared light. The maximum absorption coefficients of typical organic semiconductors are in the order of 105 cm−1, which suggests that the use of 100 nm thick films can absorb most of the incident light. Compared to their inorganic counterparts, these organic electronic materials generally have significantly lower material costs and can be made into thin films using inexpensive room-temperature processes.21–24 Organic materials are intrinsically compatible with flexible substrates and high-throughput, roll-to-roll manufacturing processes; hence they are ideally suited for the fabrication of large-area electronic and optoelectronic devices with low cost.13,17,23,25,26 Moreover, the electronic and optical properties of organic semiconductors can be tuned to a large extent with appropriate structure modifications during synthesis, leading to tailored materials properties for specific applications.17 With low-cost materials and processes, some statistical studies have shown that PV modules based on organic semiconductors are expected to have a much lower energy payback time and better environmental sustainability with less greenhouse gas (CO2) emission than inorganic PV technologies.23,27–29 In addition to PV applications, organic semiconductors have been used to produce organic light-emitting devices for lighting and displays,30–33 field-effect transistors,34–36 photodetectors,37–41 and memory devices,42,43 some of which have already been commercialized.17
While the organic donor–acceptor heterojunction (HJ) structure reported by Tang44 in 1986 has been widely considered as the foundation for all efficient OPV devices, studies on the photovoltaic behavior of organic solids can be traced back to the 1950's, around the years when the first Si solar cell was demonstrated.45–47 As early as in 1967, Golubovi predicted that “organic photoconductors may prove practical for solar cells”.48 However, the early OPV devices employed an organic light absorber sandwiched between two electrodes,49,50 thus relying on the Schottky contact effect to achieve the separation of electrons and holes,51 which as we know now is rather inefficient. Hence, the power conversion efficiencies of these early OPV devices were generally significantly below 0.1%.52 In Tang's report, a two-layer OPV cell containing a layer of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) serving as an electron donor and a layer of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic bis-benzimidazole (PTCBI) as an electron acceptor was demonstrated.44 This CuPc/PTCBI donor–acceptor heterojunction serves to efficiently separate electron–hole pairs through a rapid electron transfer process at the interface, and for the first time, a nearly 1% efficient OPV cell was demonstrated. Since then, the performance of OPV devices, including the efficiency and stability, has steadily improved with new materials and/or novel device architectures,53–61 with ηP now exceeding 10% for both polymer and small molecule based OPV devices,7,24,62 which has really driven the strong research and development interests of this technology. The rapid expansion of research in the OPV field can be illustrated by the exponential growth of the annual totals of peer-reviewed publications and citations (Fig. 1), which have an annual growth rate of 35–40% in the last 15 years. In 2012 alone, there were more than 3000 peer-reviewed publications and more than 90000 citations on organic photovoltaics.
 Fig. 1  Annual total number of peer-reviewed journal publications in the field of organic photovoltaics and the annual total citations on these publications in the period of 1970 to 2012. Data (shown as symbols) are from Science Citation Index, using the search topic of “(organic or polymer) and (photovoltaic or solar cell)”. Publications on inorganic solar cells fabricated using metal–organic chemical vapor deposition or molecular beam epitaxy are excluded. The solid lines are fits showing exponential growth of 35–40% per year. 
In this review article, we present the recent progresses in OPV research through the application of new device architectures and the design of optical structures within the cells/modules. In Section 2, we briefly discuss the basic principles and characterization of PV devices, introduce the two donor–acceptor heterojunction structures (planar and bulk/mixed heterojunctions) that have been widely used in OPV cells, and present some representative small molecule and polymer donor and acceptor materials with high voltage output and good solar spectra coverage. More complete reviews on the active OPV materials can be found elsewhere.18,24,37,63,64 This review focuses on device architectures and optical designs that can maximize the photovoltaic performance of a given set of active materials. In Section 3, new donor–acceptor heterojunctions, including planar-mixed and ordered HJ structures, are reviewed, which can mitigate the exciton diffusion/dissociation and charge transport/collection bottlenecks in planar and mixed HJs. Other structures with different layer-stacking sequences for achieving high device efficiency, e.g. inverted and tandem device architectures, are also discussed. Instead of studying the internal components of OPV devices, the optical management within OPV cells as optical systems is another critical factor that influences the photovoltaic performance. In Section 4, we discuss the optical field distribution in both single and tandem devices and review the methods for maximizing light absorption by tuning the layer thicknesses in the devices. Applying optic designs is another promising, yet underexplored approach to increase the device efficiency. This section also covers the use of external optical designs for either changing the optical intensity distribution or introducing light trapping within devices. Finally, we present conclusions and outlook in Section 5.
2 Organic photovoltaic cells: overview
Organic semiconductor based PV cells share certain basic device operation principles with inorganic semiconductor based devices, but also present some important differences due to the different physical properties of the semiconductors. Upon the absorption of an incident photon that has a higher energy than the optical gap of the organic active material, an electron in the HOMO will be excited to the LUMO, leaving a hole in the HOMO. Such photo-generated electron–hole pairs are localized on the same molecule or on neighboring molecules, due to the weak intermolecular interactions between organic molecules, which then quickly relax to Frenkel or charge-transfer excitons with binding energies in the range of 0.1 eV to 2 eV.65,66 A dissociation of the charge-neutral excitons into separated electrons and holes before they recombine, either radiatively or non-radiatively, is necessary for the photovoltaic device to function. For an efficient electron/hole separation after photoexcitation (light absorption), nowadays essentially all OPV devices use the so-called donor–acceptor heterojunction structure. With a type II (staggered) heterojunction energy level alignment at the donor–acceptor interface (Fig. 2(a)), a photogenerated exciton near this interface may dissociate through a rapid electron transfer process,14 resulting in separated holes in the donor HOMO level and electrons in the acceptor LUMO level. To allow the electron transfer process to be energetically favorable, the LUMO (or HOMO) level offset at the interface needs to be greater than the exciton binding energy. After the exciton dissociation/charge separation process at the donor–acceptor interface, the separated electrons and holes move towards their respective electrodes, driven by either the built-in electric field or the charge carrier concentration gradient, leading to a photocurrent or photovoltage. Hence, the overall external quantum efficiency (ηEQE), or the ratio of the number of electron–hole pairs collected at the electrodes to the number of incident photons can be written as: ηEQE = ηAηEDηCTηCC = ηAηIQE, where ηA, ηED, ηCT, and ηCC are the efficiencies of light absorption (exciton generation), exciton diffusion, charge transfer (exciton dissociation), and charge collection, respectively, and ηIQE is the internal quantum efficiency, or the ratio of the number of electron–hole pairs collected at the electrodes to the number of absorbed photons.37,67,68
 Fig. 2  (a) Consecutive steps for photocurrent generation in a donor–acceptor heterojunction structure (see ref. 37). (b) Schematic cross-section of planar donor–acceptor heterojunction. (c) Schematic cross-section of mixed or bulk heterojunction (see ref. 76). 
Since the first demonstration by Tang, the bilayer donor–acceptor heterojunction structure with sequentially deposited neat donor and acceptor layers (Fig. 2(b)) has been widely used for small molecule based OPV cells. However, most organic semiconductors have exciton diffusion lengths on the order of 10 nm, which is considerably shorter than the optical absorption length (typically on the order of 50–100 nm).69–71 To allow the photogenerated excitons reaching the donor–acceptor interface with high probabilities, the donor–acceptor layers need to be thin, which then limits the light absorption efficiency. Thus, this fundamental trade-off between optical absorption and exciton diffusion strongly limits the performance of planar HJ devices. Another type of HJ structure, mixed or bulk heterojunction (BHJ), by intermixing or blending the donor and acceptor materials, has therefore been developed to overcome this “exciton-diffusing bottleneck”.15,72,73 For thermal vacuum-deposited small molecules, the mixed HJ structure can be realized through the co-evaporation of donor and acceptor materials as first shown by Hiramoto et al. in 1992.72 In 1995, the groups of Heeger and Friend independently reported solution-processed bulk HJ structure using polymer–fullerene and polymer–polymer blends, respectively, which has now become the predominant structure for solution-processed OPV devices.15,73 As illustrated in Fig. 2(c), the high interfacial area between the donor and acceptor materials facilitates the exciton diffusion process, even for active layers significantly thicker than the exciton diffusion lengths. A fundamental challenge for the bulk HJ structure is to control its three-dimensional morphological structure to achieve the optimal spatially distributed exciton dissociation interfaces and charge transport channels.54,74–77 Considering the importance of the morphology on the photovoltaic characteristics of bulk HJs, researchers have employed different processing conditions78–83 and applied post-deposition treatments58,84–86 to influence the phase separation process. For solution-processed bulk HJs, phase separation and donor–acceptor network formation are strongly influenced by the solvent's physical properties, such as the vapor pressure and molecular polarity.87 Moreover, processing the donor–acceptor blend with appropriate solvent additives has also become a useful strategy to increase the degree of separation, local structure ordering and charge transport.54,88–90 Post-deposition treatment, such as thermal85,91 and solvent annealing,86,92 can also induce changes in the bulk HJ morphology. For many vacuum deposited mixed HJs, the donor and acceptor materials are intimately mixed and the domain features are difficult to distinguish before any post-deposition treatments. This fine intermixing of the materials inevitably leads to disruption in continuous charge transport paths for photo-generated electrons and/or holes, and in turn leads to low carrier mobilities and a low fill factor, FF, for the OPV cells.93 After thermal or solvent annealing, the donor–acceptor networks will become more apparent with a typical feature size of ∼10 nm, as a result of the increased crystallinity of either donors or acceptors, which can benefit the charge transport in the active layers and hence improve the power conversion efficiencies.85,91
The design of both the donor and acceptor active materials is obviously essential for the OPV performance. The structures of some widely used donor and acceptor materials are shown in Fig. 3. Copper and zinc phthalocyanines (CuPc and ZnPc, respectively) are arguably the two most common small molecule donors used in OPV cells,37,44,53,94 whereas poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is the most widely used polymer donor material.84,92 In the past 15 years or so, many more efficient donor materials have been explored, which yield a higher voltage output and a better solar spectral coverage.64,95 For example, Mutolo et al. reported the use of boron subphthalocyanine chloride (SubPc) as the donor material for small molecule based OPV devices, which shows a maximized open-circuit voltage, Voc, of ∼1 V (much higher than Voc ≈ 0.5 V for the CuPc/C60 cells) due to the deeper HOMO energy level of SubPc.96,97 Lead phthalocyanine (PbPc) was explored as the donor material to extend the spectral coverage to more than 1000 nm.41,98 Most recently, some aromatic molecules, such as tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DBP)99,100 and diindenoperylene (DIP),101 have also been used as donor materials, which show the optimized efficiency of more than 5% with simple planar HJ structures.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of several widely used organic donor and acceptor materials (small molecules and polymers). 
Similarly, polymer donor materials with deeper HOMO levels have been demonstrated by many groups.24,64,102 To achieve low-gap polymers and improve the solar spectrum coverage, the design of an alternating donor–acceptor structure is one of the most successful methods, in which the covalently connected electron-rich units (donor) and electron-poor units (acceptor) lead to new hybridized HOMO/LUMO orbitals and a narrower optical gap than either the donor or acceptor unit.103,104 For example, the low-gap donor–acceptor polymer, poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT), combines a dialkyl-cyclopentabithiophene donor unit and a benzothiadiazole acceptor unit, and has an optical bandgap of about 1.4 eV, corresponding to a long-wavelength absorption edge of up to 900 nm.54 Electron-withdrawing functional groups, such as fluorene and carbazole, are added to the electron-rich polymer chain to make it less electron-rich and result in a lower HOMO level.104,105 In addition to narrowing the optical gap, some other parameters of polymers, such as carrier mobility, crystallinity and HOMO level, should also be taken into consideration to further improve device performance. Chen et al. replaced the bridging carbon atoms in PCPDTBT molecule with a Si atom (referred as PSBTBT), which has a slight change on absorption but improves the hole transport and material crystallinity, leading to a higher short-circuit current density, Jsc, for devices based on PSBTBT.106 Using a different side chain, a similar donor, alternating the copolymer of 4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole and N-octylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (PDTSTPD) was reported by Chu et al. with a deeper HOMO level of 5.57 eV, which resulted in a maximum power conversion efficiency of 7.3% in OPV devices.107 Last but not least, Amb and co-workers used an even larger atom, germanium, as the bridge, leading to even stronger π-stacking and a certified efficiency of 7.4%.108,109
So far, fullerenes and their derivatives have been found to be the best acceptor candidates, owing to their high charge carrier mobility and electron affinity.15,37,84,110,111 For example, C60 is the common acceptor material for most small molecule based PV devices, the unique properties of which offers special packing ability in donor–acceptor blends to form an efficient charge transport channel.53,94,112 To make these fullerene materials compatible with solution processing methods, functional side groups are anchored onto the fullerene molecules, which not only improve the solubility in common organic solvents, but also yield tunable miscibility with the donor components. [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)113–115 and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM)104,109 are the most widely used acceptors for solution-processed OPV devices. Additionally, some n-type polymers with a high optical absorption have been developed as acceptors.73,116,117 However, the efficiency of the polymer–polymer systems is typically lower than those based on fullerene derivatives, resulting from the low electron mobility and limited charge transport of such polymer acceptors.57,118 Inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals with a high electron mobility and electron affinity, such as CdSe119–121 and ZnO,122,123 have also been used as alternative acceptor materials. Research on such polymer–nanocrystal hybrid PV cells received great attention after Huynh et al. demonstrated nearly 2% efficient P3HT:CdSe nanorod cells in 2002,121 and there appears to be a renaissance of this type of device in the last few years, with better interfacial engineering and a deepened understanding of the device physics.124 Most recently, our group demonstrated polymer–CdSe nanorods hybrid PV cells with a maximum efficiency over 5% using an ethanedithiol treatment.125
3 Advanced device architectures
Along with the efforts on developing new materials and new material processing methods, there have also been significant research efforts on developing suitable device structures to maximize the photovoltaic function of the active (donor and acceptor) materials. Heterojunction structures other than the basic planar or bulk HJ structures were reported to further control the exciton and carrier dynamics in the photoactive region. Devices with the polarity of the top and bottom electrodes inverted enabled the incorporation of some electrode modification layers to improve charge injection from the electrode. Finally, the tandem cell architecture has been applied to OPV devices to achieve the highest efficiencies.
3.1 Double heterojunctions and use of electrode interfacial layers
The basic OPV device consists of a donor–acceptor HJ (planar or bulk) sandwiching between a transparent electrode (typically indium-tin oxide, or ITO) and a reflective metal (Ag or Al) electrode. Besides the focus on a basic planar or bulk HJ structure for achieving efficient OPV devices, different studies have shown that a double or even multiple HJ structure with additional functional layer(s) inserted between electrodes and photoactive layers significantly enhances device performance.126 Such additional layer(s) can engineer the electrode–organic interfaces for improving electrical (i.e. blocking misdirected carriers) and physical (i.e. preventing damage from electrode deposition) properties and affect the light intensity distribution within the active layers (see below).
Peumans et al. reported the incorporation of a 10 nm thick bathocuproine (BCP) layer inserted between the active layers and the Ag cathode as an exciton-blocking layer (EBL) in a CuPc/PTCBI device to form a double heterojunction (CuPc/PTCBI/BCP).127 With the thin BCP layer, the ηEQE of the device was slightly increased as the CuPc and PTCBI active layer thickness was reduced, whereas it was dramatically reduced for the thinnest device if the BCP layer was omitted. This suggests that the BCP layer can eliminate excitons diffusing towards and quenching at the acceptor–metal interface, hence improving the device quantum efficiency. Some other small molecule materials with lower LUMO levels (higher electron mobility) than BCP, such as bathophenanthroline (BPhene),128 tris(acetylacetonato)ruthenium(III) (Ru(acac)3)129 and tris-8-hydroxy-quinolinato aluminum (Alq3),130,131 have also been used as EBLs in small molecule based OPV devices to reduce or eliminate the electron transport barrier from the acceptor. Transparent metal oxides (such as ZnO (ref. 120, 132 and 133) and TiOx (ref. 126, 134 and 135)) are another type of materials for use at the organic–cathode interface, especially for solution-processed bulk HJ devices. The wide bandgap of these oxides provides good exciton-blocking characteristics, and their deep valence band blocks the unwanted transport of photogenerated holes towards the cathode.
On the anode side, suitable interfacial layer(s) have similarly been inserted to prevent exciton quenching and/or block photogenerated electrons from reaching the anode.136 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is widely utilized as an anodic buffer layer in OPV devices, which planarizes the anode (ITO) surface and reduces the leakage current. However, the PEDOT:PSS layer is not a good EBL and sometimes an addition layer is inserted between the PEDOT:PSS–donor interface to further reduce exciton quenching and improve the device performance. For example, Hirade et al. introduced a tris[4-(5-phenylthiophen-2-yl)phenyl]amine (TPTPA) layer in a DBP/C60 device, and achieved an increase of Jsc from 5.61 mA cm−2 to 7.15 mA cm−2 and an increase of ηP from 3.9% to 5.3%.100 Besides serving as an EBL, some anode interfacial materials (i.e. pentacene,98 tetracene,137 and CuI138,139) have also been employed to affect the growth of organic molecules and enhance the total optical absorption.140 Metal oxides, such as V2O5,141 MoO3,142–144 WO3,145,146 and NiO,147–149 are another types of anode modification materials. Irwin et al. demonstrated a P3HT:PCBM device with a p-type NiO layer, which indicated an enhanced device performance of Voc = 0.638 V, Jsc = 11.3 mA cm−2, FF = 0.69, and ηP = 5.2% compared to that of a PEDOT:PSS based control device (Voc = 0.624 V, Jsc = 9.54 mA cm−2, FF = 0.40 and ηP = 2.4%).150
3.2 Planar-mixed heterojunction
As discussed above, exciton diffusion limits the performance of a planar donor–acceptor HJ device, since organic semiconductors usually have the exciton diffusion length (∼10 nm), considerably shorter than the active layer thickness for efficient light absorption. A mixed or bulk HJ device is designed to achieve high exciton diffusion efficiency while maintaining good absorption. However, the low charge transport/collection efficiency, as a result of the intermixing of the active materials, often limits the performance of a mixed HJ device.151 A hybrid planar-mixed HJ (PM-HJ) structure consisting of a mixed donor–acceptor layer sandwiched between a neat donor layer and a neat acceptor layer has therefore been developed to mitigate the limitations of planar and mixed HJs while preserving their advantages.152–154 Exciton dissociation and charge separation in a planar-mixed HJ occurs at the donor–mixed and mixed–acceptor layer interfaces as well as throughout the entire mixed layer. This broadened charge generation zone allows the use of somewhat thinner neat and mixed layers compared to those in optimized planar HJ or mixed HJ devices, mitigating the exciton diffusion or charge transport bottlenecks in the latter devices.
Xue et al. compared the performance of an optimized CuPc:C60 planar-mixed HJ cell with those of the optimized planar and mixed devices.152,153 As shown in Fig. 4, with a 10 nm thick mixed layer sandwiched between a 15 nm thick donor layer and a 35 nm thick acceptor layer, the planar-mixed HJ cell showed ∼25% higher Jsc than the planar HJ device (20 nm thick CuPc/40 nm thick C60), and nearly the same as that of the mixed HJ cell (with a 33 nm thick mixed layer). Moreover, the planar-mixed HJ cell processed the same high FF ≈ 0.6 as the planar HJ device at 1 sun illumination, which is much higher than that of the mixed HJ cell (FF = 0.46). Combined, the high Jsc and FF of the hybrid PM-HJ cell lead to a ∼40% improvement in ηP over the planar or mixed HJ devices.153 Most recently, Xiao et al. demonstrated a high efficiency DBP:C70 device using such a planar-mixed HJ structure.155 The planar-mixed HJ device showed an internal quantum efficiency higher than 90% between the wavelengths of 450 nm and 550 nm, ∼10% higher than the mixed HJ device, and thus an increase of ηP from 5.7% to 6.4%.155
 Fig. 4  Performance of an optimized CuPc/C60 hybrid planar-mixed heterojunction (PM-HJ) photovoltaic cell as compared to optimized planar or mixed HJ cells.153 
It is also noted that the design of the planar-mixed HJ does not require the donor material in the mixed layer to be the same as that in the neat donor layer, and similarly for the acceptor materials in the mixed layer and in the neat acceptor layer. Hence, it is possible to use this device structure to incorporate two different donors (or acceptors) to extend the overall spectral coverage of the OPV cell.124 For example, Yuen et al. reported an OPV cell using the active layer structure of ZnPc/ClInPc:C60/C60. The somewhat complementary absorption of the two donor materials (ZnPc and ClInPc) contributed to an enhanced Jsc of 6.75 mA cm−2, considerably higher than that from the ZnPc/C60 bilayer cell (Jsc = 4.47 mA cm−2) or from the ClInPc/C60 bilayer (Jsc = 3.95 mA cm−2).156
3.3 Controlled bulk heterojunctions
Despite the significant advances in controlling the morphology of the bulk heterojunctions using appropriate processing methods and optimized conditions, the random nature of the phase separation process in the donor–acceptor blend possess a fundamental limitation. The degree of phase segregation strongly depends on the intermolecular interactions and the processing conditions. Morphological islands, bottlenecks, or cul-de-sacs in the bulk HJs may be formed during phase separation, which can cause charge trapping within the unfavorable structures and limit charge transport and collection. Seemingly minor changes to the molecular structures of the active materials could sometimes lead to dramatic changes in the bulk HJ morphology and require significantly different optimal processing conditions to achieve maximum OPV performance. This present a strong challenge to the further development of new active materials, as one may need to survey a wide range of processing methods and conditions to explore the full potential of a new OPV active material.
Due to the lack of a theoretical foundation nowadays to accurately predict the BHJ morphology given a set of active materials and processing conditions, it is desirable to explore alternative ways to achieve a desired bulk HJ morphology using bottom-up or top-down techniques. The interdigitated donor–acceptor structure is commonly conceptualized as an ideal structure for bulk HJs, which has the nano-scale donor or acceptor phases that secure efficient exciton diffusion and the pure donor and acceptor phases that are respectively connected with the two electrodes leading to superior charge transport over that in a mixed film.157–161 The realization of such a structure, however, is very challenging, and there have been only moderate success so far.
In one example, Yang et al. used the organic vapor phase deposition (OVPD) method to grow CuPc nanostructures as the foundation for an interdigitated bulk HJ structure.162 Different from the vacuum thermal evaporation (VTE) method commonly used for deposition of small molecules, the OVPD method employs an inert carrier gas to carry small molecule vapors to the substrate.163 A wide range of CuPc film morphologies were achieved by controlling the growth conditions in OPVD, which include source and substrate temperatures, carrier-gas flow rate, and chamber pressure.164 With optimized process conditions, CuPc films with densely distributed short needle features that have an average diameter of 30 nm and peak-to-valley height of 35 nm were successfully obtained. The interdigitated bulk HJ active structure was then created by filling the acceptor molecules, PTCBI, into the spacing between the CuPc “protrusions” using OVPD. The resulted CuPc/PTCBI device showed much improved Jsc and ηP (11 mA cm−2 and 2.7%, respectively), approximately doubling those of the planar HJ devices fabricated using the VTE method (Jsc = 6 mA cm−2 and ηP = 1.0%).
Zheng et al. also reported the synthesis of vertically oriented molecular nanorods using the oblique angle deposition (OAD) method, in which the molecular beam reaches the substrate surface at a large angle from the substrate normal, instead of perpendicular to the substrate, as in conventional VTE processes.165,166 Due to the ballistic shadowing effect of the nuclei formed on the substrate during the initial deposition in OAD or other non-planar surface features, the molecules subsequently deposited on the substrate grow on top of the nuclei, forming nanorods slanted in the general direction of the incoming molecular beam (but at a smaller angle from the substrate normal). As shown in Fig. 5(a), CuPc nanorods with a diameter of 20 to 50 nm and a length up to 200 nm were successfully grown. Rotating the substrate during the OAD growth led to mostly vertically aligned nanorods (Fig. 5(b)). To create an interdigitated bulk HJ active layer, a chlorobenzene solution of PCBM was spin-coated onto the nanorod array, resulting in relatively smooth top surface as PCBM molecules infiltrate into the gaps between nanorods (Fig. 5(c)). Based on such interdigitated HJ structure, the CuPc nanorods/PCBM device shows a maximum current density of Jsc = 5.6 mA cm−2 and efficiency of ηP = 1.8% (Fig. 5(d–e)), approximately twice that of the planar HJ devices (Jsc = 3.4 mA cm−2 and ηP = 0.85%), due to the increased exciton dissociation/charge collection efficiency. A further reduction in nanorod size is likely needed to improve the overall device efficiency using this method.
 Fig. 5  SEM topographic images of CuPc nanorods grown on a stationary (a) or rotational (b) substrate. (c) SEM cross-section image of CuPc nanorod/PC61BM composite film. The scale bars are 100 nm for those images. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of four CuPc/PC61BM devices: a bilayer device (“planar”), two devices with CuPc rods grown with a stationary (“NR-S”) or rotational (“NR-R”), and a device with a flat CuPc buffer layer followed by a nanorod film (“planar-NR”). (e) External quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of wavelength λ for planar and planar-NR devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
For solution-processed devices, several different methods, such as using inorganic templates and developing polymer nanowires or nanoparticles, have been employed to fabricate the nanostructured devices.167 Among those methods, nanoimprint lithography (NIL), which directly transfers the nanopattern from a template to the active layer, is an emerging technique to form polymer nanostructures with predesigned structures.168–170 With careful operation and proper surface treatment, imprinted P3HT nanopillars and nanoholes with 15 nm diameter (aspect ratio ∼2.5) were reported by Park et al. (Fig. 6).171 After filling in a second material in gaps to form an interdigitated structure, such devices showed higher efficiencies (in the range of 1% to 3.5%) than those of the bilayer devices, but they were not higher than the best random bulk HJ devices.159,172–174 One of the major limiting factors is the donor–acceptor interface of the nanoimprinted cells, which was inevitably exposed to the ambient and/or chemicals during the device fabrication process. A large number of grain boundaries, defects and trapping states at the donor–acceptor interface result from the contact–release processing of NIL, which causes excitons/carriers to recombine and lowers device performance. Hence, further optimization of this technique or some alternative methods should be developed to further improve the donor–acceptor interfaces.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of imprinted P3HT nanopillars (a) and nanoholes (b) with 15 nm diameter. The inset images provide high magnification view. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To avoid the formation of randomly dispersed donor or acceptor domains in a bulk HJ, researchers have also been working on developing donor–acceptor molecules that can spontaneously form ordered donor–acceptor bulk HJ structure.175 In 2009, Matsuo et al. first demonstrated a well-defined interdigitated HJ structure by the spontaneous crystalline phase separation of the donor–acceptor film during thermal treatment (see Fig. 7).158 In the optimized structure, the donor columns stand almost vertically on the buffer layer with an average diameter of 26 nm and an average height of 65 nm. This ordered HJ leads to a maximum power conversion efficiency of ηP = 5.2%, whereas device based on a planar HJ structure only shown the maximum efficiency of ηP = 2.3%. More understanding on the basic principles of the creation of such ordered structure, such as the driving force of the molecule stacking, the effects of the side groups of the molecules, and the relationship between the molecular structures and the morphology of the thin films, is still needed to expand this method to other higher efficiency materials. Meanwhile, several other groups have designed small molecules with self-complementary intermolecular hydrogen bonding, in an attempt to self-organize the active materials into ordered bulk HJs.176–179 These reports all showed a positive impact of the hydrogen bonding, although a clear demonstration of the ordered/interdigitated bulk HJ morphology is still lacking.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of organic photovoltaic devices with spontaneously-formed interdigitated structure. (b) SEM cross-section image of BP column structures on top of ITO/PEDOT:PSS surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Inverted device architectures
Conventionally, OPV devices are fabricated with the organic active layer first deposited on the top of a transparent high work function anode (e.g., ITO) on a transparent substrate (e.g., glass) followed by the deposition of a low work function metal cathode (e.g., Al or Ca). A PEDOT:PSS hole injection layer is also commonly deposited on ITO to improve the anode work function. However, there are several concerns about this conventional architecture in terms of device stability and fabrication cost. The low work function metals used as top electrodes may be easily oxidized in the ambient environment, which allows the diffusion of oxygen into the active layer and causes device degradation. Also, a high vacuum is required for the deposition of these metal electrodes, limiting their compatibility with large-scale roll-to-roll processing. Inverted OPV devices that have similar stacks as the conventional devices, but have reversed charge movement, have been developed to remedy these problems. Due to the reversed polarity of charge collection, high work function metals, like Au, Ag and Cu, can be utilized as the top electrode to minimize the device degradation.180,181 Two types of inverted OPV devices have been demonstrated recently: bottom and top illuminated devices based on the direction of the incident light. Bottom illuminated inverted devices use a transparent or semi-transparent bottom electrode to collect electrons and a top reflective anode to collect holes, whereas the top illuminated devices have a bottom reflective cathode and a top transparent anode.
The bottom illuminated structure has been widely studied and utilized since its geometry is similar to conventional devices with a bottom transparent ITO electrode and a top reflective metal electrode. One essential requirement for this geometry is to engineer the ITO interface for effective electron collection.182 Several highly transparent interfacial materials have been developed to modify the ITO layer for efficient electron collection, such as Ca,183 ZnO,184,185 TiO2,186,187 Cs2CO3,188,189 and some polymer materials including polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE).190 In addition, a hole-transporting and electron-blocking layer (e.g. transition metal oxides, MoO3,143,191 WO3,146,192 V2O5,193 and PEDOT:PSS194,195) is inserted between the top electrode and active layer to improve hole selectivity and avoid possible damage to the active layer during electrode deposition.196–198 With the design of new small bandgap materials, efficiencies of the inverted OPV devices have been steadily improved, from ηP ≈ 3.0% (P3HT:PC61BM)184,187,188 and ηP = 6.1% (poly[N-9′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT):PC71BM)199 to ηP = 8.5% (polydithienogermole-thienopyrrolodione (PDTG-TPD):PC71BM).109 Based on the inverted device architecture, You et al. recently built an inverted tandem OPV device that has a record efficiency of ηP = 10.6% for polymer PVs.102 Furthermore, such inverted OPV devices show relatively higher stability compared to conventional devices. As compared by Hau et al., a ∼20% degradation in device efficiency was observed for the un-encapsulated P3HT:PC61BM inverted device after stored in air for 40 days, whereas the normal reference device was very unstable and was totally degraded after 4 days.200
The top illuminated inverted device geometry requires the deposition of a transparent or semi-transparent conductive electrode on top of the active layer(s). Glatthaar et al. used a PEDOT:PSS/Au grid layer as the top semi-transparent electrode and an Al/Ti bottom cathode and demonstrated an inverted P3HT:PCBM device with a maximum efficiency of ηP = 1.4%.201 Hsiao et al. reported a similar inverted device with the highly conductive PEDOT:PSS as the top electrode to increase the efficiency to 2.4%.197 Cao et al. used an oxide/metal/oxide trilayer structure as a good ITO substitute for OPV devices, the transparency and conductivity of which are tunable by varying the choice of metal and layer thicknesses in the trilayer stack.202 With this semi-transparent electrode, a maximum efficiency of up to 2.5% was achieved for an OPV device based on P3HT:PCBM blends.202 Moreover, such top illuminated devices can be fabricated on different types of surfaces, either transparent (glass and plastics) or opaque (stainless steel foils) substrates. For example, a top illuminated P3HT:PCBM device was fabricated on a stainless-steel substrate with sputtered ITO and Al grids as the top transparent electrode showing the efficiency of up to 3.0%.203
However, searching for top transparent electrodes is still one of the biggest challenge for the top illumination devices. Besides the similar requirements as that of the bottom transparent electrode, such as the high transparency, low resistivity and good mechanical properties, the deposition processes for the top transparent should also be take into consideration to minimize the possible damage to the underlying active layer(s). There have been several successful materials developed for the top transparent electrodes, e.g. thin metal films,202 metal grids,204 and conductive polymers,205 however, the relatively poor electrical and optical properties limit the overall device performances. Solution-processed metal nanowires,206–208 carbon nanotubes,209,210 and graphenes211,212 have also emerged as attractive transparent electrodes for large-area OPV cells, although significant efforts are still needed to develop better processing techniques for large-scale deposition of these transparent electrodes on top of organic active layers while maintaining good film properties.
3.5 Tandem devices
Although many low bandgap materials have been developed to harvest more infrared photons, it is often offset by the reduced absorption of the shorter wavelength visible photons due to the relatively narrow absorption spectral range of those materials, typically about 200 nm in wavelength. Tandem photovoltaic cells consisting of two or more sub-cells with complementary absorption stacked together have been designed to overcome this absorption limitation. The most common tandem cells are based on a two terminal monolithic geometry, in which two or more sub-cells are connected in series by a charge recombination zone (CRZ) where photo-generated electrons from one sub-cell recombine with holes arriving from the sub-cell on the opposite side of the CRZ. Therefore, the current is continuous throughout all sub-cells (I = I1 = I2 = …), whereas the voltage of the tandem device is the sum of all sub-cell voltages (V = V1 + V2 +…), where the subscripts, 1, 2, …, denote the individual sub-cells.213
To build an efficient tandem cell, the charge recombination zone connecting the sub-cells needs to be transparent to allow light to reach the sub-cell(s) further from the light source, while allowing the effective recombination of electrons and holes transported from the opposite sides of the CRZ.214–218 The first two-terminal tandem cell was demonstrated by Hiramoto et al., where two identical sub-cells were connected by a thin Au layer.219 The poor transparency of the CRZ in that device did not lead to higher efficiency than a single cell. Later, Yakimov et al. demonstrated that using an ultrathin (<1 nm thick) Ag layer, in the form of distributed Ag nanoclusters, was sufficient for efficient hole–electron recombination and voltage addition, without attenuating the light passing through.220 The plasmonic effect of the Ag nanoclusters also led to an enhanced optical intensity in the surrounding region, resulting in an enhanced absorption and more than doubling the efficiency in a two-cell tandem device.221 However, for bulk-heterojunction sub-cells, the thin metal interlayer, which is connected with both the donor and acceptor domains in the mixed active layers, yields poor selective extraction of holes or electrons. This is solved by combining carrier/exciton blocking layers with the thin metal layer as the CRZ interlayer, which not only provides sufficient recombination sites but also prevents the losses of excitons and opposite charge carriers. As reported by Xue et al., a CRZ layer comprised of Ag nanoclusters sandwiched between a 4,4′,4′-tris(3-methyl-phenyl-phenyl-amino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) hole-transport layer and a PTCBI electron-transport layer was used in a CuPc/C60-based tandem device, showing a ηP ∼5.7%.214 Additionally, highly doped organic layers have been developed as the CRZ contact for small molecular tandem devices in order to avoid the utilization of metal layers or clusters that may interrupt the organic evaporation. Also, the high carrier mobility of those highly doped layers enables the possibility of using a rather thick interlayer in the tandem cell that can improve the optical management.216,222 This will be discussed in more detail in the next section. With an optimized interlayer and active layer thicknesses, a certified efficiency of up to 6.1% was achieved by Riede et al. for a tandem device with a 2.0 cm2 active area.223
The advantages of vacuum deposition make it rather straightforward to fabricate small molecule based tandem devices. However, it is more challenging to fabricate tandem cells using solution process as the integrity of the underlying layers may be affected by the solvent used for the deposition of overlayers. Prior to all solution-processed tandem cells, researchers had been focusing on so-called hybrid tandem cells with one solution-processed polymer-based device and one vacuum-deposited small molecule-based device that would have a broad coverage of the solar spectrum.224,225 The first demonstration of a tandem cell with two identical solution-processed sub-cells was conducted by Kawano et al. using sputtered ITO as the connection layer with relatively low device efficiency.226 An important breakthrough in this area was the demonstration of a transparent TiOx/PEDOT:PSS interlayer by Kim et al.,227 which not only serves as an efficient CRZ in tandem cells but physically protect the underlying sub-cell active materials from potential damage during the deposition of the second sub-cell active materials. Based on this interlayer, a maximum efficiency of up to 6.5% was achieved with the low band-gap PCPDTBT:PC61BM and large band-gap P3HT:PC71BM cells as the two sub-cells.227 Similar to a TiOx/PEDOT:PSS interlayer, a solution-processed ZnO nanoparticles/PEDOT:PSS layer was also developed as a good charge recombination interlayer.228 Here, the ZnO nanoparticles were dispersed in alcohol based solvents, which do not affect the bottom polymer cell. The aqueous PEDOT:PSS was also pH neutralized to avoid reaction with the ZnO. With the proper selection of new active materials that have a higher Voc and a better coverage of the solar spectrum and the optimization of device architecture that balances the current of the two individual cells, the efficiency of the solution-processed polymer tandem PV devices have been rapidly increased.228 A tandem device with diketopyrrolopyrrole–oligothiophene copolymer (PDPP5T)/PC61BM and poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] (PCDTBT)/PC71BM as the sub-cells was demonstrated by Gevaerts et al., showing a Voc = 1.44 V, Jsc = 8.8 mA cm−2 and ηP = 7.5% under 1 sun illumination.217
Furthermore, inverted architectures reviewed in the previous section have also been combined with the tandem structure.215,226 Vacuum deposited MoO3/Ag/Al/Ca was first reported by Sun and co-workers which connected two P3HT:PC61BM inverted sub-cells leading to an efficiency of ηP = 2.8%.229 Following this, different types of hybrid (needing both the vacuum and solution processes) recombination interlayers, such as MoO3/Al/ZnO and V2O5/Ag nanoparticles/ZnO were demonstrated for inverted tandem devices, which show a minor loss in the Voc addition.230 Most recently, a fully solution-processed inverted PEDOT:PSS/ZnO interlayer was demonstrated by several groups for tandem cells and further improved the device performance.231,232 Using a P3HT:indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) front cell and a poly[2,7-(5,5-bis-(3,7-dimethyl octyl)-5H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyran)-alt-4,7-(5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PDTP-DFBT):PCBM back cell, You et al. demonstrated an inverted tandem cell with a certificated ηP of 10.6% (see Fig. 8).102
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure of an inverted tandem device with PEDOT:PSS/ZnO interlayers. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a P3HT:ICBA/PDTP-DFBT:PC61BM device (tandem 1)and a P3HT:ICBA/PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM device (tandem 2) under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) External quantum efficiency of the tandem 1 and 2 devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 
So far, tandem structures that combine two sub-cells for broader solar spectrum coverage have been the most successful design for OPV devices to achieve high power conversion efficiencies, which are likely needed to increase the efficiency to meet practical application requirements (laboratory ηP > 15% and module ηP > 10%).24 Meanwhile, tandem cells with more than two sub-cells potentially can further increase the spectral coverage and lead to high efficiencies, although it certainly increases the device complexity and manufacturing cost.
4 Optical designs in organic photovoltaic devices
Much of the work in the field of organic photovoltaics to date has been focused on understanding the fundamental photovoltaic mechanisms and in developing new materials and device structures to maximize the light absorption, charge separation and collection and voltage output. While we have some basic understanding of the OPV devices as an optical system, there have been limited attempts to exploit the optical designs to manage the light in-coupling and propagation as means to enhance the overall device performance.
4.1 Optical management in planar, non-textured devices
Typically, an OPV device is fabricated on a flat substrate with no surface texture, and the multilayer stack consisting of the two electrodes, one or more organic active layer(s), and other additional interfacial layers are only patterned to define the overall device area or for electrical connection and packaging purposes. The overall thickness of the multilayer stack is in the order of 100 nm, shorter than or approaching the incident light wavelength. Hence, there is interference between the incident light and the light reflected from the metal electrode within the multilayer stack, leading to a strong intensity variation within the OPV device in the normal direction. Consequently, it is important to optimize the active device structure, including the layer thicknesses and placement of the absorbing materials, to maximize their total light absorption.

4.1.1 Optical spacer in single-junction cells. 
For conventional OPV devices, the incident light first passes through the transparent electrode and is absorbed by the active layer, and the unabsorbed light is then reflected by the highly reflective metal electrode with a phase shift of 180°. The reflected light is coupled with the incident light, leading to the formation of a standing wave and strong oscillation of the optical field within the multilayer structure. With near-zero electric field of the light wave at the metal surface, the optical intensity peaks are located at approximately (2m + 1)λ/n from the metal electrode surface, where λ is the wavelength of the light, n is the index of refraction of the active materials, and m is a non-negative integer (m = 0, 1, 2, …) (note that the light wave has a small penetration depth into the metal electrode). The intensity peaks progress further away from the metal electrode with the increase of wavelength. Therefore, it is important to position the active layer of the OPV device in the region with high optical intensity to maximize the total light absorption. Peumans et al. illustrated that a favorable optical intensity profile exists in the CuPc/C60 cells: the C60 acceptor layer, which predominately absorbs in shorter wavelengths (400–550 nm), is located closer to the metal cathode, whereas the longer wavelength (550–750 nm) absorbing CuPc layer is located further away from the metal cathode.37
The incorporation of a transparent layer between the absorber and the refractive electrode to function as an optical spacer layer has now become one of the most common methods to manage the optical field distribution in OPV devices.37,126,233 As the optical field near the reflecting metal cathode is very weak, any light-absorbing active materials in that region would have minimal contribution to the overall light absorption. On the other hand, inserting a transparent spacer makes it possible to displace the active materials to the region with the highest optical field to maximize light absorption, especially when the active layer thickness is limited due to either exciton diffusion (such as in planar HJs) or charge transport (such as in bulk HJs). Furthermore, the spacer layer could also positively impact the carrier and exciton dynamics in the OPV device and function as a buffer layer to alleviate potential damages to the active materials from the electrodes during deposition or device operation.
Peumans et al. first used a 10 nm thick BCP layer in small molecule OPV devices, which acts as an optical spacer and an exciton-blocking layer, to improve the device efficiency.127 However, the low conductivity and very high LUMO level of such wide gap materials limit the BCP layer thickness to ∼10 nm. Using Ru(acac)3, whose LUMO level is more aligned with the LUMO of the C60 acceptor, Rand et al. showed that this exciton-blocking layer can be more than 30 nm without negatively affecting the collection of photo-generated electrons by the cathode, thus providing a greater opportunity for optical management optimization.129 Doped layers are also used as the optical spacer to achieve high electrical conductivity, which can be more than 100 nm thick with negligible loss in electron transport. The doped materials are widely utilized in small molecule-based tandem devices, which not only serve as good carrier transporting layers but also provide the high possibility to optimize the absorption of the two individual cells.222,234–236
Solution-processed metal oxides, such as TiOx and ZnO, have also been used as optical spacers in solution-processed OPV devices, which provide good electron contact and are sufficiently transparent in the visible and near infrared spectral regions.132,133,186 As an example, Gilot et al. simulated the optical electric field distribution in a P3HT:PC61BM devices with a ZnO layer as the optical spacer (Fig. 9(a)), and calculated the corresponding device current assuming an 100% internal quantum efficiency.233 As shown in Fig. 9(b), the effect of ZnO layer on device absorption is related to the thickness of the photoactive layer. For active layers of 70 to 130 nm thick, the insertion of the ZnO spacer shifts the active layer away from the maximum of the optical field, resulting in a decrease in Jsc. However, for active layers thinner than 50 nm, the inclusion of the ZnO spacer could lead to a strong increase in light absorption and Jsc. For polymer–nanocrystal hybrid photovoltaic devices, it was also shown that the use of a ZnO nanoparticle layer between the photoactive region and the metal cathode not only improves the device efficiency due to the optical spacer effect and carrier/exciton blocking effect, but also leads to drastically improved device lifetime.120,125,132,133
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic structure of a P3HT:PC61BM device with a ZnO optical spacer. (b) Theoretical and experimental of the short circuit current of devices with and without a 39 nm ZnO optical spacer as a function of the active layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. 


4.1.2 Optical optimization for tandem cells. 
The tandem cell structure has proven to be a critical solution to achieve high efficiency for both organic and inorganic semiconductor based PV devices.237 Stacking two or more sub-cells enables a broad coverage of the solar spectrum and more complete absorption of the incident photons. One important difference for organic and inorganic tandem solar cells is the arrangement of absorbers with different bandgaps in the light path. For inorganic tandem cells, the absorber bandgap decreases along the light path; i.e. the front sub-cell (or the sub-cell closest to the light source) has the highest bandgap and the back sub-cell (or the sub-cell furthest from the light source) has the lowest bandgap. In this way, the front sub-cell harvests short-wavelength photons but remain transparent to longer wavelength photons, allowing them to reach the subsequent sub-cells and be harvested. For organic tandem cells, such a bandgap arrangement requirement is not necessarily needed due to the relatively narrow absorption spectral range for typical organic semiconductors; i.e., a low-gap organic semiconductor, while absorbing long-wavelength photons, may possess a reasonably broad window for the transmission of short-wavelength photons. Due to the optical interference effect (see above), the longer-wavelength light has peak intensities at locations further away from the reflecting metal cathode. Hence, it may be more desirable to position the longer-wavelength absorbing (or lower-gap) active materials in the front sub-cell, in complete opposite to their position in an inorganic tandem cell.
Early organic tandem cells were actually built with same absorbers in the sub-cells. As described earlier, the short exciton diffusion length in organic electronic materials limits the layer thickness in planar and bulk HJ cells, leading to a trade-off between using a thin layer to achieve high internal quantum efficiency and using a thick layer to absorb the incident light more completely. Stacking multiple thin cells in the tandem cell architecture is therefore an effective way to circumvent this trade-off. Yakimov et al. demonstrated more than doubling of efficiency when two or more very thin CuPc/PTCBI planar HJ cells (each <20 nm thick) were stacked in tandem cells.220 For the more efficient CuPc/C60 planar-mixed HJ structures, stacking two such sub-cells still led to an increase of the efficiency from 5% to 5.7%,214 although the relative increase is much lower as the same donor–acceptor material combinations were used in both sub-cells. Nevertheless, the complementary absorption spectra of CuPc and C60 was exploited in the planar-mixed HJ structures to create an “asymmetric” tandem cell to maximize light absorption, in which the front sub-cell has a thicker CuPc layer to achieve more longer-wavelength absorption whereas the back sub-cell has more C60 for more shorter-wavelength absorption.214
The full potential of the tandem cell will have to be realized with different donor–acceptor material pairs in the sub-cells, achieving complementary light absorption in different spectral regions. Regardless, with a large number of different layers in the tandem structure, optimizing the thicknesses of all layers is essential to maximize the optical absorption and to control the electrical coupling among the sub-cells. Similar to that of the planar single-junction cells, the reflected light from the reflective metal electrode coupled with the incident light results in an optical field redistribution within the multi-layer stack. Therefore, optical modeling of the tandem cells allows optimizing the active layer thicknesses of the two sub-cells to determine the obtainable device current.217,228 Gevaerts et al. demonstrated a solution processed polymer tandem solar cell using small bandgap polymer PDPP5T:PC61BM and wide bandgap polymer PCDTBT:PC71BM as the two sub-cells.217 Using an optical model, together with the thickness dependent J–V and IQE of the single devices, the power conversion efficiency of such a tandem device was calculated as the function of the layer thickness of both cells. Assuming no losses in the charge recombination layer, a maximum power conversion efficiency of up to ηP = 7.1% was found, when the front PCDTBT:PC71BM device and back PDPP5T:PC61BM device have the active layer thickness of 170 and 120 nm, respectively, which is consistent with the experimental device with ZnO and pH-neutral PEDOT:PSS as the intermediate connection layer.217
Furthermore, the intermediate connection layers, the charge recombination zone, for the sub-cells in a tandem device may also play an important role to tune the optical field distribution within the sub-cells, provided that they are highly transparent and conductive. The thicknesses of such connection layers lead to a significant change in the short circuit current and the corresponding device efficiency for the tandem device due to the strong optical interference within the whole structure. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 10(a), a combination of p-doped N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(4′-(N,N-bis(naphth1yl)-amino)-biphenyl-4-yl)-benzidine (p-DiNPB) and n-doped C60 (n-C60) layers was employed by Schueppel et al. as the charge recombination zone for small molecule tandem devices, the thickness of which could be more than 300 nm without compromising the open-circuit voltage and fill factor of the devices appreciably.236 A maximum short-circuit current of up to Jsc = 5.0 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of ηP = 5.6% were achieved when a 165 nm thick spacer was used between the two sub-cells (Fig. 10(b)), which displaces the front sub-cell to the second interference maximum and maximizes the overall photocurrent. As a comparison, a similar tandem device with a 60 nm thick spacer only generates a photocurrent of Jsc of 3.0 mA cm−2.223
 Fig. 10  (a) Stack structure of a small molecule tandem heterojunction device with F4-ZnPc:C60 and DCV6T:C60 single cells. (b) PV parameters, Voc, Jsc, FF and η as a function of spacer thickness in the tandem stack. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 

4.2 Light trapping configurations
As mentioned in Section 2, the external quantum efficiency of an OPV cell is determined by the efficiencies associated with light absorption, exciton diffusion, charge transfer, and charge collection processes. There is a fundamental trade-off between the light absorption efficiency (ηA) and the internal quantum efficiency (ηIQE). According to the Beer–Lambert law, a thicker active layer leads to more complete absorption of the incident photons, whereas a thinner active layer generally improves ηIQE, either by increasing the probability of an exciton diffusing to a D–A interface for dissociation (i.e. ηED, such as in a planar HJ cell) or by increasing the probability for charge carriers to travel to an appropriate electrode and be collected (i.e. ηCC, such as in a bulk HJ cell), or both. As reviewed in the previous sections, there have been several approaches to ameliorate this trade-off and improve the device efficiency, including the synthesis of new active materials with enhanced carrier mobilities and the control of favorable active layer morphologies with high exciton diffusion and/or charge collection efficiency.
An alternative method is to involve new optical designs to increase the optical path lengths of the incident light inside the OPV cell (i.e. the “optical” thickness) without increasing the physical thickness of the active materials. For normal incident light on a typical OPV cell with a reflecting electrode, the optical path length is twice the active layer thickness. The unabsorbed light escapes the device in the opposite direction of light incidence. Using appropriately designed optical structures to re-direct or even trap the incident light inside the device, it is possible to increase the optical path length to beyond twice the film thickness. Here, we present a few recent demonstrations of such optical management approaches for OPV devices.

4.2.1 Folded device architectures. 
A V-shape tandem device with two individual cells combined in a folded geometry was proposed by Tvingstedt and collaborators in 2007.238–240 As shown in Fig. 11(a), the unabsorbed light from the first cell will be reflected towards and absorbed by the next cell. Due to the multiple reflection and absorption in this V geometry, the total optical path length within the active layers of the two individual cells is highly enhanced. At small entrance angles, almost all the light can be trapped within the structure and eventually absorbed by the active layers. Also, similar to the conventional tandem device, active materials with different absorption range can be used in this geometry to have a broader coverage of the solar spectrum. The two individual devices in this tandem structure can be either series or parallel connected, both of which exhibit about two-fold power conversion efficiency at a small entrance angle of ∼20°, compared to the planar reference cells. Rim et al. calculated the absorption by the active layer and the corresponding device current as a function of the V-fold opening angles.241 The current of the devices is highly enhanced with narrowing the opening, which quantitatively agrees with the above experimental result. They also demonstrated the use of such a V-shaped geometry in devices with many different active materials, including small molecule CuPc/PTCBI cell, polymer P3HT:PCBM cell and thin film amorphous (a-Si) and microcrystalline silicon (μc-Si) solar cells. According to the optical simulation, about 30% to 300% increases in the short circuit current are obtained for devices with the above active materials, depending on the absorption coefficient and the layer thickness of the active layers (Fig. 11(b–d)).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic geometry of the V-shaped light trapping structure for thin film photovoltaic devices. (b) Modeled external quantum efficiency (ηEQE) of a CuPc/PTCBI device for the planar configuration and in a V-shaped light trap (2α = 30°). Calculated Jsc for several thin-film photovoltaic devices at normal incidence (c) and average on the whole day (d) as a function of the V-fold opening angle 2α. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. 


4.2.2 Devices with textured structures. 
Instead of combining two individual devices in desired geometries, fabricating OPV devices on substrates with three dimensional micrometer scale structures is another possible method to induce light trapping within the active layers. Niggemann et al. demonstrated an OPV device on a substrate with 90°-micro-prism structures (Fig. 12(a)) that show the possibility of a second absorption process.242 Upon normal incidence, the light passes through the substrate and is absorbed by the active layer; the unabsorbed light is then reflected off by the back electrode and strikes another facet of the prism structure. Thus, two reflections occur within the prism structure with the angle of 45°, leading to an increase in the total optical path length. A comparison of the optical absorption for 100 nm thick MDMO-PPV/PCBM devices on planar and textured substrates is shown in Fig. 12(b). By integrating the absorption spectra with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, an average of 44% increase in device absorption was obtained for non-polarized light. Experimentally, a highly conductive and transparent PEDOT layer was spin-coated onto a UV-curable acrylic polymer substrate with 100 μm prism features as the transparent anode, followed by spin-coating a P3HT:PCBM blend and thermally evaporated Al as the active layer and back electrode, respectively. Compared to planar ITO-reference cells, the micro-prism cell has a more than 55% enhancement in Jsc (7.0 vs. 4.5 mA cm−2) due to the light trapping effect. However, the Voc and FF of the devices are much smaller as a result of the increased electrical shunt resistance due to the non-homogenous films on the corrugated surfaces, resulting in a rather low device efficiency, ηP = 1.1%.242
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device on a micro-prism substrate. (b) Calculated device absorption for normal incidence on a MDMO-PPV/PCBM device and a twofold reflection under 45° in TE- and TM-polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
In order to improve the film homogeneity and obtain high performance for OPV devices with textured structures, a soft lithographic approach was proposed to form desired structures directly on active layers, instead of fabricating devices on non-planar substrates.243 A PDMS stamp with periodical patterns is first brought into contact with the spin-coated active layer. After annealing, the stamp is then separated from the device, leaving behind the textured active layer. With periodic Al reflectors or gratings, incident light could be diffracted backwards according to the diffraction equation: mλ = npsinθd, where λ is the wavelength of incident light, n is the refractive index of the active layers, p is the grating period, θd is the diffraction angles, and m is the diffraction order (0, ±1, ±2, …). For example, assuming that a monochromic light with λ = 500 nm impinges the grating, the first-order (m = 1) and second-order (m = 2) reflection can be bent by 30° and 90° with p = 500 nm and n = 2.0.Therefore, the total optical path length within the active layer is increased and hence the device current as well as the efficiency are improved. Experimentally, Na et al. presented the P3HT:PC61BM layer with such soft lithographic method with both one- and two-dimensional structures (p = 500 nm).243 Compared to ηP = 3.6% for the planar reference cell, the textured devices show an optimized efficiency of ηP = 4.3% due to the increased light absorption.


4.2.3 Light trapping in planar devices. 
The optical management techniques described above are built upon non-planar substrates or active films, which may affect the electrical characterization of the device and limit their compatibility with large-area, high throughput, and inexpensive processing techniques. Light trapping systems that have the optical elements separated from the thin-film devices have been proposed to enhance the light absorption without affecting the internal optoelectronic properties of the devices.
An array of microlenses combined with a self-aligned array of apertures in a metal film was applied to OPV device to induce the light trapping within the active layer.244 The incident light is focused by the microlenses, which passes through the apertures, and is subsequently confined between the metal film (the top mirror) and the bottom reflective metal electrode of the OPV device, resulting in multiple optical passes through the active layer and thereby increasing the total light absorption. As reported by Tvingstedt et al., both the spherical and cylindrical lens were assembled with an alternating polyfluorene copolymer (APFO Green 9)/PC71BM device, which show a 25% increase in the short circuit current compared to the reference cell without the light trap.238 A drawback for this approach is that it only works for normal incident light. For titled incident light, the focal point could be outside the apertures of the top mirror, resulting in significantly reduced or no light through the apertures. This is not suitable for PV modules without a solar tracking system. In addition, the complicated lithographic processes used increase the device fabrication cost and limit the compatibility with large area manufacture.
A rather simple optical design was demonstrated by Myers et al., by directly molding a transparent polymer microlens array on the device substrate, which can also remedy the angle dependent limitation.245 When it strikes the microlenses, the incident light will be deflected by the curved microlens surface, resulting in an increased path length within the active layer and thereby an enhanced device performance, as shown in Fig. 13(a). The close-packed, hemispherical microlens array (see Fig. 13(b)) was fabricated using a low-cost soft lithographic method that can be easily scaled up for large-area devices.246–248 Myers et al. demonstrated that applying this microlens array method to several different material systems (small molecule, polymer–fullerene, polymer–nanocrystal) and device platforms (planar HJ, bulk HJ) led to a 15%–50% relative enhancement in the PV cell efficiencies.245 For example, the power conversion efficiency under 1 sun 1.5G solar illumination of a small molecule-based SubPc/C60 device was increased from ηP = 3.1% to ηP = 3.7% with the microlens array attached, a ∼19% relative enhancement (Fig. 13(c)), whereas the efficiency of the poly(benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-(5,6-difluoro-4,7-dithien-2-yl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole) (PBnDT-DTffBT):PCBM cell was increased from ηP = 6.2% to ηP = 7.0%. Moreover, such efficiency enhancement for devices with the microlens arrays was present regardless of the light illumination angles, due to the reduction of reflection at high-incident angles, suggesting their great application in organic solar cell systems.245
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of light behavior within an organic photovoltaic device with and without a microlens array. (b) SEM images of microlens array. (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for a SubPc/C60 device with and without a microlens array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another light trapping design was demonstrated by Cao et al., in which rear pyramidal reflectors were integrated on semi-transparent thin-film OPV devices (Fig. 14(a and b)).55 With the pyramidal reflectors, the incident light passes through the active layer due to the total internal reflection at the front device–air interface. The pyramidal reflector with a base angle of 30° leads to a more than 2.5 times longer optical path length within the active layer compared to planar reference cells, where the light only passes through the active layer twice. As illustrated in Fig. 14(c), experimental demonstration showed a 30% enhancement in the Jsc and ηP of a device with a 40 nm thick P3HT:PC61BM active layer. However, the non-ideal surfaces of the pyramids and the possible absorption in the transparent electrode limit the overall enhancement. Based on ray-tracing calculation, the enhancement can be theoretically increased to up to 75% assuming no light loss within the whole device.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device with a pyramidal rear reflector (a) and a semi-transparent organic photovoltaic device (b) which corresponds to the circle area in (a). (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of P3HT:PCBM devices with planar and pyramidal reflectors. Inset: light intensity distribution for the reflected light within the active layer over the pyramid base area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. 
These above examples, which are limited in number and have varying levels of success in efficiency improvement, do indeed open up a new direction for the further improvement of OPV device performance. Besides lenses and pyramids, there are other possible optical structures that can be utilized to change the incident light travel directions and hence enhance the total optical path length. Furthermore, a robust simulation method should be employed to predict the possible enhancement for devices with external optical structures as well as the angle-dependent enhancement. To find a suitable material for these optical structure is another challenge for this technique. Materials used for fabricating such optical structures need to be fully transparent to minimize the optical loss when light is travelling through the structure and to be robust to sustain any damage during the device fabrication process and normal operation periods. The refractive index of optical structure properties should also be taken into consideration, since it determines the light travel direction and hence, influences the optical path length enhancement. Last, but not least, more work is needed to develop suitable methods to scale up the production of the external elements on different substrates, which should also be compatible with the high-throughput roll-to-roll OPV fabrication lines.

4.3 Plasmonics for OPV devices
Another method for achieving light trapping in thin-film PV devices is to utilize surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in metallic nanostructures. Surface plasmons (SPs) are electron oscillations excited by either photons or electrons at the metal–dielectric interfaces, associated with well-confined surface electromagnetic waves.249 With proper engineering of the metal structures, such confinement can lead to an enhanced electromagnetic field at the metal–dielectric interfaces, which has been utilized in many applications, such as SP optical antennas,250 surface enhanced Raman scattering,251 and plasmonic lasers.252 For the PV applications, incident light can be concentrated around metallic nano-clusters that can improve the active layer absorption, and thereby increase the device performance.253,254
Metal nanoparticles can be embedded in different layers of the OPV devices, either in carrier transport layers or organic active layers.255–258 As reported by Lee et al., Au nanoparticles were doped in the PEDOT:PSS layer of the P3HT:PCBM device to induce the plasmonic enhancement for the active layer.80 The power conversion efficiency for the device with a low concentration of Au nanoparticles was improved from ηP = 3.04% to ηP = 3.65%, although only slightly enhancement in Jsc of the device was observed. Most of the ηP enhancement came from a higher FF, which was attributed to the efficient charge dissociation in devices with metal nanoparticles due to the strong coupling between the plamons and excitons in the P3HT:PCBM device.80
Instead of being embedded in the carrier transport layer, the metal nanoparticles have also been mixed into the organic active materials, which scatter the incident light and increase the total optical path length within the active layer (Fig. 15(a)).255 As demonstrated by Wang et al., doping 40 nm size Ag nanoparticles into a PCDTBT:PC71BM active layer with a concentration of 1 wt% led to an up to 10% enhancement in Jsc (from 10.79 mA cm−2 to 11.61 mA cm−2) and ηP (from 6.3% to 7.1%) (Fig. 15(b)).256 Kim et al. also demonstrated well-dispersed Ag nanowires with a diameter of 110 nm and length of 5.0–8.0 μm in P3HT:PC61BM blends to introduce the SPR enhancement.259 With the Ag nanowires, the optical absorption by the P3HT:PC61BM layer was increased by approximately 20% in the spectra range of 330 nm to 650 nm, leading to an increase of Jsc from 8.25 mA cm−2 to 9.28 mA cm−2.259
 Fig. 15  (a) Absorption of the plain PCDTBT:PC71BM film and the film with 40 nm Ag nano-clusters. Insert: schematic illustration of light behavior for the devices with and without Ag clusters. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the plain PCDTBT:PC71BM device and the device with Ag clusters (Ag nanoparticle diameters of 30 nm, 40 nm, and 60 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
Periodic nanowire structures have been reported as a possible substitute for the ITO electrode in OPV devices, the transparency and conductivity of which can be tuned by adjusting the width of the nanowires. As reported by Kang et al., such periodic nanowires can also couple the incident light to surface plasmon waves and increase the optical absorption of the active layers.260Fig. 16(a–d) shows the calculated electrical field profiles of nanowire device as well as the ITO reference cell with TM and TE illuminations at λ = 530 nm. For the TM illumination, the electric field is highly concentrated at the edge of both the bottom nanowire and top Ag electrodes, whereas the maximum optical field is located between the top and bottom electrode for the TE illumination. Thus, the enhanced optical field intensity in the organic layers leads to higher optical absorption, as compared to devices using an ITO transparent electrode. Experimentally, with CuPc/C60 as the active layers, the nanowire-based devices have a similar Voc and FF, but about 40% higher Jsc compared to the ITO device (5.21 mA cm−2vs. 3.72 mA cm−2) (Fig. 16(e)), which is consistent with the prediction from the optical simulation.
 Fig. 16  (a) Simulated electric field profiles of CuPc/C60 devices on nanowire and ITO substrates at the wavelength of 530 nm for TM illuminations (a and b) and TE illuminations (c and d). (e) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the nanowire device and the ITO reference device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
In summary, metallic nanostructures, either randomly dispersed or periodically built in OPV cells, may improve the photoactive layer absorption due to the plasmonic effects. Generally, there are three different ways to utilize the plasmonics.249,261 Such nanostructures can be applied at the front surface of devices as the scattering elements to improve the optical path length in active layer(s). They can also be embedded in transport/active layer(s) to generate localized surface plasmons and improve the absorption by the active material. The third position is the back metal/active layer interface, which will couple the photons to surface plasmon polaritons and propagate into the active layers. Although there have been a few experimental and computational evidences for these approaches, many fundamental physical mechanisms are not systematically understood. The size, shape, concentration and material properties of the metallic nanostructures are key factors for the plasmonic enhancement in OPV cells. Moreover, these nanostructures are incorporated either in the transport/active layer(s) or at the related interfaces of OPV cells, which can affect the charge carrier movements within the layers. Thus, it is also important to minimize the possible loss mechanism, such as the exciton quenching and charge carrier recombination in cells. Tandem cells are the most efficient organic based PV devices; however, there are few examples showing the incorporation of the plasmonic geometries to improve the device efficiency. With proper structure design and material selection, the plamonic-enhanced tandem OPV cells can be further improved.
Conclusions & outlook
In the last two decades, the field of organic photovoltaic materials and devices has expanded enormously and attracted researchers from many disciplines such as materials science, chemistry, physics and electrical engineering. With the rapid development in this field, the community now has a better understanding of the key factors limiting the OPV cell performance. The development of new materials, in terms of enhancing voltage output, solar spectrum coverage and morphology understanding, etc, has been the subject of several other reviews. This review article focuses on advances in device architectures and optical designs that impact OPV device performance.
The three-dimensional spatial distribution of the donor–acceptor heterojunction strongly affects the transport and dynamics of photogenerated excitons and charge carrier in an OPV device. Aside from the basic planar and bulk HJ structures, other novel device architectures have been demonstrated, including double (planar) HJs, planar-mixed HJs, and controlled bulk HJs, all of which target an improved balance between potentially conflicting mechanisms. OPV devices based on inverted structure that reverses polarity of charge collection can use the high work function metals as the top electrodes, which can not only minimize the device degradation but also reduce the fabrication costs and complexity. Furthermore, tandem devices that stack two or more individual cells together to obtain a broader coverage of the solar spectrum have been widely explored to achieve the highest power conversion efficiency.
In addition to the optimization of the internal factors that affect the OPV device performance, managing the light wave propagation within the multi-layer stacks through internal and external modifications has also shown some success in improving OPV device performance. The interference-induced strong intensity variation inside the multilayer stack can be exploited to maximize light absorption, especially with strategically located transparent spacers. External optical designs, such as V-shaped geometries and molded microlens arrays and pyramids, have been applied to OPV devices to manipulate the light propagation and/or induce light trapping within the active layers, resulting in prolonged optical path lengths and more complete absorption of the incident light by the active layer without physically increasing the layer thicknesses. By embedding metal nanostructures into the active layers, the optical absorption may also be increased as a result of the strong plasmonic effect at the metal–organic interfaces.
With the above optimization strategies, the maximum power conversion efficiency of OPV devices has exceeded 10% in laboratory cells24,62,102,237 and 7–8.5% in modules.237 Besides the design of novel organic semiconductors to have a broader solar spectrum coverage for high Jsc and well-aligned energy levels for high Voc, controlling the phase separation of the donor–acceptor blends for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport should be further explored. The complex interplay between molecular properties and processing conditions makes it difficult to predict the bulk heterojunction morphology. Often minor modifications to the molecular structures and/or changes in the processing conditions lead to significant changes in film morphology and device performance. This presents significant challenges for quickly assessing newly developed materials, but also may result in quality control issues during the manufacturing process. It could be very challenging to find active materials that simultaneously have optimal optoelectronic properties (energy gap, ionization potential/electron affinity, charge mobility, etc.) and can yield optimal morphological structures in thin films (especially in bulk heterojunctions). Thus, it may be desirable to design self-assembly material platforms to control the film-forming characteristics of the active materials and make them less dependent on the necessary changes in molecular structure for the optimization of the optoelectronic behavior.
Furthermore, the external optical components need be integrated with devices with efficient materials and optimized structures to obtain higher efficiencies. A useful optical approach should be compatible with large-scale, roll-to-roll manufacturing of OPV devices/modules without incurring a significant additional cost. Both microscopic geometric structures and plasmonic nanostructures have shown promise for inducing light trapping and enhancing light absorption. When evaluating the effectiveness of a particular approach, we need to consider the possible variation in the light incident direction. If a certain method only works well with normal or near-normal incident light, but not all incident angles, the usage of such method will be limited to OPV devices with a sun-tracking system, which more likely will not be the case in real-world applications of large area OPV modules.
Last, but not least, the stability of OPV devices is a critical hurdle that should be tackled before their commercialization. Although OPV devices with a lifetime over seven years have been demonstrated,261 a more robust encapsulation technology, as well as more detailed study about the degradation mechanism, is required to improve the device stability. In particular, the phase separated bulk heterojunction structure generally is not at equilibrium; thus its morphological stability during operation may be a concern that needs to be better studied.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge partial financial support from the National Science Foundation, the Research Corporation for Science Advancement, and the University of Florida Office of Research.
Notes and references
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chow, R. J. Kopp and P. R. Portney, Science, 2003, 302, 1528–1531 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Smalley, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 412–417 CrossRef .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, ed. A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Wiley & Sons,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .
T. Surek, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 275, 292–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Masson, M. Latour, M. Rekinger, I.-T. Theologitis and M. Pap, Global Market Outlook for Photovoltaics 2013–2017, European Photovoltaic Industry Association,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2001, 9, 123–135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goodrich, P. Hacke, Q. Wang, B. Sopori, R. Margolis, T. L. James and M. Woodhouse, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 114, 110–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reichelstein and M. Yorston, Energy Policy, 2013, 55, 117–127 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xue, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10–19 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
H. L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1793–1896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Garcia-Valverde, J. A. Cherni and A. Urbina, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 535–558 CAS .
N. Espinosa, M. Hosel, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5117–5132 CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Tao, C.-C. Wu, J.-Y. Eu, W.-L. Lin, K.-C. Wu and C.-H. Chen, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 4018–4023 CrossRef CAS .
B. Azzopardi, C. J. M. Emmott, A. Urbina, F. C. Krebs, J. Mutale and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3741–3753 Search PubMed .
N. Espinosa, R. Garcia-Valverde and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1547–1557 CAS .
D. Yue, P. Khatav, F. You and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9163–9172 CAS .
S. B. Darling and F. You, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17633–17648 RSC .
C. W. Tang and S. A. Vanslyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Eom, Y. Zheng, E. Wrzesniewski, J. Lee, N. Chopra, F. So and J. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153303 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, N. Chopra, D. Bera, S. Maslov, S.-H. Eom, Y. Zheng, P. Holloway, J. Xue and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 136–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Katz, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4748–4756 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 1859–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, M. H. Tong, Y. J. Xia, W. Z. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Hammond and J. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 073302 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Vasseur, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, L. Froyen and P. Heremans, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 886–895 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moller, C. Perlov, W. Jackson, C. Taussig and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 426, 166–169 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, L. Ma, J. Wu and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 064507 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levin and C. E. White, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 417–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kearns and M. Calvin, J. Chem. Phys., 1958, 29, 950–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kallmann and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1959, 30, 585–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Golubovi, Space Aeronautics, 1967, 48, 112 Search PubMed .
P. H. Fang, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 4672–4673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Okumura, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 5317–5323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Reucroft, K. Takahashi and H. Ullal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 664–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Reucroft, K. Takahashi and H. Ullal, J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 46, 5218–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, J. D. Myers, Y. Zheng, W. T. Hammond, E. Wrzesniewski and J. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 023306 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sista, Z. R. Hong, L. M. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1606–1620 CAS .
P. Sonar, J. P. F. Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558–1574 CAS .
G. Wei, S. Wang, K. Sun, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 184–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12–20 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5432–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Yang and W. You, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 607–632 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and L. Yu, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 454–473 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill, A. Kahn, Z. G. Soos and R. A. Pascal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Myers and J. Xue, Polym. Rev., 2012, 52, 1–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Luhman and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 764–771 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, H. Fujiwara and M. Yokoyama, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3781–3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8045–8074 CAS .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. Jo and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 304–308 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, K. G. Jespersen, C. Bjorstrom, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, V. Sundstrom, K. Magnusson, E. Moons, A. Yartsev and O. Inganas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783–1789 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, D. Y. Lee and K. Cho, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 416–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Hoven, X.-D. Dang, R. C. Coffin, J. Peet, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E63–E66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2284–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhou, J. Cong, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9756–9759 CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Moon, C. J. Takacs, S. Cho, R. C. Coffin, H. Kim, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4005–4008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Salim, L. H. Wong, B. Brauer, R. Kukreja, Y. L. Foo, Z. Bao and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 242–250 RSC .
H.-C. Liao, C.-C. Ho, C.-Y. Chang, M.-H. Jao, S. B. Darling and W.-F. Su, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 326–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, J. Xue, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124902 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223307 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kroon, M. Lenes, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and B. De Boer, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 531–582 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Mutolo, E. I. Mayo, B. P. Rand, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8108–8109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9281–9286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, J. P. Mudrick, Y. Zheng, W. T. Hammond, Y. Yang and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fujishima, H. Kanno, T. Kinoshita, E. Maruyama, M. Tanaka, M. Shirakawa and K. Shibata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1029–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hirade and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 153302 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wagner, M. Gruber, A. Hinderhofer, A. Wilke, B. Broker, J. Frisch, P. Amsalem, A. Vollmer, A. Opitz, N. Koch, F. Schreiber and W. Brutting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4295–4303 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud and M. Leclerc, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2295–2300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Price, A. C. Stuart, L. Yang, H. Zhou and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4625–4631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, A. E. Hayden, H. Yang, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Chu, J. Lu, S. Beaupre, Y. Zhang, J.-R. Pouliot, S. Wakim, J. Zhou, M. Leclerc, Z. Li, J. Ding and Y. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4250–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Amb, S. Chen, K. R. Graham, J. Subbiah, C. E. Small, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10062–10065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Small, S. Chen, J. Subbiah, C. M. Amb, S.-W. Tsang, T.-H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Shin, H.-H. Jeong, M.-K. Kim, S.-H. Jin, M.-R. Kim, J.-K. Lee, J. W. Lee and Y.-S. Gal, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 384–390 RSC .
I. Kim, H. M. Haverinen, Z. Wang, S. Madakuni, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 023305 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sakai, T. Taima, T. Yamanari and K. Saito, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. Lepeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, S. C. Price, K. J. Knight and W. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7992–7995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, S. C. Price, S. Liu and W. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2995–2998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. McNeill, A. Abrusci, J. Zaumseil, R. Wilson, M. J. McKiernan, J. H. Burroughes, J. J. M. Halls, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 193506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Mikroyannidis, P. Suresh and G. D. Sharma, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 932–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhou, Y. Zheng, L. Qian, Y. Yang, P. H. Holloway and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3507–3514 RSC .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1009–1013 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, Y.-J. Lee, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, J. A. Voigt and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16640–16645 CAS .
F. Gao, S. Ren and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2020–2040 CAS .
R. Zhou, R. Stalder, D. Xie, W. Cao, Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. Plaisant, P. H. Holloway, K. S. Schanze, J. R. Reynolds and J. Xue, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4846–4854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hansel, H. Zettl, G. Krausch, R. Kisselev, M. Thelakkat and H. W. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2056–2060 CrossRef .
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650–2652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Chan, C. S. Lee, S. L. Lai, M. K. Fung, F. L. Wong, H. Y. Sun, K. M. Lau and S. T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094506 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Rand, J. Li, J. Xue, R. J. Holmes, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2714–2718 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, F. Li, H. Yang, H. Wu, X. Wang, W. Zhou, J. Zhao, X. Ding, C. Huang and X. Hou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 42–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lare, B. Kouskoussa, K. Benchouk, S. O. Djobo, L. Cattin, M. Morsli, F. R. Diaz, M. Gacitua, T. Abachi, M. A. del Valle, F. Armijo, G. A. East and J. C. Bernede, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2011, 72, 97–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qian, J. Yang, R. Zhou, A. Tang, Y. Zheng, T. K. Tseng, D. Bera, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3814–3817 RSC .
J. Yang, L. Qian, R. Zhou, Y. Zheng, A. Tang, P. H. Holloway and J. Xue, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 044323 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hayakawa, O. Yoshikawa, T. Fujieda, K. Uehara and S. Yoshikawaa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163517 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Lee, N. E. Coates, S. Cho, N. S. Cho, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243308 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Barito, M. E. Sykes, D. Bilby, J. Amonoo, Y. Jin, S. E. Morris, P. F. Green, J. Kim and M. Shtein, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 203110 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Fleetham, B. O'Brien, J. P. Mudrick, J. Xue and J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 083303 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cheng, J. Wang, G. Du, S. Shi, Z. Du, Z. Fan, J. Bian and M. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 083305 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4146–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, C. K. Renshaw and S. R. Forrest, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A444–A450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Kim, J. Subbiah, G. Sarasqueta, F. So, H. Ding, Irfan and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Jasieniak, J. Seifter, J. Jo, T. Mates and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2594–2605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Murase and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, W. S. Shin, M. Seo, D. Gupta, S. J. Moon and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 791–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, B. Kim, M. J. Ko, D.-K. Lee, H. Kim, S. H. Kim and K. Kim, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 959–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Irwin, J. D. Servaites, D. B. Buchholz, B. J. Leever, J. Liu, J. D. Emery, M. Zhang, J.-H. Song, M. F. Durstock, A. J. Freeman, M. J. Bedzyk, M. C. Hersam, R. P. H. Chang, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2218–2226 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, P. F. Ndione, N. E. Widjonarko, M. T. Lloyd, J. Meyer, E. L. Ratcliff, A. Kahn, N. R. Armstrong, C. J. Curtis, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 813–820 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ratcliff, J. Meyer, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Armstrong, D. Olson and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 744–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uchida, J. Xue, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4218–4220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124903 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng and J. Xue, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 420–453 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, J. D. Zimmerman, B. E. Lassiter, K. J. Bergemann and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 073302 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Yuen, A.-M. Hor, J. S. Preston, R. Klenkler, N. M. Bamsey and R. O. Loutfy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 173301 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hong, B. Maennig, R. Lessmann, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and P. Simon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 203505 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048–16050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. He, F. Gao, G. L. Tu, D. Hasko, S. Huttner, U. Steiner, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hirade, H. Nakanotani, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 80–83 CAS .
S. Yu, C. Klimm, P. Schafer, J. P. Rabe, B. Rech and N. Koch, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shtein, H. F. Gossenberger, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 1470–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 014906 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, R. Bekele, J. Ouyang and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1621–1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, R. Bekele, J. M. Ouyang and J. Xue, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1544–1551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Weickert, R. B. Dunbar, H. C. Hesse, W. Wiedemann and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1810–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Hong, P. Huang and J. Shieh, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7722–7728 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, T. Chen, Y.-S. Jung, Y. Miyamoto, G. Han, S. Cabrini, B. Ma and D. L. Olynick, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2627–2634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Mielczarek, M. Aryal, A. Zakhidov and W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2877–2892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Park, M. G. Kang and L. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2601–2608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. C. Cho, M. Shtein, L. J. Guo and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 123113 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, C. Rolin, J. Genoe, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. G. Hasko, S. Huttner, N. C. Greenham, U. Steiner, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Rancatore, C. E. Mauldin, S.-H. Tung, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. Strzalka, J. M. J. Frechet and T. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2721–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Jeong, T.-G. Kim, E. Jung and J.-W. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6837–6842 CAS .
R. J. Kumar, J. Subbiah and A. B. Holmes, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2013, 9, 1102–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lam, T. R. B. Foong, Z. E. Ooi, J. Zhang, A. C. Grimsdale and Y. M. Lam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13265–13274 CAS .
B. M. Schulze, N. T. Shewmon, J. Zhang, D. L. Watkins, J. P. Mudrick, W. Cao, R. B. Zerdan, A. J. Quartararo, I. Ghiviriga, J. Xue and R. K. Castellano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1541–1549 CAS .
S. K. Hau, K. M. O'Malley, Y. J. Cheng, H. L. Yip, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1665–1675 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 474–510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. R. Manders, S.-W. Tsang and F. So, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24202–24212 RSC .
D. W. Zhao, P. Liu, X. W. Sun, S. T. Tan, L. Ke and A. K. K. Kyaw, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 153304 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, C.-W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-H. Liao, L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173303 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J. L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, C. Y. Jiang, G. Q. Lo, D. W. Zhao and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 221107 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tao, S. Ruan, G. Xie, X. Kong, L. Shen, F. Meng, C. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043311 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Huang, C.-Y. Chou, M.-Y. Liu, K.-H. Tsai, W.-H. Lin and C.-F. Lin, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1060–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou and A. K.-Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 233304 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Hsiao, C.-P. Chen, C.-H. Chao and W.-T. Whang, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 551–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, C. Zhong, C. Liu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1682–1689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, N. S. Baek, J. Zou, K. O'Malley and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253301 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Glatthaar, M. Niggemann, B. Zimmermann, P. Lewer, M. Riede, A. Hinsch and J. Luther, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 491, 298–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, Y. Zheng, E. Wrzesniewski, W. T. Hammond and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2221–2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-C. Chen, J.-L. Wu, C.-L. Lee, W.-C. Huang, H.-M. P. Chen and W.-C. Chen, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2009, 30, 727–729 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Kang and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1391–1396 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061–4067 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, T. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price, B. J. Wiley and W. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4075–4084 CAS .
C.-C. Chen, L. Dou, R. Zhu, C.-H. Chung, T.-B. Song, Y. B. Zheng, S. Hawks, G. Li, P. S. Weiss and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7185–7190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, X. Zhu, K. Forberich, J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, M. Halik, S. Spallek, B. Butz, E. Spiecker, T. Ameri, N. Li, P. Kubis, D. M. Guldi, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, G. Wang, A. Yang, X. Tao, X. Liu, Y. Shen and Z. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2893–2902 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 CAS .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chou, W. L. Kwan, Z. Hong, L.-M. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1282–1286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meiss, T. Menke, K. Leo, C. Uhrich, W. M. Gnehr, S. Sonntag, M. Pfeiffer and M. Riede, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 043301 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Gevaerts, A. Furlan, M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2130–2134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. W. Shim, T. M. Khan and B. Kippelen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9827–9832 CAS .
M. Hiramoto, M. Suezaki and M. Yokoyama, Chem. Lett., 1990, 327–330 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1667–1669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dennler, H. J. Prall, R. Koeppe, M. Egginger, R. Autengruber and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 073502 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Timmreck, S. Olthof, K. Leo and M. K. Riede, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 033108 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Riede, C. Uhrich, J. Widmer, R. Timmreck, D. Wynands, G. Schwartz, W. M. Gnehr, D. Hildebrandt, A. Weiss, J. Hwang, S. Sundarraj, P. Erk, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3019–3028 CrossRef CAS .
A. Colsmann, J. Junge, C. Kayser and U. Lemmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 203506 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Zhao, X. W. Sun, C. Y. Jiang, A. K. K. Kyaw, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083305 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kawano, N. Ito, T. Nishimori and J. Sakai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073514 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E67–E71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Sun, D. W. Zhao, L. Ke, A. K. K. Kyaw, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 053303 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Zhao, L. Ke, Y. Li, S. T. Tan, A. K. K. Kyaw, H. V. Demir, X. W. Sun, D. L. Carroll, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 921–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, K.-S. Chen, J. Zou and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 253307 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C.-C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, I. Barbu, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113520 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Drechsel, B. Mannig, D. Gebeyehu, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and H. Hoppe, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 175–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1233–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schueppel, R. Timmreck, N. Allinger, T. Mueller, M. Furno, C. Uhrich, K. Leo and M. Riede, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 044503 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 827–837 Search PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, V. Andersson, F. Zhang and O. Inganas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 123514 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt and O. Inganas, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 094520 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. Zhang, K. Tvingstedt, W. Tian and O. Inganas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033302 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-B. Rim, S. Zhao, S. R. Scully, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 243501 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Niggemann, M. Glatthaar, P. Lewer, C. Muller, J. Wagner and A. Gombert, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 628–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo, S.-H. Oh, J. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3956–3963 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvingstedt, S. Dal Zilio, O. Inganas and M. Tormen, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21608–21615 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Myers, W. Cao, V. Cassidy, S.-H. Eom, R. Zhou, L. Yang, W. You and J. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6900–6904 CAS .
S.-H. Eom, E. Wrzesniewski and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 472–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Eom, E. Wrzesniewski and J. Xue, J. Photonics Energy, 2011, 1, 011002 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Wrzesniewski, S. H. Eom, W. Cao, W. T. Hammond, S. Lee, E. P. Douglas and J. Xue, Small, 2012, 8, 2647–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Muhlschlegel, H. J. Eisler, O. J. F. Martin, B. Hecht and D. W. Pohl, Science, 2005, 308, 1607–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
R. Colombelli, K. Srinivasan, M. Troccoli, O. Painter, C. F. Gmachl, D. M. Tennant, A. M. Sergent, D. L. Sivco, A. Y. Cho and F. Capasso, Science, 2003, 302, 1374–1377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203113 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. Konda, R. Mundle, H. Mustafa, O. Bamiduro, A. K. Pradhana, U. N. Roy, Y. Cui and A. Burger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 191111 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Wang, D. Y. Kim, K. W. Choi, J. H. Seo, S. H. Im, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5519–5523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Wang, K. H. Park, J. H. Seo, J. Seifter, J. H. Jeon, J. K. Kim, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 766–770 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lim, K.-D. Kim, S.-Y. Park, E. M. Hong, H. O. Seo, J. H. Lim, K. H. Lee, Y. Jeong, C. Song, E. Lee, Y. D. Kim and S. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9803–9807 CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Luo, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kim, S.-H. Cha, S. C. Kim, M. Song, J. Lee, W. S. Shin, S.-J. Moon, J. H. Bahng, N. A. Kotov and S.-H. Jin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3319–3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378–4383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Weiran Cao	Weiran Cao received his B.S. degree in materials science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2008 and his Ph.D. degree in materials science and engineering from the University of Florida in 2013. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Jiangeng Xue's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Florida. His current research work mainly focuses on novel optical designs for organic light-emitting devices and photovoltaic devices.
Jiangeng Xue	Jiangeng Xue is a University of Florida Research Foundation Professor and Associate Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Florida. He received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Princeton University in 2005. His research interests are broadly on the physics and processing of organic and hybrid organic–inorganic electronic materials and their applications in lighting, displays, photovoltaics, photodetection and circuitry.

Broader context
Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices based on π-conjugated organic molecules or polymers offer great opportunities for low-cost solar energy conversion, due to several technological advantages of organic semiconductors. These advantages include low material cost, easy and high-throughput manufacturing processes, compatibility with flexible substrates and tunable material properties via chemical structure modification. In recent years, the performance of OPV devices, including the efficiency and stability, has steadily improved, resulting from the development of new active materials and material processing/treatment methods, novel device architectures and internal/external optical structures to manage the light. The state-of-the-art power conversion efficiency of laboratory cells has reached over 10%, attracting tremendous commercialization interests.


 	Fig. 1  Annual total number of peer-reviewed journal publications in the field of organic photovoltaics and the annual total citations on these publications in the period of 1970 to 2012. Data (shown as symbols) are from Science Citation Index, using the search topic of “(organic or polymer) and (photovoltaic or solar cell)”. Publications on inorganic solar cells fabricated using metal–organic chemical vapor deposition or molecular beam epitaxy are excluded. The solid lines are fits showing exponential growth of 35–40% per year.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Consecutive steps for photocurrent generation in a donor–acceptor heterojunction structure (see ref. 37). (b) Schematic cross-section of planar donor–acceptor heterojunction. (c) Schematic cross-section of mixed or bulk heterojunction (see ref. 76).	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of several widely used organic donor and acceptor materials (small molecules and polymers).	 

 	Fig. 4  Performance of an optimized CuPc/C60 hybrid planar-mixed heterojunction (PM-HJ) photovoltaic cell as compared to optimized planar or mixed HJ cells.153	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM topographic images of CuPc nanorods grown on a stationary (a) or rotational (b) substrate. (c) SEM cross-section image of CuPc nanorod/PC61BM composite film. The scale bars are 100 nm for those images. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of four CuPc/PC61BM devices: a bilayer device (“planar”), two devices with CuPc rods grown with a stationary (“NR-S”) or rotational (“NR-R”), and a device with a flat CuPc buffer layer followed by a nanorod film (“planar-NR”). (e) External quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of wavelength λ for planar and planar-NR devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of imprinted P3HT nanopillars (a) and nanoholes (b) with 15 nm diameter. The inset images provide high magnification view. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of organic photovoltaic devices with spontaneously-formed interdigitated structure. (b) SEM cross-section image of BP column structures on top of ITO/PEDOT:PSS surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure of an inverted tandem device with PEDOT:PSS/ZnO interlayers. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a P3HT:ICBA/PDTP-DFBT:PC61BM device (tandem 1)and a P3HT:ICBA/PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM device (tandem 2) under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) External quantum efficiency of the tandem 1 and 2 devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic structure of a P3HT:PC61BM device with a ZnO optical spacer. (b) Theoretical and experimental of the short circuit current of devices with and without a 39 nm ZnO optical spacer as a function of the active layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Stack structure of a small molecule tandem heterojunction device with F4-ZnPc:C60 and DCV6T:C60 single cells. (b) PV parameters, Voc, Jsc, FF and η as a function of spacer thickness in the tandem stack. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic geometry of the V-shaped light trapping structure for thin film photovoltaic devices. (b) Modeled external quantum efficiency (ηEQE) of a CuPc/PTCBI device for the planar configuration and in a V-shaped light trap (2α = 30°). Calculated Jsc for several thin-film photovoltaic devices at normal incidence (c) and average on the whole day (d) as a function of the V-fold opening angle 2α. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device on a micro-prism substrate. (b) Calculated device absorption for normal incidence on a MDMO-PPV/PCBM device and a twofold reflection under 45° in TE- and TM-polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of light behavior within an organic photovoltaic device with and without a microlens array. (b) SEM images of microlens array. (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for a SubPc/C60 device with and without a microlens array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device with a pyramidal rear reflector (a) and a semi-transparent organic photovoltaic device (b) which corresponds to the circle area in (a). (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of P3HT:PCBM devices with planar and pyramidal reflectors. Inset: light intensity distribution for the reflected light within the active layer over the pyramid base area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Absorption of the plain PCDTBT:PC71BM film and the film with 40 nm Ag nano-clusters. Insert: schematic illustration of light behavior for the devices with and without Ag clusters. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the plain PCDTBT:PC71BM device and the device with Ag clusters (Ag nanoparticle diameters of 30 nm, 40 nm, and 60 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Simulated electric field profiles of CuPc/C60 devices on nanowire and ITO substrates at the wavelength of 530 nm for TM illuminations (a and b) and TE illuminations (c and d). (e) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the nanowire device and the ITO reference device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
