Bilayer nanoporous electrodes for dye sensitized solar cells  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B005921H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B005921H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2000, 2231-2232Bilayer nanoporous electrodes for dye sensitized solar 
cellsA. Zaban*a, S. G. Chena, S. Chappela and B. A. GreggbaChemistry Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel.. E-mail: zabana@mail.biu.ac.ilbNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, 80401, USAReceived  (in Cambridge, UK) 21st July 2000, Accepted 3rd October 2000First published on 31st October 2000AbstractThe fabrication of a new bilayer 
TiO2/Nb2O5 nanoporous electrode that 
improves the performance of dye sensitized solar cells by more than 35% is 
reported.The high light-to-energy conversion efficiencies achieved with 
dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) may be attributed to the nanoporous 
TiO2 electrodes.1 These 
electrodes consist of nanosize semiconductor colloids that are sintered on 
a transparent conducting substrate resulting in a porous geometry and a 
very large surface area. Both the low absorbance of dye monolayers and the 
low efficiency of dye multilayers necessitate the large surface area. 
However, the resulting electrode geometry introduces special 
characteristics, some of which reduce the performance of the DSSCs.2–4 One of these characteristics 
relates to the small size of the individual colloidal particles that cannot 
support a high space charge.2,4,5 
In other words an energy barrier is not formed at the 
electrode–electrolyte interface.Upon illumination of a DSSC, an electron is injected from the dye into 
the TiO2 film followed by a hole transfer to the 
electrolyte1,6 The injected electrons 
must cross the TiO2 film and reach the conducting substrate, 
while the oxidized ions diffuse towards the back electrode where they are 
re-reduced.1,6 The porous geometry that 
permits the presence of the electrolyte through the entire electrode 
provides a high surface area for recombination between the injected 
electrons and the holes in solution2,7 
In the absence of an energy barrier at the electrode–electrolyte 
interface, the rate of this recombination process may be very high 
depending on the properties of the hole carrier.2,5,8,9 For this reason, DSSCs utilizing the 
I−/I3− redox couple perform 
better than similar cells consisting of faster couples.10 Furthermore, part of the low efficiencies 
observed with solid electrolytes is attributed to this recombination 
process.3 The formation of an energy barrier 
at the surface of the TiO2 electrode that will enable the use of 
various mediators has the prospect of improving the performance of DSSCs 
significantly.We report here on the fabrication of a nanoporous wide band gap 
semiconductor electrode that has an inherent energy barrier at its surface. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time such an electrode has 
been reported. The new electrode consists of an inner nanoporous 
TiO2 matrix covered with a thin layer of 
Nb2O5. The conduction band potential of 
Nb2O5 (0 V vs. NHE at pH 0) is ca. 
100 mV more negative than that of the TiO2.11 As illustrated in Fig. 
1, this potential difference forms an energy barrier at the 
electrode–electrolyte interface, which can reduce the rate of 
recombination processes of the photoinjected electrons. A comparison of two 
similar DSSCs that differ only in their nanoporous electrodes, shows that 
the new bilayer electrode is superior to the standard one with respect to 
all cell parameters. This superiority measured with many cells results in a 
35% increase of the overall conversion efficiency. Fig. 1  A schematic view of the new bilayer nanoporous electrode which consists 
of a nanoporous TiO2 matrix covered with a thin layer of 
Nb2O5. The Nb2O5 coating forms 
an inherent energy barrier at the electrode–electrolyte interface, 
which reduces the recombination rate of the photoinjected electrons. The TiO2 nanoporous matrix of 6 μm thickness was prepared 
from colloids with particles of 23 nm diameter. The colloid and the matrix 
preparation methods are reported elsewhere.12 The Nb2O5 coating was 
prepared by dipping the sintered TiO2 matrix in a dry solution 
of 0.005 M niobium isopropoxide in isopropyl alcohol for 30 s, followed by 
washing with dry isopropyl alcohol and sintering at 500 °C in air for 
30 min. The dipping was performed under dry nitrogen atmosphere. The 
thickness of the electrode measured with a Mitutoyo, Surftest SV 500 
profilometer did not change upon coating. XPS measurements of the coated 
electrodes show that the average metal mol fraction of Nb was 36% with the 
remainder Ti. Given this molar ratio, a 2.7 nm thick 
Nb2O5 layer is calculated when assuming that the 
TiO2 colloids are spherical and single sized, and that the 
Nb2O5 coating is uniform.A sandwich-type configuration was employed to measure the DSSCs. A Pt 
coated F-doped SnO2 film was used as a counter electrode, and 
0.5 M Li/0.05 M I2 in 1∶1 acetonitrile–NMO was used 
as electrolyte. The dye 
[cis-di(isothiocyanato)-N-bis(4,4′-dica
rboxy-2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium(II), (N3)] was adsorbed by 
immersing the electrodes overnight in a 0.5 mM ethanol solution of the dye. 
The oxidation potential of the dye (ca. 1.09 V vs. NHE in 
acetonitrile) is sufficient to allow injection into both TiO2 
and Nb2O5.11 The 
amount of dye adsorbed on the electrode was measured by visible absorption 
of the electrode using a HP 8453 spectrophotometer. Illumination of the 
cell was conducted using a calibrated Xe lamp. IPCE measurements were 
performed using a ScinceTech 9010 monochromator scaled to 6 nm 
bandwidth.We describe here a comparison of two typical DSSCs that differ in their 
type of electrode. One cell contained the new bilayer electrode and the 
other served as a reference, consisting of a standard nanoporous 
TiO2 electrode. Both cells were studied under similar 
conditions. The reference electrode and the TiO2 matrix were 
made from the same batch and separated only after the first sintering 
process. After the Nb2O5 coating of the 
TiO2 matrix was performed, both electrodes were sintered again 
to ensure similarity. The thickness of both electrodes was 6 μm, and the 
same amount of dye was adsorbed on both films as confirmed by absorption 
spectra. Finally, the undyed electrodes had the same transparent appearance 
showing transmission spectra that differed slightly only in the band gap 
region. Under illumination equivalent to sunlight, 
Nb2O5 coating of the TiO2 resulted in an 
increase of all cell parameters. The photocurrent increased from 10.2 to 
11.4 mA cm−2, the photovoltage from 659 to 732 mV, and the 
fill factor from 51.1 to 56.4%. As a result, the maximum power of the cell 
was increased from 3.45 to 4.70 mW cm−2.The improved cell performance achieved by the new bilayer electrode may 
be attributed to the energy barrier formed by the deposition of the thin 
Nb2O5 layer. The Nb2O5 layer 
apparently decreases the rate of recombination of the photoinjected 
electrons with the dye and the electrolyte. This phenomenon is revealed 
best from incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) measurements for the 
two cells. As shown in Fig. 2(a) the curves 
of both cells resemble the absorption spectrum of the N3 dye. The measured 
IPCE values of the cell containing the bilayer electrode are higher than 
those of the reference cell throughout the visible spectrum. However, the 
improvement in the conversion efficiency is wavelength dependent as 
indicated by the ratio between the IPCE values of the two cells (the 
improvement factor). Fig. 2(b) shows that 
this factor increases at illumination wavelengths in which the absorption 
coefficient of the dye becomes low. Fig. 2  (a)IPCE curves of the reference dye sensitized solar cell and 
the cell containing the bilayer electrode. The IPCE curves resemble the 
absorption spectrum of the electrodes shown in (b) which shows the ratio 
between the IPCE values of the two solar cells as a function of the 
illumination wavelength revealing its wavelength dependence. The improved performance evident from Fig. 
2(a) is not necessarily the result of a change in the collection 
efficiency. This improvement can be related to other factors, such as the 
injection yield.1 However, the wavelength 
dependence of the improvement factor can be directly related to the 
electron collection.13 The mean distance a 
photoinjected electron must diffuse in order to reach the current collector 
increases as the absorption coefficient of the dye decreases thus changing 
the light absorption profile. This phenomenon means that recombination 
events are expected to increase as the absorption coefficient of the dye 
decreases.13 In other words, a change in 
the rate of recombination is expected to have a more significant effect at 
the low dye absorption coefficient regions. Fig. 
2(b) indicates that this is the case of the new bilayer 
electrode.The results presented above clearly demonstrate that the bilayer 
electrodes are superior to the standard single material nanoporous 
electrodes in terms of the performance of DSSCs. These results suggest that 
the improvement is achieved by the formation of an energy barrier at the 
electrode–electrolyte interface, which slows the recombination 
process. However at this stage of research we lack information on the 
quality of the coating with respect to its homogeneity throughout the film 
which affects the ability to determine the exact thickness of the coating. 
In addition, it is still unclear to what extent the new electrode can 
improve the performance of DSSCs in which mediators other than the 
I−/I3−-based electrolyte are 
used. Research towards better understanding of this system and further 
performance improvement are currently being undertaken.AcknowledgementsWe thank the National Center for Photovoltaics at NREL and The Israel 
Science Foundation founded by The Israel Academy of Science and Humanities 
for supporting this research.ReferencesK. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gratzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 77, 347 CrossRef CAS .A. Hagfeldt, S. E. Lindquist and M. Gratzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 32, 245 CrossRef CAS .A. Zaban, A. Meier and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7985 CrossRef CAS .J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Solid State Electrochem., 1999, 3, 337 CrossRef CAS .L. Kavan, M. Gratzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716 CrossRef CAS .B. O’Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 20056 CrossRef CAS .I. Bedja, S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1997, 101, 1651 Search PubMed .C. Nasr, P. V. Kamat and S. Hotchandani, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 420, 201 CrossRef CAS .F. Pichot and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6 CrossRef CAS .K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3825 CrossRef CAS .A. Zaban, S. T. Aruna, S. Tirosh, B. A. Gregg and Y. Mastai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4130 CrossRef CAS .G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3136 CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic view of the new bilayer nanoporous electrode which consists 
of a nanoporous TiO2 matrix covered with a thin layer of 
Nb2O5. The Nb2O5 coating forms 
an inherent energy barrier at the electrode–electrolyte interface, 
which reduces the recombination rate of the photoinjected electrons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a)IPCE curves of the reference dye sensitized solar cell and 
the cell containing the bilayer electrode. The IPCE curves resemble the 
absorption spectrum of the electrodes shown in (b) which shows the ratio 
between the IPCE values of the two solar cells as a function of the 
illumination wavelength revealing its wavelength dependence.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
