Nanostructured material-based biofuel cells: recent advances and future prospects  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00044D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00044D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1545-1564Nanostructured material-based biofuel cells: recent advances and future prospects

        
          
            Cui-e 
            Zhao†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Panpan 
            Gai†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Rongbin 
            Song†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianrong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jun-Jie 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *a
aState key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Collaborative Innovation of Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. E-mail: jrzhang@nju.edu.cn; jjzhu@nju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory for Organic Electronics and Information Displays & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Jiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China
cCollege of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China
Received 
      16th January 2016
    First published on 17th February 2017AbstractDuring the past decade, biofuel cells (BFCs) have emerged as an emerging technology on account of their ability to directly generate electricity from biologically renewable catalysts and fuels. Due to the boost in nanotechnology, significant advances have been accomplished in BFCs. Although it is still challenging to promote the performance of BFCs, adopting nanostructured materials for BFC construction has been extensively proposed as an effective and promising strategy to achieve high energy production. In this review, we presented the major novel nanostructured materials applied for BFCs and highlighted the breakthroughs in this field. Based on different natures of the bio-catalysts and electron transfer process at the bio-electrode surfaces, the fundamentals of BFC systems, including enzymatic biofuel cells (EBFCs) and microbial fuel cells (MFCs), have been elucidated. In particular, the principle of electrode materials design has been detailed in terms of enhancing electrical communications between biological catalysts and electrodes. Furthermore, we have provided the applications of BFCs and potential challenges of this technology.
Cui-e Zhao
Cui-e Zhao received her PhD from Nanjing University under the direction of Professor Jianrong Zhang and Professor Jun-Jie Zhu in 2013. After postdoctoral training at Nanyang Technology University (NTU), Singapore, she joined as an associated professor at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (NJUPT) in 2015. Her research expertise involves novel functionalized nanomaterials and their applications in the microbial fuel cell (MFC) area.
Panpan Gai
Panpan Gai obtained her BSc from Liaocheng University in 2008 and MSc from Ningbo University in 2011. She received her PhD from Nanjing University under the supervision of Prof. Jian-Rong Zhang and Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu in 2015. Currently, she is a professor at Qingdao Agriculture University. Her primary research interests include the synthesis of novel functionalized nanomaterials and fabrication of enzymatic biofuel cells (EBFCs) and self-powered biosensors.
Rongbin Song
Rongbin Song is a PhD student in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Nanjing University. He received his BS (2010) and MS (2013) from Nanjing Tech University. Currently, he works in Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu’ group, and his research mainly focuses on the design of innovative nanomaterials for microbial fuel cell (MFC).
Ying Chen
Ying Chen received her BS degree from Nanjing University in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate with Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, China. Her research involves multifunctional nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical sensing and catalysis.
Jianrong Zhang
Jian-Rong Zhang was born in 1963 in Wujiang City of the Jiangsu Province. He received his BSc (1984), MSc (1987), and PhD (1990) from Nanjing University. After he obtained his PhD, he worked at Nanjing University as a lecturer starting in 1990 and a Professor starting in 2003. His research interests focus on biofuel cells and electroanalysis for biomolecules. He has published more than 150 papers and received a number of national and ministerial awards.
Jun-Jie Zhu
Jun-Jie Zhu is a Professor of Chemistry at Nanjing University, China. He received his BS (1984) and PhD (1993) degrees in Chemistry from Nanjing University. After this, he started his academic career at Nanjing University in 1993. During 1998–1999, he was a postdoctoral fellow in Bar-Ilan University, Israel. His current research interests are analytical chemistry and materials chemistry, and he mainly focuses on the study of nanobioanalytical chemistry including bioelectrochemistry, nanoelectrochemistry and the fabrication of biosensors.
1. Introduction
The global energy crisis and environmental pollution have sped up research on clean and renewable energy. As a sustainable technology, biofuel cells (BFCs) have recently attracted significant interest owing to their unique ability to convert chemical energy stored in biodegradable substances directly into electricity.1–7 Enzymatic biofuel cells (EBFCs) and microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are two important parts of the BFC system, in which devices with renewable redox enzymes and/or microorganisms are used as the catalysts to perform natural oxidation processes at the anode, resulting in the release of electrons and the generation of an electrical current. The biocatalysts (enzymes or microorganisms) are clean and renewable and endow BFCs with the ability to operate under mild conditions (i.e., ambient temperature and neutral pH). Unlike the high-cost of the noble-metal catalysts, scaling up the use of these biocatalysts can reduce production costs. Furthermore, BFCs offer a clean energy alternative to fossil fuels in that they can use cheap, environmentally friendly, renewable fuels (e.g., sugars), wastewater, and even glucose endogenously existing in biological systems to produce electrical energy.8–11 All these unique characteristics make BFCs more attractive as an economical and portable energy alternative to batteries and conventional fuel cells. Therefore, BFCs have important potential for powering electronic devices in remote areas (e.g., sea-floors), removing organic pollutants from wastewater while producing electricity, and applications in implantable and non-invasive medical devices, self-powered sensors, etc.12–20
Electrical generation in a biological system was first observed in 1911 by Michael C. Potter,21 initiating the development of the BFC concept with intensive research conducted in the past few decades. Traditionally, redox mediators are used as electron shuttles to facilitate the electron transfer process between biological catalysts and electrode surfaces. However, these diffusive redox molecules are costly, unstable and potentially toxic, greatly limiting the applications of BFCs. The development of BFC technology requires significant improvement in the efficiency of biocatalysts immobilization on electrodes, so as to enable direct electron transfer and establish more efficient electrical communications with electrode surfaces.22–24
Currently, the main bottle-neck problems in BFCs are their short life-time and low-power density, which hamper the broad practical applications of BFCs. To address these issues, many efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of nanostructured materials with the purpose of facilitating electron transfer between enzymes/microbes and the electrodes and providing a suitable microenvironment for the natural catalytic processes of the enzymes/microbes.25–30 The tailored sizes and structures of these materials are supposed to shorten the distance between buried active sites or electron relays inside the redox proteins and the electrodes to give efficient electron transfer that cannot be achieved at a planar electrode due to difficult or non-specific orientation of the redox proteins at the interface. Besides, the optimized compositions of these materials are able to enhance the biocompatibility and surface properties of the electrodes, which guarantees the activity and stability of the biocatalysts and improves the biocatalysts–electrode interactions.30 As a consequence, the investigation and development of new nanostructured materials with different dimensions, morphologies and composites have a high probability of providing feasible strategies to overcome the critical difficulties faced by the current BFC systems, such as slow electron transfer, low power density and short-term stability.
In this review, we focus on the fundamentals and developments of nanostructured electrode materials in BFCs to consolidate the basis for applications in implantable biomedical devices, self-powered sensors and wastewater treatments. Hopefully, this review will encourage further efforts toward investigations of nanomaterials to overcome the obstacles in BFC development, as well as provide guidance on the directions of future research and the prospects of this technology for real-world applications.
2. Fundamentals
As a new type of fuel cell with a high energy conversion efficiency, BFCs can be divided into EBFCs and MFCs, which use isolated redox enzymes and living microorganisms as bio-catalysts for power generation, respectively. The different nature of these bio-catalysts leads to different properties and application fields. On the one hand, EBFCs can produce high levels of power and are well-suited to applications such as sensors using power outputs as analytical signals, or implantable power sources that are fueled by endogenous substances such as glucose in the blood stream. On the other hand, MFCs offer the possibility of harvesting electricity from a diverse range of ‘dirty’ fuels that are considered to have little value, such as organic waste and organic matter in solids and sediments for wastewater treatment. Despite these exciting possibilities, the expansion of these systems is still limited to some extent by their low power density and poor stability. To further improve the practicality of this technology, a great focus on understanding the mechanisms of electron transfer and biological processes in BFC systems is required.
2.1. Enzymatic biofuel cell (EBFC)
The EBFC was first introduced in 1964 by Yahiro and co-workers,31 giving rise to a number of advances in this field, especially in the last decade. EBFC works in a manner similar to that of conventional fuel cells but possesses remarkable advantages over them due to its low cost, renewability, biodegradability, and excellent intrinsic properties such as specificity towards a substrate and high catalytic activity with a low overvoltage for energy conversion from a substrate such as glucose in the body blood. Recently, EBFC has attracted considerable attention because of the possibility of implantation of living batteries into living organisms and electric power generation from the blood sugar in body fluids, which make it a promising power source for cardiac pacemakers, implantable self-powered sensors and medical devices.32–41

2.1.1. Basic principles of EBFC. 
Most of the recent studies on EBFC are based on enzymatic reactions at both bio-electrodes modified with immobilized enzymes,42–44 with fuels such as glucose oxidized at the anode and the oxidant such as dioxygen reduced to water at the cathode (Fig. 1). The attractive feature of EBFC is to exploit the excellent selectivity of enzymes, which implies that no other components are required. In this case, both electrodes can be immersed in one chamber containing the substrate and the oxidant,45–47 in which a membrane is not necessary if there are no crossover reactions between the bioanode and biocathode.48 As such, the membrane-less EBFC would be designed for micro- or even nano-power sources,49,50 and miniature EBFCs have great potential for powering implantable medical devices.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a membrane-less EBFC. 


2.1.2. Electron transfer between enzymes and electrodes. 
EBFCs are capable of employing enzymes to catalyze chemical reactions under mild conditions, and they have become eco-friendly and attractive alternative energy sources for microelectronic devices and biosensors. However, because of the electrical insulation of the enzyme active sites by their surrounding protein shells, the poor electron transfer between enzymes and conductive supports has hindered the applications of EBFC technology. Thus, a significant fundamental understanding of bio-catalytic enzymes is required, and effective enzyme immobilization methods must be developed to improve the activity and stability of the enzymes.
A recent trend in the development of membrane-less EBFC is based on the electro-enzymatic oxidation of fuels and oxygen reduction by different enzymes.51–54 The oxidation of fuel, typically glucose, occurs at the anode with the aid of glucose oxidase (GOx) or glucose dehydrogenase (GDH),55–57 while dioxygen is reduced to water at the cathode by specific enzymes such as laccase or bilirubin oxidase (BOD).58–61 These redox reactions may need redox molecules to shuttle electrons from biocatalytic active sites to the electrode surfaces for mediated electron transfer (MET) or undergo direct electron transfer (DET) between the enzyme active sites and the electrode (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the bioelectrocatalytic process at the enzyme bioelectrodes: (a) MET from redox mediators to a GOx enzyme on the bioanode surface, and (b) DET from a biocathode surface to a laccase enzyme. The important catalytic copper complexes in the laccase are highlighted. 
Since glucose is ubiquitous and abundant in most living organisms, along with the advances in GOx-based bioanode, significant research on EBFCs has focused on the use of glucose as the fuel source.62–64 In GOx, the redox-active cofactor, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), is buried deeply within the protein core, making it extremely difficult for DET to occur at the electrode.65–67 To facilitate the electron transfer, small redox mediators that easily diffuse into and out of the enzyme active sites,68 in particular those with redox potentials close to that of the FAD cofactor, have been explored to electrically connect these enzymes to the electrode surfaces (Fig. 2a). However, this approach has several disadvantages such as high cost, potential toxicity, and limited stability. Because DET in the GOx enzyme depends significantly on the distance between the redox-active cofactor and the electrode surface, several approaches, such as exploring an immobilization strategy for pursuing suitable space orientation of enzymes to substrates, have been developed to promote the electrical communications of redox enzymes with electrodes. In addition, chemically modified electrodes with favourable functional materials, especially nanostructured materials, could display electron-mediating functions and facilitate the DET processes of redox enzymes. As such, more and more researchers have been working on engineering and developing high-performance bioanodes, and significant progresses concerned with GOx-based EBFCs have been achieved. Meanwhile, the elaboration of mediator-less EBFC arouses considerable interest because it can be successfully implanted in biological organisms, such as rats, insects and snails,69–71 allowing for potential applications in sugar-powered portable electronics, blood-powered wireless sensors and practical implantable use.
To date, laccase and BOD have been utilized at the biocathode to perform an efficient oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), mainly relying on the high catalytic capabilities of these two enzymes with coordinated copper (Cu) centers to catalyze the reduction of oxygen to water.72–75 As a multicopper oxidase (MCO), laccase is one of the most impressive and widely used enzymes for cathodic ORR because the redox potential of the active site of laccase (∼0.78 V vs. SHE at neutral pH) is very close to that of the O2/H2O redox couple. The active center of laccase contains four Cu atoms located in three different regions of the protein, which are classified as T1, T2 and T3 (Fig. 2b). The T1-Cu site is a hydrophobic pocket near the surface of the protein and is able to accept electrons from substrates that act as electron donors with the electrode. Then, electrons are further passed to the T2/T3 Cu sites formed by a trinuclear cluster, where oxygen is efficiently reduced to water in a four-electron mechanism.
Aside from laccase, several BOD biocathodes have also been established for ORR catalysis with similar catalytic mechanisms. Unlike the optimal pH of laccase (∼5), BOD operates optimally at pH 7. In addition, the redox potential of laccase T1-Cu is higher than that of BOD, hence, its activity is higher than that of commercial BOD. As a matter of fact, laccase is widely used as the cathode catalyst. Because the T1-Cu site in the enzyme is responsible for the electron transfer between the substrate and enzyme, the DET of laccase at the electrode surface can be governed by the inherent redox potential of the enzyme active sites and suitable enzyme immobilization with nanostructured materials to ensure the electrode materials are sufficiently close to the T1-Cu site.

2.2. Microbial fuel cell (MFC)
As the other principal type of BFC, MFCs are distinct from the better-developed EBFCs in that the electricity is generated through redox enzymes rather than whole cells. In MFCs, the fuel source is generally microbially degradable organic matter, in which case the microbial metabolism must be accelerated at the anode to convert the organic matter to electricity in an effective manner. MFC as a green treatment technology can continuously extract energy from organic waste and convert it into electrical current by means of the catalytic activity of microorganisms.76–78 These organisms, termed ‘electricigens’ or ‘electroactive bacteria’, offer the possibility of efficiently oxidizing organic compounds to carbon dioxide with direct electron transfer to the electrodes in self-sustaining systems with long-term stability.79–81

2.2.1. What is an MFC?. 
An MFC can be regarded as an electrochemical system that involves electrochemical interactions (usually the anodic reaction) with microorganisms to transfer electrons from a biodegradable substrate to a solid electrode.82–85 A typical MFC consists of two electrodes, an anode that accepts electrons from the microbial culture, and a corresponding cathode that transfers electrons to an electron acceptor, typically oxygen for most perceived practical applications (Fig. 3). Usually, the anode and cathode are separated by a proton exchange membrane (PEM) that restricts oxygen diffusion from the cathode chamber to the anode chamber, while allowing protons that are released from organic matter by microbial metabolism to move from the anode to the cathode. The electrons released by microbial colonization of the anode during the metabolic process are transferred to the cathode surface through an external load, leading to the generation of electrical power simultaneously with the removal of organic waste.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of a typical two-chamber MFC. 


2.2.2. Electron transfer between microorganisms and electrodes. 
In recent years, MFCs as an alternative renewable power source have been well explored with the rapid development of nanotechnology, which brings them closer to practical applications. In spite of a bright future, there is still room for MFCs to mature to meet the ever-growing demands for environmental sustainability by simultaneously performing pollutant removal and energy production, mainly because of the low extracellular electron transfer (EET) efficiency between microorganisms and electrodes. To date, several EET mechanisms between microbes and electrodes have been proposed:86–89 (1) MET through artificial or self-secreted mediators as electron shuttles to ferry electrons between the electrode surface and the cell, (2) DET through tight contact between out-membrane proteins and electrode surface, (3) through microbially generated ‘nanowires’ (electrically conductive pili) to connect the membrane-bound cytochromes and electron surface.
2.2.2.1. MET to electrodes. 
The earliest studies on MFC document electricity production with fermentative micro-organisms such as Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas and yeast,90–93 but the current generation is generally minute because these microorganisms are unable to effectively transfer electrons derived from the central metabolism to outside of the cell. To solve this problem, scientists proposed the introduction of electron mediators to facilitate the electron transfer from cells to the electrode surfaces (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of EET mechanisms between microorganisms and electrodes: (a) MET via artificial mediators or microbial secondary metabolites to shuttle electrons. (b) DET via direct contact between outer cell membrane bound cytochromes and the electrode surface, and (c) DET via electronically conducting nanowires to connect the electrode surface. 
Artificial mediators, sometimes referred to as electron shuttles, are typically capable of crossing the cell membrane to accept electrons from electron carriers within the cell, exiting the cell in the reduced form and then transferring electrons to the electrode surfaces. A large number of diffusive small molecules including thionine, neutral red, 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone and various phenazines, phenothiazines and phenoxoazines have been investigated as MFC mediators to enhance the kinetics of anodic reactions and increase the current density.94–100 However, the use of artificial electron shuttles has several drawbacks in the development of practical MFCs. For example, most applications will probably operate in open systems that will require the continual addition of electron shuttles, which will also add expense. More critically, many of the electron shuttles are toxic to humans and could not be responsibly released into the environment.
In some instances, microorganisms may produce low-molecular, electron shuttling compounds through secondary metabolic pathways to carry out the electron transfer process. For example, Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 was found to excrete a quinone-like molecule to promote EET.101–103 Other microorganisms, such as P. aeruginosa, have been proven to produce phenazine electron shuttles that can aid in electron transfer to the electrode,104–106 while the production of quinone-like compounds from E. coli cells could be induced by a different growing environment in the MFC.107 The production of a small amount of these compounds (directly in the anodic biofilm) enables the organism to dispose of electrons at sufficiently high rates, especially in batch cultures, which can effectively facilitate the electron transfer.
2.2.2.2. DET to electrodes. 
The DET in MFC is found in metal-reducing bacteria catalysed anodes, which takes place via direct physical contact of the outer-membrane proteins with the electrode (Fig. 4b) and no diffusive electron mediators are involved in the electron transfer from the cell to the electrode.108–110 Two kinds of metal-reducing bacteria strains, Geobacter sulfurreducens and S. putrefaciens MR-1, are widely used in mediator-less MFCs, and they possess membrane-bound redox proteins to transfer electrons from the inside of the bacterial cell to the solid terminal electron acceptor (a metal oxide or an MFC anode).111–115 It is well known that c-type cytochromes contain heme groups, which have a highly-conjugated porphyrin surrounding a metal ion, as the active centre for redox reactions, and they have been demonstrated to be important in the DET process between the metal-reducing bacteria cells and the electrode.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that the pili of some Geobacter and Shewanella strains were highly conductive116–118 and could serve as biological nanowires involved in electron transfer to the electrode for cells that are not in direct contact with the anode surface (Fig. 4c). Later on, Richter studied the electrochemical activity of the G. sulfurreducens biofilm by means of cyclic voltammetry (CV), and their results indicated a conductive network of bound electron transfer mediators for transferring electrons across the biofilm–electrode interface.119 Moreover, they found that type IV pili were important in this electron transfer process. Interestingly, the pili were often intertwined and connected to the membrane-bound cytochromes, raising the possibility of cell-to-cell electron transfer. Thus, the formation of such nanowires was essential for the development of thicker electroactive biofilms and higher anode performances.

3. Nanostructured materials for BFCs
In recent years, one main challenge for the development of BFCs is the low charge transfer efficiency between the biocatalysts and electrodes. Thus, how to improve the electron transport processes is an extremely important issue in BFC design. In BFCs, the structure and composition of the electrodes strongly influences the electron transfer as follows: (1) the direct electron transfers between biocatalysts and electrodes; (2) the diffusion of the mediator in the electrodes; and (3) the activity of the biocatalysts that regulate and control the production of electrons from the substrate. Modification of the substrate electrodes with nanomaterials or direct utilization of nanostructured materials as electrodes provides a sustainable and efficient solution to solve the aforementioned problem since the unique property of nanostructured materials can supply an affinitive connection with biocatalysts (physical absorption or chemical integration). This guarantees the direct electron transfer from the biocatalysts to the electrodes. Furthermore, nanostructured materials possess larger surfaces to accept electrons from the redox mediators or provide porous structures for the fast diffusion of mediators in the electrodes. In addition, the materials can offer an adequate microenvironment that can preserve the stability of the biocatalysts and extend their activity or lifetime, ensuring the sustainable decomposition of the substrate for electron production. Thus, progress has been made in BFCs using various nanostructured materials, such as carbon-based materials, conducting polymers and metal/metal oxides. Certainly, nanostructured materials also possess an important function of improving the biocatalyst density on the electrodes. Comprehensive reviews giving insight into the effect of the nanostructured materials on the biocatalysts-hosting capability of the electrode are available.4,120–126 Therefore, in this part, we will summarize the newly developed materials for BFC electrodes and focus on the latest examples based on the nanostructured materials for facilitating electron transfer in BFC systems.
3.1. Carbon-based nanomaterials
The nanostructured materials for electrodes in BFCs are specialized; they usually possess the ability to extract the electrons from biocatalysts and to protect the biocatalysts from being deactivated. In this regard, carbon nanomaterials have attracted a great deal of interest in the field of BFCs due to their good electrical conductivity and biocompatibility. Besides, their excellent mechanical performance and predominant chemical stability also play an important role in the long-term operation of BFCs. With the advanced nanotechnologies and methodologies, carbon materials that possess various nanostructures, such as nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanowires, nanofibers and nanosheets, have been widely fabricated and used as electrode materials in BFCs. The different nanostructures of carbon materials can lead to the distinction in the charge diffusion lengths and the immobilization structures of biocatalysts, thereby changing the efficiency of the electron transfer. For example, nanotubes/nanofibers can directly connect the enzyme active center and let the produced electron transport to the electrode along the tubular network. In the case of nanosheets, the electrons are injected into multiple domains of the nanosheets, thereby enhancing the electron transport.127 Therefore, to deeply explore the function of carbon materials in the electron transfer in BFCs, three typical carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions and their derivatives are presented.

3.1.1. CNTs. 
CNTs are a kind of cylindrically shaped nanomaterial with large specific surface areas (usually a few hundreds to 1300 m2 g−1), high mechanical strength and excellent conductivity, and they have been used in many bioelectrochemical applications and have become one of the most promising electrode materials. CNTs as a catalyst support in BFCs have attracted attention, showing excellent properties to significantly enhance electron transfer at the electrode interfaces.
3.1.1.1. CNTs for EBFC. 
Among the newly developed nanomaterials, CNTs are considered as a privileged electrode material in EBFCs, not only for their intrinsic conductivity and large specific surface, but also for their ability to act as conducting nanowires to bridge the active sites of the enzyme and the electrode surface as CNTs can approach the redox centers and the prosthetic sites of immobilized enzymes. As a consequence, CNTs have been widely used to modify different kinds of substrate electrodes in the field of EBFCs. For instance, Mao et al.57 presented work on the fabrication of a one-compartment glucose/O2 EBFC with a CNT-based bioelectrode. The CNTs served as a support to facilitate the DET of the reduction of O2 in the cathode. However, the power output is only 9.5 μW cm−2. For this bioelectrode, the laccase enzymes were simply coated onto the surface of the CNTs, creating a relative long distance between the cathodic catalyst (laccase) and the CNTs, thereby attenuating the direct electron transfer to some extent. Thereafter, research on CNT-based EBFCs has begun to flourish in further improving the electron transfer by regulating the gap between the nanotube and active sites of the enzyme.
To achieve this target, a smart way is to attach the enzyme molecules in a rational orientation. Unlike the laccase enzymes with full hydrophobic binding pockets, BOD enzymes have predominantly hydrophilic ones. Considering the great compatibility between deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and the BOD enzyme, Salimi and co-workers developed a new strategy to immobilize BOD in a glucose/O2 biofuel cell by coupling DNA and CNTs as the supporting materials (Fig. 5).128 In this system, the DNA endowed the CNT-based electrode with a negative surface charge, which could control the orientation of the BOD enzyme due to hydrophilic properties around the electron acceptor unit (Type I Cu) of the BOD enzyme. The resulting electrode showed excellent electro-catalytic activity for oxygen reduction with an onset potential of 0.57 V and current density of 277 μA cm−2, which made it applicable as a biocathode for EBFC design.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of DNA adsorption on GC/MWCNT modified electrode, and (b) directing immobilization of BOD enzyme molecules onto the GC/MWCNTs/DNA electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 
Another general approach to achieve a close proximity between CNT-based electrodes and enzymes is to use mechanical compression. Cosnier and co-workers129 created the bioelectrode of a mediator-less glucose biofuel cell (GBFC) by compressing the mixture of enzymes and multi-walled CNTs with a hydraulic press. In this case, the enzymes (GOx and laccase) were entrapped into the CNT matrix, and their surrounding CNTs allowed for direct electrical wiring of the redox sites of the enzymes, leading to an improved DET (Fig. 6a). As a result, the fabricated GBFC delivered a high power density up to 1.3 mW cm−2 and an open circuit voltage (OCV) of 0.95 V, which represented an increase of two to three orders of magnitude in terms of power density compared to similar configurations. Subsequently, the same group added a mediator (naphthoquinone) to the as-mentioned CNTs/GOx bioanode by mechanical compression.130 With the combination of DET and MET for the electrical wiring of GOx, the established GBFC displayed an improved power output (1.54 mW cm−2). However, the instability of the used mediator directly affected the EBFC performance. Therefore, the long-term stability of this GBFC still needed to be evaluated for the future supply of long-term implants.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of a cross-section of the CNT/GOx bioanode (scale bare, 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of the enzyme entrapment inside a free-standing film of CNTF by liquid-induced shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the liquid-induced shrinkage is also an effective pathway to diminish the distance between the CNT-based electrode and enzyme. Nishizawa et al. fabricated a free-standing film of a carbon nanotube forest (CNTF) to in situ regulate the enzyme-modified electrode.131 Owing to the surface tension of the liquids, the CNTF films, after soaking in a solution of the enzymes, could dynamically shrink according to the amount and size of the enzymes during the drying process, thereby entrapping the enzyme molecules (Fig. 6b). In this prepared CNTF/enzyme bioelectrode, the enzymes were likely to intimately connect with nanotubes to form a sandwich-like construction, leading to a high-efficiency DET. As a result, the EBFC displayed a high power output at the mW cm−2 level for more than one day.
In addition to the high-efficiency DET, fast mass transport and large surface also play important roles in deigning high-performance EBFC. To be an ideal combination for achieving large surfaces as well as fast mass transport, the CNT-based electrode has been engineered to possess a 3D porous structure. Gao et al.132 designed an engineered porous microwire comprised of assembled and oriented CNTs for EBFC. Aside from a large surface area for the immobilization of enzymes and accepting electrons from enzymes, this CNT microwire possessed a porous structure that could improve the mass transport of the reactants and products in the biosystem (Fig. 7). Thus, this electrode exhibited more than ten-fold higher performances than conventional carbon fibres. Additionally, many other 3D porous CNT-based bioelectrodes fabricated through a layer-by-layer assembly technique have also been used to successfully improve the performance of EBFC.120,133,134
 Fig. 7  SEM images of a carbon fibre (a) and a CNT fibre (b). Schematic of the oxygen reduction on the modified carbon fibre (c) and on the modified CNT fibre (d) (the green shade represents the redox polymer and the blue colour the enzymes). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.1.1.2. CNTs for MFC. 
Normally, the exoelectrogen naturally grows onto the anode of MFCs for current generation. Thus, the electron-accept ability of the anode highly influences the electron transfer efficiency and MFC performance. As an excellent electrical conductive material that can improve the direct contact between bacterial protein redox centers and electrodes, CNTs have been studied as anode-modifying materials to increase the conductivity and the power output.135–137 In these studies, exoelectrogens were inoculated into the anode chamber to form a biofilm, which covered the CNTs. In the biofilm, the electrons produced by the exoelectrogenic bacteria near the CNTs could be quickly transferred to the anode in the manner of DET. However, for the bacteria that had a distance to the CNTs, their produced electrons were hard to transfer via DET because of the poor conductivity of the biofilm. Therefore, the concept of constructing a conductive biofilm has been proposed. By taking advantage of the CNTs’ good conductivity and high specific surface area, Liang et al.138 presented a method of simultaneously adding CNT powders and G. sulfurreducens into the anode chamber of an MFC to form a composite biofilm. In this composite biofilm, the electron propagation could go along the highly conductive CNTs instead of traditional electron transfer between adjacent bacteria, thereby promoting the electro-chemical activity of the biofilm and the electricity generation performance. Despite their promising properties, conventional CNTs should be further improved with an N-dopant. Because N-doping can break the chemical inertness of pure CNTs and create rich hydrophilic (N) defects, which are beneficial for facilitating electron transfer to/from the redox proteins on the outer membranes of the bacterial cells.139–141 For instance, He et al.142 demonstrated a facile method to prepare N-doped CNTs with a bamboo-like nanostructure (Bamboo-NCNTs) (Fig. 8a) and used them as anode-modifying materials. The Bamboo-NCNTs significantly improved the performance of an MFC in current production and power output compared with CNT-modified and unmodified carbon cloth anodes, which could be ascribed to the synergetic effect of its unique structure, higher surface area, and N-doping to provide more active sites for the interface electrochemical reaction.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Bamboo-NCNTs nanostructures, inset is high-magnification. (b) SEM images of the microbial growth on the CNT–textile anode, cross section illustrating internal colonization. (c) SEM image of the bacterial biofilm attached on the CNT/CHI modified carbon paper cathode. (d) TEM analyses of NCNTs showing vertically aligned and bamboo-like structures (inset). (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 150 and 153. Copyrights 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing. 
Besides high conductivity and catalytic activity, increasing the anode surface area with a porous structure is also an efficient way to improve the MFC performance because it enhances the mass transport and the electron transfer area as well as the bacterial attachment.143–145 In this regard, Xie et al.146 fabricated a CNT–textile composite by conformally coating CNTs on a macroscale porous textile made of randomly intertwined polyester fibres, resulting in a two-scale porous structure, namely, a micro-scale porous CNT layer coated onto a macro-scale porous textile. The macro-scale porous structure of the intertwined CNT–textile created an open three-dimensional (3D) space for efficient nutrient supply, electro-oxidation by-product removal and internal colonization. The micro-scale porous CNT layer displayed a strong interaction with the microbial biofilm to facilitate electron transfer from the redox proteins on the outer membrane of bacteria to the CNT–textile anode and provided an extended surface area to collect electrons from a self-secreted shuttle (Fig. 8b). Compared with a widely used carbon cloth anode, the CNT–textile anode achieved a considerably better performance: the maximum current density was 157% higher (7.2 vs. 2.8 A m−2), the maximum power density was 68% higher (1098 vs. 655 mW m−2), and the energy recovery was 141% greater from the same mass of added glucose.
Because of the inherent excellent mechanical and electronic properties, CNTs also present opportunities for the MFC cathode to enhance the cathodic ORR, thus contributing to more efficient and sustainable MFC.147–149 Chemical doping CNTs with nitrogen heteroatoms can change the natural structure of the functional oxygen groups in the nanotubes, which creates metal-free active sites for the high electrocatalytic activity of NCNTs towards oxygen reduction. In this case, Wang et al.150 investigated the use of bamboo-shaped and vertically aligned N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) as a metal-free cathodic catalyst for oxygen reduction in MFC (Fig. 8c). The maximum power density of the resulting NCNTs–MFC was ∼1600 mW m−2, which was higher than the commonly used Pt catalyst (Pt/C) (∼1393 mW m−2), indicating that the MFC with NCNTs as the cathodic catalyst could generate electricity more efficiently than that with Pt/C. In contrast to EBFCs that commonly utilize enzymes for cathodic ORR, MFCs usually use chemical catalysts for ORR at the cathode. However, several reports have shown that bacteria are promising to act as biocatalysts for cathodic ORR.151,152 To further facilitate the microbially catalysed ORR, a new type of MFC biocathode material was fabricated by electrodepositing CNTs and chitosan (CHI) onto a carbon paper electrode.153 Owing to their size effect, CNTs could display good communication with the active center of the redox proteins on the surface of the bacteria and facilitate the electron transfer. Furthermore, such a CNT/CHI cathode provided favourable conditions for biofilm formation (Fig. 8d). As a result, the CNT/CHI biocathode possessed a 130% increase in power density compared to the carbon paper biocathode. In view of the high cost and limited reserves of the Pt catalysts for ORR at the cathode of the MFC, the exploration of cost-effective and durable catalysts for efficient oxygen reduction represents an important research field.


3.1.2. Graphene. 
As a two-dimensional sheet formed with sp2 hybridized carbon atoms, graphene has unique properties such as outstanding electrical conductivity, extremely high specific surface area (up to ∼2600 m2 g) and mechanical robustness,154–157 which make it an attractive electrode material for electro-chemical devices, especially providing new opportunities for BFCs. In general, graphene is prepared by the reduction of graphene oxide, which is defined as reduced GO (rGO). In comparison with pristine graphene, rGO is more hydrophilic due to the existence of the incompletely reduced oxygen-contained functional groups.158 Such improved hydrophilicity would be beneficial for biocatalysts immobilization. Furthermore, rGO offers plenty of space for chemical functionalization, which would improve the interaction between rGO and biocatalysts. The improved hydrophilicity and interaction would play an important role in the direct electron transfer. On another level, owing to their unique structure and physical properties, graphene with various novel porous architectures can be easily fabricated, which can promote the mass transport of mediators and provide extended electrochemical-active surfaces for collecting electrons. Thus, graphene-based materials have been extensively studied as electrode materials to improve the electron transfer efficiency between biocatalysts and electrode surfaces.
3.1.2.1. Graphene for EBFC. 
Li et al.159 were the first to report a biofuel cell that used graphene sheets/enzyme composite electrodes and demonstrated that it was feasible to improve electron transfer and electricity generation using graphene. Compared to another SWCNT based biofuel cell constructed in this study, the graphene based biofuel cell possessed a higher power density. Since then, the application of graphene and its derivatives in EBFC has rapidly increased. For instance, nanoscale graphene platelets have been successfully used as electrode materials to immobilize the anode catalyst GOD and the cathode catalyst laccase. As the nanoscale graphene platelet in the sensing interface could be effective for the acceleration of electron transfer, the constructed EBFC displayed a maximum power density of 57.8 μW cm−2.160 Because of the lack of information on the graphene electrode in this report, we cannot make a direct comparison in terms of the electron transfer efficiency.
Compared to graphene, nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) exhibits much better electro-catalytic activity because of its special structure and extraordinarily unique physical and chemical properties.161–166 Motivated by the capacity in enhancing electron transfer, our group fabricated an NG/gold nanoparticles/formate dehydrogenase (NG/AuNPs/FDH) bioanode in a membrane-less formic acid/O2 EBFC and demonstrated that the NG was effective in decreasing the NADH oxidation overpotential due to the excellent electron accepting ability of the nitrogen atoms on the surface of the NG. Thus, the recycling process of the NAD+/NADH cofactor was promoted, indicating an enhanced electron transfer between NG/AuNPs and FDH.167 The maximum power density and the OCV of the as-prepared EBFC were up to ∼1960 μW cm−2 and ∼0.95 V, respectively. Two cascaded EBFC systems could light up red light-emitting diodes (LEDs, Fig. 9a). The obvious improvement in the electron transfer efficiency by doping nitrogen has propelled us to use other nitrogen-containing carbon nanomaterials, such as carbon nitride nanosheets (g-C3N4 NSs). A new carbon composite, CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs/Au NPs ternary hybrid, was synthesized and used as a substrate electrode for EBFC (Fig. 9b and c).168 In this system, the pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent glucose dehydrogenase (PQQ–GDH) was utilized for the catalytic oxidation of glucose, and BOD was selected for the reduction of oxygen in a membrane-less and mediator-less glucose/O2 EBFC. The g-C3N4 NSs possessed a high content of electron-rich pyridinic N and tertiary N species, which provided a high electronic state density and sufficient free electrons for facilitating electron transfer and electrocatalysis of the enzyme. Furthermore, the incorporated CNTs served as three dimensional electric networks, which also substantially facilitated the electron transfer. As a result, the fabricated CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs/Au NPs ternary hybrid electrode displayed a maximum power density of ∼249 μW cm−2, which was 3.3 times greater than that of the CNTs/Au NPs binary hybrid electrode and 2.3 times higher than the same enzyme-based EBFC.169
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a membrane-less formic acid/O2 EBFC using NG/Au NPs hybrids as substrate electrodes. (b) TEM image of CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs, (c) TEM image of CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs/Au NPs ternary hybrid nanostructures; FESEM images of (d) bare 3D graphene and (e) 3D graphene–SWCNT hybrid. Each inset shows the surface of the skeleton at a large magnification. (a), (b) and (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 167 and 168. Copyrights 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) and (e) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 175 Publishing. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
As an advanced material that could provide large specific areas, an interconnected conductive network and fast mass transport to allow for efficient electron transport, 3D graphene has been used as an electrode to fabricate many high-performance devices, such as lithium ion battery, supercapacitor, solar cell and chemical fuel cells.170–173 The dramatic developments of these devices caused by 3D graphene have guided researchers towards the application of 3D graphene in EBFCs. Xie et al.174 utilized 3D graphene networks (GNs) as a substrate for the immobilization of laccase in a glucose/O2 EBFC. To shorten the distance of the electron transfer, 3D graphene was non-covalently functionalized with a mediator (dopamine) using 3,4,9,10-perylenee tetracarboxylic acid (PTCA) as a bridge. Due to the enhanced MET for bioelectrocatalytic reduction of oxygen, the resulting EBFC had a power density of 112 μW cm−2. In another study, an EBFC system equipped with a 3D graphene–CNT–GOx bioanode and a 3D graphene–CNT–laccase biocathode was developed (Fig. 9d and e).175 In this system, the CNTs assisted in anchoring the enzymes for accelerating the DET, while the 3D graphene provided a large surface area for accepting electrons from the mediator. Thus, the EBFC achieved a high-performance with a 2.27 ± 0.11 mW cm−2 power output.
3.1.2.2. Graphene for MFC. 
The modification of the electrode materials with graphene has been shown to greatly improve the MFC performance due to their excellent conductivity as well as large surface area for bacterial colonization and electron collection.176–179 Thereafter, graphene has been functionalized to improve the surface properties for better connection with bacterial cells. In a typical study, positively-charged ionic liquid functionalized graphene nanosheets (IL–GNS) were used as bioanode modifiers in MFCs. Since the ionic liquid had positive charges, and the bacteria carried negative charges on their outer membranes, the electrostatic attraction was excepted to improve the bacteria–electrode interactions and the rate of direct electron transfer.180 The SEM image (Fig. 10a) clearly indicated that the bacterial cells intimately contacted the entire anode surface. Meanwhile, the positively-charged IL–GNS played an important role in increasing bacterial adhesion on the anode surface. Taken together, an almost 3.5-fold increase in the anodic current was obtained compared to that of the GNS-modified carbon paper anode (2.8 vs. 0.8 A m−2).
 Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) bacterial cells adhered onto the IL–GNS modified carbon paper electrode. (b) The 3D rGO/Shewanella hybrid biofilm. (c) The mechanism of EET (d) SEM image of nitrogen-enriched graphitic carbon scaffold (NGC scaffold) and their optical photographs in the insets. (a) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 180. Copyrights 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing. (b) and (c) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 181. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons. (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons. 
To further enhance the electron transfer efficiency, an rGO/bacteria hybrid biofilm was constructed by self-assembly of bacterial cells and GO nanosheets to form a 3D macroporous network.181 In this biofilm, the bacterial cells were previously captured by the GO nanosheets, thus the bacterial cells could be encapsulated within the graphene layers during the self-assembly process, rending an improved biofilm–graphene interaction (Fig. 10b). The interconnected rGO network offered multiplexed conductive pathways for direct contact-based EET (Fig. 10c). As a consequence, the hybrid biofilm exhibited an extraordinarily high electro-chemical activity with a 25-fold increase in the outward current and 74-fold increase in the inward current, outperforming naturally occurring biofilms.
The 3D macroporous structures not only allow internal colonization, but also guarantee unhindered substrate and mediator transport, ensuring the high viability of cells in the biofilm and the enhanced MET. In view of this, the application of graphene in the MFC anode enters into a new era. 3D graphene in various macroporous structures has been fabricated for obtaining high-performance MFCs.182–184 Wang et al. coated nickel foam with rGO,185 while Xie et al. coated polyurethane sponges with graphene.186 He et al. fabricated a 3D chitosan/vacuum-stripped graphene (CHI/VSG) scaffold with a hierarchically porous structure using ice segregation induced self-assembly.187 Yang et al. constructed rGO–agarose foam on stainless steel mesh.188 All of these anodes possessed high performance. The doping of nitrogen atoms on the graphene layers would facilitate the electrical conductivity due to the induced structural disorder. In addition, the nitrogen-containing functional groups formed on the graphene layers could make graphene positively charged, which could enhance the bacteria–graphene interaction due to the electrostatic attraction. Therefore, 3D nitrogen-doped graphene has emerged in MFCs to further improve the electron transfer and performance.189,190 To further improve the nitrogen content, a 3D macroporous nitrogen-enriched graphitic carbon (NGC) was fabricated by in situ carbonization of melamine foam (Fig. 10d). As the graphitic nitrogen and pyrrolic nitrogen could more easily take electrons from the c-type cytochromes, the high content of nitrogen involved in NGC should be effective for enhancing EET. Benefiting from the enhanced EET and its unique 3D macroporous open-cell structure, the electrode generated a power density of 750 mW cm−2.191


3.1.3. Other carbon materials for BFC. 
As a zero-dimensional carbon material, carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) have the advantages of high conductivity, good biocompatibility, ease of functionalization and high surface-to-volume ratio. More importantly, they possess redox features of C60 that allow their function as redox mediators for regulating the electron transfer between biocatalysts and electrodes.192 Thus, carbon nanoparticles and their derivatives have also been used as electrode materials in the BFCs development. Willner et al.193 designed an EBFC system based on enzyme-capped mesoporous carbon nanoparticle electrodes. In the fabrication of the electrodes, redox mediators were previously loaded into the pores of the CNPs before capping these pores with the corresponding redox enzymes, such as GOx and BOD. The entrapment of mediators in the enzyme-capped pores favoured a close proximity between the mediators and capped enzymes, thereby reducing the diffusion distance of the mediators and enhancing the MET between the electrodes and capped enzymes. By integration of the Fc-MeOH/GOx CNP bioanode and the ABTS2−/BOD CNP biocathode, the resulting EBFC revealed a power output of ∼95 μW cm−2. Besides, carbon nanoparticles were shown to facilitate DET of GOx and BOD.194 In this report, carbon nanodots (CNDs) were used as an electrode material to fabricate EBFC. The discrete and quasi-spherical structures endowed CNDs with the ability to function as electron relays for the acceleration of DET. Thus, a mediator-free glucose/air EBFC with an OCV as high as 0.93 V and a maximum power density of 40.8 μW cm−2 at 0.41 V was obtained.
In MFCs, N-doped carbon nanoparticles have been reported to modify the electrode to improve the electron transfer.195 Owing to the nitrogen doping, the π–π interaction between the N-doped carbon nanoparticles and flavins was enhanced, which increased the anodic absorption of flavins and facilitated the MET between the biofilm and anode. Meanwhile, the NDCN was also able to enhance the contact-based DET because the presence of the C–N bond in the structure could improve their electrochemical property. Taken together, the N-doped carbon nanoparticle electrode delivered a higher maximum power density than that of the carbon nanoparticle electrode (298.0 vs. 218.9 mW m−2).
Until now, the research on the BFCs based on CNPs has been relatively limited. In our view, the potential of CNPs in BFCs is still far from being fully exploited. Considering their nanoscale size, the CNPs may insert into biocatalysts and contact the active center. Taking advantage of this unique property, CNP-based BFCs with higher performance could be obtained.

3.2. Conducting polymers
Conducting polymers are considered to be promising candidates as active materials for BFC technology owing to their great advantages including high energy density, electro-chemical stability and environmental friendliness.196–199 With the merit of large specific surface areas, high conductivity and great flexibility, nanostructured polymers have attracted extensive attention in BFCs at both the fundamental and application levels.

3.2.1. Polymers for EBFC. 
Conducting polymers including polyaniline (PAIN), polypyrrole (PPy), poly(ethylenimine) (PEI), or their composites with other materials are ideal materials for fabricating EBFC because they can offer a large surface area as well as a high electron conductive property to enhance the loading and stability of enzymes.200,201
PANI, as the most investigated conducting polymer candidate, plays a key role in creating an electrical bridge between the enzyme and the substrate electrode. PAIN/CNT composites have been reported for use as the modified electrode to achieve the DET of PQQ–GDH and GOx.202,203 These studies suggested that the intensive positive chargeability of PANI was favourable for the high-efficiency electron shuttle between the enzyme and the substrate electrode. PEI, a positively charged conducting polymer, was also reported for entrapping the GOx in EBFC through an attractive force since GOx was negatively charged in neutral conditions. Unlike PANI, PEI had abundant free amino groups, and it could form more covalent bonds with the amino groups of GOx.204 Generally, a cross linker, such as terephthalaldehyde (TPA), glutaraldehyde (GA), was adopted on the nanocomposites structure, which would create π conjugated bonds in GOx–PEI and GOx–GOx molecules to promote electron transfer as a pathway.205,206 In addition, the nanostructure of the conducting polymer also had a great influence on the electron transport in the EBFC. For example, the bioenzyme and electron mediator were entrapped in PPy nanowires or PPy film to fabricate the EBFC, and the PPy nanowires-based EBFC exhibited a higher power density than the PPy film-based EBFC by two orders of magnitude.207 The increased performance of the PPy nanowires-based EBFC was mainly attributed to the fact that the shuttle of nanowires to the enzyme active sites facilitated electron transport along the PPy nanowires. Furthermore, the electron mediator functionalized conducting polymers were demonstrated to further increase the electron transfer efficiency in EBFCs.208,209 In these studies, besides preserving the high efficiency of the DET, the MET processes between the electrodes and enzyme were also promoted through the covalently attached mediators.


3.2.2. Polymers for MFC. 
Among various nanostructured materials, conductive polymers have also been explored as MFC anode materials210–214 because of their simple synthesis process, environmental stability, high power density and low-cost potential. For example, Schroder et al.215 developed an efficient way to ’wire’ the microbial activity to an anode by using a PANI-modified, catalytically active anode to shuttle electrons from the bacterial suspension. Owing to the importance of the polymer layer for an efficient and sustained electrode activity, the MFC continuously generated a current output more than one order of magnitude larger than the known MFC (1.5 mA cm−2vs. 20 μA cm−2).
To fully exploit the advantage of conducting polymers, a 3D graphene/PANI anode, composed of monolithic graphene foam decorated with the conductive polymer PANI, was explored for use in MFCs.216 Because positively-charged PANI could electro-statically interact with the negatively-charged bacterial membrane, while the macro-porous structure of this 3D electrode allowed sufficient substrate exchange to support the internal bacterial biofilm growth, the graphene/PANI MFC achieved a maximum power density of ∼768 mW m−2, which was about 4 times higher than the carbon cloth MFC (∼158 mW m−2). Subsequently, we fabricated a novel MFC anode by electro-depositing PANI networks onto graphene nanoribbons (GNRs)-coated carbon paper (CP/GNRs/PANI) to increase the attachment of the bacterial cells.217 The CP/GNRs/PANI anode showed obvious characteristic redox peaks at −0.248 and −0.062 V, which were believed to originate from the outer membrane proteins of Shewanella, confirming the enhanced electrochemical interactions between the bacterial biofilm and the electrode. As a result, a one order of magnitude increase in the anodic current density (5.8 vs. 0.52 A m−2) and a 6.2-fold increase in the power density (856 vs. 152 mW m−2) were obtained with the use of the CP/GNRs/PANI anode compared to the commonly used carbon paper (CP) anode. During the polymerization of PANI, the structure of the anions in the dopants is indispensable in compensating the conducting polymer charges, thereby affecting the conductivity and stability of PANI. The conductivity of PANI doped with organic anions is better than that of PANI doped with inorganic anions due to a better superposition of the molecular orbitals with the π atomic orbitals of the polymeric chain. Inspired by this, our groups recently fabricated a porous and phytic-acid-doped PANI gel as the MFC anode (Fig. 11a).218 The presented EIS analysis revealed that the charge-transfer resistance of the phytic-acid-doped PANI electrode (27 Ω) was much smaller than the HCl-doped PANI electrode (90 Ω). As a result, the phytic-acid-doped PANI anode displayed an obvious increment in the power density compared to HCl-doped PANI (693 vs. 406 mW m−2). More impressively, the phytic-acid-doped PANI electrode was constructed by an inkjet printing technique (Fig. 11b), offering this MFC anode an easy, scale-controllable and high-throughput fabrication process. Therefore, this high-performance anode would find its place in the future practical application of MFCs. Aside from improving the conductivity of the conducting polymers, designing their structure in a reasonable manner is another pathway to obtain high-performance MFC. Wang et al. reported a nanosucker array that was fabricated by vertically growing conductive PPy nanotubular structures on carbon textiles for MFC anodes.219 After the open side of this distinctive nanosucker was proofed by active bacterial cells during the operation of the MFC, the oxygen that existed in the inner space of the nanosucker could be quickly depleted by the metabolism of the bacteria, leading to the formation of a nanovacuum (Fig. 11c). In this case, a suction process occurred between the PPy nanosucker array and the bacterium, which improved the affinitive mechanical contact. Such an increase in the affinitive contact could decrease the interface resistance between the PPy nanosucker array and biofilm, thereby facilitating the electron transfer (Fig. 11d). As estimated by polarization curves, the MFC with the PPy nanosucker array displayed a maximum power density of 728 mW m−2, which was 58.3% higher than that with a bare carbon textile. By exploring the appropriate size of the sucker in this PPy nanotube array, the performance of the MFC may be further improved.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of the inkjet-printed PANI/CP. (b) Image of the inkjet-printed PANI on CP. (c) SEM image of the PPy nano-SA with tubular openings on the top section of the nanotubes. Inset: High-magnification SEM of the hollow structure for an individual nanosucker. (d) A schematic that illustrates how the sucking effect occurs on the interface of nano-SA–anode/microbes of the MFC. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyrights 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 219. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons. 

3.3. Metal and metal oxides
In the last decade, metal or metal oxides have received significant attention due to their various advantages such as abundance, low cost and structural stability. Therefore, metal or metal oxides have been widely applied in many fields including sensors, solar cells and energy-related devices.220–225

3.3.1. Metal nanoparticles for EBFC. 
Besides their enhanced surface area and high catalytic activity, metal nanoparticles are similar in size to some enzymes, thus decreasing the electron transfer distance of the bioelectrodes.226 Among the reported metal nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were the commonly used candidates for bioelectrode fabrication since they could act as electron relays or “electrical nanoplugs” for the enzyme alignment on the conductive support and the electrical wiring of the enzyme active center.227–232 In some cases, AuNPs were decorated on the surface of other nanomaterials such as CNTs, graphene, or conducting polymers, and acted as the anchor to immobilize the enzyme through a condensation reaction between the terminal amino groups of the enzyme and carboxyl groups on the AuNPs.168,233,234 Thus, the distance between the enzyme and the substrate materials was diminished to promote electron transport. Other metal nanoparticles, for example, Pt and Pt0.75Sn0.25 nanoparticles, were also used for the fabrication of EBFC.235 In this study, the dendrimer-encapsulated Pt or Pt0.75Sn0.25 nanoparticles also played the role of anchoring the enzyme, thereby improving the immobilization of the enzyme on the electrodes and promoting the electron transfer.


3.3.2. Metal oxide for MFC. 
The inefficient long-distance electron transfer through outer-membrane proteins to the electrode is one of the key limiting factors in the process of current production. Nanoscale materials such as metals/metal oxides have been reported as a unique approach to facilitate the electron transfer at biological interfaces due to their comparable dimensions to biomolecules and electronic properties.236–238 To enhance the outer membrane c-type cytochrome (OM c-Cyts) wire efficiency, the Fe3O4/Au nanocomposites (NCs) were used in the MFC to provide a favourable bio-compatible environment for the proteinaceous electron transfer components necessary for EET.239 The Fe3O4/Au NCs possessed high conductivity and good biocompatibility, which could accelerate the electron communication of the redox-active OM c-Cyts wire on the electrode surfaces. Later, a 3D G/MWCNTs/Fe3O4 foam was also applied as an anode for MFC to improve electron transport at the cell/electrode interface through OM c-Cyts mediated EET from bacterial cells to the electrode surface.240 Since the OM c-Cyts wires play an important role in the electron transfer process, the incorporation of biocompatible nanomaterials into bacterial biofilms to accelerate bacteria–electrode electron transport represents a unique and promising direction in MFC research.

4. Applications
As one sustainable and green power source, the BFC technology has shown a wide range of promising applications, including self-powered sensors and wastewater treatment due to its attractive properties such as the ability to operate under mild conditions.
4.1. EBFC-based self-powered biosensors
Regarding practical application, the development of EBFC not only aims to improve power output and long-term stability, but also to explore feasibilities in new practical areas, such as self-powered biosensors. Compared with traditional biosensors, the EBFCs-based self-powered biosensors have some unique advantages: (1) since there is no need for external power sources, the devices are simply constructed with only two electrodes (bioanode and biocathode). (2) Because no power sources are applied, the redox references can be efficiently estimated, endowing them with a high anti-reference ability. Therefore, EBFC-based self-powered biosensors have potential in many applications including the determination of biomolecules, toxic pollutants, immunoassays and tumour detection.241–245
It was worthy to note that our group proposed an EBFC-based self-powered cytosensor,246 which has been demonstrated to be a powerful tool for the detection of tumor cells, for the first time. Due to the dramatic steric hindrance of the cancer cells and the electrostatic repulsion between the negatively-charged acute leukemia CCRF-CEM cells and the electron acceptor ([Fe(CN)6]3−), the electron transfer between the probe and the bio-cathode surface was blocked, leading to a remarkable decrease in the power output of the EBFC and sensitive detection of the cells. In the following study,247 we designed an exogenous redox-free, EBFC-based, self-powered, cytosensing platform for point-of-care cancer diagnosis. In our system, BOD was used to catalyze oxygen reduction at the biocathode, and PQQ–GDH was used for the catalytic oxidation of glucose at the bioanode. A membrane-less EBFC self-powered cytosensor was then set up to detect the cancer cells (Fig. 12). It is apparent that no external power sources or exogenous reagents are required in this setup, and the proposed cytosensor is compatible to real-time and in vivo bioassays. This effective strategy for cytosensing based on an EBFC device holds great promise as a powerful point-of-care tool for early diagnosis of cancer in vivo.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the fabrication of self-powered cytosensor based on EBFC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing. 
4.2. MFC for environmental treatment
There is substantial energy in organic matter that is currently wasted or lost in treatment processes, and capturing part of this energy would provide a new source of electrical power. Thus, MFCs that use microorganisms to catalyse different electrochemical reactions are a promising approach for capturing the energy in waste biomass for diverse purposes such as desalination, remediation of environmental contamination and treatment of organic-rich wastewater.248–255 As is well known, MFCs have been used to produce electricity from different organic compounds.256 It is also possible for MFCs to produce electricity from domestic wastewater for the post-treatment of organic compounds, while at the same time accomplishing biological wastewater treatment (removal of chemical oxygen demand; COD) to meet discharge standards. This was first demonstrated by the Logan group for domestic wastewater treatment in a single-chamber MFC configuration.257 The domestic wastewater was pumped into the MFC reactor and used as the fuel without any modifications except for dilution of the wastewater with deionized water, and the reactor generated electrical power up to 26 mW m−2 and removed up to 80% of the COD of the wastewater (initial COD of 200–300 mg L−1).
Based on the power generation, the MFC technology represents a completely new approach to wastewater treatment. Min et al.258 demonstrated the electricity production directly from animal wastewaters, such as swine wastewater, using an MFC as well as the MFC-based wastewater treatment. Due to the higher concentration of organic matter in the swine wastewater, a single-chambered air cathode MFC produced a maximum power density with the animal wastewater of 261 mW m−2, which was 79% larger than that previously obtained with the same system using domestic wastewater. Likewise, actual wastewaters including beer brewery wastewater and urban and industry wastewater have been examined as substrates for power generation in MFCs,259–261 which makes the MFC technology effective in reducing the economic burden of treatment and providing access to sanitation technologies throughout the world.
Since the power generated in MFC is limited and not sufficient for operating electronic devices directly, the energy can be stored in an external energy-storing device, such as a capacitor.262 To meet the power requirements of the electronic devices, Dewan et al.263 designed an MFC tester (MFCT) to evaluate the performance of an MFC as a power source. When a capacitor is connected to an MFC, the energy from an MFC can be stored and dispensed intermittently in bursts of high power until a desired amount of energy was stored. The use of a capacitor can produce a higher power continuously, making the MFC technology useable in real-world applications to power small electronic devices, such as a wireless sensor.264
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we discussed the recent advances in nanostructured materials that have been used in BFCs for facilitating the electron transport between electrodes and biocatalysts. From the perspective of current development, a wide range of nanoscale materials can be applied and proven to be good alternatives as electrode materials to improve the performance of the BFCs. The outstanding performance of nanostructured materials is appreciated through the analysis of the bio-catalytic reactions at the electrode interfaces. It is interesting to observe how these materials in BFCs make electron transport between the electrode surfaces and biocatalysts more efficient, as reported in this review. As such, the exploration of nanomaterials will be more important and attractive because the excellent electro-catalytic activity will greatly enhance the current density and power density of BFCs. It is not surprising at all to see the promising potential applications of BFCs in many fields, including but not limited to self-powered biosensors and wastewater treatment.
It is worth noting that in most cases, the enhanced electrochemical performance of the anode electrodes and/or cathode electrodes will occur by utilizing DET-based systems. The beneficial use of nanostructured material effects in BFCs include: (1) an increase in the electrode surface area, providing more sites for redox enzymes/microbes loading; (2) a reduction in the distance of the buried active sites inside the redox proteins to the electrodes, rendering efficient electron transfer and direct contact between the enzymes/microbes and the electrodes; (3) a greater biocompatibility for enzyme immobilization or bacterial adhesion, providing an adequate microenvironment for biochemical reactions; and (4) a higher electrical conductivity, enabling faster electron transport as well as more efficient catalytic activity of biocatalysts on electrode surfaces. Therefore, nanostructured materials are desirable and attractive as electrode materials to enhance the bio-electrocatalytic activity for a faster DET process.
Despite great progress that has been made in the past decade, the research on BFCs is still at an early stage and many issues are waiting to be tackled for practical applications. The most significant challenges include the performance of the device, the longevity of the biocatalysts, and the cost of the electrode materials. In order to address these challenges and advance the commercialization of biofuel cells, the following materials are promising for BFCs. (1) Materials with more sophisticated structures. The special structures of these materials will provide new immobilization mechanisms to further improve the interactions between the electrodes and biocatalysts, the electron transfer processes and the catalytic activity of the biocatalysts. A recent study has revealed that the edges in the nanomaterials with prisms and octahedral shapes were more conducive to the attachment of bacterial OM c-Cyts compared to sphere-shaped nanomaterials.126 (2) Biomimetic and bioinspired materials. In BFCs, the lifetime of the devices is strongly dependent on the biocatalyst stability. With the biomimetic perspective, electrode materials that mimic the native environments of the biocatalysts will extend the longevity of the biocatalysts and the lifetime of the BFC. (3) Materials derived from natural resources. Compared to currently used materials such as CNTs, graphene and metal nanoparticles, the materials based on natural resources are much cheaper and can be obtained more easily. Moreover, some of the natural materials possess a porous structure, which will improve biocatalyst loading and electron transfer efficiency. For example, a loofah sponge has been demonstrated to be an ideal anode material for MFC.265 With the efforts devoted to these studies, we have good reasons to believe that the BFC technology will realize commercial applications in implantable medical devices, portable power batteries, wastewater treatment and etc. In addition, BFCs hold the key to the vision for green energy production, which will lead to a clean environment in the very near future.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21375059, 21605092 and 21335004), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (SBK2016042150) and State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science (SKLACLS1507 and SKLACLS1509).
References
R. A. Bullen, T. C. Arnot, J. B. Lakeman and F. C. Walsh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 2015–2045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, S. C. Barton, G. Binyamin, Z. Gao, Y. Zhang, H. H. Kim and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8630–8631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Moehlenbrock and S. D. Minteer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1188–1196 RSC .
M. Zhou and S. Dong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1232–1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Cooney, V. Svoboda, C. Lau, G. Martin and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 320–337 CAS .
X. W. Liu, W. W. Li and H. Q. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 43, 7718–7745 RSC .
S. Freguia, B. Virdis, F. Harnisch and J. Keller, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyake, K. Haneda, N. Nagai, Y. Yatagawa, H. Onami, S. Yoshino, T. Abe and M. Nishizawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5008–5012 CAS .
N. Mano, F. Mao and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12962–12963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barrière, P. Kavanagh and D. Leech, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5187–5192 CrossRef .
C. Pan, Y. Fang, H. Wu, M. Ahmad, Z. Luo, Q. Li, J. Xie, X. Yan, L. Wu, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5388–5392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Macvittie, J. Halámek, L. Halámková, M. Southcott, W. D. Jemison, R. Lobel and E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 6, 81–86 Search PubMed .
M. Rasmussen, R. E. Ritzmann, I. Lee, A. J. Pollack and D. Scherson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1458–1460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Du, C. Chen, B. Li, D. Wen, S. Dong and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2172–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Tam, G. Strack, M. Pita and E. Katz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11670–11671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Katz and K. Macvittie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2791–2803 CAS .
S. Cosnier, A. L. Goff and M. Holzinger, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 19–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Babadi, S. Bagheri and B. A. Hamid, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 850–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Desmaële, L. Renaud and S. Tingry, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 583–589 CrossRef .
W. W. Li, H. Q. Yu and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 7, 911–924 Search PubMed .
M. C. Potter, Proc. R. Soc. B, 1911, 84, 260–276 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Du and C. M. Li, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 815–831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, S. J. Bao and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 544–553 CAS .
A. D. Poulpiquet, A. Ciaccafava and E. Lojou, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 126, 104–114 CrossRef .
J. Wei, P. Liang and X. Huang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 9335–9344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Bao, L. C. Ming, J. F. Zang, X. Q. Cui, Q. Yan and J. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Liu, L. Li and T. You, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9885–9895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, M. Chi, J. Luo, H. He and T. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4427–4435 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Kumar, V. G. S. Sarathi and K. S. Nahm, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 461–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-B. Song, C.-e. Zhao, P.-P. Gai, D. Guo, L.-P. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. – Asian J., 2016 DOI:10.1002/asia.201601272 .
A. T. Yahiro, S. M. Lee and D. O. Kimble, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1964, 88, 375–383 CAS .
M. Gamella, N. Guz, S. Mailloux, J. M. Pingarron and E. Katz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13349–13354 CAS .
M. Rasmussen and S. D. Minteer, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1140–1144 RSC .
E. Katz and V. Privman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1835–1857 RSC .
M. Gamella, N. Guz, S. Mailloux, J. M. Pingarrón and E. Katz, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 2552–2557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. Zhai, W. Gu, J. Li and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 2543–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cosnier, A. Le Goff and M. Holzinger, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 19–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cadet, S. Gounel, C. Stines-Chaumeil, X. Brilland, J. Rouhana, F. Louerat and N. Mano, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 83, 60–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. MacVittie, T. Conlon and E. Katz, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Babadi, S. Bagheri and S. B. Hamid, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 850–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schröder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2–5 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Yang, T. Ge, J. Nan and B. L. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5540–5563 CAS .
D. Liu, F. Wang, H. Chen, S. Li, W. Liang, T. Wang and S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 329–333 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hou, D. Yang, B. Liang, A. Liu and A. Chem, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 6057–6063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mano, M. Fei and A. Heller, ChemBioChem, 2004, 5, 1703–1705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Coman, C. Vaz-Domínguez, R. Ludwig, W. Harreither, D. Haltrich, A. L. De Lacey, T. Ruzgas, L. Gorton and S. Shleev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6093–6096 RSC .
A. Zebda, L. Renaud, M. Cretin, C. Innocent, R. Ferrigno and S. Tingry, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 149, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz, I. Willner and A. B. Kotlyar, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 479, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
K. MacVittie, J. Halamek, L. Halamkova, M. Southcott, W. D. Jemison, R. Lobeld and E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 81–86 CAS .
O. Conghaile, P. M. Falk, D. MacAodha, M. E. Yakovleva, C. Gonaus, C. K. Peterbauer, L. Gorton, S. Shleev and D. Leech, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 2156–2163 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Arechederra, B. L. Treu and S. D. Minteer, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Moore, S. D. Minteer and R. S. Martin, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 218–225 RSC .
M. J. Moehlenbrock, T. K. Toby, A. Waheed and S. D. Minteer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6288–6289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Topcagic and S. D. Minteer, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2168–2172 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6803–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Noh, M. S. Won, J. Hwang, N. H. Kwon, S. C. Shin and Y. B. Shim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1735–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, W. Zheng, L. Su and L. Mao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2639–2643 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ammam and J. Fransaer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 39, 274–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Filip, J. Šefčovičová, P. Gemeiner and J. Tkac, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 366–374 CrossRef CAS .
A. Habrioux, T. Napporn, K. Servat, S. Tingry and K. B. Kokoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7701–7705 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, C. Lau, B. Branch, V. Rajendran, D. Ivnitski and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10767–10771 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Yan, L. Su, L. Wang and L. Mao, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 989–996 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ivnitski, B. Branch, P. Atanassov and C. Apblett, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1204–1210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zebda, C. Gondran, P. Cinquin and S. Cosnier, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 173, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Holland, C. Lau, S. Brozik, P. Atanassov and S. Banta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19262–19265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schulz, R. Kittl, R. Ludwig and L. Gorton, ACS Catal., 2015, 17, 628–640 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamashita, S. Ferri, L. H. Mai, H. Shimizu, H. Yamaoka and K. Sode, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2013, 52, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barrière, Y. Ferry, D. Rochefort and D. Leech, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 237–241 CrossRef .
A. Zebda, S. Cosnier, J. P. Alcaraz, M. Holzinger, A. L. Goff, C. Gondran, F. Boucher, F. Giroud, K. Gorgy and H. Lamraoui, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1453–1456 Search PubMed .
L. Halámková, J. Halámek, V. Bocharova, A. Szczupak, L. Alfonta and E. Katz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5040–5043 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kan, Y. Akiyama, M. Suzuki, N. Nakamura, H. Ohno and K. Morishima, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 78, 390–395 Search PubMed .
S. Garavaglia, M. T. Cambria, M. Miglio, S. Ragusa, V. Iacobazzi, F. Palmieri, C. D'Ambrosio, A. Scaloni and M. Rizzi, J. Mol. Biol., 2004, 342, 1519–1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Christenson, S. Shleev, N. Mano, A. Heller and L. Gorton, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2006, 1757, 1634–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Soukharev, N. Mano and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8368–8369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cline, B. Reinhammar, P. Jensen, R. Venters and B. M. Hoffman, J. Biol. Chem., 1983, 258, 5124–5128 CAS .
Z. Du, H. Li and T. Gu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2007, 25, 464–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan and J. M. Regan, Trends Microbiol., 2006, 14, 512–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Bradley, H. Emily, W. K. Peter, P. Jeremy and C. Biffinger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 2143 CrossRef .
N. Eaktasang, C. S. Kang, J. R. Song, Y. Suma and H. S. Kim, Environ. Eng. Res., 2013, 18, 277–281 CrossRef .
R. Kumar, L. Singh, Z. A. Wahid and M. F. M. Din, Int. J. Energy Res., 2015, 39, 1048–1067 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Hong, J. Guo and G. P. Sun, Acta Microbiol. Sin., 2007, 47, 173–177 CAS .
F. Zhao, R. C. T. Slade and J. R. Varcoe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1926–1939 RSC .
D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Trends Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schröder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2619–2629 RSC .
M. Y. Elnaggar, G. Wanger, K. M. Leung, T. D. Yuzvinsky, G. Southam, J. Yang, W. M. Lau, K. H. Nealson and Y. A. Gorby, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 18127–18131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reguera, K. D. Mccarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. Torres, A. K. Marcus, H. S. Lee, P. Parameswaran, R. Krajmalnik-Brown and B. E. Rittmann, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 2010, 34, 3–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Schaetzle, F. Barrière and K. Baronian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 607–620 CAS .
D. Prasad, T. K. Sivaram, S. Berchmans and V. Yegnaraman, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 991–996 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Finch, T. D. Mackie, C. J. Sund and J. J. Sumner, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 312–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Newman and R. Kolter, Nature, 2000, 405, 94–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rahimnejad, G. D. Najafpour, A. A. Ghoreyshi, F. Talebnia, G. C. Premier, G. Bakeri, J. R. Kim and S. E. Oh, J. Microbiol., 2012, 50, 575–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Thurston, H. P. Bennetto, G. M. Delaney, J. R. Mason, S. D. Roller and J. L. Stirling, Microbiology, 1985, 131, 1393–1401 CAS .
H. Hou, X. Chen, A. W. Thomas, C. Catania, N. D. Kirchhofer, L. E. Garner, A. Han and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Park and J. G. Zeikus, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2000, 66, 1292–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rhoads, H. Beyenal and Z. Lewandowski, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 4666–4671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jayapriya and V. Ramamurthy, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Harald von Canstein, S. Shimizu and J. R. Lloyd, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 615–623 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. D. Shikhare, C. Dan, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Okamoto, K. Saito, K. Inoue, K. H. Nealson, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1357–1361 CAS .
Y. Wang, S. E. Kern and D. K. Newman, J. Bacteriol., 2010, 192, 365–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Pham, N. Boon, K. D. Maeyer, M. Höfte, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 80, 985–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Pham, N. Boon, P. Aelterman, P. Clauwaert, L. D. Schamphelaire, L. Vanhaecke, K. D. Maeyer, M. Höfte, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 77, 1119–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, S. J. Bao, Z. Lu and Y. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1290–1292 RSC .
S. K. Chaudhuri and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Malvankar, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5790–5797 CAS .
D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl.
Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pier-Luc, Z. M. Summers, R. H. Glaven, K. P. Nevin, Z. Karsten, C. L. Barrett, Q. Yu, B. O. Palsson and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 13, 13–23 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Kim, H. S. Park, M. S. Hyun, I. S. Chang, M. Kim and B. H. Kim, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2002, 30, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Strycharz, A. P. Malanoski, R. M. Snider, H. Yi, D. R. Lovley and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 627–628 Search PubMed .
K. P. Katuri, P. Kavanagh, S. Rengaraj and D. Leech, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4758–4760 RSC .
K. P. Katuri, S. Rengaraj, P. Kavanagh, V. O'Flaherty and D. Leech, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7904–7913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Leang, X. Qian, T. Mester and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 4080–4084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reguera, K. P. Nevin, J. S. Nicoll, S. F. Covalla, T. L. Woodard and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 7345–7348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Reardon and K. T. Mueller, J. Biol. Chem., 2013, 288, 29260–29266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Richter, K. P. Nevin, H. Jia, D. A. Lowy, D. R. Lovleya and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 506–516 CAS .
D. Wen and A. Eychmuller, Small, 2016, 12, 4649–4661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, C. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3418–3441 CAS .
S. Cosnier, M. Holzinger and A. Le_Goff, Bioenergy and Biofuels, 2014, 2, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Aquino Neto and A. R. De Andrade, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2013, 24, 1891–1912 CAS .
T. Noll and G. Noll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3564–3576 RSC .
I. Willner, Y. M. Yan, B. Willner and R. Tel-Vered, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 7–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalathil and D. Pant, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30582–30597 RSC .
Y. Umasankar, D. B. Brooks, B. Brown, Z. Zhou and R. P. Ramasamy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 789–796 CrossRef .
A. Korani and A. Salimi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 185, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zebda, C. Gondran, A. L. Goff, M. Holzinger, P. Cinquin and S. Cosnier, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 2555–2559 Search PubMed .
B. Reuillard, A. Le Goff, C. Agnès, M. Holzinger, A. Zebda, C. Gondran, K. Elouarzaki and S. Cosnier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4892–4896 RSC .
T. Miyake, S. Yoshino, T. Yamada, K. Hata and M. Nishizawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5129–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, L. Viry, M. Maugey, P. Poulin and N. Mano, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 2 Search PubMed .
K. H. Hyun, S. W. Han, W. G. Koh and Y. Kwon, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, C. Chen, M. Zhou, S. Guo, E. Wang and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 4283–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, M. Ye, L. B. Hu, N. Liu, J. R. Mcdonough, C. Wei, H. N. Alshareef, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5265–5270 CAS .
H. Y. Tsai, C. C. Wu, C. Y. Lee and E. P. Shih, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Erbay, G. Yang, P. D. Figueiredo, R. Sadr, C. Yu and A. Han, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liang, H. Wang, X. Xia, X. Huang, Y. Mo, X. Cao and M. Fan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3000–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Ju, B. H. Kwon, H. I. Park, H. Kim, G. K. Min, S. P. Ji, E. S. Kim, S. Yoo, D. Y. Jeon and O. K. Sang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2011–2017 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Li, U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, D. S. Choi, W. J. Lee, Y. Oh, G. Y. Lee and S. O. Kim, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Yu, J. Tan, F. Peng, H. Wang, J. Li, W. Zheng and N. B. Wong, Carbon, 2013, 57, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ci, Z. Wen, J. Chen and Z. He, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karthikeyan, B. Wang, J. Xuan, J. W. C. Wong, P. K. H. Lee and M. K. H. Leung, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 314–323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, H. Hou, F. Harnisch, S. A. Patil, A. A. Carmonamartinez, S. Agarwal, Y. Zhang, S. Sinharay, A. L. Yarin and A. Greiner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1417–1421 CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, H. X. Huang, B. Li and W. S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5110–5118 CAS .
X. Xie, L. Hu, M. Pasta, G. F. Wells, D. Kong, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 291–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Hu, S. Li and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, R. W. D. Wan, S. H. A. Hassan, T. Jafary, M. Rahimnejad, A. Ahmad and M. H. Yazdi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 41, 4872–4878 CrossRef .
M. Ghasemi, M. Ismail, S. K. Kamarudin, K. Saeedfar, R. W. D. Wan, S. H. A. Hassan, L. Y. Heng, J. Alam and S. E. Oh, Appl. Energy, 2013, 102, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Yan, Y. Chen and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1892–1899 CAS .
D. V. D. H. Peter Clauwaert, N. Boon, K. Verbeken, M. Verhaege, A. Korneel Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7564–7569 CrossRef .
K. Rabaey, S. T. Read, P. Clauwaert, S. Freguia, P. L. Bond, L. L. Blackall and J. Keller, ISME J., 2008, 2, 519–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Liu, X. F. Sun, Y. X. Huang, G. P. Sheng, S. G. Wang and H. Q. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1422–1427 CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, S. Alwarappan, Z. Chen, X. Kong and C.-Z. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1829–1833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, H. Y. Zhao, J. X. Zhang, H. M. Zhou, X. X. Xu, Y. F. Zheng, Y. B. Wang, Y. Cheng and B. Z. Jang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 869–871 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Nakamura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6928–6932 CAS .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, X. Q. Zheng, J. Y. Xu, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 34, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Y. Xiao, H. H. Li, J. J. Yang, Z. Wang, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, G. Achutharao, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
P. Gai, Y. Ji, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, J. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Analyst, 2015, 140, 1822–1826 RSC .
P. Gai, R. Song, C. Zhu, Y. Ji, Y. Chen, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14735–14738 RSC .
V. Scherbahn, M. T. Putze, B. Dietzel, T. Heinlein, J. J. Schneider and F. Lisdat, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 61, 631–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, P. Yep, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 456–477 CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, H.-J. Qiu, K. Sugawara, S. Heguri, N. H. Tu, K. K. Huynh, T. Fujita, T. Takahashi, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 4822–4826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Chu, L. Yang, Y. Tan, W. Deng, M. Ma, X. Su and Q. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12808–12814 CAS .
K. P. Prasad, Y. Chen and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3387–3393 CAS .
Y. Yong, S. Zhou, Z. Bo, Z. Li and Y. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 116, 453–458 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. Mo, X. Li, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Ye, X. Huang and C. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, J. Damien, J. Luo, H. D. Jang, J. Huang and Z. He, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan and Z. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7022–7029 RSC .
C. Zhao, Y. Wang, F. Shi, J. J. Zhu and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6668–6670 RSC .
Y. C. Yong, Y. Y. Yu, X. Zhang and H. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4480–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, H. Tian, C. L. Gardner, T. L. Ren and J. Chae, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3539–3547 RSC .
S. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Yin, Z. Liu, E. Luan, F. Zhao, Z. Tang and S. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500372 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, X. Li, Y. Ren and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 21001–21010 RSC .
H. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Ling, F. Qian, Y. Song, X. Lu, S. Chen, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10283–10290 RSC .
X. Xie, G. Yu, N. Liu, Z. Bao, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6862–6866 CAS .
Z. He, J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. M. Li and T. T. Y. Tan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Wang, S. Peng, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, W. Deng, Y. Tan, M. Ma and Q. Xie, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10634–10638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang and C. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 Search PubMed .
C. J. Kirubaharan, K. Santhakumar, G. Gnana Kumar, N. Senthilkumar and J.-H. Jang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 13061–13070 CrossRef CAS .
S. You, M. Ma, W. Wang, D. Qi, X. Chen, J. Qu and N. Ren, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1601364 CrossRef .
F. Patolsky, G. Tao, E. Katz and I. Willner, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 454, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trifonov, K. Herkendell, R. Telvered, O. Yehezkeli, M. Woerner and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11358–11368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Gao, J. Sun and F. Gao, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Yu, C. X. Guo, Y.-C. Yong, C. M. Li and H. Song, Chemosphere, 2015, 140, 26–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Li, L. Zhang, J. Xu, W. Yang and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 40–46 CAS .
S. Sahoo, S. Dhibar, G. Hatui, P. Bhattacharya and C. K. Das, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1033–1042 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Xian, T. Peng, H. Sun and F. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 13607–13612 RSC .
S. Khilari, S. Pandit, J. L. Varanasi, D. Das and D. Pradhan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20657–20666 CAS .
M. Ammam and J. Fransaer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1474–1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pablo, C. Romina, S. Rafael, L. Laura, F. Flavia and E. J. Calvo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11132–11140 CrossRef PubMed .
I. W. Schubart, G. Göbel and F. Lisdat, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Christwardana and Y. Kwon, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 604–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Xiong, M. L. Forrest, G. Ton, A. Zhao, N. M. Davies and G. S. Kwon, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 4889–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Christwardana, K. J. Kim and Y. Kwon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30128 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chung, K. H. Hyun and Y. Kwon, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1161–1168 RSC .
J. Kim, S. I. Kim and K. H. Yoo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 350–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Campbell, H. Murata, S. Carmali, K. Matyjaszewski, M. F. Islam and A. J. Russell, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 446–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Godman, J. L. DeLuca, S. R. McCollum, D. W. Schmidtke and D. T. Glatzhofer, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 3541–3551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, Z. Liu and P. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. E. Zhao, D. Sun, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 823–829 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lv, Y. Chen, H. Wei, F. Li, Y. Hu, C. Wei and C. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Yu, H. L. Chen, Y. C. Yong, D. H. Kim and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12825–12827 RSC .
C. E. Zhao, J. Wu, S. Kjelleberg, J. S. C. Loo and Q. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 3440–3443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schröder, J. Nießen and F. Scholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2880–2883 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Chanpark, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, P. Gai, C. Liu, X. Wang, H. Xu, J. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12587–12594 CAS .
R.-B. Song, K. Yan, Z.-Q. Lin, J. S. Chye Loo, L.-J. Pan, Q. Zhang, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14555–14559 CAS .
W. Wang, S. You, X. Gong, D. Qi, B. K. Chandran, L. Bi, F. Cui and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 270–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang, C. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, C. Qian, H. Li and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2630–2637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Yu, S. Xu, J. Bai, R. Xiao, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, X. Q. Yang, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2365 Search PubMed .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jeng, K. C. Chen, T. Y. Chiang, P. Y. Lin, T. D. Tsai, Y. C. Chang, T. F. Guo, P. Chen, T. C. Wen and Y. J. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4107–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, J. Escarré, K. Söderström, M. Charrière, M. Despeisse, F. J. Haug and C. Ballif, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 535–538 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Vincent, X. Li, C. F. Blanford, N. A. Belsey, J. H. Weiner and F. A. Armstrong, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 761–762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, F. Patolsky, E. Katz, J. F. Hainfeld and I. Willner, Science, 2003, 299, 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao and I. Willner, Science, 2003, 299, 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Youhui, L. Zhenhua, C. Zhaowei, R. Jinsong and Q. Xiaogang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 2600–2610 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xie, W. Xu and X. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1511–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, S. Raichlin and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2385–2391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Blaik, E. Lan, Y. Huang and B. Dunn, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 324–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, P. Gai, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11511–11516 CAS .
Y. Chen, P. Gai, L. Jin, D. Zhu, D. Tian, E. S. Abdel-Halim, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3451–3457 RSC .
S. Aquino Neto, T. S. Almeida, L. M. Palma, S. D. Minteer and A. R. de Andrade, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Park, M. Christy, P. Kim and K. S. Nahm, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Zhao, W. J. Wang, S. Dong, W. Xin, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 7091–7097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, J. Hu, A. M. Lieber, C. S. Jackan, J. C. Biffinger, L. A. Fitzgerald, B. R. Ringeisen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6737–6742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Deng, S. Guo, Z. Liu, M. Zhou, D. Li, L. Liu, G. Li, E. Wang and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7172–7174 RSC .
R. Song, C. E. Zhao, L. P. Jiang, E. S. Abdel-Halim, J. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 16170–16177 CAS .
E. Katz, A. F. Bückmann and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10752–10753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wen, L. Deng, S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3968–3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, Y. Han, L. Deng and S. Guo, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 11782–11788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hou, S. Fan, Q. Lang and A. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3382–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Felipe, V. Jeevanthi, P. Sascha, J. M. Pingarrón and S. Wolfgang, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1854–1858 CrossRef .
P. P. Gai, Y. S. Ji, W. J. Wang, R. B. Song, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 19, 541–549 CrossRef .
P. Gai, R. Song, C. Zhu, Y. Ji, W. Wang, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16763–16766 RSC .
P. Pandey, V. N. Shinde, R. L. Deopurkar, S. P. Kale, S. A. Patil and D. Pant, Appl. Energy, 2016, 168, 706–723 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, S. Cheng and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 658–662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Virdis, K. Rabaey, Z. Yuan and J. Keller, Water Res., 2008, 42, 3013–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Oh, J. R. Kim, G. C. Premier, T. H. Lee, C. Kim and W. T. Sloan, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 871–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sevda, X. Dominguez-Benetton, K. Vanbroekhoven, H. D. Wever, T. R. Sreekrishnan and D. Pant, Appl. Energy, 2013, 105, 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
B. Virdis, K. Rabaey, R. A. Rozendal, Z. Yuan and J. Keller, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2970–2980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, Q. Zhao, J. Zhang, G. Zhang and D. J. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 5808–5812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Nimje, C. Y. Chen, C. C. Chen, H. R. Chen and M. J. Tseng, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 2629–2634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, T. E. Ward and J. M. Regan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4781–4786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, R. Ramnarayanan and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 2281–2285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Min, J. R. Kim, S. E. Oh, J. M. Regan and B. E. Logan, Water Res., 2005, 39, 4961–4968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, W. Xin, B. E. Logan and L. He, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 78, 873–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Patil, V. P. Surakasi, S. Koul, S. Ijmulwar, A. Vivek, Y. S. Shouche and B. P. Kapadnis, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 5132–5139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rodrigo, P. Cañizares, J. Lobato, R. Paz, C. Sáez and J. J. Linares, J. Power Sources, 2007, 169, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hatzell, Y. Kim and B. E. Logan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 198–202 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dewan, C. Donovan, D. Heo and H. Beyenal, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Fan, T. Shimotori, K. C. Wang and H. Yong, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, S. Zhou, Y. Liu and J. Tang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 14525–14532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Cui-e Zhao
	Cui-e Zhao received her PhD from Nanjing University under the direction of Professor Jianrong Zhang and Professor Jun-Jie Zhu in 2013. After postdoctoral training at Nanyang Technology University (NTU), Singapore, she joined as an associated professor at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (NJUPT) in 2015. Her research expertise involves novel functionalized nanomaterials and their applications in the microbial fuel cell (MFC) area.

Panpan Gai
	Panpan Gai obtained her BSc from Liaocheng University in 2008 and MSc from Ningbo University in 2011. She received her PhD from Nanjing University under the supervision of Prof. Jian-Rong Zhang and Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu in 2015. Currently, she is a professor at Qingdao Agriculture University. Her primary research interests include the synthesis of novel functionalized nanomaterials and fabrication of enzymatic biofuel cells (EBFCs) and self-powered biosensors.

Rongbin Song
	Rongbin Song is a PhD student in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Nanjing University. He received his BS (2010) and MS (2013) from Nanjing Tech University. Currently, he works in Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu’ group, and his research mainly focuses on the design of innovative nanomaterials for microbial fuel cell (MFC).

Ying Chen
	Ying Chen received her BS degree from Nanjing University in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate with Prof. Jun-Jie Zhu at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, China. Her research involves multifunctional nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical sensing and catalysis.

Jianrong Zhang
	Jian-Rong Zhang was born in 1963 in Wujiang City of the Jiangsu Province. He received his BSc (1984), MSc (1987), and PhD (1990) from Nanjing University. After he obtained his PhD, he worked at Nanjing University as a lecturer starting in 1990 and a Professor starting in 2003. His research interests focus on biofuel cells and electroanalysis for biomolecules. He has published more than 150 papers and received a number of national and ministerial awards.

Jun-Jie Zhu
	Jun-Jie Zhu is a Professor of Chemistry at Nanjing University, China. He received his BS (1984) and PhD (1993) degrees in Chemistry from Nanjing University. After this, he started his academic career at Nanjing University in 1993. During 1998–1999, he was a postdoctoral fellow in Bar-Ilan University, Israel. His current research interests are analytical chemistry and materials chemistry, and he mainly focuses on the study of nanobioanalytical chemistry including bioelectrochemistry, nanoelectrochemistry and the fabrication of biosensors.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a membrane-less EBFC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the bioelectrocatalytic process at the enzyme bioelectrodes: (a) MET from redox mediators to a GOx enzyme on the bioanode surface, and (b) DET from a biocathode surface to a laccase enzyme. The important catalytic copper complexes in the laccase are highlighted.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of a typical two-chamber MFC.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of EET mechanisms between microorganisms and electrodes: (a) MET via artificial mediators or microbial secondary metabolites to shuttle electrons. (b) DET via direct contact between outer cell membrane bound cytochromes and the electrode surface, and (c) DET via electronically conducting nanowires to connect the electrode surface.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of DNA adsorption on GC/MWCNT modified electrode, and (b) directing immobilization of BOD enzyme molecules onto the GC/MWCNTs/DNA electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of a cross-section of the CNT/GOx bioanode (scale bare, 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of the enzyme entrapment inside a free-standing film of CNTF by liquid-induced shrinkage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of a carbon fibre (a) and a CNT fibre (b). Schematic of the oxygen reduction on the modified carbon fibre (c) and on the modified CNT fibre (d) (the green shade represents the redox polymer and the blue colour the enzymes). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Bamboo-NCNTs nanostructures, inset is high-magnification. (b) SEM images of the microbial growth on the CNT–textile anode, cross section illustrating internal colonization. (c) SEM image of the bacterial biofilm attached on the CNT/CHI modified carbon paper cathode. (d) TEM analyses of NCNTs showing vertically aligned and bamboo-like structures (inset). (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 150 and 153. Copyrights 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a membrane-less formic acid/O2 EBFC using NG/Au NPs hybrids as substrate electrodes. (b) TEM image of CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs, (c) TEM image of CNTs/g-C3N4 NSs/Au NPs ternary hybrid nanostructures; FESEM images of (d) bare 3D graphene and (e) 3D graphene–SWCNT hybrid. Each inset shows the surface of the skeleton at a large magnification. (a), (b) and (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 167 and 168. Copyrights 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) and (e) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 175 Publishing. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) bacterial cells adhered onto the IL–GNS modified carbon paper electrode. (b) The 3D rGO/Shewanella hybrid biofilm. (c) The mechanism of EET (d) SEM image of nitrogen-enriched graphitic carbon scaffold (NGC scaffold) and their optical photographs in the insets. (a) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 180. Copyrights 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing. (b) and (c) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 181. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons. (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of the inkjet-printed PANI/CP. (b) Image of the inkjet-printed PANI on CP. (c) SEM image of the PPy nano-SA with tubular openings on the top section of the nanotubes. Inset: High-magnification SEM of the hollow structure for an individual nanosucker. (d) A schematic that illustrates how the sucking effect occurs on the interface of nano-SA–anode/microbes of the MFC. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyrights 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) and (d) Reprinted with permissions from ref. 219. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the fabrication of self-powered cytosensor based on EBFC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
