Morphology evaluation of a polymer – fullerene bulk heterojunction ensemble generated by the fullerene derivatization  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM32629A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32629A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15987-15997Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMorphology evaluation of a polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunction ensemble generated by the fullerene derivatization

        
          
            Christian 
            Kästner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Diana K. 
            Susarova
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rupali 
            Jadhav
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christoph 
            Ulbricht
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Daniel A. M. 
            Egbe
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Silke 
            Rathgeber
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Pavel A. 
            Troshin
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Harald 
            Hoppe
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Physics, Ilmenau University of Technology, Weimarer Str. 32, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany. E-mail: Harald.Hoppe@tu-ilmenau.de
bInstitute for Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow region, 142432, Russia
cLinz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (LIOS), Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenbergerstrasse 69, 4040 Linz, Austria
dInstitut für Integrierte Naturwissenschaften, Universität Koblenz-Landau, Universitätsstr. 1, 56070 Koblenz, Germany
Received 
      8th March 2012
    , Accepted 9th June 2012First published on 11th June 2012AbstractWe investigated a series of bulk heterojunction solar cells and corresponding thin films by blending of an anthracene-containing poly(p-phenylene-ethynylene)-alt-poly(p-phenylene-vinylene) (PPE–PPV) copolymer with various fullerene derivatives. The so-called AnE-PVab copolymer was equipped with octyloxy side-chains at the PPE part and ethylhexyloxy side-chains at the PPV part, and has been chosen for this investigation due to its previously demonstrated superior performance in combination with phenylene-C60-butyric-acid-methyl-ester (PCBM). It is shown that the performance of bulk heterojunction solar cells strongly depends on the nature of the fullerene derivative, in particular the side-chain attached to the fullerene cage. In fact the intermolecular interaction between the polymer and fullerene derivative controls the blend morphology to a large extent, which has been interpreted on the basis of a novel approach for combining structural, topographical, photophysical, electrical and electro-optical characterizations.
1. Introduction
Interdisciplinary research in the development of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices has been intensively pursued for more than one decade1–10 and resulted in a rapid enhancement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) under standard illumination conditions (AM1.5). Certified PCE values of more than 8% have been reported for different OPV concepts11–14 up to now.15 Recently the first polymer-based OPV products have become commercially available.16
To date all highly efficient organic solar cells rely on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept.17 The term bulk heterojunction denotes that the electron donor and the electron acceptor are intimately mixed on the scale of exciton diffusion length (∼several nm) within the bulk of the thin film. As a consequence, almost 100% of the impinging photons can be utilized in the device and free charge carriers can be generated upon exciton dissociation by the photo-induced charge transfer.1,18,19 To prevent excessive recombination and to yield efficient charge transport, the 3-dimensional blend morphology has to provide percolation pathways to the respective charge extracting electrodes. Hence a subtle balance between charge generation and transport to the electrodes must be reflected by an appropriate phase separation and percolation – and thus BHJ morphology – of the donor and acceptor domains within the photoactive layer of an organic solar cell. Thus the optimum domain size of the nanoscale donor–acceptor morphology plays a crucial role for the efficiency of BHJ solar cells.
Polymer-based solar cells2 are solution processed, where both, donor and acceptor, constituents are cast from a common solvent. This film formation process generally yields non-equilibrium blend morphologies, as the rapid extraction or vaporization of the solvent quenches the system to an intermediate state of phase separation.20 This intermediate state does not necessarily represent the optimal case, and many processing parameters have to be adjusted in order to yield the most suitable morphology.
The film drying time by the choice of the solvent's vapor pressure, individual solubility and mutual compatibility of the acceptor and donor, the use of additives or pre- and post-production annealing are often studied parameters affecting the scale of phase separation within the blend morphology.20–31 For example by varying the drying time it was possible to control the scale of phase separation.24,32 Furthermore, the concentration of the active material solution also plays an important role in determining the extent of phase separation.25 In the case of too intimate mixing of donor and acceptor constituents, an increase in phase separation can be obtained by an additional post-production treatment such as thermal annealing.28 Also the introduction of additives to the processing solution enables the components to undergo more distinct phase separation during the film drying process by preferential dissolution of one component.33 Thereby a considerably different boiling point of the additive as compared to the processing solvent promotes phase separation.27
In this study the influence of the compatibility between the donor and acceptor, partly controlled by their different solubilities in the common solvent, is investigated. It has been shown previously that the derivatization, i.e. the side-chain substitution, of the fullerene cage has a strong influence on the morphology of the active layer and therefore the photovoltaic properties of the solar cells.26,34,35 The fullerene solubility has been identified as one key parameter for obtaining a suitable BHJ morphology in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)-based solar cells.26 Furthermore it was concluded on a large basis of fullerene derivatives that matching the solubility of the donor and acceptor within the common solvent leads to the most suitable morphologies.36 Here we show that the interactions between the polymer and fullerene derivatives can even control the secondary and tertiary conformations of a semi-crystalline copolymer. Furthermore, the nature of the fullerene derivative enabled the tuning of the bulk morphology of the active layer from finely intermixed to strongly phase separated. As a consequence a large set of different bulk heterojunction active layer morphologies was obtained by blending the AnE-PVab donor with various fullerene derivatives. Large variations already become obvious from tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) investigations, revealing considerably different polymer conformations at the film surface and a large range of scales of phase separation, as previously observed for PPV-based materials.37,38 For example, the polymer either formed a fibrillar order as known for P3HT, or the phase separation is so small that the polymeric and fullerenic phases could not be distinguished. It is often reasonable to assume that the gross phase organization continues similar underneath the film surface, however, the concentration profile of the blend could be subjected to selective interfacial segregation, e.g. caused by surface-directed spinodal decomposition.39–42
Therefore it is of great interest to gain an insight into the 3-dimensional active layer morphology. Nowadays superior experimental methods like Electron Tomography enable insight into the 3-dimensional bulk structure of donor–acceptor blend films.43–45 Beyond standard AFM investigations of the topography, cross-sectional AFM can be used to gain insight into the depth of the film.46 However, these methods are expensive, time consuming and not easily accessible. Therefore faster characterization methods are necessary to enable an accelerated investigation of large sample batches.
Here we introduce a simpler, cheaper and more easily accessible method, which allows an indirect insight into the bulk morphology and understanding of film formation effects by standard characterization methods. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy detects a certain ordering of the polymer inside the active layer.47 The π–π-stacking of the polymer leads to a red shift of the absorption spectrum with a typical absorption shoulder peak.48 By photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy it is possible to conclude on the domain sizes of pristine donor and acceptor phases.38 By current–voltage (I–V) measurements an overview on the efficiency of charge generation, transport and extraction is given. An s-shaped I–V-curve indicates charge extraction hindered by blocking layers at an electrode. The short circuit current density JSC directly depends on the morphology by the efficiency of charge generation and transport.49 A further indication for efficient charge transport and weak recombination is possible by the measurement of the external quantum efficiency (EQE). If there is a deviation between the EQE signal under low light level conditions and under bias light illumination, whereby EQEbias is lower than EQEmonochromatic, the charge transport is hampered and leads to higher recombination of holes and electrons.50 Charge percolation of holes is straightforwardly detectable by electroluminescence (EL) spectroscopy.
In summary, by combination of these methods and rather straight interpretations it is possible to determine quite accurately the bulk heterojunction morphology of polymer-based active layers.
2. Experimental
Polymer AnE-PVab was used as the donor material and its chemical structure is shown in Scheme 1. As the acceptor material, different fullerene derivatives with varying side-chain structures were applied in order to tune the 3D-morphology. The synthesis of AnE-PVab and the fullerene derivatives is described elsewhere.36,47
 Scheme 1  Molecular structures of AnE-PVab (Mw = 23900 g mol−1, Mn = 7980 g mol−1, PDI = 3.0) and the assembled fullerene derivatives. 
The donor polymer and the acceptor fullerene derivatives were dissolved in chlorobenzene and blended prior to film casting. Thin films with a thickness of about 50 nm were spin cast onto glass substrates for optical investigations. Thin film photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a self-built photoluminescence setup, employing a laser excitation at 408 nm. Thin film absorption spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary 5000 UV/vis spectrophotometer. Surface topography measurements were performed by a Veeco Nanoscope AFM (atomic force microscope) in tapping mode. Bulk and surface morphology information were obtained by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) experiments at the BW4 beam line, at HASYLAB at DESY in Hamburg, Germany. Experiments were carried out in pseudo-grazing incidence configuration at a wavelength of λ = 0.138 nm with a bandwidth of 10−4. The beam size at the sample position was 78 μm and 46 μm in horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. The incident polar angle has been set to αI = 0.20° and 0.10° (azimuthal angle 2θI = 0), i.e. above and below the critical angle of the active layer respectively. Two-dimensional detector patterns were collected with exposure times of 900 s on a hybrid pixel array detector (Pilatus 300k, DECTRIS, pixel size 172 μm). The detector to sample distance was determined by means of a silver behenate standard. Data are corrected for background scattering from the glass substrate and are normalized to the film thicknesses in order to allow for a comparison of peak intensities between different samples. We converted the two-dimensional detector patterns into (q,Φ)-plots. Here,  is the overall momentum transfer which can be directly related to the distance d of the corresponding scattering planes and ‖ and ⊥ are the components of the scattering vector parallel and perpendicular to the sample surface, respectively. Φ denotes the angle between ‖ and ⊥. For more details on the experimental setup and data conversion see ref. 51.
Solar cell device preparation involved etching part of the ITO-layer on glass for selective contacting of the back electrode, followed by spin coating of PEDOT:PSS from aqueous solution. The photo-active layer was spin cast from AnE-PVab:fullerene derivative solutions with blending ratios of 1:2 and identical thicknesses as for the optical investigations. No further thickness optimization has been conducted. For the top electrodes aluminium was deposited by thermal evaporation, resulting in solar cells with an active area of 0.5 cm2. Current–voltage (I–V) measurements of the solar cell devices were performed using a class A AM1.5 solar spectrum simulator and recorded with a Keithley 2400 Source-Measure-Unit. EQE was recorded with a Bentham PVE300 Photovoltaic Spectral Response Characterisation System under monochromatic or an additional halogen bias light, yielding an excitation intensity of about one sun. Electroluminescence (EL) spectra were measured using the photoluminescence setup.
3. Results and discussion
The bulk morphology of active layers can be affected by many different factors. In our study we investigated the change in the bulk morphology by blending the polymer AnE-PVab with different fullerene derivatives leading to an ensemble of morphologies. Initial information about the blend morphology were obtained from AFM measurements. Topographies from very fine scaled over coarse grained and fibrillic structures up to large lens-like structures are obtained. These topographies provide an indication of the blend morphology, even though they only probe the surface of the blend film. For example the observation of fibrillic structures reveals part of the polymer conformation obtained within the blend. While it is not clear whether these fibrillar and thus self-aggregated structures were already formed in the common solution or during film formation, it still has to be related to a certain incompatibility or repulsive interaction between AnE-PVab and the respective fullerene derivative. Hence it is worthy to note that the interaction with different fullerene derivatives can tune the conformation of the polymer in the resulting blend film. The scale of the phase separation between the polymer and the fullerene derivative can be estimated from the AFM images, which is to a large extent controlled by the different relative solubilities of the fullerene derivatives. In earlier studies it has been shown that PPV-type polymers can be tuned from fine to large scale phase separated morphologies by the choice of the solvent, because of its impact on the fullerene solubility.20,38,52,53 Here we do not change the solvent, but the fullerene solubility is varied by its chemical functionalization.
Clearly, AFM topography measurements do not provide sufficient in-depth information about the blend morphology. The simplest assumption remains, of course, that no changes within the blend organization occur in the depth of the film. However, specific segregation of one component towards the surface or the bottom of the film can change the blend composition considerably.39–41,43,54 Thus we combine the topographic information with spectroscopic and optoelectronic measurements, in order to chase differences in the in-depth morphologies that are not visible by AFM. In addition, structural characterization is applied to verify the conclusion from the simple measurements.

Fig. 1 depicts cross-sections of schematic bulk morphologies, excluding any preferential interfacial segregation to air or the substrate.
 Fig. 1  Cross-sectional images of possible bulk morphologies that can be pictured by certain surface morphologies. Even if it is not shown here explicitly, bulk type III can allow for a certain extent of polymer aggregation as well. 
These examples illustrate the extent of phase separation as controlled by the polymer–fullerene derivative compatibility, crystallinity and solubility within the common solvent. Bulk type I (a) depicts a good compatibility leading to an intimate mixing of the polymer and fullerene. Bulk type II (b) depicts a less intimate mixing which can be driven by lower compatibility and self-aggregation or partial crystallization of the polymer or aggregation of the fullerene. Bulk type III (c) depicts the situation in case of an increased compatibility/miscibility between the polymer and fullerene, but reduced fullerene solubility within the common solvent. Due to the lower solubility of the fullerene component, precipitation and aggregation sets in at an early stage of film formation during drying, resulting in lens shaped inclusions of the fullerene derivative within a blend matrix.20
Fine scaled surface morphologies can possibly be assigned to a homogeneously intermixed bulk structure. In general, also pristine layers of amorphous polymers or fullerene acceptors show smooth topographies. High miscibility of the acceptor and semicrystalline donor can also result in a fine scaled morphology by interpenetration of the acceptor into the polymer phase and consequently distortion of the crystalline polymer phase. Polymers with a tendency to crystallize can exhibit fibrillar conformation under certain circumstances, which can be present at the surface in the case of a mixture or for pristine polymer enrichment. In general, crystallization leads to certain extent of self-aggregation, which can be possibly detected by different measurements. For example, we have shown before that the polymer AnE-PVab is semicrystalline and its aggregation can be monitored by simple absorption measurements.47
Principally the three types of blend morphology shown in Fig. 1 are sufficient to describe the situation in the bulk of the film. Additional polymer or fullerene interfacial enrichment layers will however be considered as well in the following discussion of certain cases. It should be noted here that in general, and besides any potential pristine crystalline phases, an amorphous intermixing region even between semicrystalline polymers and fullerene derivatives will be present. This is simply due to the fact that less ordered regions favor mixing owing to entropic reasons.55 A combined crystalline structure of the polymer and fullerene, as found for the case of PBTTT,29 has not been detected for AnE-PVab.
 Fig. 2  Absorption and photoluminescence of the pristine polymer AnE-PVab and its blend with the fullerene derivative PCBM. Major PL peaks of AnE-PVab are located at 625 nm and 670 nm. Major PL peaks of PCBM are located at 740 nm and 810 nm. 
Few specific and the most interesting systems discussed below have been chosen from a big ensemble of the polymer/fullerene blends studied in this work. The length of this manuscript does not allow us to discuss all investigated blends. For the discussion, all information gained about the specific blend is shown within one figure (top-to-bottom, left-to-right): AFM topography, GIWAXS data, the most probable blend morphology and the photovoltaic (PV) parameters, optical properties (absorption (abs) and photoluminescence (PL)), optoelectronic properties (external quantum efficiency (EQE) and electroluminescence (EL)), and finally the I–V curve under AM1.5 solar spectrum simulation (class A) and the chemical structure of the fullerene derivative.
As a base line for the following optical characterizations, at first the absorption and PL of the pristine AnE-PVab copolymer and a 1:1 blend with the fullerene derivative PCBM are given in Fig. 2. From Fig. 2 it is evident that the polymer can preserve some of its stacking, i.e., ordering ability within blends with 50 wt% fullerene, since the shoulder of the polymer absorption at 580 nm remains visible. The PL reveals the predominant and characteristic spectroscopic transitions of the polymer and the fullerene. Two major PL peaks arise from the polymer at 625 and 670 nm, both of which can be found as well within the PL of the blend. The blend exhibits additionally two peaks arising from PCBM, located at 740 and 810 nm. As the energy levels of all the fullerene derivatives are due to the single substitution and are almost identical, no significant variation in the fullerene PL transition energies exists. Interestingly the quenching factor for this type of blend is only about 30, once again indicating that the polymer is partly aggregated within a semicrystalline state.
The first bulk morphology was achieved by blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-propionic acid 2-ethylhexyl ester (S1). Fig. 3 summarizes the results from AFM, optical, optoelectronic and solar cell characterization of AnE-PVab blended with S1.
 Fig. 3  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S1 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
The most probable cross-sectional bulk morphology derived from the achieved results is also shown. The AFM image of the film surface shows a smooth fine scaled nanomorphology which points to an intimate mixing of the polymer and fullerene derivative. This assumption is also confirmed by GIWAXS results. The GIWAXS measurement of sample 1 shows the lowest intensity in the fullerene peak of all samples. The polymer–fullerene phase separation seems to be poor. Only a very weak isotropic scattering contribution of the polymer phase is observed which would be in accordance with the assumption that fullerene is strongly intercalated into the polymer phase. The surface sensitive spectrum shows similar features as the spectrum probing the full depth of the active layer. This suggests that the bulk structures prolong into the surface region.
The photovoltaic device parameters are shown on the right hand side. As compared to the original optimization with PCBM,47,56 all photovoltaic parameters and the device performance are very weak. Since films of similar or even smaller thickness yielded up to 6.6 mA cm−2 short circuit current density, the major part of the generated charge carriers were either not generated or must have recombined before reaching the electrodes. Basic information about the film thickness can be deferred from the absorption spectra, but only relative information can be obtained in this case. Since the PL signal is comparably weak as for blends yielding larger currents, PL quenching is similarly efficient and charge generation does not seem to limit the photocurrent. Thus recombination has to account for the small short circuit current. Under smaller fields, this recombination becomes more severe, resulting in a small fill factor as well as small open circuit voltage. The difficulty of transporting charges within this bulk morphology is further expressed by a large series resistance. Taking this information together these results suggest a rather fine-scaled bulk morphology with insufficient percolation for both signs of charge carriers.
This is further evidenced by a light intensity dependent EQE, because under the one sun corresponding light bias a reduced amount of selectively excited charge carriers can be extracted. This circumstance indicates bimolecular recombination to limit the current extraction under one sun illumination intensity. Unfavorable, too fine-scaled blend morphologies can indeed provoke enhancement of bimolecular recombination. Furthermore, the electroluminescence spectrum contains no sign of polymer phase percolation, since the EL spectrum has no (or very weak) feature at the AnE-PVab PL peak. Only the recombination of charge transfer excitons or exciplexes across the heterojunction are observed at a considerably longer wavelengths.
In summary, we conclude that the present bulk morphology must be fine-scaled – as illustrated in the sketch below the AFM image of Fig. 3 – since no signs of extended polymer phases can be found and the blend seems to yield to morphology dependent bimolecular recombination, yielding a small photocurrent, fill factor and photovoltage.
The second bulk morphology was achieved by blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid butyl ester (S2). Fig. 4 summarizes the experimental results.
 Fig. 4  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S2 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
The AFM image of the film surface depicts a coarse grained structure that is attributed to a certain extent of phase separation between partly aggregated AnE-PVab and S2. The overall good solar cell parameters refer to proper charge percolation ability achieved by a proper phase separation within the bulk morphology. The AnE-PVab PL is low, but there is also a low PL of S2, which indicates smaller aggregation of S2 and thus a sufficient phase separation between the two. This is also shown by GIWAXS. The GIWAXS peak intensity of the fullerene peak and thus the polymer–fullerene phase separation are more expressed than for S1. The highly isotropic scattering contribution of the polymer domains is moderate. Since the polymer contribution to the scattering is weak, isotropic polymer scattering at low scattering vectors cannot be excluded from the surface sensitive spectrum unambiguously.
The EQE signal under bias light illumination is identical to the one under monochromatic excitation only. Hence this bulk morphology does not induce enhanced bimolecular recombination, which we attribute to a proper scale of phase separation and the existence of at least one pristine phase, providing sufficient charge percolation. The EL spectrum exhibits the same exciplex EL as for S1 with a slightly more visible polymer EL.
Due to the overall good solar cell properties, the observation of some fullerene PL and the light intensity independent EQE, we conclude that the coarse grained blend structure of the film surface is preserved within the bulk of the film, and corresponds to bulk type II.
By blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-thienyl-C61-propionic acid (S3) a similar type of bulk morphology as for S2 is achieved. Fig. 5 summarizes the experimental results.
 Fig. 5  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S3 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
The fullerene derivative S3 yielded a grainy surface topography as detected by tapping mode AFM. The absorption spectrum exhibits a small specific shoulder as an indication for stacking and aggregation of AnE-PVab, and the photoluminescence is relatively strong and additionally contains small signals from the fullerene itself. The GIWAXS results reveal increased phase separation inside the bulk. The surface GIWAXS results as well as the AFM topographies indicate a similar surface morphology as for sample 2, with somewhat smaller scale of phase separation. In contrast to sample 2, the isotropic scattering signal from the bulk polymer phase is stronger and thus represents a coarser grained phase. Furthermore, sample 2 yielded a more pronounced fullerene peak in the bulk data, corresponding to larger aggregation of the electron conduction phase. The EQE spectra are relatively high and no reduction is observed for a bias light corresponding to one sun. The short circuit current density and the integrated EQE are in good agreement. The electroluminescence spectrum contains not only a peak for recombination of charge transfer excitons (CTE) across the heterojunction, but also a strong EL signal of the pristine polymer phase. In addition to the observations described for S2 it should be noted that in this case we observe an even stronger enhanced polymer EL signal, which rises above the level of the CTE signal and reasonably originates from the larger developed polymer phase inside the bulk as concluded from GIWAXS data. All PV parameters lag a little bit behind those of the S2-based devices. This might be a result of the weaker aggregation of the fullerene in a more aggregated polymer-rich phase, yielding reduced electron transport capabilities and increased charge recombination.

Fig. 6 displays the experimental results achieved by blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C71-propionic acid ethyl ester (S4).
 Fig. 6  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S4 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
Large surface undulations are observed by AFM, which indicate lens-shaped S4 aggregates. Hence a bulk type III morphology is directly deduced, which is further evidenced by a strong fullerene PL signal. This result is also conclusive from GIWAXS. The strong fullerene peak of the GIWAXS measurement suggests a strong fullerene aggregation. The scattering contribution of the polymer phase is more isotropic with only a small preference for “edge-on” orientation. In the surface sensitive spectra the polymer contribution to the scattering is missing whereas the main fullerene peak is clearly visible. As compared to all other examples given here, the absorption seems to be considerably increased, which has to be assigned to the bumpy surface structure, which appears to capture light more efficiently. In accordance with the strong absorption, a relatively large photocurrent is observed.
The EQE signal under bias light illumination is lower than that under dark conditions, indicating an intimate mixture of the two components surrounding the lens shaped clusters. The film coverage by the polymer-rich phase, representing a barrier for electron injection or extraction, does not allow for a large CTE EL signal, and both the fill factor and open circuit voltage are reduced.

Fig. 7 summarizes the results achieved by blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-carboxylic acid isobutyl ester (S5).
 Fig. 7  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S5 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
The film surface clearly depicts fibrillic structures, which have to be assigned to the semicrystalline polymer AnE-PVab. In contrast to the common expectation, these fibrillic structures result in a medium power conversion efficiency of only 1.6%, which shall be further elucidated in the following. The absorption and photoluminescence suggest and confirm an aggregation of the polymer throughout the bulk of the thin film. The same result is evident from the GIWAXS results. The strong fullerene peak of the GIWAXS measurement suggests strong phase separation between the polymer and fullerene phases. A very broad peak at low scattering vectors at Φ ≈ 90° indicates polymer domains organizing in “edge-on” orientation accompanied by some weak isotropic scattering contribution originating from domains with random orientation relative to the substrate. The peak is also observed in the scattering spectra at 0.10° representing an “edge-on” polymer domain orientation at the free surface of the film. In agreement with this interpretation, the isotropic scattering contribution of the polymer domains with random orientation relative to the substrate most likely located in the interior of the active layer is missing and the fullerene peak is strongly suppressed in the surface sensitive spectra. The strong fullerene scattering contribution from the bulk suggests well separated polymer and fullerene phases and possibly includes an enrichment layer at the substrate.
However, there is no EL signal of the pristine polymer observed, indicating some insufficient percolation of the polymer phase between the two electrodes. On the other side, a vital photocurrent is generated, which is in good agreement with the EQE. There is no reduction of the EQE observed for increased light intensity, rather a slight increase is found when biasing the solar cell with one sun equivalent. Hence bimolecular recombination – typical for intimate blends – is not detected, but higher charge carrier densities seem to help charge extraction. This behavior indicates some barrier, which is evident from the I–V characteristics, and can be overcome by sufficiently high charge concentrations. In contrast to the good short circuit current, the voltage and the fill factor are rather low. Since the losses cannot be assigned to the bulk of the film, unfavorable interface layers seem to prevent more efficient device operation.
Since the polymer phase is clearly observed at the top of the film, a surface enrichment with the polymer is implied. However, as no polymer EL can be observed, the opposite interface near the anode must be enriched by a segregation of the fullerene S5. The corresponding film morphology is depicted in the center left of Fig. 7.
The claimed unfavorable gradient of donor and acceptor phases further is in good agreement with the electric field dependent charge extraction, leading to a weak fill factor and an apparently reduced parallel resistance.

Fig. 8 summarizes the experimental results achieved by blending AnE-PVab with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid propyl ester (S6).
 Fig. 8  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S6 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data. 
The AFM image of the film surface shows a rather smooth and fine scaled nanomorphology which depicts either an intimate mixing of the polymer and fullerene derivative or an amorphous pristine AnE-PVab or S6 phase, respectively. The amorphous polymer phase appears less probable because of the generally semicrystalline organization of the polymer. In fact the optical characterization does not reveal a stronger order within the polymer phase, it appears just average. From the EL spectra only a well developed CTE peak is observed, which indicates that the polymer phase is not penetrating throughout the depth of the film, either. Intriguingly this active layer yields the highest efficiency observed in this study; the short circuit photocurrent, the open circuit voltage and the parallel resistance mark top values among all devices studied herein. Hence a proper scale of phase separation appears to be present within the bulk of the film, especially since the EQE does not show any dependence on light intensity and therefore no signs of increased recombination losses.
The outperforming PV properties and the extraordinarily high parallel resistance are in good agreement with an improved charge extraction, obtained by a thin fullerene enrichment layer near the cathode at the top of the film as well as a polymer enrichment layer near the anode at the bottom of the film.
The GIWAXS results are in good agreement with the above observations. The surface sensitive spectra yield clearly a fullerene enrichment at the free surface, as the polymer peak appears only very weakly. The intensity of the fullerene scattering peak and thus the polymer–fullerene phase separation are comparable to sample 2. However, the scattering contribution of the polymer domains is somewhat weaker than that of sample 2, indicating slightly smaller domains comparable to sample 1. Overall, the center layer blend morphology appears to be in between samples 1 and 2.
By analyzing a combination of AFM topography, GIWAXS bulk and surface information, optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra, EQE and EL spectral data as well as the I–V characteristics, we achieved a fairly good assignment of possible bulk morphologies for a number of photoactive polymer–fullerene blends, in which the only difference was the fullerene derivative employed. While the assignment of the in-depth profile was not always unambiguous, electroluminescence in particular yielded specific information about the percolation of the polymeric phase. A further fruitful source of information was the application of the EQE light intensity dependence as a measure of an unfavorably fine-scaled morphology resulting in bimolecular recombination. Overall this work can only be rated as a starting point for refined analysis of spectroscopic, topographic and electronic data to gain insight into the bulk morphology of these donor–acceptor blends. The application of this approach might be limited to certain material systems and should be double-checked with real 3-dimensional tomography imaging in the near future.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have presented an approach to conclude on the inner bulk structure, viz., the morphology of polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells by using several spectroscopic methods in combination with AFM and electrical characterization. Whereas this study has to be rated as inferior, substantial assignment of most bulk morphologies could be achieved on the basis of only a few reasonable assumptions. A certain variety of fullerene derivatives yielded, in combination with the PPE–PPV copolymer AnE-PVab, a certain ensemble of distinctly different bulk morphologies, controlled by the specific interaction between the polymer and fullerene derivative as well as by the fullerene derivative solubility. Interestingly and in contrast to wide-spread assumptions, the occurrence of fibrillic semicrystalline polymer phases does not guarantee high performance. In our case the fibrillar morphology was even outperformed by a strong phase separated morphology containing large fullerene aggregates – as determined by AFM topography and PL spectroscopy. This reconfirms that the interpretation of AFM images alone is insufficient to explain a certain behavior and the performance of a polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunction. Combining the topographic information with GIWAXS, optoelectronic and spectroscopic data depict one route to a more refined analysis of the bulk heterojunction morphology. However, this methodology should be double-checked with a method allowing the generation of real 3-dimensional information in order to improve its reliability in the near future.
Acknowledgements
D.A.M.E, S.R. and H.H. are grateful to the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) for financial support within the framework of SPP1355. The authors acknowledge financial support provided by the Russian Ministry of Science and Education (contract No. 02.740.11.0749) and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (10-03-00443a)
References
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .

          H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, in Photoresponsive Polymers II, ed. S. R. Marder, K. S. Lee,  2008, pp. 1–86 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinsky and C. Waldauf, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 50–52 CrossRef .
S. Guenes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and A. Labouret, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3224–3233 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gang, V. Shrotriya, H. Jinsong, Y. Yan, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef .
W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .
I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, M. L. Chabinyc, D. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, M. Coelle, W. Duffy, D. Fischer, D. Gundlach, B. Hamadani, R. Hamilton, L. Richter, A. Salleo, M. Shkunov, D. Sporrowe, S. Tierney and W. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1091–1109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–U295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Q. Zhang, Y. Y. Liang, G. W. Yang, Y. Yang, L. P. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792–7799 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 84–92 CAS .

          http://www.photovoltaik4all.de
        .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
B. Kraabel, C. H. Lee, D. McBranch, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 213, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, G. Yu, D. Moses, K. Pakbaz, C. Zhang, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 15425–15433 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .
Y. Yao, J. H. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783–1789 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Koerstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Mueller-Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Mueller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .
M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Radbeh, E. Parbaile, J. Boucle, C. Di Bin, A. Moliton, V. Coudert, F. Rossignol and B. Ratier, Nanotechnology,  2012, 21, 035201 Search PubMed.
J. A. Renz, P. A. Troshin, G. Gobsch, V. F. Razumov and H. Hoppe, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2008, 2, 263–265 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Park, Y. H. Huh and M. Kim, J. Mater. Chem.,  2010, 20, 10862–10868 Search PubMed.
S. Bertho, G. Janssen, T. J. Cleij, B. Conings, W. Moons, A. Gadisa, J. D'Haen, E. Goovaerts, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 753–760 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Cates, R. Gysel, Z. Beiley, C. E. Miller, M. F. Toney, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4153–4157 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawano, J. Sakai, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 514–518 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ligui, L. Guanghao and Y. Xiaoniu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1984–1990 RSC .
O. Jianyong and X. Yijie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1592–1597 CrossRef .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, A. S. Peregudov, M. Egginger, S. Shokhovets, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Susarova, E. A. Khakina, P. A. Troshin, A. E. Goryachev, N. S. Sariciftci, V. F. Razumov and D. A. M. Egbe, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2356–2361 RSC .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryochev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 779–788 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. N. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425–434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641–646 RSC .
Y. Vaynzof, D. Kabra, L. Zhao, L. L. Chua, U. Steiner and R. H. Friend, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 329–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Engmann, V. Turkovic, G. Gobsch and H. Hoppe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .

          S. S. van Bavel, M. Barenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2010, 20, 1458–1463 Search PubMed.
B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganäs, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853–855 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. Jan Anton Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dante, A. Garcia and T. Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1596–1600 CAS .
D. A. M. Egbe, S. Turk, S. Rathgeber, F. Kuhnlenz, R. Jadhav, A. Wild, E. Birckner, G. Adam, A. Pivrikas, V. Cimrova, G. Knor, N. S. Sariciftci and H. Hoppe, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dante, J. Peet and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7241–7249 CAS .
B. T. de Villers, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18978–18982 Search PubMed .
P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rathgeber, J. Perlich, F. Kuhnlenz, S. Turk, D. A. M. Egbe, H. Hoppe and R. Gehrke, Polymer, 2011, 52, 3819–3826 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, W. Schwinger, F. Schaeffler, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511, 587–592 CrossRef .
S. Engmann, V. Turkovic, H. Hoppe and G. Gobsch, Synth. Met., 2012, 161, 2540–2543 CrossRef .
F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485–492 RSC .
R. Jadhav, S. Tuerk, F. Kuehnlenz, V. Cimrova, S. Rathgeber, D. A. M. Egbe and H. Hoppe, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 2695–2699 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Molecular structures of AnE-PVab (Mw = 23900 g mol−1, Mn = 7980 g mol−1, PDI = 3.0) and the assembled fullerene derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 1  Cross-sectional images of possible bulk morphologies that can be pictured by certain surface morphologies. Even if it is not shown here explicitly, bulk type III can allow for a certain extent of polymer aggregation as well.	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption and photoluminescence of the pristine polymer AnE-PVab and its blend with the fullerene derivative PCBM. Major PL peaks of AnE-PVab are located at 625 nm and 670 nm. Major PL peaks of PCBM are located at 740 nm and 810 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S1 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

 	Fig. 4  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S2 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S3 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S4 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

 	Fig. 7  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S5 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

 	Fig. 8  Experimental results of AnE-PVab:S6 blend films and solar cell devices and the suggested bulk morphology deduced by combination of the measurement data.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
