Ionogel-perovskite matrix enabling highly efficient and stable flexible solar cells towards fully-R2R fabrication   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01326F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01326F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3439-3448Ionogel-perovskite matrix enabling highly efficient and stable flexible solar cells towards fully-R2R fabrication†

        
          
            Yifei 
            Kang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anran 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianye 
            Kang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zisheng 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Weihui 
            Bi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yilong 
            Song
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Qingfeng 
            Dong
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: qfdong@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd April 2022
    , Accepted 29th June 2022First published on 13th July 2022AbstractFlexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are one important candidate towards scalable and low-cost roll-to-roll (R2R) photovoltaics, having achieved over 22% efficiency in spin-coating-processed devices. However, the high requirements for flexibility, efficiency and stability in R2R-compatible fabrication seriously limit overall device performance. Elastic organic additives are always incorporated to recover the fatigue grain boundaries as a compromise stratagem between device flexibility and performance. In this work, a crosslinkable multi-functional ionogel (IG)-modified perovskite polycrystalline film was fabricated in situ using a R2R-compatible bar-coating-processed fabrication method. Engineering of the ionic liquids and polymer network effectively regulated both the mechanical properties and passivation effect of the perovskite devices. Our well-designed grain boundary exhibited ultra-high elongation, toughness and rapid room-temperature self-healing ability, benefiting from the dissipation-induced toughening and dynamic physical cross-linking sites. Additionally, the real-time space- and energy-level-dependent trap density showed significant suppression of intrinsic and bend-induced defects. As a result, a record efficiency of 21.76% with the lowest VOC loss was achieved in flexible PSCs based on a scalable coating process, and unprecedented improvements in the operational stability (T90 > 1336 h), mechanical stability (T90 > 25000 cycles, 5 mm) and water-resistant stability were also accomplished in the same flexible PSCs.

Broader context
Scalable and low-cost R2R processibility are believed to be major advantages of next-generation solution-processed solar cell techniques. However, these processes have very high requirements for flexibility, efficiency and stability in the solar cell devices. Perovskite solar cells are one important candidate with high efficiency on flexible substrates via lab-scale spin coating. However, the issues of warpage, undulation and narrow processing windows in R2R processes limit the overall device performance, and the highest power conversion efficiency is still much lower than that of their rigid counterparts. In this work, we built an extensively tunable ionogel matrix as a system containing rich interactions with high elongation, toughness and rapid room-temperature self-healing ability. Its modification and collaboration with perovskite enabled the fabrication of flexible devices using a R2R-compatible coating process, and synchronously improved the flexibility, efficiency and comprehensive stability of the flexible devices.

Introduction
The development of flexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has rocketed in recent years because of their merits in terms of compatibility with low-cost and scalable roll-to-roll (R2R) fabrication and high power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to their commercialized counterparts.1–5 However, the overall device performance of flexible PSCs still lags far behind that of rigid PSCs, especially when R2R compatible scalable fabrication processes are utilized. One major limitation is the augmented structural defect density due to the expansion of micro-cracks or interfacial delamination at grain boundaries with low fracture energy when subjected to mechanical and/or thermal stress during processing, annealing and operation.6 Additionally, the increased non-radiative recombination process due to this higher level of initial intrinsic defects significantly reduces the parallel resistance,7 results in serious open-circuit voltage (VOC) loss and diminished fill factor (FF)8 and causes the PCE of flexible PSCs to continue to lag far behind those of rigid PSCs. Furthermore, R2R-compatible coating methods further amplify the above confinement effects9 due to the deficient crystallization of perovskite grain structures and low wettability of flexible substrates, leading to poor homogeneity, crystallinity and carrier lifetime, overlapping with the impact of warpage, undulation and narrow processing windows in large-area flexible substrates.3 To date, only a few R2R-compatible flexible PSCs have been reported, and the highest PCE is still much lower than those of their rigid counterparts. Thus, efficient defect engineering stratagems applicable to scalable coating to further reduce the trap density and voltage deficit of flexible PSCs are highly required.
Great efforts have been made in composition engineering to optimize both the electric and mechanical properties of flexible PSCs. Benefiting from the special defect tolerance properties of perovskites, abundant functional groups have been introduced in the additive molecules to integrate a passivating effect to reduce various types of trap densities through chemical bonds,10–12 hydrogen bonds,13,14 dipole interactions,15–17etc. However, small molecules usually have high diffusion coefficients and might alter the heterointerface electrons and charge carrier dynamics,18 making them unfavorable for the long-term operational stability of PSCs. While polymers or crosslinked networks are stable at grain boundaries and enable good encapsulation, they usually have a single dimension and simplex passivation site, as well as poor carrier mobility.19–21 Furthermore, functional materials with adhesive, buffering and/or self-healing attributes have also been introduced at grain boundaries or interfaces in order to dissipate energy and resist brittleness.22–26 However, the breaking elongation of these materials is usually low, and damaged materials cannot be repaired or require extra energy input, such as further thermal annealing, to be repaired.27,28 In addition, the generally poor electrical conductivity of doped polymers creates more insulative grain boundaries and interface,7,20 which required compromise among the passivation capability (VOC-related), series resistance (FF-related) and grain boundary fracture energy (mechanical stability-related) of the device, and greatly increased the difficulty of molecular design. Thus, it is urgent to develop novel elastic dopants with high elongation as well as preferred easy self-healing ability without sacrificing carrier mobility or the original advantages in the above strategies, which would be highly important towards efficient and stable flexible PSCs.29,30
In this work, a multi-functional ionogel (IG) was designed by the incorporation of small-molecule ionic liquids into a crosslinkable polymer network, which can be incorporated in situ in R2R-compatible bar-coated perovskite films. Engineering of the ionic liquids and functional groups in the polymer network can effectively regulate both the mechanical properties and passivation effect of the perovskite films and devices. The well-designed IG-perovskite films exhibited ultra-high elongation, toughness and rapid room-temperature self-healing ability, benefiting from the dissipation-induced toughening31 and physical cross-linking sites composed of dynamic hydrogen bonds in the IG.32 The real-time space- and energy-level-dependent trap density showed significant suppression of intrinsic and bend-induced defects in the flexible PSCs. As a result, a record efficiency of 21.76% with the lowest VOC loss, to the best of our knowledge, was achieved in flexible PSCs based on the scalable coating process. Additionally, unprecedented improvements in the operational stability (T90 > 1336 h), mechanical stability (T90 > 25000 cycles, 5 mm) and water-resistance stability were also accomplished in the same flexible PSCs.
Results and discussion
We designed the ionogel perovskite (IG-PVK) matrix (Fig. 1A) based on the characteristics of the R2R process. First, soft fluorinated hydrophobic acrylic acid, which has strong adhesion properties, and hydrogen-bond-rich stiff acrylamide swollen with ionic liquids were copolymerized to form a polymer network that contained dynamic non-covalent interactions and thus possessed self-healing ability at room temperature (Fig. 1A and B). Moreover, the mechanical properties of the ionogel could be tailored by tuning the solubility of different polymer segments in the ionic liquids and by the ratio of ionic liquid to polymer.33 Specifically, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ethyl sulfate (EMIMEtSO4) was used to dissolve acrylamide (AAm) and 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl acrylate (TFOL-A) monomer. After the initiator was added, the polymerization can be simply completed via a one-pot method under UV irradiation after complete stirring and the removal of bubbles (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Construction principle and characterization of ionogel-perovskite (IG-PVK) film. (A) Top right: Schematic illustration of the fabrication of IG-PVK devices. Top left: Schematic diagram of the interaction between the PVK grain boundaries and IG under tensile stress at the microscopic scale. Bottom: Schematic illustration of the multiple interactions contained in IG at the PVK grain boundaries on the nanoscale. (B) Self-healing behavior in different cut individual samples at room temperature. The red one is IG with dye added. Scale bar: 2 mm. (C) Strain behavior of IG under tensile stress. IG can maintain 1400% elongation without breaking. (D) Stress–strain curve of IG. (E) Stress–displacement curves of IG used to obtain the tensile adhesion and shear adhesion values between IG and PVK. (F) Resistance–time curves of IG before and after being cut and its rapid self-healing process. (G) Comparison of film-forming process of PVK (left) and IG-PVK (right) precursor droplets on polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) surfaces. Scale bar: 5 mm. (H) Image of a large-area flexible IG-PVK film prepared by a R2R compatible process; the width of the large-area perovskite film is 10 cm. (I) High-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of IG at the PVK grain boundaries. Scale bar: 50 nm. (J) Time-dependent morphology of an IG-PVK film under intense electron beam bombardment. Scale bar: 200 nm. 
We then characterized the mechanical properties of the IG. It retained transparent after stretching, showing no phase separation (Fig. 1C). Accurate tensile stress–strain curves showed that the fracture strain of IG was over 1400%, with good mechanical strength (maximum tensile stress of 0.21 MPa, elastic modulus of 65.9 ± 1.4 kPa, maximum toughness of 1.55 MJ m−3), as shown in Fig. 1D; these properties originated from the energy dissipation by the breakage of the physical crosslinking sites provided by the dynamic hydrogen bonds and the distribution of the load over the fluorinated flexible framework (Fig. 1A).32,33 The adhesion properties of the IG to the perovskite surface were also tested. To simulate the stress of perovskite grain boundaries during bending, we tested the adhesion of the IG when the perovskite film boundaries were perpendicular to the substrate under tensile stress and parallel to the substrate under shear stress. These values reached 1.06 MPa and 1000 N m−1 (Fig. 1E), respectively, which showed excellent affinity with perovskite grains and were significantly higher than those of common adhesives.34 In addition, dynamic hydrogen bonds providing physical cross-linking sites and ionic dipole interaction endowed IG with rapid self-healing at room temperature. Cracked IG needed only five minutes to regain part of its mechanical strength at room temperature (Fig. 1B), and the incision disappeared completely within 5 h (Fig. S2, ESI†). The ionic conductivity test showed that when the IG was cut, the reduced conductance caused by the incision could recover to its initial value (3 mS cm−1) within only 1 s, which also proved the excellent self-healing ability of IG at room temperature (Fig. 1F). In brief, high fracture strain and adhesion, as well as fast self-healing, provided the basis for enhancing the toughness of the grain boundaries.
The IG was then incorporated into the perovskite precursor solution to prepare the IG-PVK composite. We evaluated PVK and IG-PVK films fabricated using scalable blade coating (Fig. 1A), and a striking and inspiring contrast was discovered. The films formed by the IG-PVK droplets with enhanced wettability still had high coverage, even on an unmodified polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) surface (water contact angle up to 120.8° shown in Fig. S3, ESI†) compared to the reference droplets, which immediately slipped off (Fig. 1G). IG addition effectively prevented the shrinkage of the liquid film, widened the processing window, and improved the film-forming ability on a hydrophobic surface, which comprehensively facilitated our preparation of large-area high-quality flexible films on hydrophobic surfaces based on the R2R process (Fig. 1H, Video 1, ESI†). Additionally, the XRD results (Fig. S4, ESI†) showed that the FWHM of the (110) peak ranged from 0.098° to 0.093° after adding 0.1 wt% IG, which indicated that the high crystallinity of the perovskite was not affected by adding the ionogel.
We further observed the effect of adding IG on the morphology of perovskite films using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the perovskite grains of both the PVK and IG-PVK films were large and dense, while the grain surface of IG-PVK became smoother. As reported in a previous work,35 with prolonged electron beam irradiation, the continued loss of organic species results in gradual volume shrinkage of the grains, and when the resulting tensile stress corresponding to the stress intensity factor exceeds the grain boundary fracture toughness, the grain boundaries will gradually crack.1,35,36 Thus, we tried to leverage this effect to observe the IG within the perovskite grain boundary in situ, and intense electron beam bombardment was applied to induce in situ cracking of the grain boundaries.35 For the IG-PVK film, with the prolongation of the exposure time, the dense “Eucommia filament structure” inside the grain boundaries could be clearly seen, and gradually elongated as the grain boundary cracks gradually expanded but were still tightly linked by the fibres holding them together (Fig. 1I). Inheriting the unique mechanical properties of IG, this filamentous structure exhibited a huge breaking elongation and did not gradually break until the grain boundary cracks reached more than tens of nanometers (Fig. 1J). In addition, unlike traditional polymer dopants with poor electrical properties, this nanostructure can be easily observed via SEM, benefiting from the good conductivity and stability of the IG. However, this structure was not observed within the grain boundaries in pure PVK films, and the cracking speed of those films was obviously faster (Fig. S6, ESI†). We surmise that this is because the ionogel on the surface and grain boundaries slows down the volatilization of the organic species and reduces the corresponding tensile stress. Additionally, the increased grain boundary fracture toughness of IG-PVK can also withstand greater tensile stress.
To further determine the precise spatial distribution of the ionogel in the IG-PVK films, we detected the depth-dependent F−, CON−, C2OH− and S2− contents using time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). The contents of these fragment ions showed a consistent trend of first decreasing and then increasing, which reflected the enrichment of the ionogel at the upper and lower interfaces (Fig. S7, ESI†). We also mapped the spatial distribution of the ionogel at the surface of the IG-PVK films using Nano-IR measurements (Fig. S8A and B, ESI†). The peak at 842 cm−1 was chosen as a characteristic peak to probe the distribution of the ionogel near the surface (Fig. S8C, ESI†), and the enrichment of the ionogel at the surface grain boundaries can be clearly seen. We consider that this is because the near-saturated MAPbI3 preferentially nucleates and grows as the solvent evaporates, making the ionogel tend to distribute at grain boundaries and interfaces.
Next, we used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to analyze the changes in the chemical states of the atoms on the surface of the IG-PVK films. In the C 1s spectrum, the peak corresponding to the C–F bond introduced by TFOL-A can be clearly seen at 292.5 eV in IG and IG-PVK (Fig. 2A). In addition, due to the formation of new hydrogen bonds by oxygen atoms and the dipole interaction with lead ions, the outer electron density of carbon in the amide bonds was increased, so that its binding energy was reduced from 289.1 eV to 288.3 eV. At the same time, the positions of the Pb 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks were also obviously reduced from 138.6 eV and 143.4 eV to 137.7 eV and 142.5 eV, which was due to the strong electron donating ability of the O atoms in AAm and EMIMEtSO4, which improved the outer electron density of Pb (Fig. 2B). Correspondingly, the peak of S 2p shifted from 168.2 eV to 168.5 eV due to the weakening of the π-back-bonding by Pb and O (Fig. 2C). Comparisons of the O 1s and N 1s spectra were also shown in Fig. S9 and S10 (ESI†) to eliminate the possibility of surface contamination and degradation. In Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, the CO peak was shifted to higher wavenumber because the n–π conjugation between N and O was reduced due to the hydrogen bonds among the amide group, methylamine ions and iodide ions (Fig. 2D). Additionally, in the Raman spectrum, the Pb–I peak also changed obviously due to the interaction between EtSO4− and Pb2+ (Fig. 2E), which was also one of the main reasons for the strong affinity between the perovskite grains and IG. Steady state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved fluorescence (TRPL) measurements were then performed to check the influence of the carrier mobility and defects of the perovskite film after addition of IG. As shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†), the fluorescence intensity of the IG-PVK film was significantly enhanced and the fluorescence lifetime varied from 153.4 ns to 264.8 ns (Fig. 2F), suggesting the abundant passivation functional groups in the IG effectively reduced the nonradiative transition process in perovskite films.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of interaction between IG and PVK grains. (A) Comparison of C 1s peaks of IG and IG-PVK films from X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) results. (B) Comparison of Pb 4f peaks of PVK and IG-PVK films from XPS results. (C) Comparison of S 2p peaks of IG and IG-PVK films from XPS results. (D) Comparison of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of IG, PVK and IG-PVK powder. (E) Comparison of Raman spectra of PbI2 before and after adding the ionic liquid part of the ionogel. (F) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of PVK and IG-PVK films. 
After verifying the extraordinary mechanical properties and passivation of the IG, we adopted a flexible substrate/indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly[bis(4-phenyl) (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA)/PVK/choline chloride/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Cu device structure using a scalable blade-coating method to verify the effect of IG on the photovoltaic properties of the device. The J–V curves and device performance parameters are shown in Fig. 3A. Compared to the reference device with a VOC of 1.16 V and FF of 79.11%, the IG-PVK device after optimization of the concentration (Fig. S12, ESI†) achieved an astonishing VOC of up to 1.19 V and FF of up to 82.33%, enabling its efficiency to reach 21.76%. The steady-state output efficiency, which lasted for over 3000 s, also reached 21.7% (Fig. 3B), which was consistent with the J–V curve. The current and efficiency of the reference device were not as stable as those of the IG-PVK device during continuous output. Additionally, the integrated current density derived from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curve was also effectively improved and was in good agreement with the short-circuit current density in the J–V curve (Fig. 3C). The forward and reverse scan results showed that both of them have imperceptible hysteresis (Fig. S13, ESI†). Fig. 3D and E show the statistical results based on the FF and VOC of 60 random devices. It can obviously be seen that the improvement of the IG-PVK efficiency was mainly attributed to the improved average VOC (from 1.156 V to 1.177 V) and FF (from 76.61% to 80.82%). The statistical results of the voltage deficit, FF and PCE of recently reported high-performance flexible devices produced by R2R-compatible methods are shown in Fig. 3F.3,9,28,37–41 Benefiting from the peerless improvement in the VOC and FF compared to those of reported flexible devices, we achieved the highest efficiency flexible perovskite solar cells based on a scalable method to the best of our knowledge.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performance and defect-related characterization of the IG-PVK flexible device. (A) J–V curves of the champion PVK and IG-PVK devices. (B) Continuous output curves of PVK and IG-PVK devices at 0.995 V and 1.024 V, respectively, corresponding to the maximum power point. (C) External quantum efficiency and integrated current density curves of the corresponding PVK and IG-PVK devices. (D and E) Statistical distribution of the open circuit voltage (D) and fill factor (E) of PVK and IG-PVK devices. (F) Photovoltaic parameter statistics of reported flexible perovskite devices and the device in this work.3,9,28,37–41 (G) Space-charge limited current curves of hole-only PVK and IG-PVK devices. (H) The energy-level-dependent trap density of states (tDOS) of PVK and IG-PVK devices and their change after 1000 bending cycles with a 5 mm bending radius. (I) Spatial distribution of the increased defect density of IG-PVK and PVK after 1000 bending cycles with 5 mm bending radius. 
Flexible devices tend to have increased VOC loss and reduced FF relative to rigid devices, mainly due to the intrinsic defects and increased defects caused by the external thermal and mechanical stress of flexible devices during processing and operation. Therefore, we tested the defect density of flexible perovskite films with and without IG using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. The results showed that the introduction of the IG reduced the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) values of hole-only devices from 0.513 V to 0.412 V, and the corresponding defect concentration decreased from 3.63 × 1015 cm−3 to 2.91 × 1015 cm−3 according to the following formula42 (Fig. 3G), which demonstrated that the introduction of IG may greatly dissipate the stress during processing and reduce the defects introduced by strain and friction at the grain boundaries.  where e is the electron charge, n is the density of trap states, L is the thickness of the film and ε is the relative dielectric constant. ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant.
In order to obtain more comprehensive information on the defect variation after introducing IG into PVKs, we tested the distribution of the defect density of states in energy space using the following equation43 based on thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) measurements:  where Nt is the trap density of states (tDOS); Ef is the energetic demarcation corresponding to each frequency; Vbi is the built-in potential, which was derived from the Mott–Schottky analysis; C is the capacitance corresponding to each frequency; and W represents depletion width, assuming that the perovskite layer is completely depleted, so its value is approximately equal to the thickness of the perovskite layer. f is the frequency, kB is Boltzmann's constant and T is the thermodynamic temperature. Ef is defined using angular frequency as  where ω0 is the attempt to escape angular frequency. The results showed that the interface-related deep-level defects (trap III)40 such as those originating from dangling bonds, and the shallow-level point defects associated with grain boundaries and the bulk (trap I and II)40 were significantly reduced (Fig. 3H). It is proved that the incorporation of IG has a good passivation effect on the defects at the grain boundaries and the surface.
To simulate the damage to flexible devices during processing or operation, the energy-level-dependent tDOS was retested to examine the changes to IG-PVK and PVK devices after 1000 convex bending cycles with a 5 mm bending radius. As shown in Fig. 3H, the shallow-level defects in the trap I region were significantly increased in both the PVK and IG-PVK devices, while the deep-level defects did not change obviously, which may be due to the enhanced defect density induced by mechanical damage at the grain boundaries. However, the defect density of the IG-PVK devices increased less after bending and decreased significantly after one hour of placement, indicating that the ionic liquid released by the fractured IG after tensile stress accelerated the repair of the polymer network and may passivate the newly-generated mechanical damage.
To further reveal the spatial distribution of the defect states repaired by the ionogel, we used different DC voltages to change the width of the depletion layers of the devices and read the capacitance values at each voltage to calculate the corresponding charge density (Nc) for each edge of the depletion layers using the following equation:44  where X is the profiling distance from the junction barrier. It can be derived from  where Cg can be considered the geometric capacitance at zero DC bias, C is the corresponding capacitance, V is the corresponding voltage and A is the area of device. Nc contains the response of the bulk and interface trap density and free charge density. Assuming that the free charge density of the device is almost unchanged before and after bending, the increased charge density is mainly provided by the bulk and interface trap density. Based on this theory, the spatial distribution of the increased defect density of IG-PVK and PVK after bending was obtained (Fig. 3I) by subtracting Nc before and after bending (Fig. S14, ESI†). In the reference device, the defect density increased more near the C60 interface, which may be related to the greater tensile strain in this region. In addition, the increased defect density near 350 nm accounts for a larger proportion, which may be related to the greater amount of grain boundaries in the horizontal direction in this region. In contrast, the defect density in the IG-PVK devices increased less at each depth. Although there was an increase in defect density near the C60 interface compared to that before bending, after the repairing of the IG, the increased defect density was generally two orders of magnitude lower than that of the reference device. This explained well why the IG enabled the flexible perovskite devices to obtain such low VOC loss and such high FF.
The ionic liquids in the polymer network and the reversible hydrogen bonds between the links not only greatly improved the efficiency of flexible perovskite cells, but also greatly enhanced the bending resistance of the devices. When the convex bending radius was set to 5 mm, the corresponding elongation was about 2%.1 The results in Fig. 4A show that over 500 cycles of convex bending, the attenuation degrees of the two groups of devices were similar. However, after 5000 cycles of bending, the reference device had a 21% reduction in efficiency, which may be related to the expansion of microcracks during bending. However, the IG-PVK devices still retained more than 90% of their initial efficiencies after 25000 cycles of bending. At the same time, we observed the morphology changes in the devices after bending using SEM (Fig. 4B). The original inter-grain microcracks in the reference device had interconnected and developed into large intergranular fractures. Additionally, some grains with a larger size may be subjected to larger local stress, causing transgranular fracture or interlayer debonding. These mechanical damages significantly increased the defects at the grain boundaries and led to the attenuation of efficiency. The large fracture energy and elongation of the IG improved the toughness of the grain boundaries by around two orders of magnitude33,45,46 and effectively dissipated the local stress and inhibited the transformation of the micro-fissures into macroscopic cracks.1 Both transgranular fractures and intergranular fractures were significantly reduced. Moreover, its unique room-temperature self-healing property made the microcracks of the device unobservable after placement of 10 h (Fig. S15, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Comparison of comprehensive stability of IG-PVK and PVK devices. (A) Bending-dependent efficiency curves of IG-PVK and PVK devices under a 5 mm convex bending radius. The open red circles represent the efficiency distribution of five different IG-PVK devices. (B) Comparison of PVK (left) and IG-PVK (right) device morphology after bending. Scale bar: 5 μm. (C) Bending-dependent efficiency distribution curves of IG-PVK and PVK devices under a 2.5 mm convex bending radius. ◁ represents the maximum value, ▷ represents the minimum value, □ represents the mean value, ○ represents the median value, and the box covers the area between the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile. The shaded area shows the efficiency distribution of the bent IG-PVK devices after the room-temperature self-healing process for 10 h. (D) Morphology of an IG-PVK film stretched to 107% of its original length before (left) and after self-healing (right). Scale bar: 1 μm. Inset: Local magnified image of the corresponding area. Scale bar: 400 nm. (E) Comprehensive performance statistics of devices based on the large-area fabrication process.9,28,37–41 (F) Time-resolved topography of unencapsulated IG-PVK (bottom) and PVK (top) films after water droplets were dropped on the film surface. Scale bar: 100 μm. (G) Comparison of operational stability of unencapsulated IG-PVK and PVK devices under continuous 1 Sun irradiation following the ISOS-L-2I protocol.49 
Improvement of the bending resistance of flexible perovskite solar cells is a systematic project, which requires each functional layer to be resistant to bending. The brittleness of ITO is a huge challenge in terms of bending resistance. When the bending radius is less than 5 mm, the ITO will crack and affect the perovskite layer deposited above.1,47,48 In order to avoid the peculiarities of a single device, we simultaneously tested the efficiency of 10 devices for different convex bending times with a radius of 2.5 mm. As shown in Fig. 4C, unsurprisingly, the reference devices retained an average of less than 30% of the initial efficiency after 400 cycles of bending, due to the complete collapse of VOC and FF (Fig. S16B and D, ESI†). In sharp contrast, the IG-PVK devices still maintained an average efficiency of more than 85% after 1000 cycles of bending. Additionally, after 10 h of self-repair at room temperature, the average efficiency recovered to 90% of the initial value, relying on the significant recovery of the FF (Fig. S16D, ESI†). We also compared the SEM images of PVK and IG-PVK films after bending for 1000 cycles under a 2.5 mm radius (Fig. S17, ESI†) to investigate the mechanism of attenuation and provided a detailed discussion in the ESI.†
Further, we investigated the morphological changes in IG-PVK under extreme tensile strain conditions by depositing IG-PVK films on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer substrates coated with PEDOT:PSS (PH1000) and stretching them to 107% of their original length. As shown in Fig. 4D, large cracks began to appear between the grains, but it can be clearly seen that there were still IG filaments sticking the broken grains together. After the stress was released, these fibers guided the grains to return to their original positions and repair them, effectively avoiding the interlayer debonding that occurred in the reference device (Fig. S18, ESI†).
In addition to mechanical stability, the operation-related stability of the device is also a vitally important indicator for flexible perovskite devices (Fig. 4E–G). Therefore, we followed the ISOS-L-2I protocol49 to test the operational stability. We used a modulated compound LED light source (100 mW cm−2) that contained UV light as a solar simulator; its spectrum is shown in Fig. S19 (ESI†). Compared to the reference device, whose efficiency was attenuated to less than 90% of the initial value after 150 h, the IG-PVK devices showed excellent operating stability, maintaining 97.3% efficiency after 442 hours of continuous operation with an estimated T90 exceeding 1336 h (Fig. 4G). This is one of the most stable flexible perovskite cell devices reported so far; these results are inseparable from the encapsulation of IG at the interface and the inhibition of ion migration by ionic liquids.50 We also summarized the statistical results of key metrics related to comprehensive device performance based on large-scale fabrication.9,28,37–41 As shown in Fig. 4E, the ionogel conferred an overall improvement in all indicators.
Due to the hydrophobic outward-facing trifluoromethyl groups in the IG polymer network, the water resistance of the IG-PVK films is greatly improved. The water contact angle of the perovskite film was significantly improved from 38.2° to 78.7° after adding IG (Fig. S20, ESI†). Optical microscopy was also used to characterize the morphology changes induced by water droplets on unencapsulated PVK and IG-PVK films, respectively. For the reference film, the perovskite began to decompose within the first 0.5 s and was almost completely decomposed after 2 s (Fig. 4F). In the IG-PVK film, no perceptible decomposition was observed until 60 s (Fig. S21, ESI†), which allowed us to achieve all-air-processing fabrication of flexible perovskite layers without humidity control using a R2R-compatible method.
Conclusion
In summary, this work was based on a self-designed IG-PVK system that endowed fragile perovskite grain boundaries with toughness, water resistance and room temperature self-healing properties. At the same time, it also passivated defects and improved the operational stability. In terms of efficiency, mechanical stability and operational stability, the IG-PVK devices are at the forefront of the reported flexible PSCs, even compared to spin-coated devices (Table S1, ESI†).1–5,9,27,28,37–41,51–56 The extensively tunable IG matrix, as a platform containing rich interactions, through its modification and collaboration with perovskite endows flexible devices with robust mechanical properties, inhibition of ion migration, passivation of multiple interfaces, prevention of lead leakage,57etc., infinite possibilities. We believe that ionogel will play more important and unique roles on the road to the commercialization of flexible perovskite solar cells.
Author contributions
Q. D. and Y. K. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. Q. D. supervised the work. Y. K. fabricated the ionogel and devices, conducted the characterization and analyzed the data. R. L. assisted in the fabrication of the device, participated in the data analysis and contributed to Raman spectra, XRD and nano-IR characterization. A. W. characterized the IR spectra. J. K. contributed to the mechanical property and contact angle test. Z. W. and Y. Y. conducted the PL and TRPL measurement. W. B. provided single crystals. Q. D., Y. K., R. L. and Y. S. wrote the manuscript and all authors reviewed it.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22179050, No. 21875089).
Notes and references
Q. Dong, M. Chen, Y. Liu, F. T. Eickemeyer, W. Zhao, Z. Dai, Y. Yin, C. Jiang, J. Feng, S. Jin, S. Liu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, N. P. Padture and Y. Shi, Joule, 2021, 5, 1587–1601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Li, J. Zhang, X. Wu, X. Deng, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, C. Zhi, X. Yu, W. C. H. Choy, Z. Zhu and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2105539 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Kim, T. Y. Yang, R. Suhonen, A. Kemppainen, K. Hwang, N. J. Jeon and J. Seo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, F. Li, J. Gong, Y. Ma, J. Gu, X. Liu, S. Chen and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2109879,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202109879 .
L. Yang, J. Feng, Z. Liu, Y. Duan, S. Zhan, S. Yang, K. He, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, N. Yuan, J. Ding and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2201681,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202201681 .
Q. Dong, C. Zhu, M. Chen, C. Jiang, J. Guo, Y. Feng, Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Hu, X. Cao, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, L. Wang, N. P. Padture and Y. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, Y. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Han, T. Xu, S. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Gao, J. Zhao, X. Li, X. Ma, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. E. I. Sha, X. Li and M. Gratzel, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabg0633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 5, 44–60 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. Zeng, C. Zhang, Y. Lu, S. Qiu, C. Wang, C. Liu, L. Pan, S. Wu, J. Hu, G. Liang, P. Fan, H. J. Egelhaaf, C. J. Brabec, F. Guo and Y. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Teale, B. Chen, Y. Hou, L. Grater, T. Zhu, K. Bertens, S. M. Park, H. R. Atapattu, Y. Gao, M. Wei, A. K. Johnston, Q. Zhou, K. Xu, D. Yu, C. Han, T. Cui, E. H. Jung, C. Zhou, W. Zhou, A. H. Proppe, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, T. Filleter, K. R. Graham, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Zhang, X. Guo, C. Lu, J. Wei and J. Fang, Science, 2022, 375, 434–437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, G. Zheng, F. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Gao and Q. Zhao, Joule, 2022, 6, 240–257 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hui, L. Chao, H. Lu, F. Xia, Q. Wei, Z. Su, T. Niu, L. Tao, B. Du, D. Li, Y. Wang, H. Dong, S. Zuo, B. Li, W. Shi, X. Ran, P. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Wu, C. Ran, L. Song, G. Xing, X. Gao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Science, 2021, 371, 1359–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiong, X. Chen, B. Zhang, G. O. Odunmbaku, Z. Ou, B. Guo, K. Yang, Z. Kan, S. Lu, S. Chen, N. A. N. Ouedraogo, Y. Cho, C. Yang, J. Chen and K. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2106118 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Chen, B. Yu, S. Tan, Y. Cui, H. Wu, Y. Luo, J. Shi, D. Li and Q. Meng, Joule, 2022, 6, 676–689 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Li, X. Du, Z. Shao, X. Sun, D. Liu, C. Gao, L. Hao, Q. Zhao, B. Zhang, G. Cui and S. Pang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2022, 61, e202113932 CAS .
Y. Du, Q. Tian, X. Chang, J. Fang, X. Gu, X. He, X. Ren, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, T. Huang, I. Yavuz, R. Wang, T. W. Yoon, M. Xu, Q. Xing, K. Park, D. K. Lee, C. H. Chen, R. Zheng, T. Yoon, Y. Zhao, H. C. Wang, D. Meng, J. Xue, Y. J. Song, X. Pan, N. G. Park, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Nature, 2022, 605, 268–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, J. Yang, T. Wang, Y. Li, X. Pu, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, X. Li and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5406–5415 RSC .
J. Peng, D. Walter, Y. Ren, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Wu, T. Duong, Q. Lin, J. Li, T. Lu, M. A. Mahmud, O. L. C. Lem, S. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Shen, L. Li, F. Kremer, H. T. Nguyen, D. Y. Choi, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Science, 2021, 371, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Qin, Q. Ma, J. Lu, K. Lin, P. Xu, Y. Li, W. Feng, W. H. Zhang and Z. Wei, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 2490–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. G. Yang, Z. K. Wang, T. Kang, Q. Wang, S. H. Turren-Cruz, X. Y. Gao, C. S. Hsu, L. S. Liao and A. Abate, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901519 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Chen, Z.-H. Su, Y.-H. Lou, Y.-J. Yu, K.-L. Wang, G.-L. Liu, Y.-R. Shi, J. Chen, J.-J. Cao, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Gao and Z.-K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, n/a, 2200320 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Karimipour, S. Khazraei, B. J. Kim, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Nano Energy, 2022, 95, 107044 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Y. Deng, X. Shi, X. Li, D. Qi, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2022, 61, e202112673 CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, F. Li, M. Su, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, Z. Cai, X. Yang, X. Meng, P. Li, Y. Wang, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 979–987 RSC .
C. Ge, X. Liu, Z. Yang, H. Li, W. Niu, X. Liu and Q. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2022, 61, e202116602 CAS .
X. Meng, Z. Xing, X. Hu, Z. Huang, T. Hu, L. Tan, F. Li and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2020, 59, 16602–16608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, K. Huang, C. Long, Y. Ding, J. Chang, D. Zhang, L. Etgar, M. Liu, J. Zhang and J. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1412–1445 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, G. S. Han, N.-G. Park and M. J. Ko, Joule, 2019, 3, 1850–1880 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 672–687 RSC .
L. Xu, Z. Huang, Z. Deng, Z. Du, T. L. Sun, Z. H. Guo and K. Yue, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2105306 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, P. Zhang, M. Shamsi, J. L. Thelen, W. Qian, V. K. Truong, J. Ma, J. Hu and M. D. Dickey, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 359–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hao, T. Li, X. Yang and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 2029–2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Yadavalli, M. Chen, M. Hu, Z. Dai, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Scr. Mater., 2020, 187, 88–92 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Shenoy, A. F. Schwartzman and L. B. Freund, Int. J. Fract., 2000, 103, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, S. Lin, X. Meng, T. Hu, D. Li, B. Fan, Y. Cui, F. Li, X. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107726 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xue, G. Chen, X. Hu, M. Su, Z. Huang, X. Meng, Z. Jin, J. Ma, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 19959–19969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Xing, Z. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Cui, T. Hu, M. Su, X. Liao, L. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Meng, X. Yang, Z. Huang, Z. Xing, P. Li, L. Tan, M. Su, F. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 527–535 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Lu, Z. Xu, J. Hu, Y. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Guo and Y. Mai, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2101856 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W. Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Ye, H. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Hao, H. Cai, J. Song and J. Qu, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106370 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Kim, J. W. Lee and Y. S. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007131 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Scr. Mater., 2020, 185, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 RSC .
J. H. Kim, H. J. Seok, H. J. Seo, T. Y. Seong, J. H. Heo, S. H. Lim, K. J. Ahn and H. K. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20587–20598 RSC .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame, A. Di Carlo, R. Cheacharoen, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Colsmann, S. Cros, K. Domanski, M. Dusza, C. J. Fell, S. R. Forrest, Y. Galagan, D. Di Girolamo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, E. von Hauff, H. Hoppe, J. Kettle, H. Köbler, M. S. Leite, S. Liu, Y.-L. Loo, J. M. Luther, C.-Q. Ma, M. Madsen, M. Manceau, M. Matheron, M. McGehee, R. Meitzner, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira, Ç. Odabaşı, A. Osherov, N.-G. Park, M. O. Reese, F. De Rossi, M. Saliba, U. S. Schubert, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks, W. Tress, P. A. Troshin, V. Turkovic, S. Veenstra, I. Visoly-Fisher, A. Walsh, T. Watson, H. Xie, R. Yıldırım, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Lira-Cantu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ru, E. Bi, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Kong, Y. Sha, W. Tang, P. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Chen, X. Yang, H. Chen and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903487 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Li, L. Wang, Y. Pei, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Lin and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22992–23001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chung, S. S. Shin, K. Hwang, G. Kim, K. W. Kim, D. S. Lee, W. Kim, B. S. Ma, Y.-K. Kim, T.-S. Kim and J. Seo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4854–4861 RSC .
L. Yang, Q. Xiong, Y. Li, P. Gao, B. Xu, H. Lin, X. Li and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1574–1582 RSC .
C. Long, K. Huang, J. Chang, C. Zuo, Y. Gao, X. Luo, B. Liu, H. Xie, Z. Chen, J. He, H. Huang, Y. Gao, L. Ding and J. Yang, Small, 2021, 17, e2102368 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Chen, Z. H. Su, Y. H. Lou, Y. J. Yu, K. L. Wang, G. L. Liu, Y. R. Shi, J. Chen, J. J. Cao, L. Zhang, X. Y. Gao and Z. K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2200320,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202200320 .
X. Xiao, M. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Gu, Y. Deng, G. Yang, C. Fei, B. Chen, Y. Lin, M. D. Dickey and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabi8249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01326fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Scalable and low-cost R2R processibility are believed to be major advantages of next-generation solution-processed solar cell techniques. However, these processes have very high requirements for flexibility, efficiency and stability in the solar cell devices. Perovskite solar cells are one important candidate with high efficiency on flexible substrates via lab-scale spin coating. However, the issues of warpage, undulation and narrow processing windows in R2R processes limit the overall device performance, and the highest power conversion efficiency is still much lower than that of their rigid counterparts. In this work, we built an extensively tunable ionogel matrix as a system containing rich interactions with high elongation, toughness and rapid room-temperature self-healing ability. Its modification and collaboration with perovskite enabled the fabrication of flexible devices using a R2R-compatible coating process, and synchronously improved the flexibility, efficiency and comprehensive stability of the flexible devices.


 	Fig. 1  Construction principle and characterization of ionogel-perovskite (IG-PVK) film. (A) Top right: Schematic illustration of the fabrication of IG-PVK devices. Top left: Schematic diagram of the interaction between the PVK grain boundaries and IG under tensile stress at the microscopic scale. Bottom: Schematic illustration of the multiple interactions contained in IG at the PVK grain boundaries on the nanoscale. (B) Self-healing behavior in different cut individual samples at room temperature. The red one is IG with dye added. Scale bar: 2 mm. (C) Strain behavior of IG under tensile stress. IG can maintain 1400% elongation without breaking. (D) Stress–strain curve of IG. (E) Stress–displacement curves of IG used to obtain the tensile adhesion and shear adhesion values between IG and PVK. (F) Resistance–time curves of IG before and after being cut and its rapid self-healing process. (G) Comparison of film-forming process of PVK (left) and IG-PVK (right) precursor droplets on polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) surfaces. Scale bar: 5 mm. (H) Image of a large-area flexible IG-PVK film prepared by a R2R compatible process; the width of the large-area perovskite film is 10 cm. (I) High-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of IG at the PVK grain boundaries. Scale bar: 50 nm. (J) Time-dependent morphology of an IG-PVK film under intense electron beam bombardment. Scale bar: 200 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of interaction between IG and PVK grains. (A) Comparison of C 1s peaks of IG and IG-PVK films from X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) results. (B) Comparison of Pb 4f peaks of PVK and IG-PVK films from XPS results. (C) Comparison of S 2p peaks of IG and IG-PVK films from XPS results. (D) Comparison of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of IG, PVK and IG-PVK powder. (E) Comparison of Raman spectra of PbI2 before and after adding the ionic liquid part of the ionogel. (F) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of PVK and IG-PVK films.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performance and defect-related characterization of the IG-PVK flexible device. (A) J–V curves of the champion PVK and IG-PVK devices. (B) Continuous output curves of PVK and IG-PVK devices at 0.995 V and 1.024 V, respectively, corresponding to the maximum power point. (C) External quantum efficiency and integrated current density curves of the corresponding PVK and IG-PVK devices. (D and E) Statistical distribution of the open circuit voltage (D) and fill factor (E) of PVK and IG-PVK devices. (F) Photovoltaic parameter statistics of reported flexible perovskite devices and the device in this work.3,9,28,37–41 (G) Space-charge limited current curves of hole-only PVK and IG-PVK devices. (H) The energy-level-dependent trap density of states (tDOS) of PVK and IG-PVK devices and their change after 1000 bending cycles with a 5 mm bending radius. (I) Spatial distribution of the increased defect density of IG-PVK and PVK after 1000 bending cycles with 5 mm bending radius.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of comprehensive stability of IG-PVK and PVK devices. (A) Bending-dependent efficiency curves of IG-PVK and PVK devices under a 5 mm convex bending radius. The open red circles represent the efficiency distribution of five different IG-PVK devices. (B) Comparison of PVK (left) and IG-PVK (right) device morphology after bending. Scale bar: 5 μm. (C) Bending-dependent efficiency distribution curves of IG-PVK and PVK devices under a 2.5 mm convex bending radius. ◁ represents the maximum value, ▷ represents the minimum value, □ represents the mean value, ○ represents the median value, and the box covers the area between the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile. The shaded area shows the efficiency distribution of the bent IG-PVK devices after the room-temperature self-healing process for 10 h. (D) Morphology of an IG-PVK film stretched to 107% of its original length before (left) and after self-healing (right). Scale bar: 1 μm. Inset: Local magnified image of the corresponding area. Scale bar: 400 nm. (E) Comprehensive performance statistics of devices based on the large-area fabrication process.9,28,37–41 (F) Time-resolved topography of unencapsulated IG-PVK (bottom) and PVK (top) films after water droplets were dropped on the film surface. Scale bar: 100 μm. (G) Comparison of operational stability of unencapsulated IG-PVK and PVK devices under continuous 1 Sun irradiation following the ISOS-L-2I protocol.49	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01326f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
