Copper indium gallium selenide based solar cells – a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE00826K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE00826K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1306-1319Copper indium gallium selenide based solar cells – a review

        
          
            Jeyakumar 
            Ramanujam†
*a and 

        
          
            Udai P. 
            Singh
          
          
        
      b
aPhysics of Energy Harvesting Division, CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 110 012, India. E-mail: ramanuj@nplindia.org
bSchool of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, India
Received 
      24th March 2017
    , Accepted 20th April 2017First published on 20th April 2017AbstractCopper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) based solar cells are receiving worldwide attention for solar power generation. They are efficient thin film solar cells that have achieved 22.8% efficiency comparable to crystalline silicon (c-Si) wafer based solar cells. For a production capacity of 1000 MW y−1 with 15% module efficiency, the CIGS module production cost is expected to be $0.34 W−1. For CIGS cells over glass, a graded bandgap high temperature deposition process has been established, however, this process has not been established for CIGS over flexible polymer substrates which is a low temperature process. For small area devices, the main focus is precise control over CIGS film stoichiometry and efficiency. For industrial production, apart from stoichiometry and efficiency, low-cost, reproducibility, high-throughput and process tolerance are of much importance in commercializing the technology. Due to process complexity, CIGS module production is lagging behind that of cadmium telluride (CdTe) modules. In this review article, the working mechanism of CIGS solar cells with a back surface field, the importance of developing CIGS solar cells, and the limitations for their commercialization are discussed. CIGS solar cells are compared with c-Si solar cells. After briefly reviewing the history of the chalcopyrite alloy system, graded bandgaps, effects of sodium distribution in CIGS layers, growth of CIGS layers using various techniques, role of buffer layer/transparent conducting oxides, CdS free buffer layers, concerns related to flexible solar cells, and factors affecting the cell efficiency are reviewed. Further efficiency improvement options are discussed. Cell stability, challenges, solutions and future prospects of CIGS solar cells are outlined.
Jeyakumar Ramanujam
Jeyakumar Ramanujam received his PhD in Physics (semiconductor films for photovoltaic applications) from National Physical Laboratory (NPL)/University of Delhi, India in 1998. After having 11 years of Canadian experience from the University of Waterloo, Research In Motion, and McMaster University, Dr Jeyakumar moved back to NPL as a Principal Scientist. He has experience in various types of solar cell technologies, viz. crystalline silicon based solar cells (front junction, back junction, front heterojunction, and back heterojunction), CIGS solar cells, perovskite solar cells, and silicon nanowires for solar cells. Currently, Dr Ramanujam is working on low cost and high efficiency solar cells.
Udai P. Singh
Udai Pratap Singh received his PhD from Banaras Hindu University, India in 1993. Subsequently, he worked for Global Solar Energy (India) Ltd on the development of CdTe solar cells. Afterwards, he moved to Institute of Energy Conversion, University of Delaware, USA where he worked on CIGS based thin film solar cells on flexible substrates. Dr Singh worked as a visiting consultant for CIGS based thin film solar cells at Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Taiwan. Since 2003, Prof. Singh has been with the School of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. His current research area is thin film photovoltaic devices.

Broader context
At present, about 92% of solar panels are made from Si, followed by 5% CdTe, 2% CIGS and <1% a-Si:H. Under one sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination, c-Si based solar cell efficiency reaches 25.6%. A c-Si wafer with 180 μm thickness is used for solar cell fabrication which acts as an absorber. Almost all light is absorbed within a few micrometers of Si, however, for mechanical support high thickness is required. The main issue with the first generation (i.e. c-Si) solar cells is the high production cost due to (i) wafer cost, (ii) complicated manufacturing processes, and (iii) high thermal budget (∼1100 °C) for an extended period of time (∼60 min). As of now, the Si requirement is 5–10 g Wp−1. Thin film solar cells such as CIGS, CdTe and a-Si:H are second generation solar cells, an alternative to first generation solar cells. Due to light induced degradation and the low power conversion efficiency of 12% (stabilized), a-Si:H solar cells are less important. In CdTe solar cells, a toxic material (Cadmium) is involved, and CdTe module disposal is an issue since these modules cause pollution during decommissioning. CIGS solar cells are a promising alternative to c-Si solar cells due to their comparable efficiency (22.8%) and their manufacturing cost can be reduced substantially by using inexpensive glass substrates and flexible/plastic foils. Around a 2 μm thick CIGS absorber film is required for cell fabrication. Therefore, absorber material wastage is lower, whereas in first generation solar cells material wastage is high. CIGS solar cells on flexible substrates can also be used for building integrated photovoltaics. However, the main material issue with CIGS solar cells is the price of indium. About 31 tons of indium is required for the production of a 1 GW CIGS PV module. With large scale CIGS panel production, the price of indium may be unstable due to high demand, as was the case in the 1980s when, due to the increased demand for indium in LCD devices, the indium price increased to several hundred dollars per kilogram.

1. Introduction
Copper indium selenide (CuInSe2 or CIS) is a ternary compound p-type absorber material belonging to the I–III–VI2 family and crystallizes in the tetragonal chalcopyrite structure.1 In 1953, a CIS material with a bandgap of 1.04 eV was first synthesized by Hahn et al.,2 and then, an efficiency of 12% has been reported3 for single crystal CuInSe2 based solar cells. In 1976, the first CuInSe2/CdS thin film solar cell was fabricated with an efficiency of 4–5% by evaporating CuInSe2 powder in the presence of excess Se vapor.4 A few years later, by using the co-evaporation technique, an efficiency of 11.4% was reported by Boeing.5 Around the same time, Kazmerski and Sanborn reported copper indium sulfide (CuInS2) thin film homojunction solar cells with an efficiency of 3%.6 CIS based thin film solar cells started receiving much attention in 1981 when Mickelsen and Chen demonstrated an efficiency of 9.4% by using co-evaporation from elemental sources.7 Since then, a number of breakthrough technologies, viz. alloying with gallium (Ga) such as CuIn1−xGaxSe2 (hereafter called CIGS), sodium (Na) doping and replacing the thick cadmium sulfide (CdS) window layer with a thin CdS layer followed by intrinsic and doped zinc oxide (ZnO) layers etc. have improved the efficiency. Recently, by using a Cd-free buffer material (Zn, Mg)O/Zn(O, S, OH), the best efficiency was reported8 to be 22.8% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.711 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 41.4 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.775. To achieve this, a new process has been developed to improve the Voc by depositing potassium fluoride between the CIGS and buffer layers. This new process resulted in better junction properties.
A schematic diagram of a CIGS based solar cell having a structure of substrate/Mo/p-CIGS/n-CdS/intrinsic ZnO/ZnO:Al/ARC/metal-grid is shown in Fig. 1. In this substrate configuration, light enters the cell through TCO, and a back contact is deposited on the substrate. Note that, in the superstrate configuration, light enters the cell through a glass substrate, which acts as a window for illumination. The working principle of the CIGS solar cell is as follows: the n-type CdS buffer layer (Eg ∼ 2.4 eV) transmits light up to 2.4 eV to the absorber where electron–hole pairs are mainly generated. High energy photons (≥2.4 eV) are absorbed by the CdS layer. Due to a built-in electric field across the p–n junction interface (between CIGS/CdS), electrons within the diffusion length region are swept away from the p-type absorber to the n-type buffer layer and collected by the n-type electrode. Similarly, holes are swept away from the n-type layer to the p-type layer and collected by the p-type electrode. A back surface field (BSF) in the CIGS layer created by a Ga gradient (close to the Mo back contact) is an additional mechanism which reflects electrons towards the p–n junction to be finally collected by the n-type electrode. The BSF reduces minority carrier recombination at the rear (close to the CIGS and Mo interface) side of the device. Details regarding the BSF can be found elsewhere.9,10
 Fig. 1  Schematic cross-section of CIGS based thin-film solar cells. A soda-lime glass substrate (SLG) is generally used. Through the Mo back contact, sodium diffuses from glass into the CIGS absorber and increases conductivity/carrier concentration in the absorber. Substrates such as plastic (polyimide) films and stainless-steel foils have been used to obtain flexible solar cells. When flexible substrates are used, for sodium doping, a sodium containing precursor film such as sodium fluoride (NaF, ∼10 nm) is deposited onto the Mo back contact. A heterojunction is formed between CdS and the CIGS layer. A high resistive intrinsic ZnO layer is deposited to prevent shunting paths due to diffusion of aluminum from the Al-doped ZnO layer into the absorber. An Al-doped ZnO layer is required for lateral conduction to transport photogenerated current into the Ni/Al grids. MgF2 acts as an anti-reflective coating. 
For high efficiency solar cells, the sputtering technique is used for molybdenum (Mo) and ZnO. Vacuum and non-vacuum (chemical bath deposition, CBD) process methods are used for the deposition of the CIGS absorber layer and CdS window layer respectively. The p-type conductivity of the CIGS absorber arises due to shallow defect copper vacancies (Vcu).11 Fabrication of CIGS based solar cells starts with Mo back contact deposition on glass or flexible substrates. Most commonly, for the back contact, a Mo metal film is deposited in two steps by using DC sputtering.12 The Mo film also acts as a reflector and reflects unused light back into the absorber. Substantial improvement in reflection from the rear side has been noticed when a Mo–Cu alloy is used as the rear contact.13
In the CIGS crystal structure, some indium is replaced by Ga in the CuInSe2 film and consequently the CIGS bandgap increases from 1.04 eV. If all indium is replaced by Ga, the CIGS bandgap increases to about 1.7 eV.14 The advantages of CIGS based solar cells compared to CIS based solar cells are: (i) the optical bandgap can be tuned by varying the Ga/In ratio to match the solar spectrum,15 (ii) improved Voc can be obtained due to Ga incorporation since Voc ∼ Eg/2 and (iii) a single phase CIGS absorber can be made more easily than a single phase CIS absorber.16
CIGS is a promising absorber material and has received considerable attention17–23 due to its direct band (∼1.0–1.12 eV), high absorption co-efficient (105 cm−1) and less material wastage.24 The tetragonal CIGS unit cell is shown in Fig. 2. The lattice parameter ratio (c/a) is close to 225 and any deviation from this value is known as tetragonal distortion which comes from Cu–Se, In–Se or Ga–Se bonds.
 Fig. 2  Crystal structure of tetragonal chalcopyrite CIGS unit cell. A chalcopyrite structure is obtained from cubic zincblende structures of II–VI materials (ZnSe) by ordered substitution of the group II element (Zn) by group I (Cu) and group III (In or Ga) elements. In the tetragonal unit cell, the lattice constant ratio (c/a) is close to 2 and any deviation (known as tetragonal distortion) from this is due to different strengths of the Cu–Se, In–Se and Ga–Se bonds. Group I or group III atoms make four bonds with the group VI atom (Se or S). From ref. 26, E. Ghorbani, J. Kiss, H. Mirhosseini, G. Roma, M. Schmidt, J. Windeln, T. D. Kühne and C. Felser, hybrid-functional calculations on the incorporation of Na and K impurities into the CuInSe2 and CuIn5Se8 solar-cell materials, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25197–25203. Copyright© 2015 American Chemical Society. Permission granted. 
The CIGS bandgap can be tuned to match the solar spectrum by replacing indium with Ga. CIGS absorbs most parts of the solar spectrum within 1 μm, a thin layer of ∼2.0–2.5 μm is sufficient for the device, and hence raw material usage can be reduced. Using various deposition techniques, the CIGS material can be deposited on rigid as well as flexible substrates. Apart from terrestrial applications, CIGS solar cells can be used for space applications due to their high radiation tolerance. Also, their suitability for monolithic integration (cell-to-cell interconnection) leads to low production cost due to there being fewer processing steps.
There are some limitations in commercialization. The compositional uniformity from run-to-run is a limitation, and in situ diagnostic tools are critical for process control. Standardization of equipment for both multisource co-evaporation and two-stage processing of CIGS for large scale manufacturing is another limitation. A large difference in efficiency exists between small area cells (>22.8%) and commercially available modules (16.1%). In mass production, there may be a problem of indium supply and the cost may rise suddenly. As a note, 31 tons of indium is required to produce a 1 GW PV module.27
In light of the above, this review article focuses on the potential of CIGS based solar cells for energy applications. The beneficial effects of a graded bandgap and Na distribution in the CIGS absorber are reviewed. Deposition of a CIGS layer by co-evaporation, sequential deposition and non-vacuum techniques is reviewed in detail. Concerns related to flexible solar cells, factors influencing cell efficiency and suggestions to improve efficiency are discussed. Current developments in R&D, issues in production, strategies to overcome the issues and future prospects of CIGS solar cells are briefly presented.
2. Comparison between CIGS solar cells and c-Si solar cells
Si is non-toxic and abundant in nature, and was the first material used to manufacture solar cells. CIGS raw materials are less abundant. For high absorption and mechanical strength, thick and rigid c-Si wafers (180 μm) are used as absorbers in module production; about 50% of the production cost of the cell is due to wafer cost. Recently, for c-Si based solar cells, SunPower reported 24.1% module efficiency (area 11310.1 cm2) certified by NREL. Whereas for CIGS technology, module efficiency is around 16.1% which is much lower than the efficiency of c-Si modules. About 92% of commercial modules are made from Si and thin film modules account for 8%, of which CIGS modules are only 2%.28
Growing large crystals of pure Si is hard and expensive manufacturing technology is required for Si solar cells. However, Si solar cell reliability is unmatched by any other solar cell technology and process technology has been established. Si solar cell performance is stable for a long time (around 20 years). For CIGS cells, not enough stability reports are available for encapsulated cells.
CIGS solar cells are an alternative to Si solar cells and less susceptible to damage than Si solar cells. Different layers used in CIGS cells help to reduce Jsc losses. CIGS technology is highly competitive and involves less raw materials, cost, and time. Module production requires a lower thermal budget (∼550 °C) than c-Si (∼1100 °C), and CIGS cells can be monolithically integrated during cell processing, whereas in Si solar cells, monolithic integration is not possible. The lab-scale (2 × 2 cm2) efficiencies of these technologies are closer (CIGS 22.8%, c-Si 25.6%); CIGS solar panels are heavier than Si panels since two panes of glass are used in CIGS modules whereas in Si modules only one pane of glass is used.
Si is a poor absorber due to its indirect bandgap nature, and its absorption co-efficient is low (104 cm−1). On the other hand, CIGS possesses a direct bandgap and its absorption co-efficient is high. Due to this reason, the CIGS thickness can be about 100 times less than the thickness of the c-Si wafer. In CIGS solar cells, high energy photons are absorbed by a CdS window (buffer) layer and low energy photons are transmitted by the window layer and absorbed by the absorber which leads to better utilization of the solar spectrum. Due to lower material usage and energy requirements for manufacturing, the cost of production of CIGS solar cells is lower than that of Si solar cells. Also, the energy payback time for CIGS technology (∼1 year) is less than that of c-Si technology (∼2 years).
A CIGS film can be deposited directly onto a variety of substrates such as glass and flexible foils, which require less energy than growing and slicing Si. In conventional c-Si solar cells, to obtain ohmic contacts and to lower series resistance, the screen printed grids and full area rear Al contacts are about 20 μm and 40 μm thick, respectively, whereas in CIGS solar cells, the contact thicknesses are less than those of c-Si solar cells.
In Si solar cells, a back surface field is created at the rear side of the Si wafer by alloying aluminum with p-type c-Si which acts as a heavily doped region and creates a potential barrier (p+–p junction, known as high–low junction) at the rear side between the heavily doped region and low doped region. The electric field across the high–low junction sweeps (reflects) electrons away from reaching the rear contact/surface. Hence recombination at the rear side is reduced. Similarly, Ga grading at the rear side of the CIGS (towards the CIGS/Mo interface) creates a back surface field and sweeps electrons away from reaching the Mo back contact and towards the front contact, thereby increasing the collection efficiency.
3. Optical bandgap
The optical bandgap and electrical bandgap of the absorber and window materials are the important parameters for solar cells. The former is the energy required for an electron to move from the valence band to the conduction band, and the latter is related to the activation energy of the material. In this section, we discuss the optical bandgap of the absorber materials where most of the photogeneration takes place.
In the chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga,Al)(Se,S)2 alloy system, the bandgap can be varied from 1.04 eV (CuInSe2) to about 3.5 eV (CuAlS2), almost covering the visible spectrum (Fig. 3). All these materials shown in Fig. 3 are direct bandgap materials which makes them appropriate for solar cell applications as absorbers. Note that tuning the bandgap by varying the Ga/In ratio in CIGS or by changing the S/Se ratio in copper indium gallium sulfur selenide (CuInGaSSe or CIGSSe for short) causes a setback in the device due to changes in the conduction band offset.29
 Fig. 3  Bandgap as a function of lattice constant “a” of the Cu(In, Ga, Al)(S, Se)2 alloy system. For selenide based materials, the system includes a wide range of bandgap energies from 1.04 eV for CuInSe2 to 2.7 eV for CuAlSe2, and for sulfide based materials from 1.55 eV for CuInS2 to 3.45 eV for CuAlS2. The system covers most of the visible spectrum range. Data from ref. 34–36. 
In the CIGS layer, a low Ga atomic ratio [x = Ga/(Ga + In) ∼ 0.26] and (Cu)/(In + Ga) ratio in the range 0.88–0.92 are required for high efficiency solar cells.30,31 Bulk defects are minimal in CIGS when the Ga atomic ratio is around x = 0.3.32 With a higher Ga (x > 0.3) ratio, the number of defects in the film increases with Ga content. In the case of a CIGSSe film, when the S/(S + Se) ratio is >0.61, the fill factor decreases drastically due to an increase in the series resistance.33
3.1 Problems associated with a high bandgap CIGS layer
An optimum bandgap for a CIGS absorber is ∼1.14 eV.37 In general, for high absorption, an absorber bandgap of 1.4 eV is required to match the solar spectrum. However, as mentioned below, there are some problems associated with a high bandgap (>1.14 eV) CIGS material:38,39
(i) Cell efficiency decreases due to midgap defect states/dangling bonds/recombination and band discontinuities at the interface.
(ii) The donor type defect level is located at 0.8 eV above the valence band edge which affects DX centers (known as deep levels associated with donors). For wide bandgap CIGS materials, the defect level is located around the middle of the bandgap, and for narrow bandgap materials, the defect level is close to the conduction band edge. Thus, the defects are associated with increasing CIGS bandgap.
(iii) Recombination occurs at the CdS/CIGS interface due to discontinuity in the conduction band (ΔEc). The discontinuity increases as the bandgap increases, from a small spike to a cliff.
3.2 Graded bandgap CIGS layers
A schematic diagram of a graded bandgap is shown in Fig. 4. CIGS films prepared by a three-stage co-evaporation technique result in a double-graded conduction band profile, with a deep notch point closer to the absorber front surface. A wide bandgap is located at both sides (due to high Ga at%) and a narrow bandgap is located at the notch point such that Eg3 > Eg1 > Eg2. A graded bandgap composition is used to improve the electronic properties such as reduced recombination losses etc. Front grading improves Voc;40 back grading increases carrier collection/Jsc, and decreases bulk/surface recombination at the back contact interface due to the BSF created by Ga grading. The grading conduction band profile is due to low diffusion of Ga atoms on the growing surface.39 At the front side, the conduction band grading offset is due to band bending at the CIGS/CdS interface.41 If the Ga concentration is high in the CIGS film, the notch becomes deep and minority carrier collection from the CIGS absorber is reduced.39 To achieve an appropriate conduction band profile and bandgap, the Ga concentration has to be varied carefully to obtain a wider bandgap >1.14 eV for high Voc and efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Double grading (notch type) bandgap profile for CIGS solar cells. Notch structure is a double profiling structure, having a higher Ga content towards the front and the back of the CIGS absorber layer and low Ga content in between them. This can be visualized as a low bandgap material sandwiched between two wider bandgap materials. The structure has the potential for optimized photon absorption in a specific photon energy range. Front side grading improves Voc, and back grading improves Jsc. From ref. 42, M. A. Contreras, J. Tuttle, A. Gabor and K. Ramanathan, High efficiency Cu(In,Ga)Se2-based solar cells, Processing of Novel absorber structures. First World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Hawaii, USA, December 5–9, 1994. pp. 68–75. 
4. Effects of Na diffusion on the device performance
During the absorber growth on SLG substrates at high temperature (∼550 °C), Na diffuses through the Mo layer from SLG substrates to the CIGS layer by thermal activation. The presence of Na in the CIGS absorber passivates grain boundaries and surfaces. A moderate level (0.1%) of Na in the CIGS layer improves cell efficiency. When flexible substrates are used, Na doping at low temperature is accomplished by depositing a 10 nm NaF layer prior to CIGS layer deposition. Commercially available flexible (polyimide) substrates can withstand up to 450 °C. As a side note, cell efficiency is high when the CIGS growth process temperature is high.
Due to Na diffusion through the Mo layer, the properties of the Mo layer significantly influence the cell performance. Even though Na diffusion improves lab-scale cell efficiency, diffusion leads to lateral non-uniform distribution in the device and affects cell performance.43 To avoid non-uniform diffusion, Na containing precursors such as NaF44,45 are deposited onto Mo-coated SLG substrates. To prevent Na diffusion from SLG substrates to the CIGS film, a diffusion barrier layer such as SiO2, SiN or Cr is used between the Mo film and SLG substrate.
The influence of Na incorporation on CIGS solar cells has been reported.46–50 The beneficial effects of Na incorporation at lower concentrations are as follows: (i) about 0.1 at% of Na (which gives a hole concentration of 1020 cm−3) is incorporated into the CIGS film, bonded to selenium as NaSex, thus Se is included in the film preventing the formation of a VSe donor; (ii) the incorporation of Na improves Voc, FF, efficiency and film morphology (and hence an improvement in 〈112〉 grains), enhances hole concentration/conductivity by creating acceptor-type NaIn defects and passivates the grain boundary. Also, Na incorporation passivates shallow donor-type InCu antisites by forming NaCu defects and reduces charge compensation. The reduced number of compensating VSe donors is also a reason for the improved conductivity of Na-containing CIGS films; (iii) Na diffusion inside the CIGS grains passivates non-radiative centers located at the grain boundaries; (iv) a Cu-deficient CIGS surface is required to reduce interfacial recombination. Na incorporation attracts oxygen to the chalcogenide material surface, and induces the formation of indium oxide and gallium oxide, and hence copper is buried under the surface oxide layer. That is, Na incorporation yields a Cu-deficient CIGS surface and interfacial recombination is reduced; (v) Na incorporation decreases the [Ga]/[Ga + In] ratio towards the centre of the CIGS layer (Fig. 5) and assists bandgap gradient in the CIGS layer.
 Fig. 5  Incorporation of Na into the CIGS absorber film improves device performance. Na incorporation leads to improved structural and electronic properties of the absorber. After Na incorporation into the CIGS film, the following changes were observed: (A) enhanced carrier density and grain boundary passivation, (B) gallium segregation, and (C) changes in crystallographic orientation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, E. S. Mungan, X. Wang and M. Ashraful Alam, Modeling the effects of Na incorporation on CIGS Solar Cells, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3 451–456. Copyright© 2013 IEEE. Permission granted. License Number: 3550561378185. 
The detrimental effects are less explored at higher Na concentrations. One detrimental effect is that Na doping affects the interdiffusion kinetics of elements resulting in an altered graded bandgap profile and defect formation.51
Several methods have been used for the incorporation of Na into the CIGS layer to achieve suitable electronic properties. Elemental Na or compounds such as NaF44,45 or Na2S53 or Na2Se54 layers have been used. However, the standard method is to use SLG substrates for a Na source. The following other methods have also been reported: (i) evaporation of a thin NaF precursor layer before CIGS deposition,55 (ii) co-evaporation of a Na compound during CIGS deposition,56 and (iii) evaporation of the Na compound after CIGS deposition followed by post deposition annealing in a vacuum.57 Out of these methods, better results are obtained for the post deposition treatment.51 A low Jsc has been reported when Na is added during the CIGS growth.51 The control of Na incorporation into the CIGS film from the precursor layer allows the use of metal or polymer films as substrates.
5. Deposition of the CIGS absorber layer
A CIGS absorber is grown between 450 and 600 °C to obtain a high quality absorber. Despite a wide range of deposition methods, there are few methods that dominate both in lab-scale and large-scale (industrial) production. These deposition methods can be classified into three main categories, viz. (a) co-evaporation, (b) sequential selenization/sulfurization of the precursor metal films, and (c) non-vacuum techniques, mainly particle deposition by printing suitable inks on a substrate and subsequent annealing. The criteria for the selection between different deposition techniques may be different for lab-scale and large-scale production. For lab-scale, the primary focus is precise control over CIGS film composition and cell efficiency. For industrial production, apart from efficiency, low-cost, reproducibility, high-throughput and process tolerance are of much importance.
5.1 Co-evaporation
By using the co-evaporation technique, CIGS solar cells have been developed.58,59 Growth processes can be categorized by the number of growth stages in which elements are deposited (under vacuum) as thin layers at different deposition rates and substrate temperatures. Atomic absorption spectroscopy is used to control the elemental flux and X-ray fluorescence is used for in-line detection of CIGS film composition.
Various types of co-evaporation processes are shown in Fig. 6. Depending upon the number of stages, growth processes are generally referred to as: (i) a single stage process (Fig. 6a) which consists of only one evaporation rate for each element, and is Cu deficient throughout the complete process, (ii) a two-stage process known as the Boeing process61 in which Cu-rich growth is utilized in the first stage, and Cu-poor growth is performed in the second stage of deposition (Fig. 6b) by reducing Cu flux, (c) a three stage process62 in which indium and Ga are deposited in the first stage, Cu is deposited in the second stage, and indium and Ga are deposited in the third stage (Fig. 6c). A graded Ga/In profile is also employed in the three stage process (in other words, the three stage process is a combination of Cu-poor, Cu-rich and graded Ga/In profile), (d) to obtain graded absorbers, In/Ga/Cu fluxes are varied (Fig. 6d). A constant Se flux is also supplied in the co-evaporation processes. With a certified efficiency of 19.3%, the in-line compatibility of the three stage CIGS process has proven to have potential for large-scale manufacturing of high-efficiency CIGS thin-film modules.63
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of different co-evaporation processes: (a) single stage process, (b) bilayer or Boeing process in which the first layer is deposited at lower substrate temperature, and the second layer is deposited at a higher substrate temperature, (c) three stage process in which In and Ga are deposited in the first and third stage, whereas Cu is deposited in the second stage, and (d) In, Ga and Cu fluxes are varied during the growth to obtain a graded structure. In processes (a)–(d), a constant Se flux is also supplied.60 With permission from U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra, Progress in polycrystalline Cu(InGa)Se2 thin-film solar cells, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 2010, p. 468147, DOI: 10.1155/2010/468147. Copyright© 2010 U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra. 
To obtain high efficiency, CIGS solar cells are made from Cu-poor (Cu/(In + Ga) < 1) absorbers. In contrast, all the electronic properties, viz. defect density, bulk recombination, and transport properties (for example, mobility) are better in CIGS materials grown under Cu-excess (Cu/(In + Ga) > 1). The reason for high efficiency by employing Cu-poor absorbers in CIGS solar cells is due to reduced recombination at the interface between CIGS and the CdS buffer layer.64 Cu-excess CIGS cells show lower efficiency due to high interface recombination.65 Also, in the Cu-excess case, Cu being incorporated as Cu2Se at the surface is highly conductive and degrades the cell performance. CuxSe segregation to the grain boundaries leads to lower shunt resistance, resulting in low fill factor and cell efficiency.64 Cu-rich devices are limited by low current due to tunneling enhanced recombination.66
There are several disadvantages and challenges involved in the vacuum process production of CIGS solar cells. The vacuum process is not economical and is time-consuming. Evaporation sources have cosine flux distribution. Therefore, sharp changes in film composition and uniformity over a large area could not be maintained. To support large area glass substrates and uniform heating of large area substrates above 550 °C, the evaporation source must be mounted in a top-down design.67 Also, since Se is relatively un-reactive, it must be supplied in excess to avoid loss of Se from the CIGS film leading to condensation of selenium vapor on the side walls of the coating system. The recycling of condensed Se vapor is a major limitation.
5.2 Sequential deposition (selenization/sulfurization)
The second approach is the sequential technique, a two-stage deposition process where Cu/In/Ga elements are sputtered onto the substrate and then annealed in a chalcogen-containing (Se and/or S) atmosphere for the formation of CIGS or CIGSSe films. For the first stage, sputtering is suitable for large area deposition and industrial production. In the second stage, using the selenization/sulfurization process, a chalcopyrite material (CIGS, CIGSSe) is formed by annealing/reactive annealing or rapid thermal processing (RTP) of the metal (Cu/In/Ga) precursor stack. For chalcogen sources, elemental (Se or S) and/or hydride gases, viz. hydrogen selenide/hydrogen sulphide (H2Se/H2S) are used. Selenization or sulfurization of the metal stack using elemental or hydride gases is performed in a predetermined stoichiometry.
The hydride gases are toxic. However, the advantages are them being highly reactive and easy to control. Toxic gases can be avoided by using the RTP process and stacked elemental precursor layers with an evaporated Se layer on top. In this case, stacked layers are selenized by RTP in an inert or Se atmosphere.
Metallic precursors react at high temperature (∼500 °C) in the sulfurization and/or selenization (SAS) processes, and form a compound such as Cu(In1−xGax)S2 or Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 or Cu(In1−xGax)(Se1−xSx)2 by incorporating sulfur or selenium or both. The latter improves the interface with CdS (buffer layer) since the buffer layer also contains sulfur. SAS processes require either a resistance heated furnace or an infrared lamp (i.e. RTP) furnace. An optimized time-temperature reactant profile is required for the second stage process.68 Using a two stage selenization process, the best efficiency is reported to be 19.2%.23
5.3 Non-vacuum deposition techniques
High production cost and complex vacuum processes have led to the development of simple and low-cost non-vacuum solution methods. The non-vacuum technique is the third approach to CIGS manufacturing; this technique can eliminate the vacuum evaporation process. The non-vacuum technique is basically a two-step process which involves precursor deposition at low temperature followed by high-temperature annealing in a chalcogen atmosphere. The main advantages of non-vacuum techniques over vacuum based techniques are: (i) reduced material cost and better material utilization, (ii) low capital investment, (iii) better stoichiometric control, (iv) low energy input, (v) high-throughput, and (v) roll-to-roll compatible processing. Non-vacuum techniques can be classified as CBD/electroless deposition/electrodeposition,69–72 particulate deposition (solid particles in a solvent to form an ink)/inkjet printing,73,74 and spray/spin coating.75 Non-vacuum techniques yield inhomogeneous, less dense films and contamination, and it is more challenging to produce a graded chemical composition in the film.
Electrodeposition can be carried out in one-step or in successive steps. In one-step electrodeposition (i.e. co-deposition of all elements), complexing agents are used to bring down the individual deposition potentials together or close to one another. The critical step is the final film formation after annealing. As such, process optimization is difficult in one-step electrodeposition. An efficiency of 13.8% on glass76 and 15.4% on stainless steel has been reported77 by using the electrodeposition technique.
Particulate techniques such as screen printing, spray coating, and spin coating are the most commonly used deposition techniques. The material is reduced to particulate form (granular pieces) of the final film and deposited onto a substrate. Particulate materials viz. CIGS, metal oxides, metals, and/or metal selenides are prepared by various methods such as solution precipitation, laser pyrolysis, laser ablation etc. Using particulate materials, an absorber layer is formed by spin coating or screen printing or the doctor's blade method. The final film is subject to high-temperature annealing in a chalcogen atmosphere to form CIGS absorber films. CIGS particles require very high temperature for sintering.78 Due to oxidation and handling issues, the use of metal particles has been limited.
The best results are reported for a slurry of a mixture containing selenide powders or metal oxides. Using a non-vacuum printing method on flexible foil, the highest efficiency was reported to be 17.1% by Nanosolar.79 For the solution based process, hydrazine based compounds and organometallics etc. have been used and a highest efficiency of 15.2% has been reported for hydrazine based compounds.80 However, hydrazine use has been limited only to a laboratory scale due to its toxic and reactive nature.
Using solution processing, large scale production at lower cost with less material wastage can be realized. Solution processed CIGS devices showed good performance79,80 which was due to the absorber bandgap of 1.16 eV (this is close to an ideal value of 1.1.4 eV), good absorber quality, collection efficiency, long diffusion length and high minority carrier life-time as evidenced from a very low (Eg/q − Voc) value of ∼0.45 V. However, the efficiency is not high enough due to high series resistance (three times higher than the vacuum processed cell) and low fill factor, which is due to non-ideal contact (less than perfect ohmic behavior) at the Mo/CIGS interface.79,80
Besides the above approaches for the preparation of CIGS absorber films, several other methods have also been investigated. These include MBE,81 MOCVD,82 electron beam deposition,83 and pulsed laser deposition.84 The advantages and disadvantages of different techniques are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 List of various growth methods used for the preparation of CIGS films, and their advantages and disadvantages




Methods
Advantages
Disadvantages




Co-evaporation
Well established technique for lab-scale devices
Simultaneous control of sources is difficult and results in variation in stoichiometry, poor reproducibility and uniformity over large area


Sputtering
Controlled deposition rate and better crystallinity
High operational cost, produces multiple phases, viz. CIS, CGS


Selenization/sulfurization
Large area deposition, established technique can be used for precursor deposition and reaction
Toxic gases (H2Se), additional processing step is required, poor adhesion with back contact


Electrodeposition
Low cost method, room temperature deposition
Process optimization is difficult


Screen printing
Little material wastage, high packing density, high throughput
Control of Ga profile is not possible, while drying, phase segregation and inhomogeneities occur


Spray coating
Scalable, high throughput and low cost
Precursor material wastage during spray coating


Spin-coating
Film uniformity (lab-scale), cost of equipment is low, easy operation
No uniformity over a large area, material wastage, roll-to-roll incompatible


Doctor's blade
Less material wastage, roll-to-roll compatible, better stoichiometric control
Solvent evaporation is slow which leads to accumulation


MBE
Minimum contamination due to ultra-high vacuum deposition, this method is good for basic studies such as defect studies and phase segregation
Large area deposition has not been reported, high efficiency not reported


MOCVD
Useful for basic studies, growth rate is faster than MBE
Not suitable for industrial processes, large area growth is not reported, process is not as abrupt as MBE


Electron beam deposition
Good stoichiometry and film purity
Large area deposition not reported, not compatible with industrial processes


Pulsed laser deposition
Target composition can be transferred to films and yield good stoichiometry in the film, CuSe binary phase can be avoided
Not suitable for large area, large area stoichiometry has not been reported


Inkjet printing
Mask-less patterning simplifies processing steps, compatible for roll-to-roll technology
Low efficiency




6. Buffer layer and transparent conducting oxide
Over the years, several buffer layers and deposition techniques have been evaluated with varying results.60 The best results are obtained by using a CdS buffer layer85 with a Voc of 741 mV, Jsc of 37.8 mA cm−2 and FF of 80.6% and an efficiency of 22.6% (0.5 × 0.5 cm2). The CdS layer is usually deposited by CBD over the CIGS absorber layer, and generally made by an alkaline aqueous solution (pH > 9) using three components: cadmium salt as a cadmium source (CdSO4, CdI2etc.), ammonia (NH3) as a complexing agent, and thiourea as a sulfur source. The role of NH3 is to supply the ligand for the metal ions (cadmium) and to control the hydrolysis of thiourea via the pH. Since the CBD solution contains NH3, to some extent, the CIGS surface is etched away; etching removes the Na-containing CIGS surface and oxides just before CdS nucleation.86 The CdS layer thickness has been reduced to 40–80 nm to act as a buffer layer rather than as an emitter layer. CdS remains the best choice, however, CdS is hazardous since Cd is toxic. Cd-free buffer layers such as zinc sulfide and indium sulfide are being pursued in CIGS solar cells. Generally Cd-free buffer layers are higher bandgap materials than CdS; Cd-free buffer layers improve the blue response of the solar cells and hence Jsc. Solar Frontier reported a high efficiency of 19.7% using a CBD Zn(S,O,OH) buffer layer.87 AGU and ZSW have also reported a high efficiency (>18%) by using a Zn(O,S) buffer layer.88,89
Several other Cd-free buffer layers such as Zn1−xMgxO, ZnxSn1−xOyetc. have been studied as a heterojunction partner in CIGS solar cells.90 The highest efficiency of 22.8% (Voc 0.711 V, Jsc 41.4 mA cm−2 and fill factor 0.775) has been reported when a Cd-free buffer layer (Zn,Mg)O/Zn(O,S,OH) is used in the device.91 In some cases, the Voc of Cd-free CIGS solar cells is lower than that of CIGS/CdS solar cells since a higher surface photovoltage is produced when CdS is used.92 In the case of a Zn1−xMgxO buffer layer, conduction band off-set can be tuned by varying the Mg content. For Cd-free buffer layers, a better understanding of band alignment and low defect density at the buffer layer interfaces are required.
A highly transparent, suitable bandgap (>3.3 eV) and n-type conducting transparent conducting oxide (TCO) layer (i.e. ZnO) over a CdS layer acts as a front contact, also called a window layer because it transmits light to the absorber where the charge carriers are created. High lateral conduction along the TCO layer is required to transport the photogenerated current laterally to the contacts without significant losses. Typically a bilayer of ZnO consists of a thin (100 nm) intrinsic ZnO layer and a thick (300 nm) n-type doped ZnO layer. The intrinsic ZnO is required to provide an isolation between the CdS and Al-doped ZnO (ZnO:Al) so that the intrinsic ZnO layer prevents the diffusion of Al into the absorber layer. Usually, a highly conductive ZnO:Al or ZnO:Ga layer is used as the TCO layer. As a note, in the ZnO:Al film, doped Al3+ substitutes the Zn2+ and creates extra free charge carriers in the film. Therefore, lower resistivity is obtained in the ZnO:Al film than the intrinsic ZnO film.93
TCOs are chosen based on their conductivity, transparency, moisture stability, and compatibility with further processing. The existence of Al in the ZnO:Al film enhances the moisture absorption in the film. Moisture exposure is detrimental to the ZnO:Al film. Upon moisture exposure, a severe degradation in resistivity, i.e. an increase in resistivity, of about an order of magnitude has been observed in the ZnO:Al film.93 Therefore long term stability is the main challenge when ZnO:Al is used in CIGS solar cells.
7. CIGS solar cells on flexible substrates
Solar cells on flexible substrates open up a new market for building integrated photovoltaics. Production costs can be lowered by using flexible substrates and roll-to-roll manufacturing. Remarkable progress has been made on flexible CIGS solar cells particularly using polyimide substrates. Monolithic interconnection (a three step laser scribing process) of cells made on polyimide has been established.51 Flexible solar cells are fabricated over curved/uneven surfaces which are very thin, light weight, and can be rolled up for storage. These substrates can be classified into three types: (i) metallic foils such as Ti, Mo, Al, Cu, and stainless steel,94–97 (ii) polymer (25 μm thick polyimide) sheets,98,99 and (iii) ceramics (Zirconia).100 Several groups73,101–107 have reported CIGS solar cells on various flexible substrates. A high efficiency of 20.4% on a polyimide film has been reported108 suggesting the efficiency of solar cells on flexible substrates could reach the efficiency of solar cells on rigid substrates. However, this is true for small area cells. The small area efficiencies for high (>550 °C) and low temperature processing (375–450 °C), respectively, on rigid and flexible substrates, are close to each other. A CIGS layer is grown on polyimide/metal foils at a substrate temperature of about 450 °C/550 °C for high quality absorbers. Also, since polymer substrates are electrical insulators, it allows direct monolithic integration of solar cells. On metal substrates, monolithic integration is possible by depositing an additional dielectric barrier layer. The barrier layer provides electrical insulation between the Mo/substrate interfaces, and serves as a diffusion barrier against impurities from the substrate.109
For low-cost production, high efficiency and large scale manufacturing with high throughput and yield are the critical factors. For commercialization, long term stability is one of the important factors. There are some concerns that exist with flexible solar cells: (i) lack of flexible substrates fulfilling minimum requirements, for example, with suitable physical, chemical and mechanical properties; (ii) metals and special polymers have been used as flexible substrates. Metals such as Cu and Al can withstand high temperature processing. Nevertheless, they have high density, large thermal expansion co-efficient and high roughness. Thermal expansion co-efficient varies widely depending on the manufacturers; (iii) most metals (for example, steel) contain impurities. Contamination due to the diffusion of undesired elements from flexible (metal) foils to absorbers is deleterious for cell performance. Reactivity of Cu or Al with Se is an issue, however, Cu can be used beneficially to synthesize CuInSe2 from the Cu substrate;110 (iv) even though polymer substrates possess much lower density and roughness than metals, they cannot sustain high temperature (550–600 °C) processing. High temperature processing is commonly required for high efficiency cells. Polyimide (polymer) substrates are plastics that can withstand temperatures up to 450 °C for a short period of time. Low temperature processing using polymer substrates (<400 °C) leads to poor absorber quality111 and efficiency; (v) an additional layer (for example, NaF) is required for Na doping in the CIGS absorber; (vi) ceramic substrates have also been used as flexible substrates.112 However, they are brittle, a limitation for industrial production. The typical thickness of flexible substrates (metal, polymer, or ceramic) is generally between 25 and 400 μm which is about 1–2 orders of magnitude less than standard glass substrates; (vii) using a high temperature process, a graded bandgap in CIGS has been achieved by fine tuning the (Ga)/(Ga + In) ratio. A low temperature process has not been established in this case; (viii) CdS growth is not compatible with roll-to-roll production since the CdS film is coated by a wet chemical process; (ix) roll-to-roll manufacturing in the multi-chamber vacuum system causes a change in temperature in the polymer substrate that induces volume expansion.
8. Factors influencing the efficiency of CIGS solar cells
There are several factors affecting efficiency including stoichiometry, grain size, surface morphology, defects in the absorber and its interfaces with Mo and CdS. Roughness less than 50 nm in the CIGS film results in smaller surface area at the CIGS/CdS interface and hence both recombination at the interface and saturation current are reduced.113 Nevertheless, one disadvantage of a smoother film is the increased reflection from the film.
Collection efficiency can be improved by bandgap engineering.114,115 As mentioned in Section 3.2, the notch structure in the CIGS film, i.e. Ga gradient as a function of depth improves the Voc, Jsc and efficiency. The improvement in Jsc is due to the quasi-electric field provided by the notch structure (i.e. gradual increase in conduction band energy towards the back contact, Fig. 4) which sweeps free electrons from the CIGS neutral region to the p–n junction and hence increases Jsc. By using front grading (Fig. 4), energy loss during thermalisation and recombination at the p–n junction can be reduced. However, it is reported that CIGS with high Ga is of lower quality than CIGS with low Ga due to an increase in defect density.116
High efficiency is reported116 for a standard CIGS thickness of 1.6 μm and up to a thickness of about 1 μm. Beyond 1 μm thickness, severe degradation in efficiency has been observed due to Voc, Jsc and FF losses. Degradation is associated with optical losses, and shunting etc.
To improve Jsc, as mentioned before, a wide bandgap window layer is required to enhance light transmission to the absorber for more photogeneration to occur. Therefore, a Zn(O,S) window layer is used instead of CdS since the bandgap of Zn(O,S) is higher than that of CdS. Also, an increase in Ga concentration in the space charge region improves Voc.117
In the two-step selenization process,118 a low Voc has been reported due to Ga segregation towards the back of CIGS films. To improve Voc, a sulfurization step was performed to widen the CIGS bandgap near the surface. In addition to the two-step selenization process, potassium fluoride post-deposition treatment was also performed to improve Voc.
In general, Jsc can be improved by reducing CdS layer thickness, and improving TCO properties such as conductivity, transparency and environmental stability. Cell performance decreases (such as a drop in Voc) with increasing CdS buffer layer thickness. To enhance FF, parasitic leakage current, contact resistance and series resistance of the cell should be reduced. By improving the crystallinity and density of the CIGS absorber layer, the parasitic leakage current can be reduced. In CIGS solar cells, electronic inhomogeneity119 is a key factor for efficiency limitation.
9. Current status, challenges and future prospects
For the CIGS bandgap of 1.14 eV, the theoretical efficiency limit is 33.5%.120 In the near future cell efficiency as high as 25% can be reached. An improvement from the current value (22.8%) can be achieved by using the following approaches: (i) improving CIGS absorber properties such as maximizing absorption by using innovative doping methods for high Jsc, (ii) reducing defect density by employing surface passivation on both sides of the CIGS layer to reduce recombination losses at the interfaces leading to high Voc, (iii) using a Cd-free large bandgap window layer for high Jsc, (iv) utilizing a reflector (mirror) layer at the rear side of the cell to redirect unused light back to the absorber for electron–hole pair generation etc.
Most of the stability studies have been performed on unencapsulated CIGS cells.121 In ref. 122, it is reported that Mo rear contact causes instability due to its oxidation and degradation. Also, interfacial reaction at the rear contact is crucial. To improve the long term stability of CIGS solar cells, an alternative back contact is required. To prevent oxygen and moisture entering the module, a robust encapsulation technology is required.
For a production capacity of 1000 MW y−1 (15% module efficiency), the CIGS module production cost is estimated to be $0.34 per W.123 Cumulative CIGS module production has reached over 1.6 GW in 2015124 and its current market share among all technologies is around 2%. Due to process complexity, CIGS panel production is lagging behind that of CdTe modules. Using the vacuum technique, an efficiency of 22.6% has been reported.85 The about 0.3% gain in efficiency from the previous record of 22.3% was due to post deposition treatment over the CIGS surface using alkaline metal compounds and other improved processes. By tuning the Cu(In1−x,Gax)(S1−x,Sex)2 material properties for a single junction, and combining with other materials such as perovskites for multi-junctions, the cell efficiency can be improved further. There are several challenges/issues in CIGS solar cell production:
• CIGS is a quaternary compound; film uniformity (thickness and composition) across the large area substrates is an issue. Uniformity is the main requirement for electronic and optical properties of high efficiency solar cells. Reproducibility and uniformity over a large area directly influence yield in production. For large area substrates, sputter deposition is suitable.
• Cell efficiency in large area manufacturing is low. A non-destructive technique is required to evaluate the thickness and composition of the CIGS film.
• The main challenge for commercialization is scaling up lab-scale techniques to industrial production while maintaining high efficiency. A large gap exists between lab-scale efficiency (22.8%)8 and commercial module efficiency (16.1%).125 Module performance is usually limited due to inhomogeneity in the CIGS film. To reduce the efficiency gap, a homogeneous CIGS film is required over a large area. In-line process controls improve module manufacturing.
• If both non-vacuum and vacuum processes (for example, CdS by CBD, CIGS by the vacuum technique) are involved for CIGS solar cell fabrication, substrate handling between different tools is an issue.126 Also, difference in throughput between the processes is another issue. This can be avoided by using a vacuum process for all film depositions, viz. the sputtering technique.
• Since cadmium is toxic, disposal of the cadmium containing product causes adverse effect on the environment, and produces toxic effects on humans. Decommissioning is a major issue in developing countries.28 Cadmium-free CIGS panels are required.
• Indium is mainly obtained as a by-product from zinc and its availability is restricted from zinc production.127 Indium demand may increase with large production of CIGS modules28 and price escalation can occur due to a supply–demand gap. To solve this issue, a thinner CIGS layer of ≤1 μm should be used in the device without compromising Jsc.
• The processing time for CIGS and TCO layers should be reduced. This can be done by using a thinner CIGS layer and a high speed growth technique for TCO.
• CIGS modules with EVA/glass have shown degradation since module performance is sensitive to water vapor; the main reason is an increase in ZnO resistance and Mo corrosion.128,129 To avoid moisture ingress, a suitable edge seal with better properties such as adhesion, durability, low moisture vapor transmission rate and thermal stability etc. is required.
• There are cleaning issues after laser scribing for monolithic integration for series interconnection. This issue can be solved by using a short pulse width laser.
• A graded CIGS bandgap profile improves the electrical and optical properties. A high throughput process can lower the production cost.
• For high efficiency lab-scale cells, a static deposition process (substrates in a fixed position) is used.51 On the other hand, in manufacturing, a dynamic deposition process (substrates are in motion in the in-line process) is used for the production of large area solar cells. The growth kinetics are different between static and dynamic processes. Consequently, small area high efficiency is not reproducible over a large area. The deposition process should be identical in both cases.
Due to the scarcity and price volatility of indium and Ga used in CIGS, CZTS with a kesterite structure is a candidate for replacing CIGS, and has attracted attention as an absorber for solar cells. CZTS is a quaternary absorber material consisting of copper, zinc, tin, and sulfur, which are non-toxic and abundant in the earth. CZTS is similar to the CIGS absorber, but the scarce elements indium and Ga present in CIGS are replaced by Zn and Sn, respectively, in CZTS. However, the highest cell efficiency reported is only 12.6% due to high Voc losses associated with recombination due to defects in the bulk and at the interfaces. In other words, Voc losses are associated with CZTS material quality. No further improvement in efficiency has been reported in the past few years. The low efficiency limits the implementation of CZTS based solar cells.
Looking further into the future of CIGS solar cells, studies on optimization of materials and interface properties are required to improve efficiency. For large area and large scale production, as mentioned in Section 1.0, standardization of equipment for multi-source evaporation and a two-stage selenization process are required. At present, about a 3 μm thick CIGS layer is used in high efficiency solar cells which requires a deposition time of about 60 min. For industrial production, about a 10 min deposition time is required for high throughput without deteriorating device performance. Also, for the two-stage selenization technique, a faster selenization process is required. To reduce the production cost, CIGS layer thickness should be reduced to about 1 μm without any degradation in device properties, particularly Jsc losses from the long wavelength region. A higher bandgap (than CdS) and cadmium-free window layer are required for high Jsc. To obtain an ideal bandgap (1.4 eV) for the CIGS layer, Ga incorporation in CIGS should be increased without compromising device performance. Meta-stability in CIGS cells fabricated by the two-stage selenization technique should be eliminated.
10. Conclusions
We have reviewed material properties, recent developments of CIGS solar cells, and various growth techniques used for fabrication. To obtain high efficiency for CIGS based solar cells, the Ga/(Ga + In) ratio and Cu/(Ga + In) ratio should be around 0.26 and 0.88–0.92 respectively. If the Ga/(Ga + In) ratio exceeds 0.3, the number of defects in the film increases. For CIGSSe based solar cells, to obtain a high fill factor, the S/(S + Se) ratio should be less than 0.61. High efficiency CIGS based solar cells are made from Cu-poor absorbers due to reduced recombination at the CIGS/CdS interface. For high efficiency, the Eg of the absorber can be increased from 1.04 eV to 1.14 eV by incorporating Ga. However, if Eg > 1.14 eV, midgap defects/recombination in the device increases and discontinuity in the conduction band increases from a small spike to a cliff. A graded bandgap profile in the absorber improves cell performance. Front grading (close to CdS) improves Voc and back grading (close to the back contact) improves the collection efficiency and Jsc. Also, sodium diffusion from glass to the absorber improves lab-scale efficiency. In industrial production, the three-stage co-evaporation process is used. A large difference exists between lab-scale efficiency (22.8%) and commercial module efficiency (16.1%). Lab-scale high efficiency is not reproducible over a large area since a static deposition process (substrate in a fixed position) is used for lab-scale devices, whereas in industrial production, a dynamic deposition process is used; the difference in efficiency is due to the difference in growth kinetics. About a 3 μm CIGS layer is used in the cell; it requires ∼60 min for growth. For high throughput, a 1 μm thick CIGS film and about a 10 min deposition time is required without deteriorating device performance. Electronic inhomogeneity is a key issue for efficiency limitation.
Acknowledgements
The author R. Jeyakumar acknowledges CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi, India.
References
R. Jeyakumar, S. Ramamurthy, M. Jayachandran and M. J. Chockalingam, Mater. Res. Bull., 1994, 29, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hahn, G. Frank, W. Klingler, A. D. Meyer and G. Storger, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1953, 271, 153–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wagner, J. L. Shay, P. Migliorato and H. M. Kasper, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 434–436 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Kazmerski, F. R. White and G. K. Morgan, Thin-film CuInSe2/CdS heterojunction solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 268–269 CrossRef CAS .

          W. E. Devaney, R. A. Michelsen and W. S. Chen, Proc. 18th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 1985, p. 1733.
L. L. Kazmerski and G. A. Sanborn, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 3178–3180 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Mickelsen and W. S. Chen, Proc. 15th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 1981, vol. 15, pp. 800–804.

          R. Kamada, T. Yagioka, S. Adachi, A. Handa, K. F. Tai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, Proc. IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Portland, OR, 2016, pp. 1287–1291.
A. Yadav, G. Singh, R. Nekovei and R. Jeyakumar, c-Si solar cells formed from spin-on phosphoric acid and boric acid, Renewable Energy, 2015, 80, 80–84 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, A. Verma and R. Jeyakumar, Fabrication of c-Si solar cells using boric acid as spin-on dopant for back surface field, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4225–4229 RSC .
S. B. Zhang, S.-H. Wei, A. Zunger and H. Katayama-Yoshida, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 9642–9656 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Scofield, A. Duda, D. Albin, B. L. Ballard and P. K. Predecki, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 260, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Krasnov, US Pat., US 9419151 B2,  2016 Search PubMed .
Y.-C. Wang and H.-P. D. Shieh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 153502 CrossRef .
X. Cui, D. Yun, C. Zhong, W. Chen, Q. Cheng, J. Feng and F. Zhang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 76, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Stanbery, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 27, 73–117 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, B. Bissig, A. Chirila, P. Blosch, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2015, 5, 656–663 CrossRef .
J. Fischer, J. K. Larsena, J. Guillot, Y. Aida, T. Eisenbarth, D. Regesch, V. Depredurand, N. Fevre, S. Siebentritt and P. J. Dale, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 126, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rampino, N. Armani, F. Bissoli, M. Bronzoni, D. Calestani, M. Calicchio, N. Delmonte, E. Gilioli, E. Gombia, R. Mosca, L. Nasi, F. Pattini, A. Zappettini and M. Mazzer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 132107 CrossRef .
T. Nakada, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2012, 8, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Kapur, R. Kemmerle, A. Bansal, J. Haber, J. Schmitzberger, P. Le, D. Guevarra, V. Kapur and T. Stempien, Proc. 33rd IEEE Proc. Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2008, vol. 33, pp. 1–5.
A. Romeo, M. Terheggen, D. Abou-Ras, D. L. Batzner, F.-J. Haug, M. Kalin, D. Rudmann and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 93–111 CAS .
K. Ramanathan, M. A. Contreras, C. L. Perkins, S. Asher, F. S. Hasoon, J. Keane, D. Young, M. Romero, W. Metzger, R. Noufi, J. Ward and A. Duda, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2003, 11, 225–230 CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403/404, 405–409 CrossRef .
J. Srour, M. Badawi, F. El Haj Hassan and A. V. Postnikov, Phys. Status Solidi, 2016, 253, 1472–1475 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ghorbani, J. Kiss, H. Mirhosseini, G. Roma, M. Schmidt, J. Windeln, T. D. Kühne and C. Felser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25197–25203 CAS .

          H. Katagiri, 3rd International Conference on Photonics 2012, Penang, 1–3 October 2012, pp. 1–5.
R. Jeyakumar, A. Verma, B. González-Díaz, R. Guerrero-Lemus, C. del Cañizo, E. García-Tabarés, I. Rey-Stolle, F. Granek, L. Korte, M. Tucci, J. Rath, U. P. Singh, T. Todorov, O. Gunawan, S. Rubio, J. L. Plaza, E. Diéguez, B. Hoffmann, S. Christiansen and G. E. Cirlin, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 82, 294–404 CrossRef .
S. Sharbati, S. H. Keshmiri and J. T. McGoffin, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 118, 1259–1265 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Dhere, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2181–2190 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hanna, A. Jasenek, U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 71–73 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Mueller, C. Zimmermann, V. Haug, F. Hergert, T. Koehler, S. Zweigart and U. Herr, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 174503 CrossRef .
A. Klein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 134201 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Morita and T. Narusawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 30, L1238–L1240 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Bhandari, Y. Hashimoto and K. Ito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 6890–6893 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Acevedo, Energy Procedia, 2010, 2, 169–176 CrossRef .

          I. Repins, S. Glynn, J. Duenow, T. J. Coutts, W. Metzger and M. A. Contreras, Technical Report NREL/CP-520-46235, July 2009.
Y. Hirai, Y. Kurokawa and A. Yamada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 012301 CrossRef .
A. Parisi, R. Pernice, V. Rocca, L. Curcio, S. Stivala, A. C. Cino, G. Cipriani, V. Di Dio, G. R. Galluzzo, R. Miceli and A. C. Busacca, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2015, 2015, 1–9 CrossRef .

          G. Yin aus Hubei, PhD thesis,  2015, p. 15 .

          M. A. Contreras, J. Tuttle, A. Gabor and K. Ramanathan, First World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy conversion, 1994, vol. 1, pp. 68–75.
T. Nakada, D. Iga, H. Ohbo and A. Kunioka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, 732–737 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. P. Salome, A. Hultqvist, V. Fjallstrom, M. Edoff, B. G. Aitken, K. Zhang, K. Fuller and C. K. Williams, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1659–1664 CrossRef .
K. Granath, M. Bodegard and L. Stolt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 279–293 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shin, J. Kim, T. Gershon, R. Mankad, M. Hopstaken, S. Guha, B. Tae Ahn and B. Shin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 695–702 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Oikkonen, M. G. Ganchenkova, A. P. Seitsonen and R. M. Nieminen, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 083503 CrossRef .
D. W. Niles, K. Ramanathan, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, B. J. Tielsch and J. E. Fulghum, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1997, 15, 3044–3049 CAS .
D. W. Niles, K. Ramanathan, J. Granata, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, B. J. Tielsch and J. E. Fulghum, MRS Proc., 1997, 485, 179,  DOI:10.1557/PROC-485-179 .

          D. Braunger, S. Zweigart and H. Schock, Proc. 2nd World Conf. Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conversion, 1998, vol. 2, pp. 1113–1116.

          http://cordis.europa.eu/result/rcn/143531_en.html, accessed November 2016.
E. S. Mungan, X. Wang and M. Ashraful Alam, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 451–456 CrossRef .
Y. M. Shin, D. H. Shin, J. H. Kim and B. T. Ahn, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S59–S64 CrossRef .
T. Nakada, H. Ohbo, M. Fukuda and A. Kunioka, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sakdanuphab, C. Chityuttakan, A. Pankiew, N. Somwang, K. Yoodee and S. Chatraphorn, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 319, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Tsai, C. H. Tsai, C. H. Chang, J. M. Ting and R. R. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1712–1716 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rudmann, D. Bremaud, A. F. da Cunha, G. Bilger, A. Strohm, M. Kaelin, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480/481, 55–60 CrossRef .
J. Lindahl, U. Zimmermann, P. Szaniawski, T. Torndahl, A. Hultqvist, P. Salome, C. P. Bjorkman and M. Edoff, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 1100–1105 CrossRef .
C. H. Huang, C. P. Lin and Y. L. Jan, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 085004 CrossRef .
U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 2010, 1–19 CrossRef .
R. A. Mickelsen and W. S. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 371–373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Binetti, P. Garattini, R. Mereu, A. Le Donne, S. Marchionna, A. Gasparotto, M. Meschia, I. Pinus and M. Acciarri, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 30, 105006 CrossRef .
P. Jackson, R. Wurz, U. Rau, J. Mattheis, M. Kurth, T. Schlötzer, G. Bilger and J. H. Werner, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 507–519 CAS .

          V. Depredurand, Y. Aida, J. Larsen, T. Eisenbarth, A. Majerus and S. Siebentritt, Proc. 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2011, vol. 37, pp. 337–342.
M. Turcu, O. Pakma and U. Rau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2598–2600 CrossRef CAS .
V. Deprédurand, D. Tanaka, Y. Aida, M. Carlberg, N. Fèvre and S. Siebentritt, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 044503 CrossRef .
C. A. Wolden, J. Kurtin, J. B. Baxter, I. Repins, S. E. Shaheen, J. T. Torvik, A. A. Rockett, V. M. Fthenakis and E. S. Aydil, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 30801–30816 Search PubMed .
S. Niki, M. Contreras, I. Repins, M. Powalla, K. Kushiya, S. Ishizuka and K. Matsubara, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 453–466 CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, P. Cowache, A. Lusson, F. Kamel, F. Boisivon, J. Vedel and D. Lincot, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7293–7302 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3060–3065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3141–3158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 64–71 CAS .
V. K. Kapur, A. Bansal, P. Le and O. I. Asensio, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431/432, 53–57 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. W. Su and C. H. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2616–2620 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lee, S. Park and J. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S88–S92 CrossRef .
D. Lincot, J. F. Guillemoles, S. Taunier, D. Guimard, J. Sicx-Kurdi, A. Chaumont, O. Roussel, O. Ramdani, C. Hubert, J. P. Fauvarque, N. Bodereau, L. Parissi, P. Panheleux, P. Fanouillere, N. Naghavi, P. P. Grand, M. Benfarah, P. Mogensen and O. Kerrec, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 725–737 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Aksu, P. Shirish, A. Kleiman-Shwarsetein, S. Kundu and M. Pinarbasi, Proc. 38th IEEE Photovoltic Specialists Conference, 2012, vol. 38, pp. 3092–3097.
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770–16777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Brown, P. Stone, J. Woodruff, B. Cardozo and D. Jackrel, Proc. 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2012, vol. 38, pp. 3230–3233.
T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 82–87 CAS .

          S. Niki, P. J. Fons, A. Yamada, R. Suzuki, T. Ohdaira, S. Ishibashi and H. Oyanagi, 11th International Conference on Ternary and Multinary Compounds, 1994, vol. 152, p. E221.

          P. N. Gallon, G. Orsal, M. C. Artaud and S. Duchemin, Proc. 2nd World Conference on Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conversion, 1998, vol. 2, pp. 515.
M. Venkatachalam, M. D. Kannan, S. Jayakumar, R. Balasundaraprabhu and N. Muthukumarasamy, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6848–6852 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Tsai, H. T. Tung, I. G. Chen, C. C. Chen, Y. F. Wu, X. Qi, Y. Hwa, C. Y. Lin, P. H. Wu and C.-W. Cheng, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 2419–2423 CrossRef CAS .
ZSW press release 09/2016, ZSW Sets New World Record for Thin-film Solar Cells, dated June 15, 2016, URL: http://https://www.zsw-bw.de/, accessed November 2016.

          V. Fjällström, Licentiate thesis,  2015, p. 28 .

          M. Nakamura, Y. Kouji, Y. Chiba, H. Hakuma, T. Kobayashi and T. Nakada, Proc. 39th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2013, vol. 39, pp. 51–58.
T. Kobayashi, H. Yamaguchi and T. Nakada, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 22, 115–121 Search PubMed .
D. Hariskos, R. Menner, P. Jackson, S. Paetel, W. Witte, W. Wischmann, M. Powalla, L. Bürkert, T. Kolb, M. Oertel, B. Dimmler and B. Fuchs, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 534–542 CAS .
N. Naghavi, D. Abou-Ras, N. Allsop, N. Barreau, S. Bucheler, A. Ennaoui, C.-H. Fischer, C. Guillen, D. Hariskos, J. Herrero, R. Klenk, K. Kushiya, D. Lincot, R. Menner, T. Nakada, C. P. Bjorkman, S. Spiering, A. N. Tiwari and T. Torndahl, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 411–433 CAS .

          R. Kamada, T. Yagioka, S. Adachi, A. Handa, K. F. Tai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, Proc. IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Portland, OR, 2016, pp. 1287–1291.
P. M. P. Salomé, J. Keller, T. Törndahl, J. P. Teixeira, N. Nicoara, R.-R. Andrade, D. G. Stroppa, J. C. González, M. Edoff, J. P. Leitão and S. Sadewasser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 272–281 CrossRef .

          J. Pan, L. Kerr, X. Li, H. J. G. Stahl and A. J. Sommer, Proc. 34th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2009, vol. 34, pp. 345–349.

          S. Wiedeman, M. E. Beck, R. Butcher, I. Repins, N. Gomez, B. Joshi, R. G. Wendt and J. S. Britt, CIGS module development on flexible substrates. Proc. 29th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2002, vol. 29, pp. 575–578.

          Y. Hashimoto, T. Satoh, S. Shimakawa and T. Negami, Proc. 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003, vol. 3, pp. 574–577.
C. A. Kaufmann, A. Neisser, R. Klenk and R. Scheer, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480/481, 515–519 CrossRef .
D. Bremaud, D. Rudmann, M. Kaelin, K. Ernits, G. Bilger, M. Döbeli, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5857–5861 CrossRef CAS .

          G. M. Hanket, U. P. Singh, E. Eser, W. N. Shafarman and R. W. Birkmire, Proc. 29th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2002, vol. 29, pp. 567–570.

          V. K. Kapur, A. Bansal, P. Le, O. Asensio and N. Shigeoka, Proc. 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003, vol. 3, pp. 465–468.
S. Ishizuka, A. Yamada, K. Matsubara, P. Fons, K. Sakurai and S. Niki, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, S154–S156 CrossRef .
A. Chirilă, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, C. Gretener, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, J. Perrenoud, S. Seyrling, R. Verma, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 857–861 CrossRef PubMed .

          V. K. Kapur
          A. Bansal
          Z. Muntasser
          J. Haber
          A. Trivedi
          D. Guevarra and D. DraganovaProc., 34th, IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2009, vol. 34, pp. 1396–1398.
F. Kessler and D. Rudmann, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 685–695 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wuerz, A. Eicke, M. Frankenfeld, F. Kessler, M. Powalla, P. Rogin and O. Yazdani-Assl, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2415–2418 CrossRef CAS .
R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, T. Eisenbarth, T. Unold, S. Schorr, R. Hesse, R. Klenk and H. W. Schock, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 1049–1053 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Rechid, R. Thyen, A. Raitzig, S. Wulff, M. Mihhailova, K. Kalberlah and A. Kampmann, Proc. 3rd World Conf. Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003, vol. 3, pp. 559–561.
F. Kessler, K. Herz, M. Powalla, M. Hartmann, M. Schmidt, A. Jasenek and H. W. Schock, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2001, 668, H3.6.1–H3.6.6 CrossRef .
P. M. P. Salomé, V. Fjällström, P. Szaniawski, J. P. Leitão, A. Hultqvist, P. A. Fernandes, J. P. Teixeira, B. P. Falcão, U. Zimmermann, A. F. da Cunha and M. Edoff, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 470–478 Search PubMed .
K. Herz, F. Kessler, R. Wachter, M. Powalla, J. Schneider, A. Schulz and U. Schumacher, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403/404, 384–389 CrossRef .
J. Penndorf, M. Winkler, O. Tober, D. Roser and K. Jacobs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 53, 285–298 CrossRef CAS .
R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, T. Eisenbarth, T. Unold, R. Klenk and H. W. Schock, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 547–551 CAS .
S. Ishizuka, T. Yoshiyama, K. Mizukoshi, A. Yamada and S. Niki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2052–2056 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Wang, PhD thesis,  2012, p. 11 .

          U. Rau and H. W. Schock, in Solar Cells: Materials, Manufacture and Operation, ed. T. Markvart and L. Castaner,  2005, pp. 305–349 Search PubMed.

          P. Wurfel, Physics of solar cells: from basic principles to advanced concepts,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Pettersson, T. Torndahl, C. Platzer-Bjorkman, A. Hultqvist and M. Edoff, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1376–1382 CrossRef .
H. R. Hsu, S. C. Hsu and Y.-S. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 233903 CrossRef .

          http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/62502.pdf, accessed October 2016.
J. H. Werner, J. Mattheis and U. Rao, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480/481, 399–409 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 CAS .
M. Theelena and F. Daume, Sol. Energy, 2016, 133, 586–627 CrossRef .
M. Theelena, K. Polmana, M. Tomassini, N. Barreau, H. Steijvers, J. van Berkumd, Z. Vroon and M. Zeman, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 252, 157–167 CrossRef .

          V. K. Kapur, V. K. Kapur, A. Bansal and S. Roth, 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2012, vol. 38, pp. 3343–3348.

          http://www.pv-tech.org news release dated Feb. 8, 2016, accessed Nov. 2016.

          http://www.tsmc-solar.com/technology/production, accessed March 2017.

          http://www.uspvmc.org/technology_pe_PVMC.html, accessed Nov. 2016.
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 347–359 Search PubMed .

          http://www.sites.ieee.org/scv-photovoltaic/files/slides/RNoufi-October-2008.ppt, accessed Nov. 2016.
M. Powalla and B. Dimmler, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361/362, 540–546 CrossRef .

Footnote† Affiliate Faculty in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Texas 78363-8202, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Jeyakumar Ramanujam
	Jeyakumar Ramanujam received his PhD in Physics (semiconductor films for photovoltaic applications) from National Physical Laboratory (NPL)/University of Delhi, India in 1998. After having 11 years of Canadian experience from the University of Waterloo, Research In Motion, and McMaster University, Dr Jeyakumar moved back to NPL as a Principal Scientist. He has experience in various types of solar cell technologies, viz. crystalline silicon based solar cells (front junction, back junction, front heterojunction, and back heterojunction), CIGS solar cells, perovskite solar cells, and silicon nanowires for solar cells. Currently, Dr Ramanujam is working on low cost and high efficiency solar cells.

Udai P. Singh
	Udai Pratap Singh received his PhD from Banaras Hindu University, India in 1993. Subsequently, he worked for Global Solar Energy (India) Ltd on the development of CdTe solar cells. Afterwards, he moved to Institute of Energy Conversion, University of Delaware, USA where he worked on CIGS based thin film solar cells on flexible substrates. Dr Singh worked as a visiting consultant for CIGS based thin film solar cells at Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Taiwan. Since 2003, Prof. Singh has been with the School of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. His current research area is thin film photovoltaic devices.

Broader context
At present, about 92% of solar panels are made from Si, followed by 5% CdTe, 2% CIGS and <1% a-Si:H. Under one sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination, c-Si based solar cell efficiency reaches 25.6%. A c-Si wafer with 180 μm thickness is used for solar cell fabrication which acts as an absorber. Almost all light is absorbed within a few micrometers of Si, however, for mechanical support high thickness is required. The main issue with the first generation (i.e. c-Si) solar cells is the high production cost due to (i) wafer cost, (ii) complicated manufacturing processes, and (iii) high thermal budget (∼1100 °C) for an extended period of time (∼60 min). As of now, the Si requirement is 5–10 g Wp−1. Thin film solar cells such as CIGS, CdTe and a-Si:H are second generation solar cells, an alternative to first generation solar cells. Due to light induced degradation and the low power conversion efficiency of 12% (stabilized), a-Si:H solar cells are less important. In CdTe solar cells, a toxic material (Cadmium) is involved, and CdTe module disposal is an issue since these modules cause pollution during decommissioning. CIGS solar cells are a promising alternative to c-Si solar cells due to their comparable efficiency (22.8%) and their manufacturing cost can be reduced substantially by using inexpensive glass substrates and flexible/plastic foils. Around a 2 μm thick CIGS absorber film is required for cell fabrication. Therefore, absorber material wastage is lower, whereas in first generation solar cells material wastage is high. CIGS solar cells on flexible substrates can also be used for building integrated photovoltaics. However, the main material issue with CIGS solar cells is the price of indium. About 31 tons of indium is required for the production of a 1 GW CIGS PV module. With large scale CIGS panel production, the price of indium may be unstable due to high demand, as was the case in the 1980s when, due to the increased demand for indium in LCD devices, the indium price increased to several hundred dollars per kilogram.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic cross-section of CIGS based thin-film solar cells. A soda-lime glass substrate (SLG) is generally used. Through the Mo back contact, sodium diffuses from glass into the CIGS absorber and increases conductivity/carrier concentration in the absorber. Substrates such as plastic (polyimide) films and stainless-steel foils have been used to obtain flexible solar cells. When flexible substrates are used, for sodium doping, a sodium containing precursor film such as sodium fluoride (NaF, ∼10 nm) is deposited onto the Mo back contact. A heterojunction is formed between CdS and the CIGS layer. A high resistive intrinsic ZnO layer is deposited to prevent shunting paths due to diffusion of aluminum from the Al-doped ZnO layer into the absorber. An Al-doped ZnO layer is required for lateral conduction to transport photogenerated current into the Ni/Al grids. MgF2 acts as an anti-reflective coating.	 

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structure of tetragonal chalcopyrite CIGS unit cell. A chalcopyrite structure is obtained from cubic zincblende structures of II–VI materials (ZnSe) by ordered substitution of the group II element (Zn) by group I (Cu) and group III (In or Ga) elements. In the tetragonal unit cell, the lattice constant ratio (c/a) is close to 2 and any deviation (known as tetragonal distortion) from this is due to different strengths of the Cu–Se, In–Se and Ga–Se bonds. Group I or group III atoms make four bonds with the group VI atom (Se or S). From ref. 26, E. Ghorbani, J. Kiss, H. Mirhosseini, G. Roma, M. Schmidt, J. Windeln, T. D. Kühne and C. Felser, hybrid-functional calculations on the incorporation of Na and K impurities into the CuInSe2 and CuIn5Se8 solar-cell materials, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25197–25203. Copyright© 2015 American Chemical Society. Permission granted.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bandgap as a function of lattice constant “a” of the Cu(In, Ga, Al)(S, Se)2 alloy system. For selenide based materials, the system includes a wide range of bandgap energies from 1.04 eV for CuInSe2 to 2.7 eV for CuAlSe2, and for sulfide based materials from 1.55 eV for CuInS2 to 3.45 eV for CuAlS2. The system covers most of the visible spectrum range. Data from ref. 34–36.	 

 	Fig. 4  Double grading (notch type) bandgap profile for CIGS solar cells. Notch structure is a double profiling structure, having a higher Ga content towards the front and the back of the CIGS absorber layer and low Ga content in between them. This can be visualized as a low bandgap material sandwiched between two wider bandgap materials. The structure has the potential for optimized photon absorption in a specific photon energy range. Front side grading improves Voc, and back grading improves Jsc. From ref. 42, M. A. Contreras, J. Tuttle, A. Gabor and K. Ramanathan, High efficiency Cu(In,Ga)Se2-based solar cells, Processing of Novel absorber structures. First World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Hawaii, USA, December 5–9, 1994. pp. 68–75.	 

 	Fig. 5  Incorporation of Na into the CIGS absorber film improves device performance. Na incorporation leads to improved structural and electronic properties of the absorber. After Na incorporation into the CIGS film, the following changes were observed: (A) enhanced carrier density and grain boundary passivation, (B) gallium segregation, and (C) changes in crystallographic orientation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, E. S. Mungan, X. Wang and M. Ashraful Alam, Modeling the effects of Na incorporation on CIGS Solar Cells, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3 451–456. Copyright© 2013 IEEE. Permission granted. License Number: 3550561378185.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of different co-evaporation processes: (a) single stage process, (b) bilayer or Boeing process in which the first layer is deposited at lower substrate temperature, and the second layer is deposited at a higher substrate temperature, (c) three stage process in which In and Ga are deposited in the first and third stage, whereas Cu is deposited in the second stage, and (d) In, Ga and Cu fluxes are varied during the growth to obtain a graded structure. In processes (a)–(d), a constant Se flux is also supplied.60 With permission from U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra, Progress in polycrystalline Cu(InGa)Se2 thin-film solar cells, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 2010, p. 468147, DOI: 10.1155/2010/468147. Copyright© 2010 U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra.	 

Co-evaporation	Well established technique for lab-scale devices	Simultaneous control of sources is difficult and results in variation in stoichiometry, poor reproducibility and uniformity over large area
Sputtering	Controlled deposition rate and better crystallinity	High operational cost, produces multiple phases, viz. CIS, CGS
Selenization/sulfurization	Large area deposition, established technique can be used for precursor deposition and reaction	Toxic gases (H2Se), additional processing step is required, poor adhesion with back contact
Electrodeposition	Low cost method, room temperature deposition	Process optimization is difficult
Screen printing	Little material wastage, high packing density, high throughput	Control of Ga profile is not possible, while drying, phase segregation and inhomogeneities occur
Spray coating	Scalable, high throughput and low cost	Precursor material wastage during spray coating
Spin-coating	Film uniformity (lab-scale), cost of equipment is low, easy operation	No uniformity over a large area, material wastage, roll-to-roll incompatible
Doctor's blade	Less material wastage, roll-to-roll compatible, better stoichiometric control	Solvent evaporation is slow which leads to accumulation
MBE	Minimum contamination due to ultra-high vacuum deposition, this method is good for basic studies such as defect studies and phase segregation	Large area deposition has not been reported, high efficiency not reported
MOCVD	Useful for basic studies, growth rate is faster than MBE	Not suitable for industrial processes, large area growth is not reported, process is not as abrupt as MBE
Electron beam deposition	Good stoichiometry and film purity	Large area deposition not reported, not compatible with industrial processes
Pulsed laser deposition	Target composition can be transferred to films and yield good stoichiometry in the film, CuSe binary phase can be avoided	Not suitable for large area, large area stoichiometry has not been reported
Inkjet printing	Mask-less patterning simplifies processing steps, compatible for roll-to-roll technology	Low efficiency
Footnote
† Affiliate Faculty in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Texas 78363-8202, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
