Organic optoelectronic interfaces with anomalous transient photocurrent  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TC00414D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TC00414D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5122-5135Organic optoelectronic interfaces with anomalous transient photocurrent

        
          
            Laigui 
            Hu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xian 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Simon 
            Dalgleish
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michio M. 
            Matsushita
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hirofumi 
            Yoshikawa
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Kunio 
            Awaga
          
        
      *bc
aDepartment of Applied Physics, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China. E-mail: laiguihu@gmail.com
bDepartment of Chemistry and Research Center for Materials Science, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan. E-mail: awaga@mbox.chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp
cCREST, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan
Received 
      11th February 2015
    , Accepted 3rd April 2015First published on 7th April 2015AbstractOrganic optoelectronic devices have received much attention in recent years, mainly owing to their flexibility and ease of fabrication. However, poor charge carrier mobility of most organic materials and the strong binding energy of excitons pose significant design restrictions on such devices, which limit their steady-state photoconduction performance. Recently it has been shown that organic semiconductor/insulator interfaces can produce photocurrent transients, remarkably decreasing the influence of poor mobility and strong exciton binding energy. Especially, fast operation speed and a great freedom in device architecture can be achieved. In this review, the various observations of photocurrent transients reported in the literature, as well as current efforts to utilize these photocurrent transients such as in transient-type photodetectors, color sensors and artificial retinas, are highlighted, and the various physical mechanistic analyses that underpin their operation are discussed.
1 Introduction
Intensive efforts have been made to substitute inorganic components for organic materials in various electronic devices in the last few decades. These efforts are supported by the many advantages of organic materials, such as flexibility, lightweight, solution processability, low cost and ease of large-area fabrication. Among the various organic devices, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)1–4 and photoconductors have been successfully introduced into the market, and widely applied. Great progress has also been made in academic circles with regard to other organic devices, including photoreceptors,5–7 photovoltaic devices (OPVs),8–12 field-effect transistors (OFETs),13–16 optically pumped organic lasers,17–20 amplifiers,21 memory devices,22–25 photodetectors26–28 and sensors.29,30 For instance, the power conversion efficiency of OPVs has been recently reported8,9 to exceed 10%, i.e., the proposed benchmark for commercialization. OFETs with performance exceeding that of amorphous silicon (a-Si) based thin-film transistors have also been demonstrated.13 As a result, the application scope for organic electronics has dramatically expanded beyond energy harvesting and displays, to include image sensors,31–33 organic-based radio frequency identification (RFID) tags,34–36 organic photonics,37,38 wearable/portable/rollable devices39–41 and even bionic systems.42
A trend in flexible electronics toward smaller, thinner, lighter and more compact devices (especially for integrated devices) has emerged.43 However, thinner devices often succumb to electric shorts due to pin-holes in sandwich-type devices, with a poor device yield,44 especially for ultra-thin organic devices with monolayers as the active components. The emergence of single organic device with multifunctions, such as organic transistors with light emitting function45–48 (i.e., light-emitting transistors) for panel displays, phototransistors,26,49,50 and non-volatile OFET memory,51–53 may provide an alternative route to miniaturization. However, the inherent drawbacks, i.e. poor mobility of most organic materials and strong binding energy of excitons, still restrict the translation of laboratory demonstrations to commercial technology, especially for organic optoelectronic devices which involve both carrier transport and exciton dissociation. While large electric fields induced by the application of high bias voltages (V) can overcome these limitations, this inherently impacts negatively on power consumption and device stability and lifetime.
Recently, we have exploited transient-type photodetectors based on organic semiconductor/insulator interfaces,54,55 which can significantly decrease the effects of poor carrier mobility and pin-hole defects. In the devices, it is not necessary for photogenerated excitons/carriers to transport a long distance larger than exciton diffusion/carrier drift lengths and charge separation efficiency can be improved due to the introduction of dielectric insulators. These devices can produce photocurrent transients in response to square-wave/pulsed light signals. In contrast to the traditional transient photocurrent technique (i.e., time of flight,56–58 TOF) for mobility extraction from photocurrent decay due to the carrier drift/diffusion process initiated by an ultra-short light pulse, in which the employed film thickness is much larger than light penetration length and only one side can “feel” the light, the duration of the square-wave pulses is larger than the transit time of the photogenerated carriers across the devices and all the whole devices can “feel” the light. With both light on and off, the photocurrent exhibits two transient peaks with different polarities (see Fig. 1), which makes the signals inherently more distinguishable. Compared to the transient peaks, the magnitude of steady-state photocurrent is much smaller, and even negligible. The corresponding peaks, or the so-called anomalous transient photocurrents, are defined as “ON” transients and “OFF” transients in this review, respectively. The tunable polarity of the transient signal provides a new platform for logic devices. Such transient photocurrent behavior has been intermittently reported in the literature, but the association and inherent relationships between these studies have not been assessed. To date, no systematic summary or review of these studies has been made, although recent progress has shown that the photocurrent transients can be employed as a novel light sensing platform for, e.g., pulsed signal detectors55 and artificial retinas.59 Herein, we review the reports on anomalous transient photocurrent behavior, as well as recent progress on this topic.
 Fig. 1  Schematic views of steady-state photocurrent and anomalous transient photocurrent. 
2 Anomalous transient photocurrent (ATPC)
2.1 ATPC in organic insulators
The operation principle of current solar cells and photodetectors/photosensors is based on steady-state photocurrent generation, which has been well studied and extensively reviewed.26,60,61 In contrast, ATPC behavior has not received much attention, though it was observed even earlier than the invention of efficient OPVs with donor–acceptor interfaces by Tang.62 In 1967, Tanaka et al.63 reported the observation of photocurrent transients from 40 μm high-density polyethylene films (at 1000 V) with gold electrodes. The photocurrent transients could be induced by near-infrared light with a photon energy close to 1.2 eV, which is far less than the energy of the material band gap (7 eV). Accompanied by the appearance of steady-state photocurrent, the photocurrent transients, with a decay time of several tens of seconds, could be gradually suppressed if the samples were pre-irradiated by high-energy electrons (see Fig. 2a–c). Optical liberation of electrons bound by shallow traps was proposed to be responsible for the steady-state photoconduction. However, the mechanism of the ATPC was not discussed.
 Fig. 2  Photoresponse from the device of (a) non-irradiated, (b) 10 Mrad-irradiated and (c) 100 Mrad-irradiated high-density polyethylene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 1967 The Japan Society of Applied Physics. Photoresponse from the devices of low-density polyethylene with (d) Al electrodes and (e) Au electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 1973 The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
Mizutani et al.64 sought to determine the possible mechanisms for the ATPC. For their study, low density polyethylene films (20 μm) were utilized for analysis with different semitransparent electrode configurations under zero bias voltage. They observed that the ATPC induced by UV light (wavelength λ < 450 nm) exhibited a different polarity for the devices with high (Au) and low (Al) work function electrodes (see Fig. 2d). Continuous square-wave illumination induced a decrease in the ATPC from the devices with Au electrodes (Fig. 2e). It was proposed that the disequilibrium between photoinjection of electrons from the electrodes which are immediately trapped at the metal/polymer interface and electron release from traps at the interface produced the “ON” and “OFF” photocurrent transients in the devices with low work function electrodes. By assuming a trap depth Et, they derived the “ON” and “OFF” transients as J(t) = ±efα(l/L)exp(−t/τa),(1)where τa = τ0exp(Et/kT), 1/τ0 denotes the attempt to escape frequency, k is Boltzmann's constant, T, e, f and α mean temperature, elementary charge, light intensity and quantum efficiency, and l and L are the penetration length of injected electrons and total thickness, respectively. For the device with Au electrodes, which induce a smaller injection and a higher light transmission, however, the transients were proposed to be mainly caused by the diffusion of mobile positive carriers in the bulk of the films.
Polyimide (PI) as an electrical insulating material also exhibits a similar behaviour. It was noted that PI thin films fabricated by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique showed a space-charge region adjacent to the electrodes, and thus a large space-charge field of 106 V cm−165,66 due to the displacement of electrons from the electrodes into the PI films. Photoconduction in Au/PI/Al devices67 was then studied without applying a bias voltage. The work functions of Au and Al are ϕAu and ϕAl, respectively, and the thickness of the PI film was only 20 nm (50 layers). Photocurrent transients in response to a square-wave light pulse of 500 nm wavelength could be obtained due to the large space-charge field (see Fig. 3a and b). The fields in the two space-charge regions of the device are bidirectional, with the potential drop Vs1 and Vs2, respectively (see Fig. 3b). Such bidirectional regions are proposed to be responsible for the photocurrent transients. This is quite different from the case of polyethylene films in which photoinjection was proposed to be responsible for the ATPC.
 Fig. 3  (a) Space-charge distribution in a Au/PI/Al junction.(b) Potential distribution in the PI device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 1993 The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
2.2 ATPC in pure organic semiconductors
Before his breakthrough invention of organic p–n heterojunction solar cells62 with a relatively high conversion efficiency (∼1%), Tang also reported ATPC behavior in chlorophyll-a (Chl-a, 100–200 nm) sandwich cells in 1975.68 Two types of cells were prepared for comparison, i.e., Cr/Chl-a/Hg and Cr/Chl-a/Hg:In, with monochromated light illumination through the Cr side. As shown in Fig. 4, the photoresponse from the two types of devices is quite different in response to different wavelength light. For the former device, a regular photoresponse, i.e., steady-state photocurrent without any overshot or transient peaks upon illumination, can be obtained. Stronger absorption at 740 nm induces a larger photocurrent, compared to the weaker absorption at 550 nm. For the latter, the situation is reversed. Spikes with two different polarities, and a steady-state photocurrent with an opposite polarity, can be observed for the stronger absorption at 740 nm. Conversely, the weaker absorption at 550 nm induces a steady-state response with the same sign, but without spikes. The conversion efficiency of the steady performance under cw excitation was only ∼10−5, which is much smaller than that of the former cells (∼10−4).
 Fig. 4  Photoresponses of (a) (Cr/Chl-a/Hg) cell and (b) (Cr/Chl-a/Hg:ln) cell under cw illumination. Positive current corresponds to the flow from Cr to Chl-a film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 1975 American Institute of Physics. 
Tang utilized a model with two opposing barriers at the Chl-a/metal interfaces to interpret the ATPC from the latter device, which showed a poor rectification behavior.68 The barrier on the Hg:In electrode side is stronger, which is responsible for the reverse steady-state photocurrent, though the effect of the other barrier also plays a role. It was proposed that the photoinduced polarization of the Chl-a microcrystal in the barrier regions, with their respective built-in fields, produces the photocurrent transients. Filter effects were proposed to induce the wavelength dependence of the photoresponse. More light can arrive at the dominant barrier for the wavelength close to the band edge, inducing a normal behavior similar to the single barrier case in the former devices. The model is similar to that for PI,65,66i.e. two opposite space-charge regions are formed. However, the formation of the barriers in the Chl-a devices and the detailed mechanisms of the photocurrent transients were not clearly demonstrated.
β-Apo-8′ carotenal was reported to exhibit such anomalous behaviour in 1996.69 However, only the anomalous rise in photocurrent was investigated by studying the temperature and light intensity dependence. A threshold temperature Tmax was observed, below which, the photocurrent rises slowly to attain a steady-state photocurrent without experiencing an overshoot. However, above Tmax, ATPC can be observed. The model for disordered inorganic semiconductors,70i.e., amorphous As2Se3 which also shows the ATPC behavior, was utilized to explain the phenomenon in this organic semiconductor. In this model, carrier delocalization and localization processes in the bulk control the anomalous behaviour. If the carrier generation rate G is larger than a threshold value G*, the recombination is determined by a bimolecular mechanism,71 with a peak of photocurrent transient Jtr ∼ r−b/(1+b) and steady-state photocurrent Jst ∼ r−1/(1+b), where b = kT/ξ, r denotes the bimolecular recombination constant and ξ is the characteristic energy of the localized states. For the rise and decay process of the “ON” photocurrent transient, J ∼ tb and t−(1−b)/2, respectively. Herein, the power law, which is obtained by assuming a bulk generation, is apparently different from that in the work of Mizutani et al.64 If the generation rate is very low, only Jst exists, and is proportional to GτR, which is dominated by monomolecular recombination, where τR is the characteristic time of monomolecular recombination.
Recently, we reported the ATPC behaviour72 (see Fig. 5) in an organic radical material 4,4′-bis(1,2,3,5-dithiadiazolyl) (BDTDA),73 which is a disjoint diradical with a crystal structure consisting of face-to-face BDTDA dimers (see the inset in Fig. 5). Thin films of BDTDA (300 nm), sandwiched between ITO as positive electrode and Al electrodes, consist of alternating π-stacks perpendicular to the substrates. This brings about a good steady-state photoconductivity under a small reverse bias voltage.73 Without external bias voltage, however, a huge ATPC was observed with positive “ON” transients and negative “OFF” transients, as shown in Fig. 5a. The ATPC values were calculated from the photovoltages across a load resistor of 105 Ω recorded by an oscilloscope. Both the light intensity f dependence of Jtr and Jst obey a power law74Jtr ∝ fγ, with γ = 0.93 for Jtr or γ = 0.28 for Jst, indicating that monomolecular recombination dominates the Jtr, and probably quadrimolecular recombination is dominant for the Jst. We reasoned that the special molecular stacking structure in BDTDA induces the high-order recombination. This situation is quite different from that in the β-Apo-8′ carotenal devices69 where both Jtr and Jst are dominated by bimolecular recombination. It was noted that the BDTDA devices exhibited good rectification (∼102 at ±2 V) in their current–voltage curves.75 Though the contacts on both sides are blocking-type, only one barrier (10 nm) is dominant, and the other one is negligible due to an ultrathin width of 2 nm, which was calculated based on capacitance–voltage measurements, and would likely induce an ohmic contact.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photoresponse of an ITO/BDTDA (300 nm)/Al photocell (inset) under the illumination of a green laser (532 nm) in vacuum with a bias voltage of 0 V. (b) Theoretical simulation for the “ON” transients. 
We analysed the ATPC by using a double-layer model involving bulk polarization. Due to the poor mobility and large thickness of the BDTDA layer, charge extraction by the electrodes is faster than the carrier transport across the film to the opposite electrodes in the thick devices. Besides the field induced dissociation in the barriers, direct exciton dissociation may also occur at the electrode/semiconductor interface,76,77 leaving another type of carrier inside the device. Photoinduced space charges inside the devices can thus be formed, leading to a redistribution of the internal electric field. This naturally involves a polarization or displacement current, since the devices have already been charged under short circuit conditions. We treated the space-charge region and bulk region as two different layers. One of the layers can be regarded as a normal photodiode, in which free charges are induced by light. The other layer is equivalent to a capacitor where space-charges are stored. Fig. 6 shows a simplified equivalent circuit without considering leakage or shunt resistance for the double-layer model, which represents the role of each layer in the devices. The photocurrent transient can be derived as (2)where ζ = ε0εi2daV/di(diεa + daεi) and τ = ε0(diεa + daεi)/diσa*. εi and εa are the relative dielectric constants of the bulk region and the space-charge region, respectively. σa* = ϕf is the photo-conductivity in the junction region and RC is the time constant in the circuit. This indicates that the ATPC is proportional to σa* as well as carrier mobility. ϕ is a proportionality constant which relates to the quantum efficiency. di and da are the thicknesses of the bulk and space-charge region, respectively. Terms 1 and 2 in exponential forms on the left of eqn (2) represent photoinduced conduction current and displacement current, respectively. Eqn (2) was derived with the assumptions that the fields in both regions are uniform, and quantum efficiency is a constant, which is likely not the case. However, the equation can still clarify the effect of polarization (i.e., the second term) on the photoresponse. With this equation, we could simulate the “ON” transients well (see Fig. 5b). Under weak illumination, only the first term plays a role, and the decay time τ of the “ON” transient is inversely proportional to intensity f. This is in accordance with experimental observations,75 though the polarization in the active layer was not considered which may also contribute to the ATPC.
 Fig. 6  Schematic views of a double-layer model. 
By considering that all the above-mentioned photocurrent transients originate from space-charges, the ATPC is produced by photoinduced charging–discharging processes within the devices (see Fig. 6), though the formation mechanisms of the space-charges are different in each case. The double-layer model is sufficient to clarify the anomalous behaviour, and the steady-state photocurrent, observed in some of these devices, can be regarded as a leakage current inside the capacitor-type layer, which will neutralize the “stored” charges and the backward current in the outer circuit, i.e., the “OFF” transient or discharging current as the other competitive way for neutralization, will be decreased or even dismissed. This could be the reason why the semiconductor devices with a large “leakage” current (i.e., higher carrier mobilities) exhibit a much smaller magnitude of “OFF” transients than that of “ON” transients (Fig. 5a). Instead, the insulator devices can produce the “ON” and “OFF” transients nearly with the same magnitude (Fig. 2a).
2.3 ATPC in multicomponent organic devices
Compared to the single semiconductor component devices, heterojunction devices are more complicated since more interfaces are involved. In 2003, Narayan et al. presented the effect of interfacial trapping at the p–n interface on photocurrent.78 They revealed similar “ON” and “OFF” photocurrent transients in ITO/poly(3-octyl thiophene) (P3OT)/poly(benzamidazobenzo phenanthroline) (BBL)/Au devices in response to light pulses with a duration of >1 ms. However, no such photocurrent transients could be observed beyond Jst if the P3OT layer was replaced by another p-type organic semiconductor, i.e., poly(2-methoxy, 5-(2-ethylhexoxy)-1, 4-phenylene vinylene) (MEHPPV). They ascribed the transient phenomenon to interfacial charging at the P3OT/BBL interface, which is confirmed by thermally stimulated current (TSC) measurements with released charges of ∼7.5 μC and only ∼0.1 nC for the MEHPPV devices. The charging process is induced by the imbalance of charge generation, transport and permittivity of the different layers, as well as the charge transfer rate. Both the dielectric relaxation and trap-induced space charges are involved in the charging process, which significantly suppresses the photovoltaic performance of the P3OT devices.
Photoresponse to square pulses of light, with relatively small “ON” transients and without the “OFF” transients, can be observed in some organic blend films for OPVs. RC constants in these systems are short and only the photoinduced conduction current plays a role in the “ON” transients which involve the information of space charges. Recently, it was employed to identify the loss of mechanisms in bulk-heterojunction OPVs79–82 or hybrid photovoltaics83 by C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham et al. The “ON” transients under a zero bias voltage were demonstrated without the “OFF” transients with an opposite polarity being observed. It was noted that most bulk-heterojunction devices they investigated showed this behaviour. As shown in Fig. 7a, blend films (220 nm) of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-2,7-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(3-hexylthien-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-2′,2′′-diyl (F8TBT) clearly demonstrated the “ON” transients79,80 with light intensity >10 mW cm−2, which are more distinguishable in Fig. 7b with the photocurrent normalized to that at 100 μs. Different from the ATPC behaviour in pure organic semiconductors or bilayer devices, no transients or discharging current with the opposite polarities was observed. A fast decay combined with a long-lived tail after turn-off of light was observed, and a stronger illumination induced a faster decay (see the inset in Fig. 7b). It was noted that the dynamics of the photocurrent induced by a constant square pulse of 35 mW cm−2 can be significantly influenced by a background illumination, as shown in Fig. 7c and d. With the increase of background illumination intensity, the “ON” transients gradually disappear and become square-wave, and the decay after turn-off of the light no longer shows a long-lived tail.
 Fig. 7  Photocurrent transients of a 220 nm P3HT:F8TBT device in response to a 100 μs square light pulse (525 nm). (a) Absolute photoresponse under different intensities. (b) Photoresponse normalized to the photocurrent at 100 μs. Inset: normalized decay kinetics with a log-linear scale. (c) Influence of background light intensity on photoresponses for a constant pulse intensity of 35 mW cm−2. (d) Comparison of curves in part (c) with constant photocurrent baseline subtracted. The inset shows changes in fall dynamics at different background intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. 
A time-dependent drift-diffusion model80 incorporating electron trapping and electric field dependent charge separation was adopted, and the photocurrent transients were well interpreted. The overshoot or photocurrent transient at the start of illumination is ascribed to trap-mediated space-charge effects, which induces a reduction in the electric field near the anode electrode as well as a reduction in the efficiency of charge generation. Upon illumination, it takes time to fill up the traps in the devices and achieve a steady-state photocurrent. Strong background illumination can produce a high trap occupation and thus remove the “ON” transients. In addition, the long-lived tail after turn-off of light was attributed to a slow detrapping process. With this model, they also explained the similar phenomenon in the blend films of poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM),82 as well as the hybrid devices of P3HT and CdSe nanocrystals.81,83 The ATPC behavior is more severe for the device with CdSe nanocrystals, which contains more defects. “OFF” transients with an opposite polarity can also be observed when a positive bias voltage is applied. It was proposed that the injection of holes back into the device to neutralize the excess trapped negative charge produces the “OFF” transients. In contrast to the above devices, the devices with less traps, such as P3HT:PCBM devices,81 did not show any anomalous current peaks, and exhibited a higher overall conversion efficiency.
Recently, the degradation effect in small molecular heterojunction devices (i.e., ITO/phthalocyanine (CuPc, 20 nm)/fullerene (C60, 40 nm)/Al) was investigated84 by the same technique. It was clearly shown that the degradation effect can gradually induce a change of the photocurrent transient shape from square-wave to transient. Correspondingly, the conversion efficiency becomes worse. For the degraded devices, negative “OFF” transients were also detected in addition to the “ON” transients under a zero bias voltage. By adding a transport material of tris (8-hydroxyquinolinato) aluminium (Alq3) on top of the C60 layer as a buffer layer to block oxygen and water permeating into the acceptor layer, such behaviour was dramatically suppressed, indicating that the traps in the C60 layer are the major cause of the energy loss in aged devices. Such photovoltaic devices clearly indicate that space-charge effects are responsible for the “ON” transients, though no “OFF” transients may not be demonstrated which could be ascribed to the negligible contribution of small capacitor components in these systems. The “stored” space charges can be released for neutralization through conduction current inside the devices instead of a discharging current outside the devices.
3 Manipulation of the ATPC
Since the ATPC is related to space charges at the electrode/semiconductor interfaces, the built-in electric field will be redistributed. For instance, the large fields in the space-charge region in “pure” semiconductor devices can lead to a much decreased field in the bulk region of the devices, which cannot efficiently separate or drive charge carriers. Only diffusion current in the bulk with a charge gradient plays a dominant role in photoconduction. Therefore, fast charge extraction by the electrodes and slow diffusion of the charges with an opposite sign towards the opposite electrodes naturally induce the formation of space charges inside the device through trapping and charge accumulation effects, especially for thick devices and heterojunction devices consisting of two discontinuous materials. Negative “OFF” transients can form due to back injection of the charges from the external circuit if the distance of most space charges is too far from the opposite electrode to transit for recombination/neutralization. Therefore, a part of the photogenerated charges are blocked (i.e., charging process) due to the trapping or accumulation effect. This can be reproduced in heterojunction devices in which one layer is blocking-type and steady-state current can be suppressed, based on the double-layer model. Therefore, the ATPC behaviour can be controlled and tuned by the nature of the blocking layer.
3.1 Devices with semiconductor–insulator interfaces
Considering that the ATPC behaviour can be ascribed to the space-charge region close to the electrodes, and the bulk region is inactive for charge separation due to its reduced (or zero) electric field, the bulk region can be substituted by insulator layers54 of sufficient thickness to suppress the steady-state photocurrent, which can be regarded as a leakage current for the photocurrent transients (vide supra). Blend films (20 nm) of zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) and C60 were utilized to replace the space-charge region where charge separation occurs (see Fig. 8). As shown in Fig. 9, similar ATPC with “ON” and “OFF” peaks were reproduced in the metal/insulator/semiconductor/metal (MISM) devices. Photogenerated holes accumulate at the interface of the insulator/blend layer. Based on the double-layer model and Maxwell's total current equation which consists of conduction current (including drift and diffusion current) and displacement current (including the contribution from electric field variation and polarization), the dielectric dependence of the photocurrent transients was found to be Jtr ∝ εr2, where εr is the relative permittivity of the insulator layer. Herein, the carrier generation rate was assumed to be a constant in the active layer, and the electric fields in both the layers were uniform but unequal for simplification. As shown in Fig. 9a–c, three different insulators were adopted, i.e., polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, εr ∼ 7–13), polystyrene (εr ∼ 2.6) and a vacuum gap (εr = 1). As expected, the photocurrent transients increase with the increase in dielectric constant. The positive peak value of the PVDF device is ∼8 × 102 times larger than that of the vacuum-gap device. This value is somewhat larger than expected.
 Fig. 8  Schematic view of a representative MISM device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. 
 Fig. 9  Photocurrent transients from the MISM devices with different insulator layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. 
We have thought about the physics behind this relation that polarization/displacement current can be added to the photoinduced conduction current to magnify the photocurrent.54 However, the opposite sign of the polarization term in eqn (2) indicates that the polarization current will decrease the conduction part. Apparently, the signal magnification is caused by the enhancement of electric field and field-dependent charge separation efficiency in the blend film. Based on the double-layer model,54 the field inside the blend layer can be expressed as (3)where εs and εb are the relative permittivity of the active and blocking layers with thicknesses of ds and db, respectively. Therefore, larger permittivity or capacitance of the blocking layer can induce a larger field in the semiconductor layers, i.e., the applied voltage mainly drops across the semiconductor layers.
Impulse response measurements for the device with PVDF by using a nanosecond laser beam (pulse width: ∼6 ns; power: ∼1.08 μJ per pulse) also show anomalous behaviour. The resultant photocurrent transients consist of rise, decay and recovery processes. The RC-dependent rise and decay time were found to be ∼15 and 100 ns for the devices, respectively. It is notable that these processes are similar to those of pyroelectric detectors, which show much slower response times,85 but whose operation speed can be faster than the decay as well as the slow recovery process. We can ascribe this to the fact that the magnitude of the displacement current is determined by the variation rate of polarization induced by field variation, instead of a complete recovery. Therefore, the operation speed for the MISM devices is mainly limited by two facts, i.e., the relaxation time of the photoinduced carriers and the RC constant of the circuit. The former can be dramatically decreased by adopting ultra-thin active layers with a negligible carrier transit time which relates to mobility and driving field, and a smaller capacitance of the insulator layer can be employed to decrease the RC constant. Considering that fast exciton dissociation may directly occur between the electrode and the organic semiconductor interface76,77 without an electric field and experiencing the carrier transport process, devices with ultrafast speed could be expected.
Though the ideal value of the steady-state photocurrent in MSM devices without the influence of the space-charge effect and recombination, if the thickness of the semiconductor layer is smaller than the sum of exciton diffusion and carrier drift lengths (typically ∼10 nm), could be equal to the magnitude of the conduction part in ATPC, pin holes usually kill the possibility with a low device yield and substituting the inactive region of the thick organic semiconductor with a dielectric polymer can be an alternative way to utilize the most highly efficient photocurrent generated at the interfaces. Dark current as well as pin hole effects can be greatly suppressed, which can lead to good detectivity and high device yield. In addition, the enlarged field in the semiconductor layer can enhance charge separation, which may produce a larger photocurrent transient. We have tried to develop infrared photodetectors based on this new operation principle.55 An ambipolar semiconductor bis-(4-dimethylaminodithiobenzyl)–Ni(II) (BDN),86 with balanced hole and electron mobilities of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and strong absorption in the near infrared region, was adopted as the active layer (50 nm) in the MISM devices. 200 nm PVDF films were utilized as the blocking layer. The photocurrent transients were found to be 50-fold larger than the signal from the single-layer Schottky device (see Fig. 10a), with a maximum responsivity Rv = 0.353 ± 0.009 mA W−1 at 1050 nm. The MISM device shows a much higher bandwidth (∼1 MHz, see Fig. 10b), which reached the limitation of our instruments, compared to that of the Schottky device with a narrow bandwidth of ∼160 kHz. Through incorporation of carbon black into the active layer, photoresponsivity could be further improved by ∼3 fold. It is notable that the detectivity can reach 1.6 × 1011 Jones at 1050 nm with a noise equivalent power (NEP) of 1.1 × 10−9 W Hz−1/2. This study demonstrates a strategy for developing optoelectronic devices using organic semiconductors which have previously been deemed unsuitable due to poor carrier mobility. Therefore, the space-charge effect, which exists even in the organic devices with relatively high mobility and usually limits the steady-state photoconduction performance, can be employed for optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 10  Photocurrent transients from BDN devices. (a) Photoresponse of an ITO/BDN (50 nm)/PVDF/Al photodetector to a square-wave light chain at 1050 nm (1.69 mW cm−2, 100 Hz), compared to a parylene-coated ITO/BDN50 nm/Al device. (b) Frequency dependence of the photoresponse for an ITO/BDN50 nm/PVDF/Al photocell, tested in air at frequencies from 100 Hz to 1 MHz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Due to the special architecture for photocurrent transients without the influence from steady-state current, we revealed a non-volatile photoresponse memory effect in MSISM devices by utilizing a special insulator, i.e., a ferroelectric polymer poly(vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF–TrFE)).87 With the screening of space-charges in the organic semiconductor layers (copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)), it was found that ferroelectric polarization could stably exist in the ferroelectric layer after applying a bias exceeding its coercive voltage. We found that the stray fields in the charge accumulation layer at the semiconductor/ferroelectric interface could serve the same purpose as the field in the depletion regions of semiconductor devices, i.e., such fields were large enough to separate photoinduced charges. The corresponding photoresponse from an ITO/CuPc/P(VDF-TrFE) (900 nm)/CuPc/Al device is displayed in Fig. 11. It is notable that the polarities of the resultant photocurrent transients could be reversed by applying different polarities of poling bias voltage, though the photocurrent transients after positive poling (ITO was defined as the positive electrode) were observed to be stable after experiencing a gradual decay over ∼2 h, as shown in Fig. 11b. The stable photoresponsivity could achieve 0.1 mA W−1. This behaviour lends itself to multifunctional optoelectronic applications. However, the relation between the photoresponsive memory effect and the semiconductor category (e.g., molecular and polymer species with different impurity density), as well as the ferroelectric layers with different coercive fields, is still needed to be further addressed for performance improvement.
 Fig. 11  Photoresponses from poled thick asymmetric devices. (a) Photocurrent transients after poling at −90 V, which are slightly decreased, compared with those before poling. The response does not show further decay. The inset is the schematic view of the energy levels for the ITO/CuPc/ferroelectric layer (FL)/C60/Al devices. (b) Photocurrent transients with opposite polarity after poling at +90 V. 
Similar architectures for achieving photogenerated displacement currents have also been reported in 2005 by A. Mohite et al.88 They constructed an inorganic MIS device with a Cu/glass/carbon nanotube structure for pulsed light detection with a large signal to noise ratio. The mat of single walled carbon nanotubes acted as both the active layer and the electrode. It was shown that both the semiconductor and metallic tubes in the mat of SWCN could function as photodetectors. N. V. Tkachenko et al.89 reported photocurrent transients in the photocells of ITO/insulator/chlorophyll a/insulator/InGa liquid metal. Only 1, 2, 4 or 10 LB monolayers of Chl were adopted as the photoactive layers and 9–10 stearyl amine films were used as the insulator layers. The built-in electric field from asymmetric electrodes was proposed to separate the excitons inside directly, and produced the observed signals. Under weak excitation, the ON transients exhibited monoexponential decay, and at least biexponential decay was observed for strong excitation, which is in accordance with our results in MISM structures. Without considering the contribution from dielectric polarization due to field redistribution, the authors gave the following equation for the transients: J(t) ∼ βfsEexp[−(βf + k)]t,(4)where β denotes charge separation efficiency, s is the strength of the field effect, k means the relaxation rate of the charge pairs.
3.2 Devices with semiconductor–liquid interfaces
It has been shown that larger photocurrent transients can be obtained by adopting insulator layers with a larger dielectric constant. However, the breadth of choice for solid-state organic materials with very large permittivities to further increase the responsivity for detection is limited. Recently, we extended the choice to liquids,90,91 especially ionic liquids (ILs)92,93 which have also been applied to organic FETs94 as gate-dielectrics. The room temperature ILs not only show a relatively large dielectric constant (1–10),94–96 but also form electric double layers (EDLs) at the interfaces of ionic liquid/electrodes (see Scheme 1a). Based on the Helmholtz model,90,97 the potential mainly drops across the two outer Helmholtz planes (OHPs) in a structure of metal/IL/semiconductor, leaving a zero field region in the bulk of the IL. The potential drop in the ultrathin regions caused by EDLs is therefore capable of storing large amounts of charge, i.e., a large capacitance (∼10 μF cm−2) can be produced by the EDL effect. In contrast to the EDL effect, the capacitance of SiO2 layers (300 nm) is only 10 nF cm−2. It is notable that the capacitance of ILs is nearly independent of thickness. This is quite different from solid dielectrics (see Scheme 1b), which show a linear potential variation throughout the layer, and therefore exhibit a thickness dependence of capacitance. Therefore, the EDL effect can lead to a large freedom of electrode arrangements in devices and can provide a larger electric field for charge separation at the interfaces.
 Scheme 1  Potential drop in ionic liquid (a) and solid-state (b) dielectrics, which are sandwiched by an electrode and an organic semiconductor. 
We recently replaced the PVDF layer by an ionic liquid, N,N-diethyl-N-methyl(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (DEME–TFSI), in the MISM devices.90,91 As expected, the photocurrent transients are dramatically increased by more than one order of magnitude, when compared to those from the device with PVDF layers, under modulated illumination from a laser at 532 nm (see Fig. 12). The responsivity at 620 nm, without an external bias voltage, can reach 142 mA W−1.
 Fig. 12  The photoresponse of the ITO/DEME–TFSI (0.15 mm)/ZnPc:C60 (50 nm)/Al and ITO/PVDF (200 nm)/ZnPc:C60 (50 nm)/Al photocells under the illumination of a modulated 532 nm laser (13 mW cm−2). The red curve is the light pulse train. The insets are the device structure of ITO/DEME–TFSI/ZnPc:C60/Al and its equivalent circuit in which the two CEDL are the capacitors formed at the interfaces, and the RBulk is the resistor of bulk DEME–TFSI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. 
It is notable that the photocurrent can also be induced even when the light spot is not incident on the superposed area of bottom and top electrodes, i.e., the cross point of the electrodes, as shown in Fig. 13a and b. The distance between the illuminated spot on the active layer/Al interface and the right edge of the ITO electrode is defined as d. We note that the variation of the d dependence of the admittance, which was measured by using the special structure in Fig. 13c, shows the same tendency as the photocurrent transients of the ionic liquid cells, while the PVDF cells do not. This clearly indicates that the electrode-position-free photocurrent is dominated by the EDL effect. One significant advantage of exploiting the EDL effect is that the semiconductor/IL interface can be directly exposed to light for optoelectronic function, and efficient photocurrent transient signals can even be obtained by using two staggered opaque electrodes91 in the MISM structure. Photoresponsivity was found to be as high as 240 mA W−1 at 580 nm without a bias voltage for the MISM device with Au/Ag electrodes and the bulk-heterojunction layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the active layer. Especially, the specific detectivity of this devices can reach 1.9 × 1013 Jones, comparably larger than silicon based photodetectors in the visible region.
 Fig. 13  (a) The scheme for the measurements in which the incident light spot (red cross) moves from the center of the superimposed area of ITO/Al electrodes to the non-superimposed area along the Al electrode. (b) The distance dependence of the peak photocurrent for the DEME-TFSI (square) and PVDF (triangle) devices, and the values are normalized by those at d = −1 mm. The red curve is the admittance of the DEME-TFSI cell, which was normalized by that at d = −1 mm. (c) The scheme for the cell impedance measurements, in which the electrodes are parallel to each other and d represents the gap distance between them. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. 
Similar organic optoelectronic semiconductor/liquid interfaces, i.e., bulk polymer heterojunction (BHJ)/electrolyte (El) devices, were also reported by Narayan et al.98 In contrast to our thin active layers, thick active layers including P3HT and poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis-(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)} (N2200) were adopted. Devices with the structure of ITO/BHJ/El (KCl) (see the insets in Fig. 14) with Pt or Ag/AgCl as the counter electrodes demonstrate an interesting behaviour, i.e., the polarities of the resultant transient photovoltages could be tuned by changing the thickness of the active layer with the incident light from the electrolyte side (Fig. 14a) or by changing the incident direction to the ITO side (Fig. 14b) for the device with thick polymer films (>2 μm). The thickness-dependent polarity reversal of the photovoltage was explained by the difference in charge-transport dynamics between electrons and holes. Based on the drift-diffusion model, the authors found that the effective carrier concentration is dominated by holes for x > Lc and by electrons for x < Lc, where x = the thickness of the BHJ layer and Lc = critical thickness. They further extended their research to light-sensing applications as natural photoreceptors59,99,100 since the operation principle of the optoelectronic BHJ/electrolyte interface resembles that of natural vision systems, which involves physiological buffer solutions. Combining the wavelength-dependent filter effect with the thickness-dependence of photovoltage reversal, the authors proposed and demonstrated a colour discriminator device99 by using an aqueous medium to replace the electrolyte layer. It was shown that the transient photoresponse could exhibit a wavelength dependence, i.e., the polarities of the photoresponse could be tuned by changing the wavelength of applied light. Such devices were also shown to operate in white background light.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photoresponse of ITO|P3HT:N2200/El devices to a square wave white light pulse incident from the electrolyte side for different BHJ layer thicknesses. (b) Photoresponse of P3HT:N2200 films (∼4.5 μm) in the ITO|BHJ/El device with KCl (100 mM) electrolyte shown for two sides of illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
This structure was recently employed as a trigger to elicit neuronal activity in an embryonic-stage blind chick retina.59,100 The solution layer was a perfusate consisting of an artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) with 124 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 1.2 mM HEPES, 5 mM KCl, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM CaCl2 and 10 mM glucose at pH 7.4. Fig. 15a shows the layered structure for their experiments, in which the retina was prepared on a BHJ polymer-coated multielectrode array (titanium nitride). Following light excitation, the generated transient photoresponse evoked retinal activity with latency (the spikes in Fig. 15b), which could not be obtained without the BHJ coating. The blind retina was successfully reactivated with a temporal resolution of ∼1 s at low light intensity. It was proposed that a potential difference over the cell membrane of inner retinal cells and retinal ganglion cells, due to the accumulated charges at the BHJ/electrolyte interface, induces the activity. The same concept has also been proposed by D. Ghezzi et al.,101,102 who successfully employed the interfaces to restore light sensitivity in degenerate rat retinas by using a BHJ/electrolyte interface, or even a single component organic semiconductor P3HT/electrolyte interface. It should be pointed out that all the above mentioned devices do not involve a regenerative redox couple, such as in dye sensitized solar cells, which gives rise to a steady-state photocurrent. The liquid layers only act as a blocking layer that can lead to charge accumulation at the interfaces. These studies suggest that the photo-functional organic/electrolyte interfaces may play an important role in artificial retinas.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the experimental set-up for photoexcitation (410 nm, 400 μW mm−2) of the BHJ/El device and recording of the retinal activity using a multielectrode array. (b) Typical neuronal response elicited in the retina upon excitation. The BHJ transient signals are followed by the neuronal spikes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Indeed, the anomalous transient behavior from liquid-based devices has also been demonstrated in some systems involving photochemical processes, especially in photobiological devices.103–106 These studies deviate from the focus of this review insofar as physical processes dominate their operation, rather than electronic processes. Nevertheless, their similarity of response deserves some mention. For instance, planar lipid bilayers containing membrane-bound chlorophyll–protein complexes from Rhodopseudomonas sphaeroides R-26 were found to show photocurrent transients in 1979.107 The bilayer separated a Teflon chamber, containing liquid electrolytes, into two compartments with a secondary donor and a secondary acceptor on opposite sides, and the cell was completed with Calomel electrodes. The “ON” transients were attributed to a charge imbalance produced by the donor that supplies an additional two electrons to the reaction center in the membrane. However, the mechanisms of the negative “OFF” transients were not clearly addressed. S. C. Tan et al.108 reported that alternating photocurrents could be produced in photoelectrochemical cells based on the photosynthetic protein from Rhodobacter sphaeroides in response to discontinuous illumination, which is similar to our concept in solid systems.72 In addition, proteorhodopsin was also found to generate photocurrent transients in Xenopus oocytes under certain pH conditions due to proton translocation.109 These results indicate that the transient photocurrent response, far from being “anomalous”, is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the natural world, especially in biological systems. Furthermore, in 1991, Iwamoto et al.110 reported that photoinduced cis–trans isomerization in a LB film/water system, in which the LB film consists of an azobenzene derivative, can generate reproducible displacement currents by alternate excitation of UV and visible light. Another similarly interesting concept is the so-called photocapacitor proposed by T. Miyasaka et al.111,112 They combined a dye-sensitized photovoltaic cell for electric power generation and a capacitor for in situ energy storage into one device, in which dye-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles for photocurrent generation and the capacitor with redox-free electrolyte, as well as porous activated carbon layers as part of its electrodes, were utilized. Repeated charging–discharging with a charging voltage > 0.45 V was found to yield a large capacitance of 0.69 F cm−2. Such combinations of discrete components in one device may lead to more compacted integrated circuits with optoelectronic and other multifunctions.
4 Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we have summarized the various instances of anomalous transient photocurrent behaviour reported in the literature, as well as recent progress toward its exploitation for device application. Interfacial charge generation and space-charge effects, mainly caused by charge accumulation and trapping in relatively thick layers, are thought to be the origin for this phenomenon. It has been shown that the photocurrent transients can be generated by ultrathin interfaces of organic semiconductor/blocking layers, and are tunable through the nature of the blocking layers. In addition, the polarity of the response can also be tuned by changing the thickness of the semiconductor layer or by using ferroelectric polymers as the blocking layer. It is notable that an organic semiconductor/liquid interface can produce very large photocurrent transients and provide freedom for device structure design for diverse applications due to the electric double layer effect. However, the mechanisms of the photocurrent transients from semiconductor/liquid interfaces are still not completely determined, since the chemical and physical stability of the semiconductor/liquid interface can show pronounced effects.113 The electrolyte may incorporate into the semiconductor layer and directly bridge the device electrodes, yielding three interfaces, i.e., electrode/liquid, electrode/semiconductor and semiconductor/liquid interfaces. In addition, the static electric properties at the semiconductor/liquid interface and whether the liquid will destroy the semiconductor with the creation of impurities remain unclear, and will likely depend strongly on the system under study.
Despite the fact that anomalous transient photocurrent has not received much attention, when compared to steady-state photocurrent, it has been employed as a probe technique for energy loss mechanisms in organic photocells and photoinduced isomerization processes. We utilized it to probe the stray fields from a poled ferroelectric polymer and demonstrated a photoresponsive memory effect.87 As a novel operation principle for organic optoelectronic devices with photoinduced charging–discharging action, it is also very promising for photodetectors or photosensors/phototransducers, and especially for artificial retinas. In addition, it may also be possible for solar energy harvesting,72,108 if solar light modulation can be achieved without consuming electrical energy. We also expect that the optoelectronic interfaces with liquid layers may be promising in microelectronic devices with optoelectronic functions.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) and JSPS Core-to-Core Program, A. Advanced Research Networks. Dr Hu also thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11004172) and the Key Program of Natural Science Foundation (No. LZ13F050002) of Zhejiang Province for support.
Notes and references
B. Geffroy, P. Le Roy and C. Prat, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 572–582 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Reineke, M. Thomschke, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1245–1293 CrossRef .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burn and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef .
C. D. Muller, A. Falcou, N. Reckefuss, M. Rojahn, V. Wiederhirn, P. Rudati, H. Frohne, O. Nuyken, H. Becker and K. Meerholz, Nature, 2003, 421, 829–833 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Weiss and M. Abkowitz, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 479–526 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Law, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 449–486 CrossRef .
C. Schlebusch, J. Morenzin, B. Kessler and W. Eberhardt, Carbon, 1999, 37, 717–720 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. You, L. T. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C. C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Cao and J. G. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2123–2144 CAS .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 69–92 Search PubMed .
C. H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2014, 61, 278–287 CrossRef .
Y. N. Li, P. Sonar, L. Murphy and W. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1684–1710 Search PubMed .
M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 605–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar, B. K. Kaushik and Y. S. Negi, Polym. Rev., 2014, 54, 33–111 CrossRef .
S. Chenais and S. Forget, Polym. Int., 2012, 61, 390–406 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Ramirez, P. G. Boj, V. Navarro-Fuster, I. Vragovic, J. M. Villalvilla, I. Alonso, V. Trabadelo, S. Merino and M. A. Diaz-Garcia, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 22443–22454 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Forget, H. Rabbani-Haghighi, N. Diffalah, A. Siove and S. Chenais, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 131102 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tessler, G. J. Denton and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1996, 382, 695–697 CrossRef .
D. Amarasinghe, A. Ruseckas, G. A. Turnbull and I. D. W. Samuel, Proc. IEEE, 2009, 97, 1637–1650 CrossRef .
P. Heremans, G. H. Gelinck, R. Muller, K. J. Baeg, D. Y. Kim and Y. Y. Noh, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 341–358 CrossRef .
S. J. Kim and J. S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2884–2890 CrossRef PubMed .
L. P. Ma, J. Liu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2997–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Colle, M. Buchel and D. M. de Leeuw, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 305–312 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267–4295 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Dong, H. F. Zhu, Q. Meng, X. Gong and W. P. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754–1808 RSC .
S. F. Tedde, J. Kern, T. Sterzl, J. Furst, P. Lugli and O. Hayden, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 980–983 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Briand, A. Oprea, J. Courbat and N. Barsan, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 416–423 CrossRef .
B. Adhikari and S. Majumdar, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 699–766 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Nau, C. Wolf, S. Sax and E. J. W. List-Kratochvil, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1048–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tanaka, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2230–2233 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Takada, M. Ihama and M. Inuiya, Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng., 2006, 6068, A680 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Subramanian, P. C. Chang, J. B. Lee, S. E. Molesa and S. K. Volkman, IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol., 2005, 28, 742–747 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cantatore, T. C. T. Geuns, G. H. Gelinck, E. van Veenendaal, A. F. A. Gruijthuijsen, L. Schrijnemakers, S. Drews and D. M. de Leeuw, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 2007, 42, 84–92 CrossRef .
P. F. Baude, D. A. Ender, M. A. Haase, T. W. Kelley, D. V. Muyres and S. D. Theiss, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3964–3966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Clark and G. Lanzani, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 438–446 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Hu, Y. H. Liu, J. Tian, B. Y. Cheng and D. Z. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 121102 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Barbaro, A. Caboni, P. Cosseddu, G. Mattana and A. Bonfiglio, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., 2010, 14, 758–766 CrossRef PubMed .

          I. Manunza, A. Sulis and A. Bonfiglio, BSN 2006: International Workshop on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, Proceedings, 2006, 208–211.
A. K. Bansal, S. Hou, O. Kulyk, E. M. Bowman and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adma.201403560 .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyasaka, SID Int. Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2007, 38, 1673–1676 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, G. N. Wang, H. Lee and T. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 315204 CrossRef .
M. A. McCarthy, B. Liu, E. P. Donoghue, I. Kravchenko, D. Y. Kim, F. So and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2011, 332, 570–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Muccini, W. Koopman and S. Toffanin, Laser Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 258–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Capelli, S. Toffanin, G. Generali, H. Usta, A. Facchetti and M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 496–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Toffanin, R. Capelli, W. Koopman, G. Generali, S. Cavallini, A. Stefani, D. Saguatti, G. Ruani and M. Muccini, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 1011–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hamilton, S. Martin and J. Kanicki, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 877–885 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yakuphanoglu and W. A. Farooq, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 379–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Baeg, Y. Y. Noh, J. Ghim, B. Lim and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3678–3685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. G. Naber, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom, G. H. Gelinck, A. W. Marsman, F. J. Touwslager, S. Setayesh and D. M. De Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Baeg, Y. Y. Noh, J. Ghim, S. J. Kang, H. Lee and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3179–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Hu, Y. Noda, H. Ito, H. Kishida, A. Nakamura and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243303 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dalgleish, M. M. Matsushita, L. G. Hu, B. Li, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12742–12750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lebedev, T. Dittrich, V. PetrovaKoch, S. Karg and W. Brutting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2686–2688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fujikake, T. Murashige, M. Sugibayashi and K. Ohta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3474–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Honma and T. Nose, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 103103 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Gautam and K. S. Narayan, Organogenesis, 2014, 10, 9–12 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4013–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka and Y. Inuishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1967, 6, 1371–1380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizutani, Y. Takai and M. Ieda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1973, 12, 1553–1557 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwamoto and A. Fukuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1993, 32, 860–863 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fukuda and M. Iwamoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1992, 31, L622–L625 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwamoto and A. Fukuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1993, 32, L1814–L1817 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang and A. C. Albrecht, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 63, 953–961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sen and T. N. Misra, Bull. Mater. Sci., 1996, 19, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Andriesh, V. I. Arkhipov, M. S. Iovu, A. I. Rudenko and S. D. Shutov, Solid State Commun., 1983, 48, 1041–1043 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lakhwani, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 557–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Hu, A. Iwasaki, R. Suizu, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga and H. Ito, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 484, 177–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwasaki, L. G. Hu, R. Suizu, K. Nomura, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga, Y. Noda, K. Kanai, Y. Ouchi, K. Seki and H. Ito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4022–4024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ito, Y. Niimi, A. Suzuki, K. Marumoto and S. Kuroda, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2743–2746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Hu, A. Iwasaki, R. Suizu, Y. Noda, B. Li, H. Yoshikawa, M. M. Matsushita, K. Awaga and H. Ito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205329 CrossRef .
Q. L. Song, C. M. Li, M. B. Chan-Park, M. Lu, H. Yang and X. Y. Hou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 176403 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Song, H. R. Wu, X. M. Ding, X. Y. Hou, F. Y. Li and Z. G. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 232101 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Manoj, A. A. Alagiriswamy and K. S. Narayan, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 4088–4095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. McNeill, I. Hwang and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 024507 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hwang, C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 094506 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, F. Gao, N. C. Greenham and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1419–1431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and C. R. McNeill, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 074513 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gao, Z. Li, J. P. Wang, A. Rao, I. A. Howard, A. Abrusci, S. Massip, C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3213–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, J. H. Huang, Z. H. Xiong and F. Li, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 621–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Odon, Meas. Sci. Rev., 2005, 5, 55–58 Search PubMed .
D. Magde, B. A. Bushaw and M. W. Windsor, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 28, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, S. Dalgleish, M. M. Matsushita, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3279 Search PubMed .
A. Mohite, S. Chakraborty, P. Gopinath, G. U. Sumanasekera and B. W. Alphenaar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 061114 CrossRef PubMed .
N. V. Tkachenko, P. H. Hynninen and H. Lemmetyinen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 261, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Noda, L. G. Hu, H. Yoshikawa, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 163304 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, S. Dalgleish, Y. Miyoshi, H. Yoshikawa, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 173302 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, Science, 2003, 302, 792–793 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wakai, A. Oleinikova, M. Ott and H. Weingartner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17028–17030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujimoto and K. Awaga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8983–9006 RSC .
C. Daguenet, P. J. Dyson, I. Krossing, A. Oleinikova, J. Slattery, C. Wakai and H. Weingartner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12682–12688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Weingartner, P. Sasisanker, C. Daguenet, P. J. Dyson, I. Krossing, J. M. Slattery and T. Schubert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4775–4780 CrossRef PubMed .
H. N. Wang and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16711–16719 CAS .
V. Gautam, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gautam, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17942–17949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gautam, D. Rand, Y. Hanein and K. S. Narayan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1751–1756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, R. Maccarone, S. Bellani, E. Lanzarini, N. Martino, M. Mete, G. Pertile, S. Bisti, G. Lanzani and F. Benfenati, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, M. Dal Maschio, E. Lanzarini, F. Benfenati and G. Lanzani, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 166 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Trissl, W. Gartner and W. Leibl, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989, 158, 515–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boyer, M. Dery, P. Selles, C. Arbour and F. Boucher, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1995, 10, 415–422 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Pandey, D. Pandey and R. Singh, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2012, 168, 936–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Hong, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1999, 62, 1–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schonfeld, M. Montal and G. Feher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1979, 76, 6351–6355 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Tan, L. I. Crouch, M. R. Jones and M. Welland, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6667–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lorinczi, M. K. Verhoefen, J. Wachtveitl, A. C. Woerner, C. Glaubitz, M. Engelhard, E. Bamberg and T. Friedrich, J. Mol. Biol., 2009, 393, 320–341 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Iwamoto, Y. Majima, H. Naruse, T. Noguchi and H. Fuwa, Nature, 1991, 353, 645–647 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 196102 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bellani, D. Fazzi, P. Bruno, E. Giussani, E. V. Canesi, G. Lanzani and M. R. Antognazza, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6291–6299 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic views of steady-state photocurrent and anomalous transient photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoresponse from the device of (a) non-irradiated, (b) 10 Mrad-irradiated and (c) 100 Mrad-irradiated high-density polyethylene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 1967 The Japan Society of Applied Physics. Photoresponse from the devices of low-density polyethylene with (d) Al electrodes and (e) Au electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 1973 The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 
J(t) = ±efα(l/L)exp(−t/τa),	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Space-charge distribution in a Au/PI/Al junction.(b) Potential distribution in the PI device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 1993 The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoresponses of (a) (Cr/Chl-a/Hg) cell and (b) (Cr/Chl-a/Hg:ln) cell under cw illumination. Positive current corresponds to the flow from Cr to Chl-a film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 1975 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photoresponse of an ITO/BDTDA (300 nm)/Al photocell (inset) under the illumination of a green laser (532 nm) in vacuum with a bias voltage of 0 V. (b) Theoretical simulation for the “ON” transients.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic views of a double-layer model.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocurrent transients of a 220 nm P3HT:F8TBT device in response to a 100 μs square light pulse (525 nm). (a) Absolute photoresponse under different intensities. (b) Photoresponse normalized to the photocurrent at 100 μs. Inset: normalized decay kinetics with a log-linear scale. (c) Influence of background light intensity on photoresponses for a constant pulse intensity of 35 mW cm−2. (d) Comparison of curves in part (c) with constant photocurrent baseline subtracted. The inset shows changes in fall dynamics at different background intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic view of a representative MISM device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocurrent transients from the MISM devices with different insulator layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 10  Photocurrent transients from BDN devices. (a) Photoresponse of an ITO/BDN (50 nm)/PVDF/Al photodetector to a square-wave light chain at 1050 nm (1.69 mW cm−2, 100 Hz), compared to a parylene-coated ITO/BDN50 nm/Al device. (b) Frequency dependence of the photoresponse for an ITO/BDN50 nm/PVDF/Al photocell, tested in air at frequencies from 100 Hz to 1 MHz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photoresponses from poled thick asymmetric devices. (a) Photocurrent transients after poling at −90 V, which are slightly decreased, compared with those before poling. The response does not show further decay. The inset is the schematic view of the energy levels for the ITO/CuPc/ferroelectric layer (FL)/C60/Al devices. (b) Photocurrent transients with opposite polarity after poling at +90 V.	 
J(t) ∼ βfsEexp[−(βf + k)]t,	(4)

 	Scheme 1  Potential drop in ionic liquid (a) and solid-state (b) dielectrics, which are sandwiched by an electrode and an organic semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 12  The photoresponse of the ITO/DEME–TFSI (0.15 mm)/ZnPc:C60 (50 nm)/Al and ITO/PVDF (200 nm)/ZnPc:C60 (50 nm)/Al photocells under the illumination of a modulated 532 nm laser (13 mW cm−2). The red curve is the light pulse train. The insets are the device structure of ITO/DEME–TFSI/ZnPc:C60/Al and its equivalent circuit in which the two CEDL are the capacitors formed at the interfaces, and the RBulk is the resistor of bulk DEME–TFSI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The scheme for the measurements in which the incident light spot (red cross) moves from the center of the superimposed area of ITO/Al electrodes to the non-superimposed area along the Al electrode. (b) The distance dependence of the peak photocurrent for the DEME-TFSI (square) and PVDF (triangle) devices, and the values are normalized by those at d = −1 mm. The red curve is the admittance of the DEME-TFSI cell, which was normalized by that at d = −1 mm. (c) The scheme for the cell impedance measurements, in which the electrodes are parallel to each other and d represents the gap distance between them. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photoresponse of ITO|P3HT:N2200/El devices to a square wave white light pulse incident from the electrolyte side for different BHJ layer thicknesses. (b) Photoresponse of P3HT:N2200 films (∼4.5 μm) in the ITO|BHJ/El device with KCl (100 mM) electrolyte shown for two sides of illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the experimental set-up for photoexcitation (410 nm, 400 μW mm−2) of the BHJ/El device and recording of the retinal activity using a multielectrode array. (b) Typical neuronal response elicited in the retina upon excitation. The BHJ transient signals are followed by the neuronal spikes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
