Doping of Cu 2 ZnSnSe 4 solar cells with Na + or K + alkali ions  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05415G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05415G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2653-2663Doping of Cu2ZnSnSe4 solar cells with Na+ or K+ alkali ions

        
          
            Sylvester 
            Sahayaraj
          
        
      *abd, 
      
        
          
            Guy 
            Brammertz
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bart 
            Vermang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Aniket 
            Mule
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Schnabel
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Marc 
            Meuris
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jef 
            Vleugels
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Jef 
            Poortmans
          
        
      bcd
aIMEC Division IMOMEC – Partner in Solliance, Wetenschapspark 1, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. E-mail: sahaya@imec.be
bInstitute for Material Research (IMO), Hasselt University, Wetenschapspark 1, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
cImec-Partner in Solliance, Kapeldreef 75, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
dDepartment of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
eDepartment of Materials Engineering (MTM), KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 44, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
fDepartment of Mechanical and Process Engineering (D-MAVT), ETH Zurich, LEEK, Leonhardstrasse 21, 8092, Zurich, Switzerland
gZentrum für Sonnenenergie- und Wasserstoff- Forschung Baden-Württemberg, 70565 Stuttgart, Germany
Received 
      22nd June 2017
    , Accepted 4th January 2018First published on 8th January 2018AbstractIn this work, the addition of molar concentrations of Na+ and/or K+ in the form of fluorides during the processing of Cu2ZnSnSe4 absorber layers was investigated. The beneficial effect of alkali salts on the performance of CZTSe solar cells has been demonstrated through physical and electrical characterization. A maximum power conversion efficiency of 8.3% has been obtained through controlled addition of Na+ and K+ in the CZTSe absorber as opposed to 6.7% from uncontrolled addition of both. The open circuit voltage in both cases was very much the same but the devices with controlled addition showed lower p-type doping, a low density of charged defects and less band tailing compared to the rest.
Introduction
Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 compounds are considered attractive potential candidates to replace the well-known Cu based CIGS thin film photovoltaic technology due to their earth abundant constituents, low costs, low toxicity and excellent optical properties. The best efficiencies achieved for kesterites (12.6%)1 and CIGS (22.6%)2 thus far have been possible with the so-called “substrate architecture” where the photovoltaic absorber material is grown on top of a substrate (glass, flexible plastics, and steel) followed by the deposition of other layers that make up the rest of the solar cell material stack. Therefore, the choice of the substrate material can be critical since it can positively or negatively influence the growth of the photovoltaic absorber. Of all choices available, the most preferred substrate is glass or more commonly soda lime glass (SLG) because it is relatively cheap, is stable over time, is corrosion resistant and can be configured in desired shapes. The composition of typical SLG used for windows contains significant amounts of alkali elements like Na+ and K+ depending on the manufacturer.3 The properties of the glass that are dependent on temperature like the strain, annealing, and glass transition point generally vary between 450 and 720 °C, as determined by the manufacturer and its composition. During the growth of the photovoltaic absorber (both CZT(S,Se) and CIGS), which is typically between 450 and 560 °C, the glass might go through one of these transition points (it will plastically deform above the Tg or annealing temperature) and at temperatures close to the strain point of the glass the transport properties of the constituents especially the alkali atoms are greatly enhanced enabling them to diffuse into the absorber indicating that the amount of alkali salts in the absorber is “uncontrolled” under these circumstances. In the case of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) based solar cells, the incorporation of Na+ into the absorber has been reported as beneficial for the electrical performance of the devices. The importance of Na+ for improved electrical performance in CIGSe was first observed in 1993 by Hedström et al.4 and Holz et al.5 Since then, there have been a plethora of reports discussing several aspects related to Na+ addition in CIGSe solar cells most of which can be found in ref. 6. As far as kesterites are concerned, the topic of alkali element inclusion during absorber growth is still in the nascent stages of discussion. There are a few recent reports7,8 claiming an improvement in efficiency upon Na+ alkali inclusion in kesterite absorbers. In this work, a cheap and simple route to include alkali salts in a very controlled manner by spin coating in a kesterite absorber is explored and the importance of a controlled addition is discussed. The changes that take place in the absorber and eventually the solar cell upon alkali addition have been studied extensively with a variety of physical, electrical and optical techniques and an explanation accounting for these changes has been provided. The results of solar cells with and without controlled alkali addition are compared.
Experiments and methods
Sample fabrication
Solar cells were fabricated on a 3 mm thick, 25 cm2 SLG substrate covered by 400 nm of molybdenum (Mo) as an electrical back contact. The constituent elements that make up the absorber layer are deposited in a Sn (215 nm)/Zn (95 nm)/Cu (110 nm) sequence on top of the Mo-coated glass by means of electron beam evaporation. The precursor films were selenized at elevated temperatures (460 °C) in a Se-rich atmosphere created by a uniform flow of H2Se at 200 sccm in an annealing chamber to form crystalline CZTSe thin films. A temperature ramp of 1 °C s−1 was used and the selenization was carried out for 15 minutes before the sample was cooled down to 50 °C. In order to incorporate and systematically study the effect of Na+ and K+ on the performance of CZTSe solar cells, the diffusion of Na+ from the SLG substrate into the CZTSe absorber was prevented. This was achieved by the use of SLG with a 100 nm thick SiON sputtered top layer followed by a Mo layer. The alkali elements in the form of their fluorides namely NaF and KF (99.9% pure, Sigma Aldrich) were dissolved in different concentrations in DI water. Appropriate amounts of the solution were spin coated for 6 minutes (for film formation and drying) on the top of the trilayer Sn/Zn/Cu metallic stack and selenized as explained above. The selenized absorbers were then immersed in a 5 wt% aqueous KCN/KOH solution for 120 seconds to remove secondary phases, elemental selenium and native oxides from the absorber surface. To obtain functional solar cells, a 50 nm thick CdS layer was deposited via chemical bath deposition followed by an intrinsic ZnO (120 nm) and an aluminum-doped ZnO (250 nm) layer by sputtering followed by the deposition of 50 nm of Ni and 1 μm thick Al fingers as the front contact. Individual cells with an area of approximately 0.5 cm2 were laterally isolated by mechanical scribing.
Physical analysis
The surface morphology and chemical composition of the CZTSe thin films were evaluated by using a scanning electron microscopy analysis (SEM) system. The accelerating voltage used for EDX (energy dispersive X-ray) analysis was 20 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on an X'Pert Pro MRD X-ray diffractometer in the conventional Bragg–Brentano ω–2θ geometry using Cu Kα (1.5411 Å) radiation as the incident beam. The compositional depth profiles of a wide range of elements were recorded using a Horiba Scientific GD-Profiler 2 Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectrometer (GDOES) which is operated in the RF-mode at a power of 26 W and an argon pressure of 5 mbar. The measurement spot has a diameter of 4 mm and a depth-resolution within the absorber of about 60 nm is achieved, comparable with those of other thin-film analytical methods like secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). STEM (scanning transmission electron microscopy) images were taken with a FEI Titan Chemi Themis 80–200 kV Cs-probe corrected TEM, operating at 200 kV accelerating voltage and equipped with an EDX SuperX Bruker detector. In this method a coherent focused probe scans across the specimen and the X-ray emission spectrum is recorded in each probe position. All samples studied in cross section mode were prepared in a focused ion beam (FIB) FEI Dual-Beam Helios 450S with FIB lift-out Cu-grids using a technique known as “lift-out”.9 In all of the samples a layer of amorphous carbon was deposited to reduce shadowing effects and to improve the electrical conductivity of the surface. On top of the buffer layer a protective Pt bi-layer assisted by the electron and the Ga beam was deposited. Lamella ion-milling, i.e. the polishing process, was done using a Ga beam, which usually creates an amorphous implanted Ga layer in the samples. The lamellae were prepared as thin as possible, <50 nm, in order to reduce the effect of layer overlapping caused by interface surface roughness.
Electrical and optical analysis
The processed solar cells were analyzed using current–voltage (IV) measurements, using a 2401 Keithley Source meter, under standard test conditions for kesterite solar cells with a solar simulator system using an AM 1.5G spectrum with an illumination density of 1000 W m−2 at 25 °C. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) has been measured at room temperature using a laboratory-built system with a grating monochromator-based dual-beam setup under chopped light from a Xe lamp. The doping profile of the absorbers was obtained by capacitance–voltage (CV) measurements, which were performed with an Agilent 4980A LCR-meter with frequencies varying from 1 kHz to 1 MHz. An excitation dependent photoluminescence analysis was performed using a Hamamatsu C12132 near infrared compact fluorescence lifetime measurement system equipped with a cryostat that can be cooled down to liquid N2 (77 K) temperatures. The tool used a 15 kHz, 1.2 ns pulsed 532 nm laser and the average laser power was varied between 0.08 mW and 56 mW to illuminate an area of 3 mm diameter on the measured solar cell. Minority carrier lifetime measurements at both room and low temperatures were carried out using the same.
Results and discussion
Effect on physical properties
Before analyzing the influence of alkali elements in CZTSe, an appropriate concentration of each element or a combination that needs to be added to CZTSe during the absorber growth had to be sorted out. Since spin coating is a solution based technique, the concentration was deduced in terms of molarity. The room temperature lifetime measurements of several selenization experiments revealed that the carrier lifetime of CZTSe (both as a bare absorber and in solar cells) was higher without using the diffusion barrier. One such example is provided in Fig. 1a. The minority carrier lifetimes were measured using time resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy (TRPL). The minority carrier lifetime is derived using a two exponential fit to the photoluminescence decay curve. The slower decay time is considered as the minority carrier lifetime.10 Therefore different molar concentrations of the individual alkali fluorides (NaF and KF) of each element and the combination (NaF + KF) from 0.01 M to 0.5 M were spin coated on top of the metallic trilayer and were selenized. The molar concentration that gave a higher carrier lifetime than that of the CZTSe absorber with an alkali diffusion barrier was considered the best concentration. In this way several molar concentrations were screened. The optimum molar concentration for NaF and KF was found to be 0.1 M and 0.2 M for their combination. The TRPL data are shown in Fig. 1b–d. This observation and screening also suggests that the presence of alkali atoms has an influence on the minority carrier lifetime of CZTSe solar cells. For the sake of simplicity, the CZTSe solar cell prepared without Na+ or K+i.e. with a diffusion barrier will be referred to as J-0, and the CZTSe solar cell fabricated on the SLG substrate without a diffusion barrier as B-0. The CZTSe solar cells spin coated with NaF, KF and NaF + KF will be called J-Na, J-K, and J-Na + K respectively.
 Fig. 1  Time resolved photoluminescence measurements (TRPL) at room temperature showing the PL decay and exponential fit giving the lifetime of CZTSe solar cells (a) with and without Na+, (b) with and without NaF external addition, (c) with and without KF external addition, and (d) with and without NaF + KF external addition (X in the figures indicate the best molar concentration). 
The surface morphology of CZTSe absorbers B-0 and J-0 after selenization and KCN etching is shown in Fig. 2a and b. The morphology of the CZTSe layers with and without Na+ looks quite different. In the absence of Na+, the shape of the grains looks distinct with voids in-between, whereas the absorber with Na+ interdiffused from the SLG substrate has a more compact morphology. The distribution of Na+ and K+ throughout the CZTSe absorber was probed using GDOES. The measurements were performed on a full solar cell. The glow discharge signal of the Mo back contact is plotted in order to differentiate the absorber from the remainder of the solar cell. A strong Na+ signal was detected for B-0, as shown in Fig. 2c, clearly proving that Na+ coming from the SLG substrate is very randomly distributed throughout the CZTSe absorber and also tends to accumulate at the backside. In comparison, the signal for the J-0 absorber is almost 100 times weaker indicating clearly that the diffusion barrier has been quite effective in preventing the interdiffusion of Na+ from the substrate. The glow discharge signal for K+ in both absorbers was very low and almost identical, indicating that no or only a very limited amount of K+ diffuses in the CZTSe absorber during selenization. The surface morphology of the CZTSe absorbers with external alkali addition, i.e. J-Na, J-K and J-Na + K, is shown in Fig. 3a–c. The SEM images present clear evidence for the considerable improvement in the morphology with controlled addition where samples J-Na and J-Na + K present large sized well-defined grains. The difference in the grain sizes in the presence of alkalis, especially Na+, can be explained by the formation of a liquid phase of alkali–Se binary compounds (NaxSe) during selenization. These compounds are in a liquid phase during the temperature ramp stage and can act as selenium reservoirs11,12 which can help grain growth by means of solution-reprecipitation resulting in densification of grains. The liquid alkali metal–Se phase can enhance a uniform elemental diffusion of the constituent atoms and merge the CZTSe grain boundaries. The controlled alkali addition experiments indicate that the enhanced grain growth can be attributed to the NaF top layer. In this case, significant amounts of Na+ are readily available at the surface to react with arriving Se molecules, while Na+ from the SLG first needs to diffuse through the Mo layer into the CZTSe layer. This could also be the reason behind the more faceted crystal growth at higher Na+ addition. The distribution of Na+ and K+ in the absorbers after controlled addition, as probed by GDOES, is shown in Fig. 3d–f. The glow discharge signal from Na+ in these absorbers, although not as high as that in B-0, is still quite reasonable and higher than that for J-0. The distribution of the alkali elements is almost uniform in the absorber compared to the interdiffusion from the SLG. Therefore it appears that Na+ is required during the absorber growth to obtain a good grain morphology. Moreover, when the Na+ is added in the right amount as a top layer, the morphology gets even better and the Na+ is uniformly distributed in the CZTSe absorber. The alkali salts incorporated in CZTSe either through controlled or uncontrolled addition end up at the grain boundaries in the microstructure. However, the absorber that has only a KF top layer has poorly defined grains with holes on the surface, despite having a higher concentration than that of the SLG substrate.
 Fig. 2  (a and b) SEM images of the absorber in CZTSe solar cells B-0 and J-0. (c and d) GDOES elemental profiles of Na, K and Mo from CZTSe absorbers in B-0 and J-0. 
 Fig. 3  (a–c) SEM images of the absorber in CZTSe solar cells J-Na, J-K and J-Na + K. (d–f) GDOES elemental profiles of Na, K and Mo from CZTSe absorbers in J-Na, J-K and J-Na + K. 
The composition determined for these absorbers by SEM-EDX is listed in Table 1 below. All the CZTSe thin films exhibit a Cu-poor and Zn-rich composition. Absorber J-0 has the lowest Zn/Sn ratio. When alkali salts are added, not only the morphology but also the composition changes reasonably. A higher [Zn]/[Sn] ratio in the CZTSe thin films with the addition of alkali salts might suggest a possible Sn loss during the selenization which results in a higher [Zn]/[Sn] ratio. The [Cu]/[Zn] + [Sn] ratio is also high for these thin films which is only a consequence of the lower Sn content. This only provides information that the presence of alkali elements indeed influences the selenization reaction. How this exactly happens has not been discussed in the literature so far for kesterites and seems very tricky to speculate as well. In an attempt to detect the precise location of the alkali salts in the CZTSe absorber, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies were performed on the cross section of 2 solar cells, J-0 and J-Na + K, i.e. one alkali free solar cell and one with both Na+ and K+ added by spin coating. The chemical composition of the CZTSe grains was assessed by TEM-EDX mapping. From the TEM-EDX maps, as shown in Fig. 4, the presence of both Na+ and K+ could not be quantified. There are two possible reasons for this, sodium only has one Kα emission line at 1.041 keV, which superimposes with the Zn Lα at 1.012 keV. Therefore, the deconvolution of the signal and further quantification could not be performed. This has been the same problem with EELS (electron energy loss spectroscopy). For K+, there is a superposition with Cd Lα. Secondly the resolution for the EDX measurements is 0.1 at%. Hence, concentrations below this limit cannot be detected. It is certainly possible that these alkali salts are present in minuscule proportions in the CZTSe making their quantification very challenging. Despite the non-detectable alkali atoms, the TEM cross sections reveal some interesting information about the CZTSe absorbers. The cross section of the J-0 solar cell is distinctly different from that of the J-Na + K. The cross section (both bright and dark field images) of the J-0 absorber reveals some voids, similar to what was observed on the surface by SEM imaging. In the vicinity of these voids some bright small sized grains can be identified. The TEM-EDX measurements reveal that these particles are particularly rich in Zn and are probably aggregates of a secondary ZnSe phase. Apart from these features, the composition of the absorber remains uniform across the thickness. The cross section of the J-Na + K looks quite compact and appears to be a continuous dense film, confirming the SEM images. At the absorber/backside interface, small aggregates are visible. From EDX measurements, these aggregates were found to be very rich in Cu and Se suggesting that these particles could be a CuxSe secondary phase.
Table 1 EDS composition of the quaternary absorber in the CZTSe solar cells without, and with uncontrolled and controlled addition of alkali elements




Sample
Cu/Zn + Sn
Zn/Sn




B-0
0.89
1.15


J-0
0.78
1.1


J-Na
0.86
1.18


J-K
0.87
1.19


J-Na + K
0.84
1.17




 Fig. 4  (a) Bright and dark field TEM images of the cross section of the CZTSe solar cell J-0 (without any alkalis) along with the EDX elemental maps of the four constituent elements. (b) Bright and dark field TEM images of the cross section of the CZTSe solar cell J-Na + K (controlled addition by spin coating) along with the EDX elemental maps of the four constituent elements. 
XRD measurements performed on these absorbers also provided similar information. The XRD patterns of the solar cells are shown in Fig. 5a. The major diffraction peaks can be indexed to the tetragonal CZTSe phase. The other secondary phases in the XRD pattern are indexed using PDF cards listed in ref. 40. The zoomed in section of the main (112) peak, as shown in Fig. 5b, shows that the main peak of the CZTSe absorbers with alkali inclusion is shifted to a lower 2θ value whereas the main peak is exactly at 27.16° 2θ for the absorber without alkali. A shift to lower diffraction angles can be due to several reasons but the most likely is an increase in the lattice constant. This can occur due to alkali atoms occupying some positions in the unit cell of CZTSe or by substituting one of the constituent elements of CZTSe. The extent of this shift does not seem to depend on the size of the alkali atoms. Absorber B-0, where Na+ is incorporated in an uncontrolled fashion, exhibits a larger 2θ shift. GDOES revealed that the Na+ distribution in this absorber is higher in comparison with a controlled addition. Therefore, the extent of this shift should be related to the amount of the alkali atoms available for incorporation rather than the type of the alkali atom. To add more support to the TEM data, the enlarged section of the XRD pattern shown in Fig. 5c confirms the presence of a CuSe secondary phase in J-Na + K, J-Na and B-0, which all contain Na+. Sn related secondary phases (SnSe and SnSe2) were confirmed in the solar cells J-Na and J-K but not in the other cells. Since the XRD measurements were performed on the solar cells, peaks of ZnO are also present in the XRD pattern. The combined information from TEM-EDX and XRD analysis clearly indicates the presence and precise location of different secondary phases in the solar cells with and without alkali elements. A hypothesis explaining this difference can however not be derived from these data alone.
 Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the CZTSe solar cells without and with uncontrolled and controlled addition of alkali elements. (b) Section of the XRD patterns showing the main (112) peak of all CZTSe solar cells. (c) Section of the XRD patterns showing the different secondary phases in all CZTSe solar cells. 
Effect on electrical and optical properties
The solar cell parameters of the devices in discussion are listed in the table below. The IV curves of the best cells are plotted in Fig. 6a, and the average and the standard deviation measured from 12 functional cells along with other solar cell parameters for each device are shown in Table 2 below. It can be clearly seen that the efficiency of the solar cell without any alkalis (J-0) is lower than the rest. The solar cell which has controlled addition of Na or both Na + K has the highest efficiency in the series whereas the efficiency of the cell which has Na incorporation through uncontrolled addition has a moderate value between the two. The open circuit voltage Voc of all solar cells which contain alkali salts is also significantly higher than that of the solar cell without the alkalis (J-0). The improvement in the solar cell efficiency with alkali incorporation is also due to a noticeable increase in the short circuit density (Jsc). The spectral response measurements shown in Fig. 6b justify this statement. The carrier collection in all the solar cells is very uniform up to 400 nm, which corresponds to the parasitic absorption region of TCOs. In the range of 500–1000 nm (visible to far infra-red), the solar cells J-Na and J-Na + K i.e. solar cells with controlled alkali addition show a remarkable increase in the carrier collection efficiency which exceeds 90%. One possibility that could explain this response can be the continuous well defined surface morphology of the CZTSe absorbers in these solar cells. A similar Jsc increase that comes from the improvement of long wavelength collection was also reported by Gershon et al., in their Na incorporation studies on CZTSe. From the defect analysis they performed, they were able to realize that when the sub-gap states are shallower, the carrier mobility and hence the long wavelength collection efficiency improved.13 The same could be true here although no experimental data are available to prove this. The response of the other solar cells in this region is only moderate in comparison. As a result of this excellent carrier collection the solar cell short circuit current densities of J-Na and J-Na + K measured from EQE turn out to be 37 and 38 mA cm−2 respectively as opposed to 31.4 mA cm−2 for J-0 and 30.2 cm2 for B-0. Fig. 6c shows the carrier density profiles of a set of CZTSe solar cells processed on three different occasions of the year, with and without the diffusion barrier from CV measurements. It is evident that the carrier density of the CZTSe solar cells without a diffusion barrier (B-0, B-0′, and B-0′′) is consistently higher than those of their counterparts. The carrier density is about 10 times higher when Na+ is incorporated in CZTSe. The increase in carrier density is accompanied by a change in the Fermi level. Since all devices have the same kind of processing, except for the absorber, the Fermi level changes only in the p-type absorber. This change of the bulk Fermi level will affect the built-in potential (Vbi) of the p–n junction. The built-in potential extracted from Mott–Schottky plots for devices J-0 and B-0 are shown in Fig. 6d and e. The built-in potential with Na+ incorporation is higher by 100 mV. A higher built-in voltage may lead to higher Voc because the built-in voltage is the upper limit of the Voc. Indeed, the Voc of the B-0 device is 85 mV higher than that of the J-0 device. The exact mechanism of how the change in carrier density occurs with Na+ is not clearly known for kesterites. The only experimental evidence in this case is that Na+ incorporation increases the p-type carrier density. Niles et al. encountered a similar situation in CIGS, where XPS analysis allowed them to conclude that Na+ present during CIGS growth replaced either In or Ga forming acceptor states that resulted in a higher p-type carrier concentration.14 It is well known that CZTSe is a derivative of CIGS, where In and Ga are replaced by Zn and Sn. Now if Na+ would replace Cu+ in CZTSe, it would lead to the formation of NaCu defects that will not create acceptor states, because Na+ and Cu+ are both column I elements. Na+ replacing Se might result in not only acceptor states but also an all metallic compound which will diminish the semiconductor behavior of the solar cell. Since Zn and Sn are present in 2+ and 4+ states in CZTSe, Na+ occupying either a Zn or a Sn site would result in acceptor states such as (NaZn)1−or (NaSn)3−. The formation energy of compensated defect clusters is much lower and more favorable than that of single donors or acceptors in CZTSe due to charge transfer and attractive Coulomb interaction between the atoms.15 The formation of (NaSn)3− is feasible but such defects would result in triple acceptor states which require a triple donor state like (SnCu)3+ for compensation, the formation of which might be possible only in Cu-rich or Sn rich kesterites. Therefore, in Cu-poor kesterites the most likely explanation for the increase in the carrier density with Na+ incorporation stems from the formation of (NaZn)− acceptor defects. This hypothesis is also supported by XRD measurements which show that the main CZTSe peaks are shifted to lower 2θ values that reflects an increase in lattice parameters due to alkali doping. The change in net carrier density with controlled alkali addition is shown in Fig. 6f. With controlled addition, there is very little change in the carrier density. In fact the carrier density is lowered in the absorber when only 0.1 M or 0.2 M concentrations of alkali salts are used. The depletion width is also higher in the case of controlled addition comparatively. Although controlled addition results in a uniform distribution of alkali salts in the CZTSe absorber (see the previous section), the amount of alkalis incorporated in the absorber is lower compared to the interdiffusion of Na+ from the SLG and it is very likely to be below 0.1 at%. At these low amounts, the effect on carrier density is not the same as what was observed with uncontrolled addition. However, when adding 0.5 M Na+ through controlled addition, the carrier density curve resembles that of the B-0. Therefore by tailoring the amount of alkali salts in CZTSe during absorber formation, the p-type doping can be modified. From this and previous studies it appears that the optimum carrier density for highly efficient CZTSe devices seems to be around 1015/cm3 (ref. 16 and 17). Another point of interest is that the built-in potential (Vbi) of the devices with controlled addition is very similar to that of J-0, but the Voc of these devices is significantly higher than that for J-0. This shows that the improvement in Voc is not only limited to the change in the built-in voltage of the p-type absorber but is also concerned with other factors. In order to understand some of them, in-depth optical and electrical analyses were performed on the CZTSe solar cells used in this discussion. Firstly excitation dependent photoluminescence measurement was performed. The behavior of the PL emission for one of the samples used in this work as a function of increasing excitation intensity is shown in Fig. 7a. At low powers the position of the PL peak is shifted drastically to lower energies. The position of this peak continues to blue shift up to a certain threshold intensity (which varies from one absorber to the other) and it saturates thereafter. With further increase in excitation intensity the position of the peak does not change. The peak signatures (intensity and position) as a function of excitation intensity were analyzed. The results are shown in Fig. 7b. It has been established that the luminescence yield of a transition generally obeys the expression IexcαIPLk.18,19 From the inset of Fig. 7b it can be seen that the K exponent is 0.82 which is characteristic of defect related recombination in the absorber.20 From the literature the dependence of the PL intensity on the excitation intensity is explained by the expression E = βln(I/Imax) (ref. 21 and 22), where E is the energy of the PL peak, I is the intensity of the PL peak and β is the energy shift in the peak position. A value of above 9 meV is obtained for the absorber. Except for the sample J-K which does not exhibit this behavior all the other samples discussed in this work have k values less than 1 and β values above 7 meV. This PL emission can be attributed to radiative transitions between carriers localized in donors and acceptors below the band edges13,23 or may involve
tail states as well. However, low energy emissions (like 0.85 eV) do not correlate well with band tails that have amplitudes around 40 meV (shown later in Fig. 8d) for absorbers with a band gap around 1 eV. For pure S and Se based kesterites the same behavior has been classified as Quasi-Donor–Acceptor transitions (Q-DAP).23,24 In the Q-DAP formulation the fluctuations can be due to spatial variations of the band gap or fluctuating electrostatic potentials. The concepts and equations that explain the Q-DAP formulation are from P. W. Yu.21 In kesterites these concepts have been employed to understand the PL emission at low temperatures for Se based kesterites.13,25,26 One of the useful quantities that can be measured from the excitation dependent analysis is the Q-DAP pair density, in other words the density of charge compensating defect clusters in the absorber by equating the magnitude of the blue-shift with the coulombic term Ecoul = e2/4πε0εrrDA, where εr the relative permittivity has a value of 8.5 for CZTSe. This gives a certain value for rDA, the average defect spacing after all the defect pairs have become neutral. With the knowledge of rDA and using the assumption r = (3/4πNd)1/3 (ref. 23), the quasi-donor to acceptor pair (Q-DAP) density and the total bulk defect density can be calculated. The calculated defect density has been plotted against the power conversion efficiency and the Voc of the solar cells in Fig. 7c and d. From the graphs a higher defect density is seen to correlate with a lower efficiency and low Voc. The existence of separate and discrete donor and acceptor levels inside the band gap will not be valid in the case of heavily doped and highly compensated semiconductors provided that the band tailing is too large and the heavy doping condition is satisfied. The heavy doping condition is given by Na,daa,d3 ≫ 1 (ref. 27) with Na,d being the concentration of acceptor and donor states and aa,d being the Bohr radius of the same. For pure selenide CZTSe a reasonable value for aa,d is of the order of 1 × 10−7–1.5 × 10−7 cm.28 The value of Na,d derived in this work is between 1017 and 1018 cm−3. The product of Na,daa,d3 is well below 1 for all the CZTSe solar cells presented in this work. It is worth mentioning that the calculated values of separation between the donors and acceptors for the absorbers presented in this work are between 5.1 and 8.8 nm which are higher than the probable values of the Bohr radius mentioned above. This also proves that the absorbers are not heavily doped as per the description from Levanyuk and Osipov.29 The solar cells presented in this work certainly do not fall into the heavily doped category and their PL emission characteristics can be sufficiently explained by Q-DAP formulation. Coming back to the results of the PL analysis, a higher Q-DAP defect density was seen in the device J-0 without alkalis. The defect density in the devices with alkali addition (either controlled or uncontrolled) differs by an order of magnitude compared to J-0 and this is also reflected in the Voc values of these devices which are significantly higher than that for J-0. Large defect densities and heavy compensation are expected to reduce the Voc, e.g., by the formation of band tail states30 in as much as defects may participate in trapping and recombination processes.31–33 The fact that devices containing alkalis exhibit a higher Voc means that the presence of alkali atoms certainly mitigates the recombination losses, e.g., by passivating some defects, in the absorber to an extent. In this context, it is worth recollecting the observation made earlier in this discussion where the minority carrier lifetime of the CZTSe solar cells was always higher with Na+ inclusion. Combining these ideas it is easy to see that a higher bulk defect density, low lifetimes, low Voc and ultimately a lower power conversion efficiency turn out to be characteristics of alkali-free CZTSe solar cells. The behavior of the Voc with temperature, as obtained from temperature dependent IV measurements, is shown in Fig. 8a. The extrapolation of the Voc at 0 K is usually interpreted as giving the activation energy of the dominant recombination process in the solar cell.34 The extrapolated Voc at 0 K for all devices is lower than the value of Eg/q (1.05 V, the actual band gap of CZTSe) which seems to indicate that the Voc is limited by recombination at the absorber–buffer interface, suggesting that there are a considerable number of interface defects. Particularly, the device J-0 has a very low Voc max. or in other words a large Voc deficit. This means that the absence of Na+ in the absorber might result in a high density of interface defect states. A characteristic feature of kesterite solar cells is the presence of absorption tails at the band edges which can act as centers of non-radiative recombination. This band tailing in CZTSe can be due to spatial band gap fluctuations that arise due to differences in the composition at the microscopic level, secondary phases or fluctuating electrostatic potentials that arise due to defect clustering of point defects or self-compensating charge complexes in the absorber. Both cases lead to a non-zero density of states within the band gap. The difference in the band tailing caused by spatial band gap fluctuations and potential fluctuations at the microscopic level is shown in Fig. 9a and b (figure and figure caption adapted from ref. 30).
 Fig. 6  (a) Illuminated IV curves of the best CZTSe cells with no, uncontrolled and controlled alkali addition. (b) External quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the best CZTSe cells with no, uncontrolled and controlled alkali addition. (c) Carrier density profiles obtained from CV measurements for a set of CZTSe solar cells with no and uncontrolled alkali addition. (d and e) Mott–Schottky plots to extract the built-in voltage (Vbi) of CZTSe solar cells with no and uncontrolled Na addition. (f) Carrier density profiles obtained from CV measurements for a set of CZTSe solar cells with controlled alkali addition. 
Table 2 The IV parameters (AM 1.5G) of the CZTSe solar cells with no, uncontrolled and controlled addition of alkali elements




Sample code

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF
Eff. η%




J-0
31.6
330
50.8
5.3% (4.7 ± 0.6)%


B-0
30
415
53.6
6.7% (6.3 ± 0.4)%


J-K
28.1
364
51
5.4% (4.7 ± 0.7)%


J-Na
35
409
54
7.9% (7.5 ± 0.4)%


J-Na + K
36.2
421
53
8.3% (7.8 ± 0.5)%




 Fig. 7  (a) Plot showing the behaviour of the PL peak with increasing excitation intensity of one CZTSe sample used in this study as an example (the inset in the figure shows the peaks at lower excitation powers). (b) Analysis of the features of the PL peaks shown in (a) to obtain the rate of blue shift and the recombination parameter. (c and d) Plots showing the relationship between the bulk Q-DAP defect density, efficiency and Voc of the solar cells. 
 Fig. 8  (a) Behaviour of Voc with temperature deduced from low temperature IV measurements in CZTSe solar cells used in this discussion. (b) An example plot explaining the extraction of the band tailing parameter σ from low temperature IV measurements. (c) Time resolved photoluminescence spectra showing enhanced lifetimes at 77 K. (d) Band tailing parameters (σ & ϒ) versus the efficiency of the solar cells. 
 Fig. 9  Schematic of (a) bandgap fluctuations and (b) electrostatic potential fluctuations. 
The roll over effect of the Voc observed in the low temperature regime is usually related to spatial band gap fluctuations. From Fig. 7c it is evident that all the solar cells used in this discussion could suffer from these band gap fluctuations. An alternative interpretation to the data shown in Fig. 7c could be given by fitting the data with the equation derived by Rau et al., for a photovoltaic absorber presenting spatial or lateral band gap fluctuations.35 Using the equation shown below  
a good fit to the experimental data can be obtained using as fitting parameters, the activation energy of the dominant recombination process equal to the band gap value 1.05 eV, Jsc, J00 and the magnitude of the band gap fluctuations (σEg) for each Voc curve. Fig. 7c could therefore also be interpreted in a way that the dominant recombination process is in the bulk of the absorber and not at the interface and that the intercept with zero kelvin is reduced because of the presence of a relatively large number of band gap fluctuations in the absorber which are very severe in the device J-0 thereby drastically reducing the maximum achievable Voc. The σEg values have been quantified and listed below in Table 3. The extent of the band tailing due to the fluctuating electrostatic potentials in the absorber can be quantified from the ϒ parameter which can be calculated from low temperature PL analysis using the formula given in ref. 36. The values of σEg and ϒ for the CZTSe solar cells in this discussion have been calculated and are plotted against the efficiency of the cells. Both band gap fluctuations and fluctuating potentials have the same effect on recombination in the absorber but they are fundamentally different on the microscopic level. In order to distinguish both and figure out which mechanism results in band tailing in these solar cells time resolved photoluminescence measurements were carried out at 77 K. The outcome of these measurements in the solar cells is shown in Fig. 8c, where enhanced lifetimes are observed in all the cases. The long lifetimes are a consequence of electrostatic potential fluctuations which separate the charge carriers spatially. The explanation behind these enhanced lifetimes is provided by Gokmen et al.,30 which can also be adapted for the CZTSe solar cells used in this discussion. The ϒ parameter, the average potential fluctuation, calculated from PL measurements is shown in Fig. 7fversus the efficiency of the solar cell. From the data presented in this work it can be concluded that although it is possible to quantify two band tailing parameters (σEg and ϒ) for CZTSe absorbers experimentally, tailing is dominated by fluctuating electrostatic potentials. Once again, J-0 has a higher value (60 meV) than the remaining solar cells which contain alkali salts. ϒ increases with increasing density of compensating donors and acceptors.21,37,38 This is also true in this case where a Q-DAP defect density of the order of 1018 cm−3 was observed in the sample J-0 which is higher than those of the other CZTSe solar cells leading to a higher degree of band tailing resulting in higher recombination losses. Therefore the reduced values of Voc extrapolated at 0 K from the low temperature IV measurements is possibly a consequence of a higher degree of band tailing. These findings clearly prove that Na or K in CZTSe modifies the degree of compensation in the absorber in a beneficial manner. The solar cells with controlled addition of alkali salts show a lower degree of band tailing and a lower density of compensating defects which are likely reasons for their high Voc. Nevertheless the efficiencies obtained through the controlled addition experiment are still lower than the record efficiencies of kesterites. This is due to the presence of secondary phases (CuSe and SnSe) in the thin film along with CZTSe. Both these phases are known to reduce the Voc and the shunt resistance (the FF indirectly),39 thereby limiting the efficiencies.
Table 3 The band tailing parameter σEg derived from the equation from Rau et al., in the CZTSe solar cells




Sample

σ

E
g
 Value




J-Na + K
60


J-Na
50


B-0
62


J-0
94




Conclusions
A detailed account of the effect of alkali ions Na+ and K+ on the physical, electrical and optical properties of CZTSe solar cells has been presented. The presence of alkali atoms looks certainly beneficial for CZTSe solar cells. The incorporation of Na+ in CZTSe from a SLG substrate and by controlled spin coating experiments was discussed. Na+ from SLG enters CZTSe from the backside through the Mo layer in an uncontrolled way. The amount of K+ diffusion is either too small or negligible to have any impact on the performance of CZTSe. When both Na+ and or K+ are added in the right amount as NaF and KF top layers on the metal precursor prior to selenization, the morphology of CZTSe grains improves considerably and the distribution of these elements in the CZTSe absorber is also very homogeneous. The controlled addition of both Na+ and K+ also results in highly efficient CZTSe devices reaching efficiencies up to 8.3% as opposed to 6.7% for uncontrolled addition. The open circuit voltage in both cases was comparable but the devices with controlled addition showed less p-type doping, a low density of charged defects and less band tailing. The use of K+ alone as the alkali source does not seem to improve the efficiencies much. These experiments and findings illustrate not only the importance of alkali salts in the processing of CZTSe solar cells but also the impact of controlled addition on their properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research is partially funded by the Flemish government, Department Economy, Science and innovation. This research has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 640868.
References
J. Kim, H. Hiroi, T. Todorov, T. O. Gunawan, M. Kuwahara, T. Gokmen, D. Nair, M. Hopstaken, B. Shin, Y. S. Lee, W. Wang, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.pv-tech.org/news/zsw-Achieves-World-Record-Cigs-Lab-Cell-Efficiency-of-22.6
        .

          http://www.menzel.de/on2014/07/16
        .

          J. Hedström, H. Ohlsen, M. Bodegård, A. Kylner and L. Stolt, Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  1993, pp. 364–371 Search PubMed .

          J. Holz, F. Karg and H. von Philipsborn, Presented at the 12th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  1994, p. 1592 Search PubMed .
P. M. P. Salomé, H. Rodriguez-Alvarez and S. Sadewasser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 9–20 CrossRef .
G. Altamura, M. Q. Wang and K. L. Choy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Hsieh, Q. Han, C. Y. Jiang, T. B. Song, H. Chen, L. Meng, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502386 CrossRef .
S. Bals, W. Tirry, R. Geurts, Z. Yang and D. Schryvers, Microsc. Microanal., 2007, 13, 80–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kanevce, D. H. Levi and D. Kuciauskas, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sangster and A. D. Pelton, J. Phase Equilib., 1997, 18, 177 CrossRef CAS .
D. Braunger, D. Hariskos, G. Bilger, U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 161, 361–362 Search PubMed .
T. Gershon, Y. S. Lee, R. Mankad, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, D. Bishop, B. McCandless and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 123905 CrossRef .
D. W. Niles, K. Ramanathan, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, B. J. Tielsch and J. E. Fulghum, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1997, 15, 6 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, J. H. Yang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 245204 CrossRef .
G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, S. Oueslati, H. El Anzeery, K. B. Messaoud, S. Sahayaraj, C. Koble, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103(163904), 1–4 Search PubMed .
S. Oueslati, G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, H. ElAnzeery, O. Touayar, C. Köble, J. Bekaert, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 582, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .

          J. I. Pankove, Optical processes in semiconductors, Dover, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .

          H. B. Bepp, and E. W. Wiliams, Photoluminescence theory in semiconductor and semimetals, ed. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Academic Press, New York,  1972, vol. 8 Search PubMed .
T. Schmidt, K. Lischka and W. Zulehner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 45, 8989 CrossRef .
P. W. Yu and Y. S. Park, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2434 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Schumacher, J. R. Botha and V. Alberts, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 063508 CrossRef .
T. Gershon, B. Shin, N. Bojarczuk, T. Gokmen, S. Lu and S. Guha, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 154905 CrossRef .
S. Oueslati, G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, C. Köble, T. Oualid, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 340–345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahayaraj, G. Brammertz, B. Vermang, S. Ranjbar, M. Meuris, J. Vleugels and J. Poortmans, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 633, 166–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahayaraj, G. Brammertz, B. Vermang, S. Ranjbar, Z. Huang, T. Schnabel, E. Ahlswede, M. Meuris, J. Vleugels and J. Poortmans, “Optoelectronic properties of CZGSe thin film solar cells”, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 171, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .

          B. I. Shklovskii and A. L. Efros, in Electronic Properties of Doped Semiconductors, Springer Series in Solid-State Science, ed. M. Cardona, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo,  1984, vol. 45 Search PubMed .
C. Persson, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 053710 CrossRef .
A. P. Levanyuk and V. V. Osipov, "Edge luminescence of direct-gap semiconductors", Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 1981, 24, 187–215 CrossRef .
T. Gokmen, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 103506 CrossRef .
D. Macdonald and A. Cuevas, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2000, 8, 363 CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235 CAS .
A. J. Lochtefeld, M. R. Melloch, J. C. P. Chang and E. S. Harmon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1465 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Scheer and H. Schock, Chalcogenide Photovoltaics, Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh sss& Co, KGaA, Weinheim,  2011 Search PubMed .
U. Rau and J. H. Werner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3735 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Yu, C. E. Stutz, M. O. Manasreh, R. Kaspi and M. A. Capano, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 504 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dobrego and I. Shlimak, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1969, 33, 805 CrossRef CAS .
Z. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, D. Z. Garbuzov and M. K. Trukan, Sov. phys. Semiconduct., 1973, 6, 1718 Search PubMed .
S. Sahayaraj, G. Brammertz, M. Buffiere, M. Meuris, J. Vleugels and J. Poortmans, EPJ Photovoltaics, 2016, 7, 70304 CrossRef .
International Center for Diffraction Data: CZTSe – 04-010-6295; MoSe2 – 04-004-8782; SnSe: 04-009-2274; SnSe2: 01-089-2939; ZnSe: 04-015-0312; CuSe: 00-049-1456; Mo: 01-088-331.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Time resolved photoluminescence measurements (TRPL) at room temperature showing the PL decay and exponential fit giving the lifetime of CZTSe solar cells (a) with and without Na+, (b) with and without NaF external addition, (c) with and without KF external addition, and (d) with and without NaF + KF external addition (X in the figures indicate the best molar concentration).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) SEM images of the absorber in CZTSe solar cells B-0 and J-0. (c and d) GDOES elemental profiles of Na, K and Mo from CZTSe absorbers in B-0 and J-0.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) SEM images of the absorber in CZTSe solar cells J-Na, J-K and J-Na + K. (d–f) GDOES elemental profiles of Na, K and Mo from CZTSe absorbers in J-Na, J-K and J-Na + K.	 

B-0	0.89	1.15
J-0	0.78	1.1
J-Na	0.86	1.18
J-K	0.87	1.19
J-Na + K	0.84	1.17

 	Fig. 4  (a) Bright and dark field TEM images of the cross section of the CZTSe solar cell J-0 (without any alkalis) along with the EDX elemental maps of the four constituent elements. (b) Bright and dark field TEM images of the cross section of the CZTSe solar cell J-Na + K (controlled addition by spin coating) along with the EDX elemental maps of the four constituent elements.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the CZTSe solar cells without and with uncontrolled and controlled addition of alkali elements. (b) Section of the XRD patterns showing the main (112) peak of all CZTSe solar cells. (c) Section of the XRD patterns showing the different secondary phases in all CZTSe solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illuminated IV curves of the best CZTSe cells with no, uncontrolled and controlled alkali addition. (b) External quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the best CZTSe cells with no, uncontrolled and controlled alkali addition. (c) Carrier density profiles obtained from CV measurements for a set of CZTSe solar cells with no and uncontrolled alkali addition. (d and e) Mott–Schottky plots to extract the built-in voltage (Vbi) of CZTSe solar cells with no and uncontrolled Na addition. (f) Carrier density profiles obtained from CV measurements for a set of CZTSe solar cells with controlled alkali addition.	 

J-0	31.6	330	50.8	5.3% (4.7 ± 0.6)%
B-0	30	415	53.6	6.7% (6.3 ± 0.4)%
J-K	28.1	364	51	5.4% (4.7 ± 0.7)%
J-Na	35	409	54	7.9% (7.5 ± 0.4)%
J-Na + K	36.2	421	53	8.3% (7.8 ± 0.5)%

 	Fig. 7  (a) Plot showing the behaviour of the PL peak with increasing excitation intensity of one CZTSe sample used in this study as an example (the inset in the figure shows the peaks at lower excitation powers). (b) Analysis of the features of the PL peaks shown in (a) to obtain the rate of blue shift and the recombination parameter. (c and d) Plots showing the relationship between the bulk Q-DAP defect density, efficiency and Voc of the solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Behaviour of Voc with temperature deduced from low temperature IV measurements in CZTSe solar cells used in this discussion. (b) An example plot explaining the extraction of the band tailing parameter σ from low temperature IV measurements. (c) Time resolved photoluminescence spectra showing enhanced lifetimes at 77 K. (d) Band tailing parameters (σ & ϒ) versus the efficiency of the solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of (a) bandgap fluctuations and (b) electrostatic potential fluctuations.	 

 		 

J-Na + K	60
J-Na	50
B-0	62
J-0	94

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
