A photosystem I monolayer with anisotropic electron flow enables Z-scheme like photosynthetic water splitting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE01901D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE01901D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3133-3143A photosystem I monolayer with anisotropic electron flow enables Z-scheme like photosynthetic water splitting†

        
          
            Fangyuan 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Panpan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Adrian 
            Ruff
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Volker 
            Hartmann
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sónia 
            Zacarias
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Inês. A. C. 
            Pereira
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Marc M. 
            Nowaczyk
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matthias 
            Rögner
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Felipe 
            Conzuelo
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Schuhmann
          
        
      *a
aAnalytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany. E-mail: felipe.conzuelo@rub.de; wolfgang.schuhmann@rub.de
bPlant Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
cInstituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras 2780-157, Portugal
Received 
      15th June 2019
    , Accepted 4th September 2019First published on 4th September 2019AbstractPhotosynthetic protein complexes are attractive building blocks for the fabrication of semi-artificial energy conversion devices. However, limitations in the efficiency of the implemented biophotovoltaic systems prevent their use in practical applications. In particular, the effective minimization of recombination processes in photosystem I (PSI) modified bioelectrodes is crucial for enabling a unidirectional electron flow allowing the true potential of the large charge separation at PSI being exploited. Here, we present controlled immobilization of PSI monolayers with a predefined preferential orientation that translates into anisotropic electron flow upon irradiation. Further interface of the oriented PSI monolayer with redox polymers allows an efficient electron transfer and minimization of possible short-circuiting pathways. To complete the functional biophotocathode, the PSI monolayer is coupled to a hydrogenase (H2ase) to realize light-induced H2 evolution. The PSI/H2ase biocathode is then combined with a redox polymer/photosystem II-based bioanode demonstrating a fully light-driven Z-scheme mimic biophotovoltaic cell for bias-free water splitting.

Broader context
Molecular hydrogen is a strategic energy carrier for current and future technologies. As the most important renewable energy source on our planet, the use of solar energy for production of H2 from water and simultaneous generation of electricity constitutes a highly promising approach. For this purpose, the high efficiency of widely abundant natural proteins involved in the photosynthetic process can be exploited, ultimately leading to a sustainable and environmentally friendly energy conversion and storage economy. However, integration of light-harvesting protein complexes for the development of bioelectrochemical devices requires the fabrication of stable and well-defined structures capable of providing appropriate electron transfer pathways between the immobilised biomolecules and a conductive support for an optimised electron transfer. We describe the rational modification of electrode surfaces by deposition of photosystem I films under a preferred anisotropic protein orientation, thus making directional electron transfer and an ultimate increase in photon-to-electron conversion efficiency possible. An additional layer comprised of a hydrogenase embedded in a redox polymer enables photoelectrochemical H2 evolution. Further coupling of the developed biophotocathode with a photosystem II-based bioelectrode able to extract electrons from water under irradiation provides a fully light-driven cell for water splitting.

Introduction
The use of renewable sources for a sustainable molecular hydrogen production is of high importance to ensure the availability of this promising fuel as energy carrier for current and future technologies. A particularly interesting approach in this regard constitutes the use of an efficient and ideally inexpensive photocatalyst enabling the use of solar energy for H2 production from water as a vastly abundant resource.1 Through billions of years of evolution Nature has developed the photosynthetic process, a fully optimized machinery enabling the conversion of solar energy and assimilation of organic matter.2 Making use of the two key protein complexes involved in oxygenic photosynthesis, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI), a semi-artificial Z-scheme mimic process could be ideally exploited for the production of fuels of interest.3–7 With this purpose, wiring of PSII to electrode surfaces has been successfully shown following different strategies that enable the efficient extraction of electrons from water upon light absorption8 (Fig. 1, left). Moreover, the use of high-light adapted natural PSII variants has demonstrated the possibility for attaining increased stability of related biodevices.9 Still, the remaining challenge is to improve even more the stability of isolated PSII, e.g., by genetic engineering, leading to lifetimes comparable to isolated PSI protein complexes. On the other hand, PSI is a natural photodiode, performing charge separation and delivering high-energy electrons upon absorption of visible light.10,11 Owing to the high quantum efficiency, abundance, and robustness of PSI, it is an attractive building block in semi-artificial photoelectrochemical assemblies and has been widely exploited for the development of energy conversion devices.12–15 Upon light absorption and internal electron transfer, a relatively long-lived charge separated state is obtained,10 in which the two opposite redox sites are constituted by the photo-oxidized special chlorophyll pair P700+ at the lumenal side and the reduced terminal Fe–S cluster FB− at the stromal side. In consequence, compared to the fabrication of a PSII-based biophotoanode, interfacing of PSI with the electrode surface is a considerably more complex task, involving different possible limitations as illustrated in Fig. 1 (right) that have to be taken into consideration in order to obtain efficient extraction of high energy electrons and their further use to produce fuels of interest.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a Z-scheme mimic fully light driven semi-artificial device for water splitting and concomitant H2 evolution. Left: PSII-based photoanode; WOC: water oxidation complex. Right: PSI-based photocathode coupled to a catalyst (Cat) for H2 production. For adequate performance certain requirements must be fulfilled for the PSI biocathode: (1) efficient wiring of protein complex with electrode surface, (2) efficient electron transfer to the catalyst for H2 production, (3) suitable orientation of the protein complex, (4) prevention of recombination processes within the protein complex, and (5) short-circuiting of high-energy electrons exiting PSI should be minimized. 
PSI exhibits a fast intramolecular charge separation rate, leading to a voltage difference of about 1 V between the two terminal redox sites (P700+ and FB−) located at opposite sides of the protein complex.16 However, this very same large voltage difference that makes PSI highly interesting for the fabrication of biophotovoltaic devices translates directly into a substantial driving force for recombination processes and the re-oxidation of reduced charge carriers at the electrode surface.17 In consequence, part of the generated photocurrents are effectively cancelled out compromising the efficiency of related biophotovoltaic devices.18,19 This has been shown, e.g., by using semiconductors such as p-doped silicon, enabling a considerable increase in photocurrent in comparison to other electrodes as a result of the strongly impeded re-oxidation of charge carriers.18,20 Towards the development of cost-effective and therefore semiconductor-free architectures, one of the major challenges constitutes the construction of well-defined structures comprising on the one hand a controlled immobilization of functional PSI anisotropically oriented to allow unidirectional electron transfer, and on the other hand, able to successfully prevent or at least minimize charge recombination and short-circuiting pathways. Among the different approaches reported for immobilization of PSI on the electrode surface, including methods based on electrostatic and affinity interactions as well as covalent binding,15,21 the most common approach has been the use of electrode surfaces modified with self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). In this way, immobilization of PSI by electrostatic interactions provides a means of an at least to a certain extent preferential orientation.13,22 Moreover, it was also shown that immobilized cytochrome c can be used as a template for the directed assembly of PSI, while simultaneously serving to electrical wiring PSI with the electrode surface as a prerequisite for increased photocurrents.23 Directed PSI immobilization was also reported after modification of graphene surfaces by π–π stacking using pyrenebutyric acid–NHS ester.24 However, a high degree of controlled orientation of immobilized PSI for functional devices was only obtained using more complex strategies, such as the expression of recombinant complexes by genetic engineering and introduction of a polyhistidine-tag at a specific location of the biomolecule surface,7,25 and the selection of specific binding peptides by phage display.26 Although an appropriate orientation of the immobilized protein complex is necessary for directed electron flow, the formation of a closely packed structure is at least of similar importance in order to prevent possible charge carrier recombination leading in turn to an increased photocurrent density. In this regard, the formation of dense PSI monolayers using vacuum-assisted adsorption enabled functional PSI-based photoelectrodes although the orientation of immobilized PSI was not fully controlled.27 In the thylakoid membrane of natural systems, a defined orientation and spatial separation of the terminal redox sites at PSI proves to be imperative for realization of the efficient energy conversion process. Short-circuiting pathways are prevented by the lipid bilayer membrane between the two opposite redox sites at the PSI protein complex that is embedded within the thylakoid membrane. In a similar way, different reports have shown reconstitution of PSI into lipid membranes creating highly packed ordered arrays able to deliver up to an order of magnitude higher photocurrents as compared to dense monolayers of equivalent PSI concentrations on Au/SAM surfaces.28
In this work, we take advantage of the amphiphilic nature of PSI and the specific orientation that isolated protein complexes adopt when spread onto a water/air interface. Langmuir monolayers of PSI are formed, in which the hydrophilic ends bearing the two terminal redox centres adopt a defined anisotropic orientation either being solubilized in water or facing air, while the hydrophobic regions stack together enabling the formation of stable monolayers. The monolayer of oriented PSI is effectively transferred to an electrode surface facilitating the fabrication of PSI-based photocathodes with an anisotropic electron flow and minimized short-circuiting. Moreover, the use of a redox polymer for mediated electron transfer between the electrode surface and the immobilized PSI offers efficient generation of photocurrents. The high-potential electron leaving PSI is further transferred via a viologen-modified redox polymer deposited on top of the PSI monolayer, but importantly not short-circuiting with the electrode surface or Os-complex based redox polymer underneath the PSI layer, to an embedded [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase guaranteeing on the one hand efficient photocurrent generation and on the other hand light-induced proton reduction enabling H2 evolution. The oriented PSI-based photocathode is finally combined with a PSII-based photoanode as proof of concept for a bias-free light driven semi-artificial device for water splitting into O2 and H2 production with previously unprecedented unidirectional electron flow.
Experimental section
Chemicals and materials
Potassium chloride, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, and di-potassium hydrogen phosphate trihydrate (VWR Chemicals), poly(ethylene glycol)diglycidyl ether (PEGDGE, Mn = 500 Da, Polysciences), branched polyethylenimine (PEI, average Mn = 600 Da, Sigma-Aldrich), citric acid monohydrate (J.T. Baker), methyl viologen dichloride hydrate (MV2+, 98%, Sigma-Aldrich), and 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES, Biomol). All chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. The synthesis and purification of the redox polymer poly(1-vinylimidazole-co-allylamine)-[Os(2,2′-bipyridine)2Cl]Cl (P-Os(I)) was described in ref. 29. The soluble Os-complex [Os-(1-(n-butyl)-imidazole)-(2,2′-bipyridine)2Cl]PF6 was synthesized according to ref. 30. The complex was used as Cl− salt by exchanging the hydrophobic PF6− counter ions against hydrophilic Cl− anions by means of an ion-exchanger (Amberlite, Acros). For this, the PF6 salt was dissolved in small amounts of MeCN and added to an aqueous suspension of the ion-exchanger. The suspension was stirred for several h, filtered off, and the organic phase was removed under reduced pressure. The Os-complex was used as aqueous stock solution (2.0 mM to 2.5 mM). The detailed procedure concerning synthesis and purification of the viologen modified polymer: poly(3-azido-propyl methacrylate-co-butyl acrylate-co-glycidyl methacrylate)-viologen (P-vio) is described in the ESI,† and was performed according to protocols described in ref. 31. The synthesis of the low-potential Os-complex modified polymer (P-Os(II)) used for the fabrication of the PSII-based photoanode was described in ref. 32. PSI trimers were isolated from cultures of Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1 as described in ref. 33. Briefly, a 20 L foil fermenter was used to grow the cells at 45 °C in BG11 medium supplemented with 5% CO2 in air, using light of increasing intensity: (20 to 100) μmol photons m−2 s−1. The cells were harvested at an OD680 of (3 to 3.5) and disrupted by a Parr bomb. For PSI isolation from thylakoid membranes, treatment with n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (β-DM, 1.2%) was used followed by hydrophobic interaction chromatography and ion exchange chromatography. The final concentration of purified PSI trimers was 6.4 μM, determined by chlorophyll a (Chla) absorption as 1.85 mgChla mL−1 and assuming a chlorophyll content of 336 chlorophyll molecules per trimer. The enzyme DvH-[NiFeSe]-hydrogenase (H2ase, from Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough) was isolated and purified according to ref. 34. The enzyme was stored at −80 °C in 20 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.6 and presented an estimated activity for H2 formation of (4000 to 5700) U mg−1.34 All solutions were prepared using deionized water (SG Water, ρ = 18 MΩ cm).
Substrate preparation and modification
Mica plates were a generous gift from the Chair of Physical Chemistry (Ruhr University Bochum). After cut to the desired size, a fresh mica surface was prepared by peeling off with scotch tape before deposition. Au-Modified surfaces were fabricated by coating Si(100) wafers (Wacker) with a 50 Å adhesion layer of titanium followed by a 1000 Å layer of gold by vapor deposition in a metal vaporization setup (Leybold Univex 300). Prior to use, the surface was cleaned using Piranha solution (concentrated H2SO4 and H2O2 in a volumetric ratio of 3:1) and then rinsed with copious amounts of distilled water. Caution!Piranha solution is highly corrosive and a powerful oxidizing agent. This solution must be handled with extreme care. Au surfaces were modified with thin P-Os(I) films by incubating in a diluted solution of P-Os(I) (1.1 μg μL−1) and the crosslinker PEGDGE (0.4 μg μL−1) overnight. Afterwards, the surface was incubated in a 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer solution pH 9.0 for 30 min to induce polymer collapse and crosslinking.30 Loosely adsorbed redox polymer was removed by rinsing with water. PSI monolayers were deposited using a Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) trough (5.5 cm × 54.0 cm, KSV Instruments) equipped with two symmetric barriers and operated at a constant compressing speed. Surface pressure vs. trough area (π–A) isotherms and LB film transfer were performed with a computer-controlled software provided by the manufacturer. A Pt Wilhelmy plate was used to determine the interfacial tension at the air/liquid interface for surface pressure measurements. As subphase a solution of 5 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.0 was used. A certain amount of PSI stock solution (6.4 μM in 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.5 with 0.03 wt% β-DM) was diluted with 5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) in a ratio of 1:10 and then spread at the air/water interface of the subphase. Drops of the PSI solution were spread gently to avoid dropping of material into the bulk of the subphase. The green PSI solution was immediately dispersed at the air/water interface. An equilibration time of 20 min was allowed for self-assembly and orientation of the PSI complexes at the air/water interface. Then, π–A isotherms were recorded while compressing the barriers at a speed of 10 mm min−1. PSI monolayers were transferred to the corresponding surface at a constant surface pressure of 42 mN m−1, using vertical pulling or dipping of the substrate at a rate of 5 mm min−1. LB film transfer was performed at a temperature of 20 °C. For more experimental details, the reader is referred to the ESI† and Fig. S3. For light-induced H2 evolution, the PSI modified substrates (bare Au-wafer or Au-wafer modified with a thin P-Os(I) film) were drop cast with a solution of DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase (2.1 μM), PEI (0.42 μg μL−1), and viologen-modified polymer (P-vio, 1.0 μg μL−1) and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. Afterwards the solution was removed and the samples were allowed to dry under ambient conditions.
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical characterization was performed using a three-electrode setup with a Ag/AgCl/3 M KCl reference electrode, a Pt mesh as counter electrode, and the modified Au-surface as working electrode. Measurements were performed using a PGU-BI 100 bipotentiostat (IPS Jaissle). A Hg–Xe lamp (LC8 type 03, Hamamatsu Photonics) was used for illumination of the whole sample electrode area (0.246 cm2). The samples were irradiated using red light (λ > 600 nm red foil filter, No. 164, LEE Filters) with an effective light intensity at the sample surface of 43 mW cm−2, unless otherwise noted.
Scanning photoelectrochemical microscopy (SPECM) measurements for the detection of evolved H2 were performed with a Pt microdisk electrode fabricated using Pt wire (25 μm Ø, Goodfellow) sealed in a borosilicate glass capillary or a H2ase modified carbon microelectrode, prepared according to ref. 35. Briefly, the tip of a carbon microelectrode was immersed into a mixture of DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase (2.1 μM) and the viologen-modified polymer (P-vio, 1.0 μg μL−1), the modified microelectrode was incubated overnight at 4 °C. The SPECM setup was described before,18,36 consisting of step-motor driven micrometer screws (Owis) and a piezoelectric positioner (NanoCube, Physik Instrumente) for accurate tip positioning. The microelectrode was positioned at a distance of 12 μm above the sample surface. Localized irradiation of the sample was performed by coupling the light source with the microelectrode probe by means of an optical fibre and using the microelectrode glass sheath as an extended light guide (irradiated spot ca. 250 μm in diameter).
Biophotovoltaic measurements were performed in a two-compartment cell separated by a Nafion membrane. As electrolyte solution Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0 was used for the cathode compartment and 50 mM MES buffer pH 6.5 (containing 50 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl2, and 15 mM CaCl2) was used for the anode compartment. An oversized anode was used to ensure that the PSI-based photocathode was the limiting electrode. Irradiation was performed using red light (λ > 600 nm) with an incident power of 32 mW cm−2 for the PSII-based bioanode and white light with an incident power of 246 mW cm−2 for the PSI-based biocathode. The power output of the biophotovoltaic cell was measured by applying a series of potential pulses between the bioelectrodes. Steady state currents at each cell voltage were used for the calculation of the polarization and power curves. All measurements were performed at room temperature.
AFM characterization
AFM measurements were performed in the AC mode at a frequency of 75 kHz with a NanoWizard 3 (JPK) using a monolithic silicon AFM probe (Multi75GD-G, BudgetSensors) with a constant force of 3 N m−1.
Mass spectrometry
The produced hydrogen was detected by means of differential electrochemical mass spectrometry37 using a GAM 400 mass spectrometer (InProcess Instruments) equipped with a QMG-22 quadrupole (Balzers).
Results and discussion
PSI monolayers with controlled orientation
Following inspiration by Nature's thylakoid membrane, modification of electrode surfaces with an anisotropically oriented dense monolayer of PSI was envisioned. The aim was on developing an electrode modification procedure which is able to overcome all possible limitations as presented in Fig. 1. For the fabrication of well-defined structures enabling controlled immobilization of functional photosynthetic protein complexes, the Langmuir–Blodgett technique has proven to be particularly useful.38–40 The isolated PSI protein complex exhibits an amphiphilic nature, with a hydrophobic core connecting two hydrophilic sides where the redox centres involved in electron transfer (P700+/FB−) are located. As shown before for other membrane proteins,38,39,41 the molecules tend to orient uniformly when spread at the air/water interface. This was the basis for the modification of electrode surfaces with PSI Langmuir monolayers (PSI-LB) exhibiting a preferred protein orientation. The comparison of surface pressure vs. trough area isotherms for different amounts of PSI trimers spread on the air/water interface allowed us to characterize the behaviour of PSI suspended on the subphase. The increase in surface pressure while compressing the barriers of the trough indicated that PSI monolayers were formed at the air/water interface. The initial spreading density of PSI was optimized to obtain a dense, closely packed monolayer on the subphase. At low spreading densities a gas-phase type behaviour was observed (Fig. S4a, ESI†), with minimal interaction between PSI trimers. By increasing the amount of PSI, this gas-type state was initially not observed due to the interaction of the large sized PSI trimers. The optimal amount of PSI spread on the subphase was found to provide the highest monolayer density‡ with about 565 nm2 occupied per molecule (Fig. S4b, ESI†). This value is comparable with the area of a PSI trimer supercomplex calculated from crystallographic data (about 346 nm2),42 and translates to a surface coverage of 61%, in agreement with values previously reported for LB monolayers of bacterial reaction centers.38 The formed structures were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) upon transfer to an atomically flat mica substrate (Fig. S5a, ESI†) by the Langmuir–Blodgett method, confirming the controlled monolayer formation (Fig. S5b, ESI†). Moreover, electrochemical characterization of PSI monolayers transferred onto Au-wafers confirmed that the PSI molecules within the monolayer remain active and are able to perform light-induced charge separation.
Anisotropic electron flow through PSI monolayers
The spontaneous preferential anisotropic orientation of PSI trimers at the air/water interface was confirmed by performing the transfer of the formed monolayers either by pulling the substrate previously immersed into the subphase or, on the contrary, by dipping the substrate into the subphase once the monolayer was formed and the predefined surface pressure was reached (Fig. 2a). First, in order to confirm that both strategies lead to the deposition of PSI monolayers, AFM phase profiles of the PSI modified surfaces were recorded, showing the presence of a closely packed structure of immobilized PSI for both monolayers obtained by either dipping or pulling (Fig. S6, ESI†). In addition, the formation of monolayers exhibiting opposite orientations was evaluated electrochemically. When the transfer of the monolayer was performed by pulling the electrode, the lumenal side of PSI bearing the P700 centre was directed towards the electrode surface, as confirmed by a redox process corresponding to the formal potential of the P700/P700+ couple in agreement with previous reports33,39 (Fig. S7, ESI†). In contrast, a monolayer transferred by dipping the substrate and thus leading to a situation where the P700 site is orientated away from the electrode surface did not reveal this redox signature (Fig. S7, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) PSI presents a preferential orientation when spread at the air/water interface that can be exploited for electrode modification. (b and d) Average values (n = 3 different electrodes); (c and e) representative photochronoamperometric response for PSI-LB monolayers deposited on Au by either dipping or pulling during transfer as indicated in panel (a). For (d and e) additional presence of soluble Os-complex as electron mediator for wiring of P700 with the electrode surface. Error bars indicate standard deviation. Eapp = 210 mV vs. SHE. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: 2 mM MV2+ in 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. 
This finding suggested that an anisotropic alignment of PSI protein complexes at the air/water interface prevails and can be exploited for the modification of electrodes with PSI monolayers offering a highly preferential orientation. This was additionally confirmed by photoelectrochemical evaluation of the immobilized PSI monolayers under air equilibrated solutions and in the presence of methyl viologen (MV2+) as electron scavenger. After light-induced charge separation and internal electron transfer, MV2+ can effectively accept the high energy electrons leaving PSI. The generated radical cation (MV+˙) reacts efficiently with dissolved O2 enabling a fast regeneration of MV2+ and the concomitant generation of cathodic photocurrents. It is important to note that the generation of photocurrent is only possible if electrons can be transferred from the electrode surface to the PSI lumenal side for reduction of the photo-oxidized P700+ centre. In consequence, photocurrent generation was confirmed for monolayers deposited by pulling the electrode during transfer, while an only minimal photocurrent was observed for the PSI monolayer obtained by opposite direction of transfer (Fig. 2b and c). This substantial difference in measured photocurrent additionally confirmed the preferential anisotropic orientation of PSI monolayers at the air/water interface as basis for a unidirectional electron flow. The experiment was repeated upon addition of a soluble Os-complex able to act as a redox mediator between the electrode surface and the photo-oxidized P700+ site of PSI independent of the protein complex orientation. In this case, increased photocurrents were observed for electrodes prepared with monolayers deposited by either direction of transfer (Fig. 2d and e), confirming that in both cases a similar amount of PSI was immobilized and remained active.
Improving the efficiency of electron transfer with immobilized PSI
For the envisioned fabrication of PSI-based photocathodes, further experiments were performed by modification of the electrode surface leading to PSI-LB monolayers with the lumenal side containing the P700 redox centre in close proximity to the electrode surface, i.e., pulling the electrode substrate during LB transfer. Even when significant photocurrents were obtained under direct electron transfer conditions, upon addition of the soluble Os-complex a considerable increase in the recorded photocurrents was observed due to diminished kinetic limitations (cf.Fig. 2b and d, red bars). Hence, in order to guarantee improved electron transfer, prior to the PSI monolayer deposition the Au surface was modified with a redox polymer that previously demonstrated an efficient electrical wiring of the P700 site of PSI30 (P-Os(I), Fig. S8, ESI†). To ensure the deposition of a compact PSI monolayer maintaining the specific orientation of PSI units, the Au surface was modified with a thin layer of the redox polymer, as confirmed by AFM (Fig. S9, ESI†). Successful modification of the Au surface with the P-Os(I) film was confirmed by cyclic voltammetry showing the characteristic redox wave of the polymer-tethered Os complex, centred at 430 mV vs. SHE (Fig. S10, ESI†). As shown in Fig. 3, the photocurrents achieved for a PSI photocathode consisting on a PSI monolayer in the presence of the thin underlying P-Os(I) film were substantially larger in comparison with PSI under direct electron transfer. Note that the photocurrent density obtained reaching about 5 μA cm−2 is amongst the highest achieved to date for a PSI monolayer at semiconductor-free electrodes. Moreover, the recorded photocurrents at different applied potentials confirmed again the immobilization of functional PSI and its anisotropic orientation. Only applied potentials more negative than the midpoint redox potential of P-Os(I) gave rise to substantial cathodic photocurrents. In contrast, a considerably lower photocurrent was observed at 410 mV vs. SHE, which is close to the P-Os(I) midpoint potential and negligible photocurrents were recorded at more positive applied potentials.§
 Fig. 3  Comparison of photochronoamperometric measurements obtained for PSI-LB monolayers in the absence and presence of a thin P-Os(I) film. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: 2 mM MV2+ in 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. 
Effective minimization of electric short-circuiting
Despite the PSI-based photocathode exhibited a significant anisotropic electron flow, the effective suppression of recombination and short-circuiting processes is of utmost importance to maximize the photocurrents. Therefore, the likely presence of imperfections or defects in the PSI-LB monolayer must be taken into consideration. The use of a soluble electron scavenger such as MV2+ enables diffusion of the redox species and hence electron exchange with the electrode surface/underlying P-Os(I) layer, facilitating a fast re-oxidation of the reduced charge carriers and hence cancelling out part of the generated photocurrent (Fig. 4a, left). This was confirmed by the observed characteristic redox response of the MV2+/MV+˙ couple at a Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB modified electrode in the presence of MV2+ in solution (Fig. 4b, purple curve). In order to decrease the kinetics for short-circuiting processes, the diffusion of the electron scavenger was restricted by its confinement within a polymer matrix (Fig. 4a, right). A viologen-modified polymer (P-vio, see ESI† for synthesis and characterization) was used for the extraction of high energy electrons from the FB− site of the immobilized PSI. Thus, even when considerably smaller peak currents were observed in cyclic voltammograms of the modified electrode bearing a top layer of P-vio, i.e., Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio (Fig. 4b, brown curve), the photocurrents were significantly higher as compared to those obtained using MV2+ in solution (Fig. 4c, cf. brown and purple traces; for a statistical comparison see Fig. S11, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic comparison of the possible short-circuiting process using MV2+ in solution and a viologen-modified redox polymer (P-vio). (b) CVs and (c) photochronoamperometric measurements for Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB electrodes with MV2+ in solution or modified with P-vio. For (b): CVs in the dark, scan rate: 10 mV s−1. For (c): irradiation with red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas, Eapp = 210 mV vs. SHE. Electrolyte: air-equilibrated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. 
In addition, the immobilized PSI layer provided an effective blocking of the electrode surface, as demonstrated by comparing the electrochemical responses of P-vio deposited on Au/P-Os(I) modified surfaces in the absence and presence of a PSI-LB monolayer (Fig. S12, ESI†). For some electrodes even a complete suppression of the P-vio redox process could be observed (Fig. 4b, orange curve). Presumably, as a result of a dense packing of the PSI monolayer that was retained after its transfer to the electrode surface, enabling effective short-circuiting blocking while allowing generation of substantial photocurrents (Fig. 4c, orange trace). Even in the case when this high-quality monolayer was not realized, the calculated electron throughput for the Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio assembly under ambient air was (183 ± 25) e− PSI−1 s−1, which is considerably higher than previously reported values under the same conditions.¶ The layered biophotocathode was hence suitable to minimize losses by re-oxidation of the charge carrier, encouraging further coupling with H2 evolution catalysts for the light-driven generation of fuels.
Light-induced H2 evolution
PSI can be used as light sensitizer providing high energy electrons with the necessary driving force for H2 evolution upon coupling with a suitable catalyst capable of performing the 2H+/H2 interconversion with high efficiency.43 For this purpose, several reports have shown the formation of biohybrid complexes between PSI and Pt nanoparticles.6,44 However, the use of comparatively active enzymatic catalysts such as hydrogenases (H2ases)45 enables to avoid the use of scarce noble metals.
The effective electron transfer between PSI and the enzymatic biocatalyst has been achieved by the design of artificial fusion proteins,7,46 and by implementation of molecular wires.47 Nevertheless, the complex experimental protocols involved prevent the use of these strategies for the large-scale fabrication of practical devices. We propose the use of polymeric redox mediators enabling electron transfer by electron hopping between PSI and the highly active [NiFeSe]-H2ase from Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough (DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase).34 A similar approach for coupling of PSI and a H2ase has shown the possibility for H2 evolution, although the performance of the reported biodevice was limited due to the use of immobilized PSI with an uncontrolled orientation.48 Cyclic voltammograms of P-vio and of DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase embedded in P-vio confirmed that productive electrical wiring of the H2ase is possible enabling H2 evolution (Fig. S13, ESI†). P-vio serves as immobilization matrix for H2ase and exhibits a suitable midpoint potential for coupling of the H2ase with PSI that delivers electrons leaving the terminal FB− site at a potential of about −580 mV vs. SHE, allowing the subsequent catalytic reduction of protons (Fig. 5a). The photocurrent response obtained for the Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase assembly in Ar-saturated solutions confirmed the photocatalytic process for generation of H2 (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the coupling of a DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase embedded in P-vio as a top layer of the implemented photocathode for light-induced H2 production. (b) Photochronoamperometric response for the fully assembled system: Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase at different applied potentials. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. (c) Currents recorded with a H2ase modified microelectrode for selective detection of evolved H2 from Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase at different applied potentials. ETip = 210 mV vs. SHE. Local irradiation through the microelectrode using white light (incident power: 280 mW cm−2).|| Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 5.0. (d) H2 detection by means of mass spectrometry (MS). After continuous irradiation of the modified electrode, the accumulated gas phase was injected into the MS system at the time indicated by the arrow. The sudden increase in ion current from the background for m/z = 2 confirmed the occurrence of photogenerated H2. Sample: Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase, Eapp = 210 mV (vs. SHE), irradiation with white light (incident power: 160 mW cm−2). Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. 
Evidently, under exclusion of O2 the only possibility for generation of cathodic photocurrents is the reduction of protons in solution. In order to confirm that the photocurrents were associated with the generation of H2, scanning photoelectrochemical microscopy (SPECM) measurements were performed using a precisely positioned Pt microelectrode for the collection of generated H2. The PSI-LB monolayer further modified with H2ase embedded in P-vio was fabricated by dipping or pulling (as shown in Fig. 2a). Increased H2 oxidation currents recorded at the Pt tip during focalized illumination were only recorded when PSI was deposited by pulling the substrate leading to an appropriate orientation of the immobilized protein complex (Fig. S14, ESI†), thus highlighting that an adequate orientation of PSI is the key point for enabling light-induced H2 evolution. The experiment was performed by applying different potentials to the two differently prepared samples. When PSI was oriented with the stromal side towards the electrode surface a relatively constant background response was observed. In contrast, for PSI oriented with the lumenal side towards the electrode surface, an increased anodic tip current was observed at potentials more negative than the P-Os(I) midpoint potential, confirming the local collection of evolved H2. Since the use of a Pt microelectrode does not provide high sensitivity for H2 oxidation, the experiment was also performed using a microelectrode modified with a H2ase as catalyst for the unambiguous detection of H2. As confirmed by previous reports31 and evidenced by the voltammetric response of DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase embedded in P-vio, in presence of H2 the enzyme serves as efficient catalyst for H2 oxidation when sufficiently positive potentials are applied (Fig. S15, ESI†). Despite of an additional photoactivity of the viologen modified polymer leading to significant background currents under irradiation, the obtained results from the evaluation of the Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase assembly confirmed the selective collection of evolved H2 in correlation with the recorded photocurrents (Fig. 5c). H2 generation was also confirmed by mass spectrometry (MS) detection. After irradiation of the PSI-based biophotocathode under Ar atmosphere and introducing the accumulated gas fraction into the MS system, a significant increase observed in ionization current at m/z = 2 unequivocally confirmed the presence of evolved H2 (Fig. 5d).
A complete biophotovoltaic cell for bias-free water splitting
Biophotovoltaic devices mimicking the photosynthetic Z-scheme have been previously described by combination of a PSI-based photocathode with a PSII-based photoanode.4,5,14,49 However, in these assemblies the highly negative potential of the generated electrons at PSI that could be ideally exploited for the formation of a variety products of interest was wasted by using free-diffusing viologen as electron scavenger, thus the high-energy electrons ultimately were used for the reduction of O2 as terminal electron acceptor.
In order to demonstrate that the proposed Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase biocathode can be successfully employed in a fully light-driven Z-scheme type water-splitting cell enabling the concomitant production of H2 without applying any external bias voltage, we coupled the implemented biophotocathode with a PSII-based biophotoanode (Fig. 6a). Isolated PSII was embedded in a low potential Os-complex modified redox polymer (P-Os(II), Fig. S16a, ESI†) exhibiting a midpoint potential of about 160 mV vs. SHE (Fig. S16b, ESI†).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the semi-artificial biophotovoltaic cell for bias-free water splitting. PSII performs the oxidation of water at the anode while PSI coupled to H2ase enables proton reduction at the cathode. Upon irradiation, generation of O2 and H2 becomes possible while power can be extracted as current flowing between electrodes. (b) Polarization and power curves of the biophotovoltaic device in a two-compartment cell separated by a Nafion membrane. Electrolyte solutions: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0 in the cathode compartment and 50 mM MES buffer pH 6.5 in the anode compartment. An oversized anode was used to ensure that the PSI-based photocathode was the limiting electrode. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, 32 mW cm−2) for the PSII-based bioanode and white light (246 mW cm−2) for the PSI-based biocathode.|| 
The PSII-based bioanode was capable of delivering significant anodic photocurrents even at relatively low overpotentials (Fig. S16c, ESI†). The complete semi-artificial biophotovoltaic cell for water splitting was able to provide electrical power in the form of current flowing between anode and cathode, with the concomitant release of O2 at the PSII modified bioanode and H2 at the PSI/H2ase-based biocathode. As a proof of concept, the device (for a detailed schematic representation see Fig. S17, ESI†) was characterized electrochemically (Fig. 6b), providing a maximum power of about 50 nW cm−2 at an operating voltage of 125 mV and an overall open circuit voltage of about 250 mV.
Conclusions
Fabrication of a PSI-based photocathode having a well-defined dense structure due to controlled anisotropic immobilization of functional protein complexes with a predefined productive orientation enabled a closely packed structure for the spatial separation of the terminal redox centres located at opposite sides of the PSI protein complex simulating the thylakoid membrane, allowing to minimize short-circuiting pathways and thus providing efficient unidirectional electron flow. Moreover, the use of specifically designed redox polymers did not only provide enhanced electron transfer rates between the electrode surface and the redox centres in the immobilized PSI, but also avoided the diffusion of conventionally used redox mediators in solution for scavenging the high energy electrons leaving the stromal side of PSI, hence minimizing possible short-circuiting processes. Furthermore, coupling of the highly efficient biophotocathode with a hydrogenase for effective light-induced H2 evolution was demonstrated. The presented proof of concept biophotovoltaic cell based on the use of a PSII photoanode and a PSI/H2ase photocathode highlights the possibility for the successful design of a fully light-driven Z-scheme type water splitting cell. However, further advances are still necessary for enabling a more efficient transfer and uptake of electrons by the used (bio)catalyst for H2 production ultimately leading to larger conversion rates and thus increasing the overall efficiency of the biophotovoltaic cell. The suggested approach presents substantial advances in comparison with previous reports, such as a reproducible fabrication procedure with clear possibilities for scale-up ensuring controlled orientation of the immobilized biomolecules.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of the Cluster of Excellence RESOLV (EXC 2033 – project number 390677874) as well as the Deutsch-Israelische Projektkooperation (DIP) “Nanoengineered Optobioelectronics with Biomaterials and Bioinspired Assemblies”. F. Z. and P. W. are grateful for the financial support by the China Scholarship Council (CSC). I. A. C. P. and S. Z. acknowledge funding from the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (Portugal) (Grants UID/Multi/04551/2013), LISBOA-01-0145-FEDER-007660 (cofounded by FCT/MCTES and FEDER funds through COMPETE2020), PTDC/BBB-BEP/2885/2014 and PhD fellowship SFRH/BD/100314/2014. The authors are grateful to Melinda Nolten for help with the redox polymer syntheses, to Dr Ines Ruff for conducting the FT-IR experiments, to Dr Uğur Kayran for assistance with LB technique, to Sandra Möller for assistance with MS measurements, and to Martin Trautmann for performing the AFM measurements.
Notes and references

  (a) T. Faunce, Interface Focus, 2015, 5, 20150029 CrossRef ; 
  (b) T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. Rutherford, D. MacFarlane, G. F. Moore, P. Yang, D. G. Nocera, T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, K. B. Yoon, F. A. Armstrong, M. R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 695 RSC ; 
  (c) N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nelson and A. Ben-Shem, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2004, 5, 971–982 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. J. D. Janssen, M. D. Lambreva, N. Plumeré, C. Bartolucci, A. Antonacci, K. Buonasera, R. N. Frese, V. Scognamiglio and G. Rea, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 36 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC ; 
  (d) B. Esper, A. Badura and M. Rögner, Trends Plant Sci., 2006, 11, 543–549 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S.-O. Wenk, D.-J. Qian, T. Wakayama, C. Nakamura, N. Zorin, M. Rögner and J. Miyake, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 1489–1493 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hartmann, T. Kothe, S. Pöller, E. El-Mohsnawy, M. M. Nowaczyk, N. Plumeré, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11936–11941 RSC .
T. Kothe, N. Plumeré, A. Badura, M. M. Nowaczyk, D. A. Guschin, M. Rögner and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 14233–14236 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Utschig, N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. G. Poluektov, S. D. Chemerisov, K. L. Mulfort and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krassen, A. Schwarze, B. Friedrich, K. Ataka, O. Lenz and J. Heberle, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4055–4061 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Li, X. Feng, J. Fei, P. Cai, J. Li, J. Huang and J. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600619 CrossRef ; 
  (b) K. P. Sokol, D. Mersch, V. Hartmann, J. Z. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, N. Plumeré and E. Reisner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3698–3709 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Kato, J. Z. Zhang, N. Paul and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6485–6497 RSC .
V. Hartmann, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, M. Rögner and M. M. Nowaczyk, Photosynthetica, 2018, 82, 1385 Search PubMed .
H. Makita and G. Hastings, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2016, 1857, 723–733 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Gerster, J. Reichert, H. Bi, J. V. Barth, S. M. Kaniber, A. W. Holleitner, I. Visoly-Fisher, S. Sergani and I. Carmeli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 673–676 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. N. Ciesielski, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 3326–3334 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Robinson, E. A. Gizzie, F. Mwambutsa, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 5, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nguyen and B. D. Bruce, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2014, 1837, 1553–1566 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tel-Vered and I. Willner, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1778–1797 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, T. Kothe, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3263–3274 RSC .

  (a) K. Brettel and W. Leibl, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2001, 1507, 100–114 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Brettel, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1997, 1318, 322–373 CrossRef CAS .
D. Buesen, T. Hoefer, H. Zhang and N. Plumere, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 39–53 RSC .
F. Zhao, N. Plumeré, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann and F. Conzuelo, Small, 2017, 13, 1604093 CrossRef .
N. Plumeré and M. M. Nowaczyk, Adv. Biochem. Eng./Biotechnol., 2016, 158, 111–136 CrossRef .
G. LeBlanc, G. Chen, E. A. Gizzie, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5959–5962 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Friebe and R. N. Frese, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 5, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ciornii, A. Kölsch, A. Zouni and F. Lisdat, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 531–539 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Stieger, S. C. Feifel, H. Lokstein and F. Lisdat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15667–15674 RSC .
S. C. Feifel, K. R. Stieger, H. Lokstein, H. Lux and F. Lisdat, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12188–12196 RSC .
R. Das, P. J. Kiley, M. Segal, J. Norville, A. A. Yu, L. Wang, S. A. Trammell, L. E. Reddick, R. Kumar, F. Stellacci, N. Lebedev, J. Schnur, B. D. Bruce, S. Zhang and M. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1079–1083 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gordiichuk, D. Pesce, O. E. C. Ocampo, A. Marcozzi, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, A. Paul, M. Loznik, E. Gloukhikh, S. Richter, R. C. Chiechi and A. Herrmann, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600393 CrossRef .
C. J. Faulkner, S. Lees, P. N. Ciesielski, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8409–8412 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Niroomand, R. Pamu, D. Mukherjee and B. Khomami, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12281–12290 RSC ; 
  (b) P. O. Saboe, E. Conte, S. Chan, H. Feroz, B. Ferlez, M. Farell, M. F. Poyton, I. T. Sines, H. Yan, G. C. Bazan, J. Golbeck and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15457–15463 RSC ; 
  (c) P. O. Saboe, C. E. Lubner, N. S. McCool, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, H. Yan, S. Chan, B. Ferlez, G. C. Bazan, J. H. Golbeck and M. Kumar, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7064–7069 CrossRef CAS .
F. Conzuelo, N. Marković, A. Ruff and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13681–13685 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kothe, S. Pöller, F. Zhao, P. Fortgang, M. Rögner, W. Schuhmann and N. Plumeré, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11029–11034 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruff, J. Szczesny, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, N. Plumeré and W. Schuhmann, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 964–968 CrossRef .
S. Alsaoub, F. Conzuelo, S. Gounel, N. Mano, W. Schuhmann and A. Ruff, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2080–2087 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, T. Kothe, M. J. Kopczak, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2435–2440 RSC .
M. C. Marques, C. Tapia, O. Gutiérrez-Sanz, A. R. Ramos, K. L. Keller, J. D. Wall, A. L. de Lacey, P. M. Matias and I. A. C. Pereira, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2017, 13, 544–550 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, F. Conzuelo, V. Hartmann, H. Li, S. Stapf, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, N. Plumeré, W. Lubitz and W. Schuhmann, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 433–437 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Zhao, S. Hardt, V. Hartmann, H. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, N. Plumeré, W. Schuhmann and F. Conzuelo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1973 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Conzuelo, K. Sliozberg, R. Gutkowski, S. Grutzke, M. Nebel and W. Schuhmann, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Andronescu, S. Barwe, E. Ventosa, J. Masa, E. Vasile, B. Konkena, S. Möller and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11258–11262 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamran, J. D. Delgado, V. Friebe, T. J. Aartsma and R. N. Frese, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, C. J. Faulkner, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15080–15086 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Lu, J. Xu, B. Liu and J. Kong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 1173–1185 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. M. Pepe and C. Nicolini, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1996, 33, 191–200 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Yasuda, Y. Hirata, H. Sugino, M. Kumei, M. Hara, J. Miyake and M. Fujihira, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210–211, 733–735 CrossRef ; 
  (d) G. Alegria and P. L. Dutton, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1991, 1057, 239–257 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Yasuda, H. Sugino, H. Toyotama, Y. Hirata, M. Hara and J. Miyake, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1994, 34, 135–139 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            V. Erokhin and L. A. Feigin, in Polymeric Layers. Progress in Colloid & Polymer Science, ed. P. Wünsche, Steinkopff,  1991, vol. 85, pp. 47–51 Search PubMed .
P. Fromme, P. Jordan and N. Krauß, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2001, 1507, 5–31 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Krassen, S. Ott and J. Heberle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 47–57 RSC ; 
  (b) C. E. Lubner, R. Grimme, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 404–414 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Zhao, F. Conzuelo, V. Hartmann, H. Li, M. M. Nowaczyk, N. Plumeré, M. Rögner and W. Schuhmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 13726–13731 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Gorka, J. Schartner, A. van der Est, M. Rögner and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2014, 53, 2295–2306 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) I. J. Iwuchukwu, M. Vaughn, N. Myers, H. O'Neill, P. Frymier and B. D. Bruce, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 73–79 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. A. Grimme, C. E. Lubner, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6308–6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J. F. Millsaps, B. D. Bruce, J. W. Lee and E. Greenbaum, Photochem. Photobiol., 2001, 73, 630–635 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz, H. Ogata, O. Rüdiger and E. Reijerse, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4081–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ihara, H. Nishihara, K.-S. Yoon, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich, H. Nakamoto, K. Kojima, D. Honma, T. Kamachi and I. Okura, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 676–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. E. Lubner, A. M. Applegate, P. Knörzer, A. Ganago, D. A. Bryant, T. Happe and J. H. Golbeck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20988–20991 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. E. Lubner, P. Knörzer, P. J. N. Silva, K. A. Vincent, T. Happe, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 10264–10266 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tapia, R. D. Milton, G. Pankratova, S. D. Minteer, H.-E. Åkerlund, D. Leech, A. L. De Lacey, M. Pita and L. Gorton, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 90–95 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Small, 2013, 9, 2970–2978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01901d‡ Increasing the amount of PSI led to the formation of multilayers and aggregates on the subphase and was therefore avoided.§ Applied potentials more positive than the midpoint potential of the redox polymer cause the oxidation of tethered Os-complexes, thus preventing the reduction of the photo-oxidized P700+ centre at PSI and the possibility for generation of cathodic photocurrents.¶ In comparison, the highest reported turnover frequency for a PSI-based biophotoelectrode is about 335 e− s−1 PSI−1.30 Note that this value has been obtained under O2 supersaturation conditions since the availability of O2 (final electron acceptor) is limiting the achieved photocurrent. The electron throughput reported for the same system under ambient air conditions (thus comparable to the value reported in the present manuscript) is about 104 e− s−1 PSI−1.|| Higher light intensity was deliberately selected for these experiments to ensure an unambiguous characterization of the system.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Molecular hydrogen is a strategic energy carrier for current and future technologies. As the most important renewable energy source on our planet, the use of solar energy for production of H2 from water and simultaneous generation of electricity constitutes a highly promising approach. For this purpose, the high efficiency of widely abundant natural proteins involved in the photosynthetic process can be exploited, ultimately leading to a sustainable and environmentally friendly energy conversion and storage economy. However, integration of light-harvesting protein complexes for the development of bioelectrochemical devices requires the fabrication of stable and well-defined structures capable of providing appropriate electron transfer pathways between the immobilised biomolecules and a conductive support for an optimised electron transfer. We describe the rational modification of electrode surfaces by deposition of photosystem I films under a preferred anisotropic protein orientation, thus making directional electron transfer and an ultimate increase in photon-to-electron conversion efficiency possible. An additional layer comprised of a hydrogenase embedded in a redox polymer enables photoelectrochemical H2 evolution. Further coupling of the developed biophotocathode with a photosystem II-based bioelectrode able to extract electrons from water under irradiation provides a fully light-driven cell for water splitting.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a Z-scheme mimic fully light driven semi-artificial device for water splitting and concomitant H2 evolution. Left: PSII-based photoanode; WOC: water oxidation complex. Right: PSI-based photocathode coupled to a catalyst (Cat) for H2 production. For adequate performance certain requirements must be fulfilled for the PSI biocathode: (1) efficient wiring of protein complex with electrode surface, (2) efficient electron transfer to the catalyst for H2 production, (3) suitable orientation of the protein complex, (4) prevention of recombination processes within the protein complex, and (5) short-circuiting of high-energy electrons exiting PSI should be minimized.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) PSI presents a preferential orientation when spread at the air/water interface that can be exploited for electrode modification. (b and d) Average values (n = 3 different electrodes); (c and e) representative photochronoamperometric response for PSI-LB monolayers deposited on Au by either dipping or pulling during transfer as indicated in panel (a). For (d and e) additional presence of soluble Os-complex as electron mediator for wiring of P700 with the electrode surface. Error bars indicate standard deviation. Eapp = 210 mV vs. SHE. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: 2 mM MV2+ in 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of photochronoamperometric measurements obtained for PSI-LB monolayers in the absence and presence of a thin P-Os(I) film. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: 2 mM MV2+ in 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic comparison of the possible short-circuiting process using MV2+ in solution and a viologen-modified redox polymer (P-vio). (b) CVs and (c) photochronoamperometric measurements for Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB electrodes with MV2+ in solution or modified with P-vio. For (b): CVs in the dark, scan rate: 10 mV s−1. For (c): irradiation with red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas, Eapp = 210 mV vs. SHE. Electrolyte: air-equilibrated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the coupling of a DvH-[NiFeSe]-H2ase embedded in P-vio as a top layer of the implemented photocathode for light-induced H2 production. (b) Photochronoamperometric response for the fully assembled system: Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase at different applied potentials. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, incident power: 43 mW cm−2) at the times indicated by the yellow shaded areas. Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0. (c) Currents recorded with a H2ase modified microelectrode for selective detection of evolved H2 from Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase at different applied potentials. ETip = 210 mV vs. SHE. Local irradiation through the microelectrode using white light (incident power: 280 mW cm−2).|| Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 5.0. (d) H2 detection by means of mass spectrometry (MS). After continuous irradiation of the modified electrode, the accumulated gas phase was injected into the MS system at the time indicated by the arrow. The sudden increase in ion current from the background for m/z = 2 confirmed the occurrence of photogenerated H2. Sample: Au/P-Os(I)/PSI-LB/P-vio/H2ase, Eapp = 210 mV (vs. SHE), irradiation with white light (incident power: 160 mW cm−2). Electrolyte: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the semi-artificial biophotovoltaic cell for bias-free water splitting. PSII performs the oxidation of water at the anode while PSI coupled to H2ase enables proton reduction at the cathode. Upon irradiation, generation of O2 and H2 becomes possible while power can be extracted as current flowing between electrodes. (b) Polarization and power curves of the biophotovoltaic device in a two-compartment cell separated by a Nafion membrane. Electrolyte solutions: Ar-saturated 150 mM phosphate–citrate buffer pH 4.0 in the cathode compartment and 50 mM MES buffer pH 6.5 in the anode compartment. An oversized anode was used to ensure that the PSI-based photocathode was the limiting electrode. Irradiation: red light (λ > 600 nm, 32 mW cm−2) for the PSII-based bioanode and white light (246 mW cm−2) for the PSI-based biocathode.||	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01901d
‡ Increasing the amount of PSI led to the formation of multilayers and aggregates on the subphase and was therefore avoided.
§ Applied potentials more positive than the midpoint potential of the redox polymer cause the oxidation of tethered Os-complexes, thus preventing the reduction of the photo-oxidized P700+ centre at PSI and the possibility for generation of cathodic photocurrents.
¶ In comparison, the highest reported turnover frequency for a PSI-based biophotoelectrode is about 335 e− s−1 PSI−1.30 Note that this value has been obtained under O2 supersaturation conditions since the availability of O2 (final electron acceptor) is limiting the achieved photocurrent. The electron throughput reported for the same system under ambient air conditions (thus comparable to the value reported in the present manuscript) is about 104 e− s−1 PSI−1.
|| Higher light intensity was deliberately selected for these experiments to ensure an unambiguous characterization of the system.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
