Recent advances in photofunctional guest/layered double hydroxide host composite systems and their applications: experimental and theoretical perspect ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM11594D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM11594D
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13128-13139Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances in photofunctional guest/layered double hydroxide host composite systems and their applications: experimental and theoretical perspectives

        
          
            Dongpeng 
            Yan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Lu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            David G. 
            Evans
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xue 
            Duan
          
          
        
      
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, 100029, PR China. E-mail: weimin@mail.buct.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-10-64425385;   Tel: +86-10-64412131
Received 
      14th April 2011
    , Accepted 8th June 2011First published on 21st July 2011AbstractIncorporation of organic photofunctional guests into host matrices has attracted considerable interest as a means of achieving controllable luminescence and other photofunctional properties for application in the next generation of light-emitting materials and sensors. In this article, recent advances in the field of photoactive guest/layered double hydroxide (LDH) host composite systems and their prospective applications are reviewed. Firstly, several chromophore/LDH solid-state powdered materials with attractive photophysical properties are introduced. Attention is then focused on ordered photoemissive LDH-based thin films, and their polarized luminescence properties and stimuli-responsive behavior as sensors. Finally, we briefly review theoretical investigations of the geometric and electronic structure of the photofunctional guest/LDH host supramolecular architecture employing molecular dynamics simulations and periodic density functional calculations.Dongpeng YanDongpeng Yan obtained his BS degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2007, and then continued his postgraduate study under the supervision of Prof. Xue Duan in the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering at BUCT. In 2010, as a visiting student, he studied at Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge on the synthesis of functional organic crystal under the supervision of Prof. William Jones. His main research topic is the experimental and computer simulation on the ordered assembly of photofunctional anions intercalated layered double hydroxides. He was awarded a “talent model” Award among the Universities in Beijing in 2010.Jun LuJun Lu was awarded the B Sc degree and the PhD at the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1998 and 2004, respectively. He worked as the research associate at the Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong University from 2005 to 2007. He was appointed as the vice professor of State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resources Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2007 and promoted to a professor in 2011. In 1998, he was granted the Guo Moruo Scholarship, the highest prize for USTC undergraduates. His research interests focus on the optical functionalization of the intercalation materials and catalysis properties of noble metal nanocrystals.Min WeiMin Wei obtained her BEng degree in 1995 and MEng degree in 1998 from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She subsequently received her PhD from Peking University in 2001, after which she joined the staff of BUCT. She was promoted to a full professor in 2005. She has been a visiting scholar in the Georgia Institute of Technology (in 2008). Her research interests focus on inorganic–organic composite functional materials as well as new catalysts.David G. EvansDavid G. Evans studied as both undergraduate and research student at Jesus College, Oxford and obtained a DPhil under the supervision of Prof. D. M. P. Mingos FRS. After postdoctoral work at Bristol University with Prof. F. G. A. Stone FRS, he was appointed as a lectureship at Exeter University in 1985. Several visits to Chinese university chemistry departments in the early 1990s convinced him of China's great potential for development in this area and he moved to Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 1996. His research interests focus on intercalation in layered solids. He was awarded an International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Award of the People's Republic of China in 2005.Xue DuanXue Duan was elected as an Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. He was awarded his BS degree from Jilin University and MS and PhD degrees from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He was subsequently appointed as the staff of BUCT and established the Applied Chemistry Research Institute in 1990. He was promoted to an assistant professor in 1990 and to a full professor in 1993 and to PhD supervisor status in 1995. He is currently a Director of the Institute of Applied Chemistry and an Executive Vice-Chair of the Academic Committee of the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering. He has been awarded the title of a Changjiang Foundation Professor and a National Outstanding Young Scholar and has received numerous other awards.
1. Introduction
Organic photofunctional molecules have received much attention due to their potential applications in fields such as dye lasers,1 solid-state self-emission devices2 and sensors.3 Organic photoactive materials consist of small molecules, metal complexes of organic ligands or π-conjugated polymers. However, the formation of aggregates of such species occurs readily in the solid state, which reduces their optical efficiency. For instance, the aggregation of a luminescent dye can lead to a fluorescence red-shift, line broadening and even luminescence quenching.4 Moreover, the thermal and optical stabilities of organic materials are generally too low for use in practical optoelectronic devices. One effective solution to both of these problems is the incorporation of organic photofunctional molecules into solid host matrices,5 which can offer a stable and robust environment which enhances the mechanical, thermal and photostabilities of the organic species. Moreover, if a homogeneous distribution of the photofunctional molecules in the solid matrices at the molecular level can be achieved, this will suppress aggregation and therefore mitigate fluorescence quenching.
Early work on the accommodation of photofunctional species into inorganic host matrices was summarized by Ogawa and Kuroda in 1995.6 Since then, numerous novel host–guest assembly systems have been reported and their potential applications have been explored. In addition, new physical and chemical insights have been obtained based on recent theoretical calculations on these supramolecular systems. In this Feature Article we focus on the intercalation of photofunctional anions into layered double hydroxide (LDH) hosts. LDHs7 are a large family of layered anionic clays which can be described by the general formula [MII1–xMIIIx(OH)2]z+An−z/n·yH2O (MII and MIII are divalent and trivalent metal ions respectively; An− is an anion). The structure of the LDH layer is based on that of brucite with edge-sharing M(OH)6 octahedra, but partial substitution of M2+ cations by M3+ induces a positive charge on the host layers which is balanced by anions in the hydrated interlayer galleries. The general structure of a typical LDH is shown in Fig. 1. In contrast to most cationic clays (where the layers have a negative charge), the charge density and elemental composition of LDHs can be varied over a wide range in the synthesis process, which facilitates fine control of the properties of the host layers. To meet the demands of specific applications, hundreds of suitable functional anions have been rationally chosen and intercalated into LDHs in order to construct new types of host–guest hybrid materials.8
 Fig. 1  A typical 3R structure of Mg2Al–Cl LDH. Green balls = Cl−, red sticks = O in water or OH, white sticks = H in water or OH, pink sticks = Al, green sticks = Mg. 
Herein, we first describe the intercalation chemistry of LDH hosts with a variety of photofunctional guests and show how the luminescence efficiency as well as the photostability and thermal stability of the photoactive material may be enhanced by tuning the host–guest interactions. For many applications in practical devices—such as sensors—LDHs must be fabricated into thin films and we therefore go on to describe how the photoactive guest/LDH host composite materials can be assembled into ordered films and focus on the polarized emission properties, stability to UV-light and temperature and applications in pH-responsive sensors of the resulting films. Finally, new physical and chemical insights into these materials based on theoretical calculations are also discussed.
2. Photofunctional anion/LDH composite materials
2.1 Enhancement of photophysical properties of luminescent anions by incorporation in LDH composite materials
After intercalation in LDH composites, a shift (which can be either blue or red) is generally observed in the absorption and fluorescence spectra of luminescent anions. For instance, Gago et al.9 found red-shifted fluorescence emission for both 1-pyrenesulfonate and 1-pyrenecarboxylate intercalated in ZnAl–LDH composites compared with the free dyes in solution. This bathochromic effect was attributed to intermolecular interactions between excited guest species and neighboring unexcited species, namely the dye excimers and/or aggregates in the interlayer galleries of the LDH. Similar phenomena have also been observed in methyl orange,10coumarin-3-carboxylate (C3C) and 9-anthracenecarboxylate intercalated LDH systems.11 However, it is well known that the formation of dye aggregates has an adverse effect on the luminescence efficiency of dye/LDH systems. We even observed complete fluorescence quenching in a sulforhodamine B (SRB) intercalated MgAl–LDH composite.12 Therefore, the key problem is how to effectively avoid the formation of dye aggregates in the LDH galleries.
One way of suppressing aggregation of fluorescent anions is to introduce a second guest anion, such as a surfactant, into the LDH gallery as a co-intercalant. In this case, the distance between the chromophore anions is increased which minimizes the possibility of aggregation. Moreover, the second guest can provide the anionic fluorophore with a homogeneous and non-polar environment and thus further enhance the luminescence performance. Another advantage of such a two-guest system is that the surfactant can be pre-intercalated into the LDH thus enlarging the interlayer spacing, and facilitating the intercalation of bulky dye anions. Last but not least, reducing the content of the—generally very expensive—fluorophore will lead to considerable cost savings in large-scale applications. The SRB/LDH system is an example of a system whose luminescence properties can be enhanced by co-intercalation of a second guest anion such as the long-chain surfactant dodecylbenzenesulfonate (DBS).12 By increasing the molar ratio of SRB:DBS in the LDH interlayer galleries, we found that the luminescence intensity and fluorescence lifetime initially increased to maximum values and then decreased gradually (as shown in Fig. 2). The optimal luminescence performance was obtained with the ratio of SRB:DBS ranging from 5–10%. At these low SRB concentrations, the SRB anions are isolated by the excess DRB anions and the luminescence intensity and fluorescence lifetime both increase with increasing loading of SRB. At higher SRB loading, however, the dye anions begin to form aggregates, resulting in a red shift in the emission and even fluorescence quenching at high SRB loadings. Similar behavior was also found in the C3C and dodecylsulfonate (DDS)13 co-intercalated MgAl–LDH and fluorescein (FLU)/heptanesulfonate (HES) co-intercalated ZnAl–LDH systems.14 These results confirm that co-intercalation can be used as an efficient method for the preparation of dye/LDH luminescent composites.
 Fig. 2  Photoemission spectra of SRB–DBS/LDH with an excitation wavelength of 360 nm. The inset plot shows the variation in fluorescence intensity and the maximum emission wavelength with increasing SRB content in the SRB–DBS/LDH(x%): (a) 0.99%, (b) 1.96%, (c) 4.76%, (d) 7.41%, (e) 9.09%, (f) 16.67%, (g) 25.0%, (h) 50.0%, (i) 75.0%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © American Chemical Society, 2009. 
2.2 Tuning of fluorescence emission by controlling the layer charge density, chemical composition and the ratio of interlayer guests
As noted above, one important feature of LDH materials is that the layer charge density (LCD, the ratio of MII to MIII) and chemical composition can be adjusted over a wide range. By changing the LCD, we observed that the maximum emission wavelength (λmaxem) of benzocarbazole anion-intercalated MgAl–LDH composites could be tuned, appearing at 522 and 494 nm for Mg/Al ratios of 1.80 and 3.13, respectively.15 The shift in the fluorescence emission can be attributed to the variation in orientation and stacking mode of the fluorescent anions as a function of the LCD. This offers a new way to tune the luminescence behavior of LDH composites. Furthermore, the chemical composition of the layer also serves as an important parameter in modulating the luminescent behavior. For composites of 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate anions (ANS) intercalated in Zn2Al– and Mg2Al–LDHs, it was observed that the λmaxem appeared at 487 and 496 nm respectively, as a result of different host–guest interactions between the host layer and the interlayer anions.16
Inspired by the success of the co-intercalation method described in Section 2.1, we developed a further way of tuning the luminescence of LDH-based materials by changing the molar ratio of the two guest anions. Metal 8-hydroxyquinolate complexes (Mqn) have been extensively studied due to their excellent optical performance, which can be employed in organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs).17 In our recent work, a bis(8-hydroxyquinolate-5-sulfonate)zinc anion (ZQS2−) and DDS were co-intercalated into MgAl– and ZnAl–LDHs via a combined co-precipitation and hydrothermal method.18a It was observed that the luminescence properties—including emission wavelength, intensity, lifetime and quantum yield—of ZQS–DDS/LDH(x%) (where x% stands for the molar percentage of ZQS in the mixture of ZQS and DDS) were strongly correlated with the fluorophore content x%. For example for the Mg2Al–LDH host, the λmaxem of the composite could be tuned from 464 to 497 nm by increasing the value of x% from 5% to 100% (the visual change in the luminescence is shown in Fig. 3), further demonstrating that the photoluminescence properties of chromophore/LDH hybrid materials can be adjusted by simply changing the interlayer content of the luminescent anion. A similar result was also obtained in the tris(8-hydroxyquinoline-5-sulfonate)aluminium anion (AQS3−) and DDS co-intercalated MgAl–LDH system.18b
 Fig. 3  Photographs under 365 nm UV irradiation of (a) ZQS; DDS–ZQS(x%)/Mg2Al–LDH with x = (b) 5, (c) 10, (d) 40, and (e) 100. Reprinted from ref. 18a, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2010. 
Changing the chemical properties of the second guest is an alternative way to tune the fluorescence of LDH-based luminescent materials. Recently, we prepared co-intercalated Zn2Al–LDH composites of FLU and a series of surfactants with different alkyl chain lengths.19 By simply changing the chain length of the surfactant CnH2n+1SO3− (n = 5, 6, 7, 10, and 12), several important fluorescence properties, such as the fluorescence wavelength, quantum yield, fluorescence lifetime and fluorescence anisotropy, can be tuned in a regular manner. Moreover, the optimal fluorescence properties were found for the sample FLU–C7H15SO3/Zn2Al–LDH, which was explained by a “size-matching” rule between the FLU dye and surfactant.
In summary, the luminescent behavior of a photofunctional guest incorporated in an LDH matrix is strongly correlated with the properties of the host layer (layer charge density and chemical composition), the guest species and the microenvironment in the LDH galleries, since these factors significantly influence the host–guest and guest–guest interactions. Importantly, modulating these factors creates opportunities for the design and preparation of LDH-based chromophores for use as solid luminescent materials.
2.3 Thermal stability and photostability of chromophores
One important aim of the intercalation of photofunctional dye molecules into LDHs is to improve their stability to heat and light as required for practical applications. Information about the thermal stability of dye/LDH composites can be obtained by thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis (TG–DTA). We have studied the thermal stability of some composites of anionic dyes (SRB,12C3C,13benzocarbazole dye,15 ANS16 and azo dyes20) with LDHs. It was found that the weight loss of the dye/LDH composite occurred more slowly on raising the temperature, and the exothermic peak in the DTA curve appeared at higher temperatures compared with the pristine dye, suggesting that the thermal stability of luminescent species can be enhanced by intercalation into LDHs.
Photostability is another important factor in evaluating dye/LDH composites. In the case of a co-intercalated FLU and HES ZnAl–LDH system, a comparison of the photostability of the FLU–HES/LDH composite and the FLU solution was carried out by illuminating them under UV light.21a It was found that the half-life of the fluorescence intensity of the FLU–HES/LDH sample was more than twice that of the FLU solution, which shows that the rigid LDH matrix significantly improves the photostability of FLU. Chakraborty et al. reported a marked enhancement in the thermal and photophysical stabilities of a perylene dye (N,N′-bis(4-benzosulfonic acid)-perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylbisimide disodium salt) after intercalation in ZnAl–LDH, MgAl–LDH and NiAl–LDH composites.21b However, the photostability and thermal stability of luminescent guests are not always enhanced by intercalation. For example, Bauer et al.22 found that the photostability of perylenebisimidetetrasulfonate intercalated in a ZnAl–LDH composite was comparable to that of the free dye. Furthermore, we investigated another perylene derivative (perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylate (PTCB) chromophore) intercalated in a MgAl–LDH composite,23 and found that the decomposition or combustion temperature of the intercalated PTCB was lower than that of the pristine form by ca. 100 °C. This somewhat unexpected result can be attributed to perylene and its derivatives being large π-conjugated systems with strong intermolecular interactions. For the pristine PTCB, the strong π–π and/or hydrogen bonding interactions between the planar PTCB anions predominate throughout the crystal lattice; whereas in the case of PCTB/LDH, the host–guest interactions (mainly electrostatic interactions between LDH layers and dye anions) determine the arrangement of PTCB, and the favorable guest–guest interactions (mainly π–π interactions) are effectively suppressed.
3. Ordered photofunctional thin/ultrathin film materials
3.1 Preferred orientation of dye/LDH thin films having polarized luminescence
Recently, oriented and ordered films based on LDHs have attracted much interest.24 We have focused our attention on photofunctional anion/LDH film systems with the aim of obtaining new types of luminescent materials and devices with potential practical applications.
A facile way to fabricate photofunctional anion/LDH films is by depositing dye/LDH particles on a substrate via the solvent evaporation method. By virtue of the intrinsic structural anisotropy of the LDH sheets, the quasi-hexagonal LDH platelets are oriented with their c-axes perpendicular to the substrate, as a result of the maximum hexagonal face-to-face contact between adjacent particles (Fig. 4). For example, we fabricated well-defined SRB–DBS/LDH thin films on quartz substrates by employing the solvent evaporation method (Fig. 4C).12 The strong basal (00l) reflections and the absence of any non-basal reflections in the XRD pattern of the SRB–DBS/LDH thin film confirm the well c-oriented assembly of LDH platelets. Scanning electron microscopy (Fig. 4A and B) and atomic force microscopy (Fig. 4D) also demonstrate that the LDH lamellar crystallites are stacked with their ab-planes parallel to the substrate.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of the LDH films with the ab-faces parallel to the substrate, which is assembled from LDH crystallites. (A) Top and (B) side view SEM images of a SRB–DBS/LDH (9.09%) thin film. (C) Photograph of the thin film on a quartz substrate. (D) Tapping-mode AFM image of the film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © American Chemistry Society, 2009. 
The polarized luminescence of the SRB–DBS/LDH thin films was investigated. Generally, polarized luminescence can be evaluated4 by determining the anisotropy value r, which can be expressed by the formula: (1)where IVH stands for the photoluminescence intensity obtained with vertical polarized light excitation and horizontal polarization detection, and IVV, IHH, IHV are defined in a similar way; G = IHV/IHH is determined from an aqueous solution of the photofunctional molecule. Theoretically, the value of r ranges from −0.2 (the absorption and emission transition dipoles are perpendicular to one another) to 0.4 (the two transition dipoles are parallel to each other).25
Steady-state polarization photoemission spectra showed that an SRB–DBS/LDH powder sample displayed no luminescence anisotropy at ambient temperature (anisotropy value r = 0 ± 0.01); whereas an SRB–DBS/LDH thin film exhibited large anisotropy (r = 0.10 ± 0.01). Furthermore, the SRB–DBS/LDH thin films showed a luminescence anisotropy decay effect in the range of their fluorescence lifetime. The luminescence anisotropy of the SRB–DBS/LDH thin films can be attributed to the ordered alignment of the dye molecules in the LDH galleries; moreover, the intrinsic anisotropy of the LDH crystallites also contributes to the enhancement of polarized luminescence. This work demonstrates that ordered assembled LDH-based luminescent thin films can exhibit polarization photoemission unlike a powder sample with the same composition.
The polarized luminescence technique is a good method for investigating the molecular orientation of the interlayer photofunctional anions. Generally, the orientation angle Ψ is defined as the angle between the transition moment of a photofunctional anion and the normal to the LDH layer, which can be determined by measuring the fluorescence intensity at different angles between the polarized excitation beam and the LDH-based film. For α-naphthalene acetate (α-NAA) and β-naphthalene acetate (β-NAA) intercalated Zn2Al–LDH thin films, the orientation angle Ψ was calculated to be 60° and 65°, respectively.26 We also fabricated ZnAl–LDH thin films with co-intercalated α-NAA and HES in different ratios. It was found that the orientation angle of α-NAA in the LDH matrix ranged from 59 (x% = 12.1%, x% is the molar percentage of α-NAA) to 71° (x% = 34.4%) with increasing molar ratio of α-NAA/HES, demonstrating that the orientation of the interlayer anion can be tuned by simply varying the fluorophore content in the LDH gallery.27
3.2 LDH-based monocolor and multicolor luminescent ultrathin films (UTFs) formed by layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly

(1) Ordered π-conjugated polymer/LDH UTF systems with monocolor and multicolor fluorescence. 
In recent years, the layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly technique has become one of the most promising methods for constructing LDH ultrathin films.28 The process involves the alternate assembly of polymer anions and positively charged nanosheets of LDH. This method facilitates the assembly of a new type of functional hybrid ultrathin film (UTF) which combines the properties of the organic polymer with those of the inorganic component. Details of the exfoliation of LDH microcrystals into LDH nanosheets have been recently summarized in two review articles by Sasaki's29 and our group.30 Herein, we mainly discuss the structural characteristics and luminescent properties of LDH-based UTFs.
The π-conjugated polymers (π-CP) have attracted much attention from both academia and industry during last two decades owing to their promising optoelectronic applications in light-emitting diodes (LEDs)31 and photovoltaic cells.32 The preparation of well-oriented π-CP thin films with a macroscopic polarized optical effect is very important; for example, these can be employed as the backlight in liquid-crystal displays.33 We chose an anionic π-CP, sulfonated poly(p-phenylene) derivative (APPP), to assemble with exfoliated MgAl–LDH nanosheetsvia the LBL method, resulting in [APPP/LDH]n ultrathin films.34 The UV/vis and fluorescence intensity of the [APPP/LDH]n UTFs increased regularly with increasing bilayer number, and the UTFs exhibited uniform bright blue luminescence with increasing intensity from n = 3 to 30 bilayers on irradiation with UV light (as shown in Fig. 5a). The thickness of these UTFs can be finely controlled at the nanometre scale. X-Ray diffraction showed that the UTF possesses an ordered periodic superlattice structure in the normal direction with a period of ca. 2 nm. Using the in situ photoluminescence technique, the UV optical stability of the [APPP/LDH]27UTF was compared with that of a [APPP/PDDA]27UTF containing a cationic organic polymer, poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride) (PDDA) in place of the LDH. It was found that the normalized fluorescence intensity of the APPP/LDH was larger than that of the APPP/PDDA counterpart, demonstrating that the presence of the inorganic LDH nanosheets leads to an enhanced optical stability of the π-CP anions compared with typical organic/organic films.35
 Fig. 5  Photographs of luminescent UTFs with different numbers of bilayers when exposed to UV light (365 nm): (a) [APPP/LDH]n (n = 3–30), (b) [APPV/LDH]n, and (c) [APT/LDH]n (n = 4–32). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34,36 and 37, © Wiley-VCH, 2009, American Chemistry Society, 2010, and Wiley-VCH, 2010. 
Another two typical anionic π-CPs, namely sulfonated poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (APPV)36 and sulfonated polythiophene (APT),37 were also assembled with LDH nanosheets into luminescent UTFs, which showed well-defined yellow (λmaxem = 550 nm) and pink-red luminescence (λmaxem = 575 nm), respectively. Their emission intensity on irradiation with UV light increased with increasing bilayer number (Fig. 5b and c). Both UTFs exhibited polarized luminescence. Taking the [APPV/LDH]nUTF as an example, for in-plane polarized excitation light, the yellow photoluminescence of the [APPV/LDH]8UTF showed an anisotropy value (r) between the parallel and perpendicular to the excitation polarization direction in the range 0.25–0.30 (which is slightly less than the highest theoretical value of 0.4 for systems without macroscopic alignment),38 confirming the oriented arrangement of APPV chains within the LDH galleries.
Multicolor luminescent materials are very important for both fundamental studies and applications in full-color displays and lasers.39 By combining the possibility of electrostatic assembly and the three-primary-color principle, it is possible to fabricate multicolor luminescent UTF systems based on the monocolor luminescent UTFs mentioned above. In a very recent work, we have fabricated a series of heterogeneous multicolor luminescent UTF materials (blue/red, blue/yellow, blue/green and red/green emission).40 Our strategy for fabricating multicolour luminescent UTFs involves the stepwise assembly of individual luminescent species and LDH nanosheets. Therefore, the composition and loading of the luminescent species can be precisely controlled by adjusting the assembly sequence and cycle number, which facilitates the fine tuning of the multicolor light emission. The luminescence color of the resulting heterogeneous UTFs can be easily tuned over nearly the whole range of the visible spectrum by rational selection of the red/green/blue color photoemissive building blocks (such as APPP, APPV, and APT). Furthermore, well-defined multicolor polarized luminescence with high anisotropy was observed for these UTFs, and the emission color changes with polarization direction. Therefore, this method provides a way of fabricating heterogeneous UTFs with tunable-color luminescence as well as polarized multicolor emission, which have potential applications in multicolor or white polarized photoemission devices.


(2) Photoactive complex/LDH UTFs. 
There have been relatively few reports of the assembly of LDH nanosheets with functional complexes or small molecules because of the relatively weak electrostatic interaction between these species and LDH nanosheets. This inhibits progress in developing applications of LDH-based organic–inorganic hybrid functional UTF materials. Recently, we demonstrated the assembly of ordered UTFs based on small anionic photoactive complexes and LDH monolayers as building blocks using the LBL method. Taking into account that the sulfonate group has a stronger interaction with the positively charged LDH nanosheets than the carboxylate group, we selected a tetraanionic complex, tris(1,10-phenanthroline-4,7-diphenylsulfonate)ruthenium(II) ([Ru(dpds)3]4−), which possesses the highest reported photoluminescence quantum yield (36%) for ruthenium-based complexes, for assembly with exfoliated MgAl–LDH nanosheets.41

UV-visible absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 6) showed that the intensity of the characteristic absorption bands correlates linearly with the number of bilayers, n (Fig. 6, inset), suggesting a stepwise and regular deposition procedure of [Ru(dpds)3]4− and LDH nanosheets in each cycle. The resulting [Ru(dpds)3/LDH]n UTFs feature an ordered periodic structure in the direction normal to the substrate with a periodicity of ca. 2.44 nm. The polarized luminescence properties of the as-prepared UTFs were investigated. The results show that no luminescence polarization (as indicated by an anisotropy value r = 0.02) was observed for the pristine [Ru(dpds)3]4− solution, whereas the values of r for the [Ru(dpds)3/LDH]n UTFs were in the range 0.20–0.30 when comparing the directions parallel and perpendicular to the excitation polarization for in-plane polarized excitation light. It is known that a highly symmetric complex often shows low luminescence anisotropy, e.g. the 8-hydroxyquinoline aluminium complex exhibits no polarized emission due to its pseudospherical structure.42 In this Ru(dpds)3/LDH system, however, the ordered assembly of the highly symmetric [Ru(dpds)3]4− anion with the LDH nanosheets exhibits polarized luminescence, which may be attributed to a uniform and ordered orientation of the guest anions within the rigid LDH matrix.
 Fig. 6  
UV-visible
absorption spectra of (Ru(dpds)3/LDH)n (n = 4–32) UTFs. The inset shows plots of the absorbance at 196, 287 and 471 nm vs. n. Reprinted from ref. 41, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2009. 
To the best of our knowledge, this Ru(dpds)3/LDH system is the first example of the design and construction of light-emitting UTFs with polarized luminescence based on a photoactive complex and LDH; subsequently, we have demonstrated that a sulfonated zinc phthalocyanine anion (ZnTSPc)43 and an iron(III) porphyrintetrasulfonate anion (Fe(III)–TPPS)44 can also be assembled with LDH nanosheets.


(3) Cationic species/LDH UTFs. 
All of the photofunctional guests mentioned above are anions, on the basis that only anionic species can be directly incorporated into the positively charged LDH matrix. If cationic photofunctional species can be assembled with LDHs, the family of LDH-based functional materials would be greatly extended. Keeping this in mind, we have developed a facile way to construct functional cation/LDH UTF systems making use of a suitable polyanion as a carrier.45 The assembly involves two basic steps: firstly, the functional cation is pre-assembled with an optically inert polyanion in solution based on the Coulombic interaction between them, resulting in cation@polyanion ion pairs combining a negative charge and the functional behavior of the cation; secondly, ordered UTFs are fabricated by alternate assembly of the ion pairs with the exfoliated LDH nanosheets. Based on this procedure, chemiluminescent bis(N-methylacridinium) dications (BNMA) and polyvinylsulfonate anions (PVS) formed a BNMA@PVS pair with a negative charge, and then this ion pair was assembled with MgAl–LDH nanosheets by the LBL method. We found the resulting (BNMA@PVS/LDH)n (n = 4–32) UTFs showed improved optical properties compared with the pristine BNMA dinitrate sample. For instance, the fluorescence lifetime of the BNMA–PVS@LDH UTF is extended more than 12-fold. This remarkable enhancement can be assigned to the uniform dispersion of the BNMA cations between the LDH monolayers with the assistance of PVS polyanions, which results in very effective suppression of the formation of chromophore aggregates.
As another example of this strategy, we also fabricated a UTF by assembly of a monovalent cation rhodamine 6G and LDH monolayers.45 Therefore, this approach can afford ordered assembly and fine-tuning of functional cation/LDH systems, which provides new opportunities to prepare novel LDH-based functional materials. It should also be noted that Mohanambe and Vasudevan46 reported that the electroneutral pyrene molecules can also diffuse into the galleries of MgAl–LDH after it was functionalized by anionic surfactant.


(4) LDH-based photofunctional films as stimuli (heat, light, and pH)-responsive materials. 
Photofunctional materials that respond to external stimuli, such as heat, light and pH, have potential applications in optical switches and sensors.47 To meet the requirements for use in such intelligent photoactive devices or sensors, it is important to fabricate ordered films with regular molecular orientation at two-dimensional surfaces.
Chromism in response to heat and light is a very extensively studied phenomenon, and materials exhibiting thermochromism48 or photochromism49 have received much interest owing to their wide applications in optical data storage50 and nonlinear devices.51 The relatively poor thermal stability as well as high thermochromic transition temperature often restrict the use of such materials, however.52 Recently, we reported a transparent thin film with thermochromic properties based on a photoactive azobenzene dye 4-(4-anilinophenylazo)benzenesulfonate (AO5) co-intercalated with DDS into the galleries of ZnAl–LDH.53a The AO5–DDS/LDH film showed marked thermochromic behavior involving a color change from light-yellow to reddish-orange in the ambient temperature range 35–65 °C (as shown in Fig. 7A), which is reversible over a number of heating–cooling cycles (Fig. 7B). In this AO5–DDS/LDH system, the LDH host layers impose an isolation effect and provide a microenvironment favoring the distribution and alignment of the azobenzene group within the available free space, which may reduce the barrier to tautomerization. We have also reported similar thermochromic behavior for azomethine-H and 1-pentanesulfonate anions co-intercalated into ZnAl–LDH films.53b
 Fig. 7  (A) In situabsorption spectra of an AO5–LDH film during heating in the temperature range 35–65 °C. (B) The correlation between the absorbance of the band at 445 nm and temperature over a complete heating–cooling cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53a, © American Chemistry Society, 2010. 
As another example, a photoactive azobenzene-type polymer (PAZO)/LDH UTF showed a reversible switching between the trans- and the cis-rich photostationary state of the azobenzene group, accompanied by significant changes in film color, upon alternate irradiation with UV and visible light (λ > 450 nm).54 It should be noted that both the pristine AO5 and PAZO show no thermochromism or photochromism under the same conditions. Therefore, it can be concluded that the host (LDH layer)–guest (AO5 or PAZO) interaction is the key factor in determining the reversible chromism of the films. In addition, we also prepared a hybrid film based on a substituted azobenzene anion 7-[(trifluoromethoxyphenylazo)phenoxy]pentanoate (CF3AZO−) intercalated in an LDH host, which showed a switch in wettability between superhydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces on alternate irradiation by UV and visible light, as a result of a reversible photoinduced transformation.55
Although reversible thermochromic materials have been well documented in the literature, thermochromic luminescent (TCL) materials have been rarely reported.56 Generally, the change in luminescence involves a chemical reaction or change of the molecular packing mode.57Stilbene-type compounds have attracted considerable attention due to their excellent optical and electronic properties,58 and it was reported that solutions of stilbene derivatives can exhibit TCL behavior.59 We found that a UTF based on the anionic bis(2-sulfonatostyryl)biphenyl (BSB, a stilbene derivative) and LDH nanosheets showed reversible TCL properties at ambient temperature.60 In the temperature range 20–100 °C, the BSB/LDH UTFs exhibited fast luminescence response and reversible transformations including intensity, color (444 nm vs. 475 nm), fluorescence lifetime (0.9 ns vs. 1.9 ns) and fluorescence polarized anisotropy (an r value of 0.15 vs. 0.02). Moreover, a blue/yellow two-color emissive (BSB/LDH)8(APPV/LDH)15UTF was also constructed by assembling the (APPV/LDH)15UTF on the surface of the as-prepared (BSB/LDH)8. In this case, the ratio of the fluorescence intensities at 445 and 547 nm displayed a reversible transformation between ∼2.4 at 20 °C and ∼1.0 at 100 °C. Therefore, the BSB/LDH-based UTF can potentially serve as a new type of temperature sensor.
pH-responsive optical sensors are important analytical tools in environmental measurement61 and biotechnology.62 Generally, the fluorophore indicators are immobilized in a matrix in order to obtain a stable lifetime and signal. However, conventional matrices, such as sol–gel polymers, have some inherent disadvantages (poor thermal stability as well as toxicity), which have limited the development of this field.63 We have developed a type of optical pH sensor based on the FLU–HES/LDH film discussed in Section 2.3.21a The fluorescence intensity of a film with a thickness of 300 nm exhibited a broad linear dynamic range for solution pH 5.02 to 8.54; it also showed good repeatability with a relative standard deviation (RSD) less than 1.5%, and reversibility with RSD less than 1.5% in 20 consecutive cycles. In the case of a APT/LDH film,37 we also observed that the film showed a pH-dependent luminescence with the λmaxem increasing from 562 to 591 nm with an increase of pH value from 4 to 13, and the pH-dependent luminescence change is repeatable. The sensitivity of the fluorescence to pH can be attributed to the protonation and deprotonation of APT in the LDH gallery. Therefore, such chromophore/LDH film materials may find applications as pH-responsive optical sensors.


(5) Photofunctional dye/LDHs as energy-transfer and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) materials. 
Lanthanide cations are often used as the activator in luminescent materials, but generally require the presence of a sensitizer which can absorb light and, by energy transfer, increase the efficiency of excitation of the lanthanide cation since its direct excitation is relatively inefficient. It has been reported that lanthanide cations (such as Eu3+ and Tb3+) can be incorporated into the host layer of LDHs.64 If photofunctional anions can be intercalated between LDH layers doped by lanthanide cations, they can act as such a sensitiser. Gunawan and Xu reported a 4-biphenylacetate intercalated Tb3+-doped LDH composite,65 which showed an efficient energy transfer from the excited state of the intercalated anions to the Tb3+ activator in the host layers. Subsequently, Gao et al.66 reported the intercalation of four separate dyes (naphthalene-1,5-disulfonate (15-NDS), naphthalene-2,6-dicarboxylate (26-NDC), benzoate (BA) and terephthalate (TA)) into a 15% Eu3+-doped Zn/Al–LDH system. It was found that the carboxylate dyes enhanced the red luminescence of Eu3+ more strongly than the sulfonate dye. Therefore, these LDH-based host–guest energy-transfer systems offer a viable way of improving the luminescence efficiency of lanthanide activators and the thermal and photostability of the sensitizer afforded by incorporation in the LDH matrix.
Besides providing a stable chemical microenvironment and enhanced thermal and photostability, an LDH host can also improve the light-harvesting ability of organic dyes. Recently, Jung et al.67 reported that an anthraquinone sulfonate (AQS) modified LDH can be used as a hybrid light sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Based on the current density/voltage (J/V) characteristics of the cells (Fig. 8), the LDH–AQS and pristine AQS-sensitized cell showed overall solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency of 0.20% and 0.14%, respectively. Thus, the hybrid sensitized cell based on the LDH–AQS system showed an obvious enhancement of the conversion efficiency compared with the pure AQS-sensitized cell, which offers a new approach for the development of light-harvesting sensitizers.
 Fig. 8  Current density/voltage (J/V) curves of LDH–AQS and pristine AQS-sensitized cells under standard AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination. The pixel area of the devices was 0.15 cm2, and the thickness of the TiO2 film was 10 mm. The J/V curves were obtained after 3 h of light soaking. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, © Wiley-VCH, 2010. 

4. Theoretical studies of the photofunctional anion/LDH supramolecular structure
4.1 Molecular dynamics simulations
Classical molecular dynamics simulation is one of the important tools of computational chemistry, which has been widely used to investigate structure and properties of functional materials.68 It provides an effective and complementary method to experimental measurements for the investigation of LDH materials. Greenwell et al.69 have reviewed a number of molecular simulation results for different anions intercalated in LDH systems. To the best of our knowledge, however, a detailed comparison between experimental results and MD simulations for the luminescent anion/LDH system has not been reported. Herein, we describe MD simulations carried out with the aim of understanding the interlayer orientation of the guest anions, and formation and distribution of the aggregates.

(1) Interlayer orientation and arrangement of photofunctional anions. 
The orientation of photofunctional anions in the LDH gallery is the key to understanding host–guest interactions, and their distribution of orientation also influences the degree of ordering and fluorescence anisotropy of LDH-based luminescent materials. Recent MD simulations carried out by our group have shown that the orientation of an interlayer guest is dependent on the LCD of the host layer, the interlayer hydration conditions and the molar ratio of the photofunctional anion to a second co-intercalated guest. In the case of benzocarbazole anions intercalated in LDH hosts with different LCD values,15 the orientation angle of benzocarbazole with respect to the Mg2Al–LDH (Model A) and Mg3.5Al–LDH (Model B) host layers was investigated. It was found that the benzocarbazole anions tend to be more inclined with respect to the LDH layers in Model B (most probable angle: 24°) than in Model A (most probable angle: 31°). Typical snapshots for these two models are shown in Fig. 9. Moreover, the distribution of benzocarbazole anions is much broader in Model A than that in Model B, suggesting that benzocarbazole anions are accommodated in the LDH gallery in a more ordered manner in Model B. The difference in distribution of the interlayer orientation accounts for the different luminescence emission in the benzocarbazole anion/LDH composites with different values of LCD. For the PTCB/LDH system mentioned in Section 2.3,23 we investigated the molecular arrangement and orientation of PTCB in the interlayer galleries of MgAl–LDH with different hydration states by using the modified cff91 force field.70 The simulation results show that the orientation angle corresponding to the experimental hydration conditions is ca. 28°, and the PTCB anions have a tendency to reorient from a tilted to a vertical orientation relative to the LDH layers as the interlayer water content increases. This study indicates that the interlayer hydration state strongly influences the orientation and arrangement of the guest anions.
 Fig. 9  Snapshots of the simulation for benzocarbazole intercalated MgAl–LDH of (A) model A and (B) model B. The van der Waals volume of the interlayer benzocarbazole anion is depicted in green. Reprinted from ref. 15, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2009. 
Most previous MD simulations of LDH-based materials focused on materials containing a single type of guest anion; and studies of LDH systems containing two or more co-intercalated anionic species have seldom been reported.71 However it is necessary to investigate such co-intercalated systems in order to understand the properties of many of the photofunctional LDH systems described here. We have studied two examples of LDH systems containing cointercalated photofunctional and surfactant anions. The first one is the C3C and DDS co-intercalated LDH system,13i.e., C3C–DDS/LDH (with DDS:C3C = 0; 1:3; 1:1; 3:1). It was observed that the C3C anions shift from a tilted to a vertical arrangement with respect to the LDH layers as the DDS/C3C ratio increases from 0 (most probable angle: 32°) to 1:1 (most probable angle: 54°) due to the enlargement of the basal spacing upon increasing the DDS content; the orientation angle decreases to 39° when the DDS/C3C ratio is 3:1, as a result of the relatively rigid environment imposed by the DDS which restricts the flexibility of the C3C anions. The second example is the BNMA and PVS co-assembled LDH system,45 in which the two organic guests adopt an ordered arrangement with a preferred orientation: the orientation angles of the N–N axis in the BNMA and the line connecting the terminal carbon atoms in PVS, with respect to the LDH layer, are populated at 15° and 2° respectively.
By employing MD simulations, further insights into the origin of the ordered arrangement and preferred orientation of photoemissive anions can be achieved for both single- and co-intercalated systems. This allows us to understand the enhancement of anisotropy of light emission for these photofunctional species/LDH UTFs, as revealed by the experimental polarized photoemission studies.


(2) The formation and distribution of aggregates of the interlayer guests. 
Several reports have shown that aggregation of photoactive species occurs upon intercalation.9–12 Normally, by experiment, the presence of H- or J-type dimers can be resolved based on the blue or red shift, respectively, in the UV-visible spectra of the fluorescent compounds. The two aggregates differ in the relative geometries of the photoactive molecules. If angle θ is defined as the angle between the transition dipole vector and the line between the centers of the two photoactive molecules, H- and J-type aggregates correspond to θ > 54.7° and θ < 54.7° respectively.

            Perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylate (PTCB) anion is a typical model system employed in MD simulations to study the formation of aggregates, since perylene-type molecules have planar conjugated structures with high symmetry and thus form aggregates easily due to intermolecular interactions. In an MD study of the PTCB/LDH system,23 it was found that H- and J-type dimers are populated under low and high hydration conditions, respectively. This can be understood in terms of the dye orientation. For low hydration, the dye molecules prefer tail-to-tail stacking (J-type dimers) due to their tilted arrangement with respect to the LDH layers. In contrast for high hydration, they tend to adopt a face-to-face stacking (H-type dimer) due to their nearly perpendicular arrangement with respect to the LDH layers. Under the experimental hydration conditions, most of the PTCB aggregates adopt a J-type dimer, as shown by the broad absorption in the range 500–600 nm in the UV-visible spectrum. Our work has demonstrated that MD simulations can be used to understand the structure–property relationships of LDH-based fluorescent materials, which is helpful in designing new fluorescent composite materials with specific target applications.
As mentioned above, experimental studies have demonstrated that the introduction of a second guest (a surfactant) is an efficient way to suppress the formation of aggregates. However, the details of the role of the second guest could not be studied experimentally. We found that the distance between two adjacent photoactive anions plays a key role in explaining this isolation effect. For the C3C and DDS co-intercalated LDH system,13 the distance r1 between the two nearest C3C anions in the LDH gallery was calculated, and found to increase by ca. 26%, 44% and 61% for the C3C/DDS ratio of 3:1, 1:1 and 1:3 respectively compared with a pure C3C-intercalated LDH. This indicates that the r1 value exhibits a nearly linear increase with surfactant content, and thus dye molecules are diluted effectively.

4.2 Periodic density functional theoretical (PDFT) calculations
Due to the lack of electronic structure information about the host LDH layer and the guest anions, the host–guest interactions and the role of the LDH in photoemission behavior cannot be fully understood on the basis of experimental measurements. PDFT calculations72 are an important method of detecting both the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and supramolecular systems, especially their optical and electronic properties.

(1) Multiple quantum well (MQW) structure: a new insight into the host–guest interaction. 
To give further insight into the physical and chemical properties of LDH-based photofunctional UTFs, we investigated three types of idealized models of anionic π-CP/LDH systems, namely APPP/LDH,34APPV/LDH36 and APT/LDH.37 Based on PDFT calculations of the total electronic densities of states (TDOS) and partial electronic densities of states (PDOS) for the APPP/LDH system, it was found that the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) are mainly populated on the p-phenylene chain and the attached O atoms, and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) are also mainly distributed on the p-phenylene chain of APPP (shown in Fig. 10). The APPP/LDH system has a low band gap of 2.6 eV. The O 2p, Mg/Al 3s and H 1s orbitals from the LDH host layer contribute to the TDOS below the top of the valence band, above the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band respectively, with a band gap of 5.7 eV. Therefore, this calculation demonstrates that the APPP/LDH UTF can serve as a multiple quantum well (MQW) structure, which is known to result in enhancement of the light-emitting efficiency for photofunctional π-CP anions.
 Fig. 10  (a) HOMO and (b) LUMO profiles for the APPP/LDH UTFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, © Wiley-VCH, 2009. 
Similar MQW characteristics were also observed in the APPV/LDH and APT/LDH systems with band gaps of 1.74 and 1.85 eV, respectively. For the APT/LDH system,36 we further studied the energy band structure. The results showed that the energy bands around the Fermi level are nearly independent of the electron wavevector (k) along the direction perpendicular to the LDH layer, indicating the strong valence electron confinement effect of the LDH layer on the π-CP anions in the normal direction. The strong valence electron dispersion can be observed along the main chain of the π-CP, suggesting the electron delocalization occurs in the main chain of the π-CP. In addition, the weak dependence of k on band energy along the direction perpendicular to the main chain of the π-CP indicates that there are no significant guest–guest interactions between the π-CP anions in the LDH gallery. These results reveal that the LDH provides a homogeneous environment for the dispersion of the π-CP anions.
To extend the scope of the LDH-based MQW structure, we further studied photofunctional complex/LDH systems. For instance, the ZnTSPc/MgAl–LDH system can also be regarded as a MQW structure.43 PDFT calculations show that the optical excitation/emission process for the ZnTSPc remains practically unchanged after incorporation into the LDH matrix; while the MgAl–LDH monolayers are inert. The valence electrons localized in the ZnTSPc anion are confined within the energy blocking imposed by the LDH monolayers.
Although the MQW structure has been studied in pure inorganic73 or organic74 materials, very few studies have been reported for organic–inorganic hybrid composites like our fluorescent species/LDH systems. Unlike in conventional inorganic MQWs, supramolecular interactions occur between adjacent layers in the hybrid MQW including electrostatic, hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces, without the need for strict lattice matching. In addition, the hybrid MQW possesses superior structural order and photostability to a pure organic MQW, as described in Section 3.2. Importantly, the hybrid MQW structure leads to specific host–guest interactions, an understanding of which provides a basis for the rational development of novel photofunctional materials.


(2) Geometric structure of the photofunctional anions in the LDH gallery. 
By virtue of the electrostatic interactions between the LDH layer and the interlayer guest anions, it can be expected that the configuration of the anions may change upon intercalation, which would further influence their photophysical and photochemical properties. The Ru(dpds)3/LDH system is a representative example.39 To understand the polarized luminescence of the Ru(dpds)3 anion assembled with the LDH host, as discussed in Section 3.2, the geometric structures of both the pristine [Ru(dpds)3]4− and intercalated anion were studied. It was found that the most significant change in the geometry of [Ru(dpds)3]4− after intercalation assembly is that the S–Ru–S angle increases from 71.0° to 110.4°, demonstrating that the [Ru(dpds)3]4− anion exhibits dramatic degradation in symmetry as a result of the host–guest interactions. This phenomenon may be the origin of the increased polarized photoemission of the Ru(dpds)3/LDH UTFs.

5. Conclusions
The fabrication and physicochemical properties of photofunctional species/LDH composite systems and their optical applications have been reviewed in this article from the viewpoint of both experimental measurements and theoretical calculations. Enhancement of the photophysical properties of luminescent anion/LDH composite materials can be achieved by tailoring the host–guest interactions (by varying the layer charge density and chemical composition of LDH host) and the guest–guest interactions (by varying the molar ratio of photoactive to non-photoactive interlayer guests). LDH-based photofunctional thin films and ultrathin films can be constructed by various methods, and possess a uniform morphology and supramolecular structure. Their photoluminescence behavior, polarized photoemission and stimuli (heat, light, and pH)-responsive performance have been discussed in detail. In addition, by employing MD simulations and PDFT calculations, further insights into the molecular arrangement, aggregation state, electronic structure and host–guest interactions in the photofunctional LDH-based materials were obtained to supplement experimental results. It is to be expected that LDH-based photofunctional composite materials are good candidates for application in solid-state luminescence devices and sensors. Our future work will focus on the construction of new types of LDH-based multifunctional and intelligent materials.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the co-workers cited in the references for their invaluable contributions to the work described here. This work was supported by the 973 Program (Grant No. 2011CBA00504), the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the 111 Project (Grant No. B07004), the Collaborative Project from the Beijing Education Committee and the Scotland–China Higher Education Research Partnership.
Notes and references

  (a) S. Nonell, C. Marti, I. Garcia-Moreno, A. Costela and R. Satre, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2001, 72, 355 CAS ; 
  (b) Y. S. Zhao, A. D. Peng, H. B. Fu, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1661 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Gao, Q. Liao, Z. Xu, Y. Yue, Q. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 732 CAS .

  (a) S. T. Kim, D. Hwang, X. C. Li, J. Grüner, R. H. Friend, A. B. Holmes and H. K. Shim, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 979 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Q. Xie, B. Yang, F. Li, G. Cheng, L. L. Liu, G. D. Yang, H. Xu, L. Ye, M. Hanif, S. Liu, D. G. Ma and Y. G. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14152 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. A. Strassert, C.-H. Chien, M. D. G. Lopez, D. Kourkoulos, D. Hertel, K. Meerholz and L. De Cola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 946 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. W. Thomas, III, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Das and P. K. Bharadwaj, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5257 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Ning, Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Yan, S. Qian, Y. Cao and H. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3799 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Zhao, H. Gao, Y. Fan, T. Zhou, Z. Su, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3165 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Wang, G. X. Zhang, D. Q. Zhang, D. B. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1858 RSC ; 
  (f) M. Sase, S. Yamaguchi, Y. Sagara, I. Yoshikawa, T. Mutai and K. Araki, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8347 RSC .

          B. Valeur, Molecular Fluorescence: Principles and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,  2001 Search PubMed .

  (a) G. Ihlein, F. Schüth, O. Krauû, U. Vietze and F. Laeri, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1117 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. J. Scott, G. Wirnsberger, M. D. McGehee, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ogawa and K. Kuroda, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 399 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. P. Newman and W. Jones, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 105 RSC ; 
  (b) 
Layered Double Hydroxides: Present and Future, ed. V. Rives, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .

  (a) A. I. Khan and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3191 RSC ; 
  (b) F. Leroux and C. Taviot-Guého, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3628 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Li and X. Duan, Struct. Bonding, 2006, 119, 193 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2006, 485 RSC .
S. Gago, T. Costa, J. S. De Melo, I. S. Gonçalves and M. Pillinger, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 894 RSC .
U. Costantino, N. Coletti, M. Nocchetti, G. G. Aloisi and F. Elisei, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 4454 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Aloisi, U. Costantino, F. Elisei, L. Latterini, C. Natali and M. Nocchetti, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3316 RSC .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1381 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, S. H. Qin, L. Chen, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5016 RSC .
W. Y. Shi, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3901 RSC .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15085 RSC .
Z. Y. Sun, L. Jin, W. Y. Shi, M. Wei and X. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 161, 293 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. H. Chen and J. Shi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 171, 161 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Brinkmann, G. Gadret, M. Muccini, C. Taliani, N. Masciocchi and A. Sironi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5147 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. D. Li, J. Lu, J. Xu, S. L. Dang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9718 RSC ; 
  (b) S. D. Li, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2848 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Shi, Z. Y. Sun, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21070 CAS .

  (a) S. Guo, D. Li, W. Zhang, M. Pu, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4597 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Tang, X. Xu, Y. Lin and D. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 2478 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Y. Shi, S. He, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3856 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Chakraborty, K. Dana and S. Malik, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1996 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bauer, P. Behrens, M. Speckbacher and H. Langhals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 241 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9200 RSC .

  (a) Y. F. Gao, M. Nagai, Y. Masuda, F. Sato, W. S. Seo and K. Koumoto, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3521 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Guo, F. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 45, 6836 RSC .

  (a) T.-Q. Nguyen, J. J. Wu, V. Doan, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Science, 2000, 288, 652 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T.-Q. Nguyen, J. J. Wu, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 609 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Shi, M. Wei, J. Lu, F. Li, J. He, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19886 CAS .
W. Y. Shi, M. Wei, J. Lu, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12888 CAS .

  (a) Z. P. Liu, R. Z. Ma, M. Osada, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4872 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Li, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4386 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Chen, S. Huang, C. Zhang, W. Wang and T. Liu, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 23, 7081 CrossRef ; 
  (d) D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, S. D. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7939 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, F. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5197 RSC .

  (a) Y. Takakazu, S. Kiyoshi, K. Takashi, I. Tetsuji and K. Takaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3930 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Vijayakumar, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2059 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Weder, C. Sarwa, A. Montali, C. Bastiaansen and P. Smith, Science, 1998, 279, 835 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. B. Han, J. Ma, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3073 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reid, Nat. China, 2009 DOI:10.1038/nchina. 2009.76 .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, X. R. Wang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7007 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 1926 CrossRef CAS .
A. P.-Z. Clark, K.-F. Shen, Y. F. Rubbin and S. H. Tolbert, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1647 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. H. Mueller, M. A. Petruska, M. Achermann, D. J. Werder, E. A. Akhadov, D. D. Koleske, M. A. Hoffbauer and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1039 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, S. H. Qin, L. Chen, S. T. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2497 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6358 RSC .
F. Camerel, J. Barberá, J. Otsuki, T. Tokimoto, Y. Shimazaki, L. Chen, S. Liu, M. Lin, C. Wu and R. Ziessel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3462 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, S. H. Qin, L. Chen, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8654 RSC .
M. F. Shao, J. B. Han, W. Y. Shi, M. Wei and X. Duan, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1077 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, L. Chen, S. H. Qin, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5912 RSC .
L. Mohanambe and S. Vasudevan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14345 CrossRef CAS .
F. Puntoriero, P. Ceroni, V. Balzani, G. Bergamini and F. Vögtle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10714 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. M Burkinshaw, J. Griffiths and A. D. Towns, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2677 RSC ; 
  (b) M. B. Johnson, D. D. James, A. Bourque, H. A. Dabkowska, B. D. Gaulin and M. A. White, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 725 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Ma, R. Zhang, A. Peng, Q. Liao, Z. Cao, H. Fu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1737 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Thomas, H. Joachim, D. J. Wendorff and C. Vasile, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2146 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P.-O. Astrand, P. S. Ramanujam, S. Hvilsted, K. L. Bak and S. P. A. Sauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3482 CrossRef .

  (a) G. A. Neff, M. R. Helfrich, M. C. Clifton and C. J. Page, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2363 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. H. Kang, T. J. Bu, P. C. Jin, J. Q. Sun, Y. Q. Yang and J. C. Shen, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7594 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Day, Chem. Rev., 1968, 68, 649 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. R. Wang, J. Lu, W. Y. Shi, F. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1247 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. R. Wang, J. Lu, D. P. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 493, 333 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Han, D. P. Yan, W. Y. Shi, J. Ma, H. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, S. Xu, F. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2009, 64, 4350 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Mutai, H. Satou and K. Araki, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 685 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-J. Yoon, J. W. Chung, J. Gierschner, K. S. Kim, M.-G. Choi, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13675 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Mutai, H. Tomoda, T. Ohkawa, Y. Yabe and K. Araki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9522 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, K. Ye, J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2369 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. A. Stanier, M. J. O'Connell, W. Clegg and H. L. Anderson, Chem. Commun., 2001, 493 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Hirai, S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen, T. Yasuda, A. Ajayaghosh and T. Kato, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4029 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Mizoshita, Y. Goto, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4798 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajayaghosh and V. K. Praveen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 644 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 720 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Grant and R. S. Glass, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 45, 35 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, N. Szita, P. A. Boccazzi, J. Sinskey and K. F. Jensen, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2006, 93, 286 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uttamlal, W. D. Sloan and D. Millar, Polymer Int., 2002, 51, 1198 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. R. Gao, L. X. Lei, C. G. Lv, Y. M. Sun, H. G. Zheng and Y. P. Cui, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1776 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. F. Chen, S. H. Zhou, F. Li and Y. W. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 6417 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Song, Q. Liu, Z. Jiang and M. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 14404 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. W. Musumeci, Z. P. Xu, S. V. Smith, R. F. Minchin and D. J. Martin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 111 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gunawan and R. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17206 CAS .
X. R. Gao, M. Hu, L. X. Lei, D. O’Hare, C. Markland, Y. M. Sun and S. Faulkner, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2104 RSC .
J. H. Lee, J. Chang, J.-H. Cha, D.-Y. Jung, S. S. Kim and J. M. Kim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8296 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  1987 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Káfuňková, C. Taviot-Guého, P. Bezdicka, M. Klementová, P. Kovár, P. Kubát, J. Mosinger, M. Pospıšil and K. Lang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2481 CrossRef .

  (a) H. C. Greenwell, W. Jones, P. V. Coveney and S. Stackhouse, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 708 RSC ; 
  (b) J. L. Suter, R. L. Anderson, H. C. Greenwell and P. V. Coveney, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2482 RSC ; 
  (c) R. L. Anderson, H. C. Greenwell, J. L. Suter, P. V. Coveney and M.-A. Thyveetil, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7251 RSC .

  (a) H. Li, J. Ma, D. G. Evans, T. Zhou, F. Li and X. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4405 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, H. Li, J. Ma, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 7671 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Thyveetil, P. V. Coveney, H. C. Greenwell and J. L. Suter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4742 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Cygan, J. A. Greathouse, H. Heinz and A. G. Kalinichev, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2470 RSC .

  (a) C. Cheng, B. Liu, E. J. Sie, W. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Gong, C. H. A. Huan, T. C. Sum, H. Sun and H. J. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19886 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Goldberg, L. I. Deych, A. A. Lisyansky1, Z. Shi, V. M. Menon, V. Tokranov, M. Yakimov and S. Oktyabrsky, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 662 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Y. Xie, J. Feng, J. S. Huang, S. Y. Liu, Y. Wang and J. C. Shen, Synth. Met., 2000, 108, 81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. J. Park, W. S. Jeon, J. W. Choi, R. Pode, J. Jang and J. H. Kwon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 103303 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Dongpeng Yan	Dongpeng Yan obtained his BS degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2007, and then continued his postgraduate study under the supervision of Prof. Xue Duan in the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering at BUCT. In 2010, as a visiting student, he studied at Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge on the synthesis of functional organic crystal under the supervision of Prof. William Jones. His main research topic is the experimental and computer simulation on the ordered assembly of photofunctional anions intercalated layered double hydroxides. He was awarded a “talent model” Award among the Universities in Beijing in 2010.
Jun Lu	Jun Lu was awarded the B Sc degree and the PhD at the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1998 and 2004, respectively. He worked as the research associate at the Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong University from 2005 to 2007. He was appointed as the vice professor of State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resources Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2007 and promoted to a professor in 2011. In 1998, he was granted the Guo Moruo Scholarship, the highest prize for USTC undergraduates. His research interests focus on the optical functionalization of the intercalation materials and catalysis properties of noble metal nanocrystals.
Min Wei	Min Wei obtained her BEng degree in 1995 and MEng degree in 1998 from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She subsequently received her PhD from Peking University in 2001, after which she joined the staff of BUCT. She was promoted to a full professor in 2005. She has been a visiting scholar in the Georgia Institute of Technology (in 2008). Her research interests focus on inorganic–organic composite functional materials as well as new catalysts.
David G. Evans	David G. Evans studied as both undergraduate and research student at Jesus College, Oxford and obtained a DPhil under the supervision of Prof. D. M. P. Mingos FRS. After postdoctoral work at Bristol University with Prof. F. G. A. Stone FRS, he was appointed as a lectureship at Exeter University in 1985. Several visits to Chinese university chemistry departments in the early 1990s convinced him of China's great potential for development in this area and he moved to Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 1996. His research interests focus on intercalation in layered solids. He was awarded an International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Award of the People's Republic of China in 2005.
Xue Duan	Xue Duan was elected as an Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. He was awarded his BS degree from Jilin University and MS and PhD degrees from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He was subsequently appointed as the staff of BUCT and established the Applied Chemistry Research Institute in 1990. He was promoted to an assistant professor in 1990 and to a full professor in 1993 and to PhD supervisor status in 1995. He is currently a Director of the Institute of Applied Chemistry and an Executive Vice-Chair of the Academic Committee of the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering. He has been awarded the title of a Changjiang Foundation Professor and a National Outstanding Young Scholar and has received numerous other awards.

 	Fig. 1  A typical 3R structure of Mg2Al–Cl LDH. Green balls = Cl−, red sticks = O in water or OH, white sticks = H in water or OH, pink sticks = Al, green sticks = Mg.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoemission spectra of SRB–DBS/LDH with an excitation wavelength of 360 nm. The inset plot shows the variation in fluorescence intensity and the maximum emission wavelength with increasing SRB content in the SRB–DBS/LDH(x%): (a) 0.99%, (b) 1.96%, (c) 4.76%, (d) 7.41%, (e) 9.09%, (f) 16.67%, (g) 25.0%, (h) 50.0%, (i) 75.0%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © American Chemical Society, 2009.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photographs under 365 nm UV irradiation of (a) ZQS; DDS–ZQS(x%)/Mg2Al–LDH with x = (b) 5, (c) 10, (d) 40, and (e) 100. Reprinted from ref. 18a, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of the LDH films with the ab-faces parallel to the substrate, which is assembled from LDH crystallites. (A) Top and (B) side view SEM images of a SRB–DBS/LDH (9.09%) thin film. (C) Photograph of the thin film on a quartz substrate. (D) Tapping-mode AFM image of the film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © American Chemistry Society, 2009.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Photographs of luminescent UTFs with different numbers of bilayers when exposed to UV light (365 nm): (a) [APPP/LDH]n (n = 3–30), (b) [APPV/LDH]n, and (c) [APT/LDH]n (n = 4–32). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34,36 and 37, © Wiley-VCH, 2009, American Chemistry Society, 2010, and Wiley-VCH, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 6  
UV-visible
absorption spectra of (Ru(dpds)3/LDH)n (n = 4–32) UTFs. The inset shows plots of the absorbance at 196, 287 and 471 nm vs. n. Reprinted from ref. 41, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2009.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) In situabsorption spectra of an AO5–LDH film during heating in the temperature range 35–65 °C. (B) The correlation between the absorbance of the band at 445 nm and temperature over a complete heating–cooling cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53a, © American Chemistry Society, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current density/voltage (J/V) curves of LDH–AQS and pristine AQS-sensitized cells under standard AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination. The pixel area of the devices was 0.15 cm2, and the thickness of the TiO2 film was 10 mm. The J/V curves were obtained after 3 h of light soaking. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, © Wiley-VCH, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 9  Snapshots of the simulation for benzocarbazole intercalated MgAl–LDH of (A) model A and (B) model B. The van der Waals volume of the interlayer benzocarbazole anion is depicted in green. Reprinted from ref. 15, © Royal Society of Chemistry, 2009.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HOMO and (b) LUMO profiles for the APPP/LDH UTFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, © Wiley-VCH, 2009.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
