Recent progress in reducing voltage loss in organic photovoltaic cells  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00581A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00581A
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 709-722Recent progress in reducing voltage loss in organic photovoltaic cells

        
          
            Jingwen 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Huifeng 
            Yao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lijiao 
            Ma
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Jianhui 
            Hou
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, CAS Research/Education Center for Excellence in Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: yaohf@iccas.ac.cn; hjhzlz@iccas.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      9th August 2020
    , Accepted 13th October 2020First published on 14th October 2020AbstractCompared with inorganic or perovskite photovoltaic cells, organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells often exhibit larger voltage losses, which hinders improvements in their efficiency. The unwanted voltage losses are mainly caused by the driving force for charge generation and non-radiative recombination. In recent years, with the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), the voltage losses of OPV cells have been significantly suppressed, contributing to a boost in efficiency. Two aspects help to decrease voltage loss: (1) many OPV cells based on NFAs possess high-efficiency charge generation under aligned energy levels between the donor and acceptor, almost eliminating the driving forces in charge generation; (2) the illumination efficiencies of active layer blends containing NFAs are vastly improved, thus decreasing the non-radiative recombination loss. In this review, we summarize the recent progress achieved in the reduction of voltage losses in OPV cells. First, we present a brief background of voltage loss in different types of photovoltaic cells. Second, we discuss the latest research results, such as the charge generation mechanism under low donor–acceptor energy offsets and how non-radiative loss can be suppressed via tuning the charge transfer state. Finally, we provide insight into the design of highly efficient OPV materials that may be achieved via further decreases in voltage loss.
1. Introduction
Organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), which are composed of active organic layers capable of converting sunlight to electricity, have attracted great attention in the academic and industrial communities due to their advantages such as light-weight, low-cost and flexibility.1–5 The solution-processable property6 of OPVs provides several unique methods to achieve mass production, such as roll-to-roll printing,7,8 slot-die9 and blade-coating,10 which is beneficial for its commercialization. With the development of various materials,11,12 and device engineering,13,14 the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OPVs have been boosted to over 17%,15–19 demonstrating great potential for practical applications in the near future. In order to increase the competitiveness of OPVs compared to other photovoltaic technologies such as traditional inorganic silicon cells and emerging organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite cells, further improvement in the PCEs of OPVs is an important undertaking.20
Reducing voltage losses in OPVs is the key to improving the achievable efficiency limit.21,22 Some theoretical results based on Shockley–Queisser limit showed that the PCEs of OPVs will be boosted to 21% if voltage losses are lower than 0.4 V.1,18 The large voltage losses in OPVs mainly arise from two aspects. First, the photo-excitation of organic semiconductors forms localized Frenkel-type excitons, which have strong coulombic binding energies (generally around 500 meV),23,24 and therefore charge separation requires extra energy.25 To solve this problem, bulk heterojunctions (BHJs), consisting of electron donors and acceptors that form bi-continuous interpenetrating networks, were introduced by Yu et al. in the 1990s.26 A large energy offset between donors and acceptors was believed to provide the necessary driving force to promote the charge separation efficiencies, which resulted in large energy losses.27,28 Second, as organic active layers have less ordered intermolecular packing, they suffer from considerably more severe non-radiative recombination.29–31 Besides, light intensity also has an effect on open circuit voltage.32 In order to compare voltage loss of different material combinations equally, all the analysis of voltage loss in this review is under the condition of one sun illumination.
The reduction of voltage losses in OPVs is closely related to progress in the development of active layer materials. In many early studies, fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM (phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) were the most common electron acceptors used in the fabrication of OPVs.33,34 As the driving forces and non-radiative recombination are relatively large, the voltage losses of the best fullerene-based OPVs are ∼0.6 V,2,11 therefore limiting the PCEs to around 11–12%.28 Since 2015, voltage losses have significantly decreased alongside the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors. Many novel non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) were designed to get rid of the limitation of fullerene derivatives.35,36 The introduction of different functional groups, such as methyl, halogen atoms, alkoxy and alkylthio groups, is proved to be a viable way to tune the energy levels of NFAs.37–39 As well as possessing efficient charge generation under aligned donor–acceptor energy levels,40 these NFA OPVs also demonstrate significant improvement in illumination efficiency,41 suggesting that non-radiative recombination is significantly suppressed. NFAs with higher lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels are expected to yield higher open-circuit voltages (VOCs) in the corresponding devices. At present, voltage losses in cutting-edge OPVs are around 0.55 eV;15,16,42 therefore, there is significant room for improvement compared to rival photovoltaic technologies.
This review begins with an introduction of voltage losses in typical photovoltaic technologies. Then, we discuss how voltage losses can be reduced via modulating the donor–acceptor energy level alignment and decreasing non-radiative recombination. Finally, we present our insight into the connection between voltage loss and molecular design, and provide guidelines aimed at improving the design of OPV materials.
2. Voltage losses in typical photovoltaic cells
In this section, we introduce some concepts related to voltage losses, such as band gap (Eg), driving force and non-radiative recombination. Characterization methods to determine Eg will also be mentioned. Specifically, voltage losses in OPVs and inorganic photovoltaic cells are compared.
2.1 Optical gap extraction methods
Voltage loss is defined as Vloss = Eg/q − VOC, where Eg is the band gap, VOC is the open-circuit voltage, and q is the elementary charge. There are different methods to determine the optical gap, Eg, and the values extracted are not always identical. Therefore, it is vital to identify the Eg using a standard method with good repeatability when comparing the voltage losses, Vlosss, of different systems. As depicted in Fig. 1a, the Eonsetg is determined by the intersection of the tangent of low energy absorption tail and the abscissa axis. It is one of the most commonly used optical gaps as is simple to obtain.38,43,44 For an ideal solar cell with a step-wise absorption spectrum, there is no uncertainty in the determination of Eonsetg. However, for an actual solar cell, choice of the tangent of the absorption tail is subjective in several situations, especially for a non-linear absorption tail, which results in inaccurate determination of Eonsetg.45,46
 Fig. 1  Methods used to determine (a) Eonsetg and (b) Einterg. (c) Diagram of the energy of the ground state, the lowest excited state and charge transfer state as a function of a generalized coordinate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Using the point at which the normalized absorption and emission spectra cross to extract Einterg is the preferred method.47,48Fig. 1c shows typical optical transitions of the ground state and excited state. According to the Franck–Condon principle, during an electronic transition (absorption or emission process), the position of the atomic nucleus in the molecular entity and its environment will remain unchanged.49,50 In other words, a vertical transition occurs between the ground state and excited state. A relaxation process will occur after the vertical transition of absorption or emission with relaxed energy λabs or λfl. The transition energy for the absorption and emission processes can be given as Emax,abs = E0–0 + λabs and Emax,fl = E0–0 − λfl, where Emax,abs and Emax,fl are the energy at the absorption peak and emission peak, respectively. E0–0 is the adiabatic transition energy, which corresponds to the optical gap Einterg of the material. When the absorption spectrum displays mirror symmetry with the emission spectrum (suitable for most organic semiconductors), the relaxed energies are almost equal.47 Then, the energy at the intersection of the normalized absorption and emission spectra is the exact Einterg value. This method of determining the optical gap is precise and reproducible. Therefore, we recommend the use of Einterg rather than Eonsetg, in order to provide comparable voltage loss values.
2.2 Voltage losses in silicon photovoltaic cells and OPVs
According to the detailed balance theory, the voltage loss of photovoltaic cells can be divided into three parts:40,51 (1)VSQOC is the maximum voltage according to the Shockley–Queisser limit (where EQE is assumed to be 1 above Eg and 0 below the Eg),52 while VradOC is the voltage attainable when there is only radiative recombination. ΔVrad,belowgapOC is the voltage loss from additional radiative recombination at absorption below Eg and ΔVnon-radOC is the non-radiative voltage loss.
The first voltage losses in eqn (1) (ΔV1 = Eg/q − VSQOC) result from the mismatch of solar irradiation in a solid angle and omnidirectional blackbody radiation of the absorption above the Eg.1 ΔV1 is inevitable for any photovoltaic cell and only depends on Eg in conditions where irradiation and temperature are stable. The value typically ranges from 0.25 V and 0.3 V. The second term in eqn (1) (ΔV2 = ΔVrad,belowgapOC) is the additional radiative recombination from the absorption below Eg and is the main distinction between OPVs and other photovoltaic technologies.1,51 For perovskite or c-Si photovoltaic cells, this term is almost equal to 0 because of the steep absorption edge and is considered negligible in Fig. 2a and b. For OPVs, in particular fullerene-based OPVs, the existence of a charge transfer (CT) state results in the additional absorption in low energy regions and reduces the maximum voltage attainable.51 In some NFA-based OPVs, because of the negligible energy offset between the CT and singlet states, this term decreases from approximately 0.7 eV to 0.1 eV.40 The last part of eqn (1) (ΔV3 = ΔVnon-radOC = Vnon-radloss) is the voltage loss resulting from non-radiative recombination. This term can be quantified by: (2)where kb is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and EQEEL is the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of electroluminescence (EL).53 The OPVs often show a larger value of Vnon-radloss due to the low EL efficiency compared to inorganic and perovskite photovoltaic technologies.54 Therefore, an excellent OPV device should also perform as an excellent OLED device.
 Fig. 2  Diagram of energy losses in (a) inorganic photovoltaic cells and (b) organic photovoltaic cells. (c) A voltage loss diagram determined by the charge transfer state. Reproduced with permission from (a and b) ref. 58 and (c) ref. 44. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 Elsevier, respectively. 
As the CT state plays an important role in OPVs, another method exists to split the voltage loss by considering the CT state (Fig. 2c).55,56 The value of Vloss can be divided into two parts: the voltage loss caused by charge separation and the voltage loss due to charge recombination. The first part of Vloss is the energy offset ΔECT of Eg and ECT. The Frenkel-type excitons in OPVs are strongly bound electron–hole pairs and historically, ΔECT is considered the driving force of charge generation, which leads to additional voltage loss. The energy level of the CT state is lower than that of the singlet state, thus the CT state is in the low energy region of absorption and the emission spectra of the BHJ blend.57 However, the CT state often shows low absorption coefficient. It is essential to use highly sensitive equipment, such as Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS), to analysis the CT state.58 According to Marcus theory, the absorption of CT state is closely related to its emission.56 As mentioned above, the value of Eg can be determined using the crossing point of the normalized absorption and luminescence spectra. Likewise, the CT state energy can be extracted using the intersection of the reduced EQE and EL spectra in the Marcus theory framework.47,58 The second term of voltage loss (Eg/q − VOC) is the voltage loss arising from charge recombination. Furthermore, it can be divided into two parts: the radiative and non-radiative parts. Up to now, voltage losses caused by charge generation and non-radiative recombination have restricted the progression in the PCEs of OPVs. Therefore, further reduction of voltage losses in OPVs is an urgent requirement.
3. Reduction of voltage losses and the development of small molecular acceptors
In this part, several typical examples are given to show the characteristics of different OPVs. In fullerene acceptor systems, we focus on the discussion on how to reduce ΔECT. In NFAs-based OPVs, we highlight the recent progress in reducing non-radiative voltage losses. Besides, the relationship between ΔECT and Vnon-radloss will be discussed, which is important for further reducing voltage loss.
3.1 Fullerene-based OPVs
Typical fullerene-based systems often exhibit voltage losses between 0.7 and 1 V with a ΔECT value of approximately 0.3 eV.59 The CT state relates to the effective gap between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor.60 Therefore, considerable attention has been focused on increasing ECT by tuning the donor or acceptor frontier molecular orbitals in order to reduce the value of ΔECT.
P3HT and PCBM were the most widely used conjugated polymer donor and acceptor, respectively. However, the low LUMO energy level of PC61BM often results in a VOC value below 0.6 V and thus restricts increases in PCEs.61,62 Li et al. designed a fullerene derivate named ICBA.63 The LUMO energy level of ICBA increased by 0.17 eV; thus, the P3HT/ICBA-based device had a VOC of 0.84 V, which is approximately 0.26 V higher than that of the P3HT/PC61BM-based device. The upshifted LUMO level of the acceptor caused a decrease in the ΔECT value, causing a considerable reduction in the voltage loss. Another example of frontier molecular orbital tuning was reported by Janssen et al.64 A new conjugated polymer, named PF10TBT, was synthesized and the voltage loss of devices based on PF10TBT and several fullerene acceptors was investigated. Benefited from a decreased HOMO energy level and an increase of ECT, this PF10TBT/PC61BM-based device showed a VOC value of 0.42 V higher than that of P3HT/PCBM. By changing the acceptor from PC61BM to ICBA, the value of ΔECT was further decreased and finally the VOC could be increased to 1.173 V. However, too low ΔECT caused a sharp reduction in the value of JSC, consequently the PCE was negatively affected. As a result, the PF10TBT/PC61BM-based device with an ΔECT = 0.18 eV demonstrated the highest PCE, whereas the devices with ΔECT values lower than 0.1 eV exhibited poor performance. Li et al.65 chose four DPP-based conjugated polymers and PC61BM as the donor and acceptor, respectively. Among these devices, the most promising performance achieved was a Vloss of 0.59 V and PCE of 5.6%. This demonstrates the key to reducing ΔECT values in fullerene-based OPVs is maintaining a balance between charge separation and additional voltage losses. In other words, a sufficient driving force and low voltage loss should be obtained simultaneously alongside a medium ΔECT value. An impressive study that achieved this trade-off was done in 2015.66 Takimiya et al. designed a new polymer named PNOz4T. When blended with PC71BM, the devices exhibited a high EQE of over 60% with a low ΔECT of 0.14 eV. According to transient absorption spectroscopy, sufficient charge separation was achieved in the PNOz4T/PC71BM blend. Benefiting from a successful balance of the parameters mentioned previously, the OPVs demonstrated a PCE of 8.9% (Fig. 3a). Although this work demonstrated that sufficient charge separation could be achieved in a fullerene-based OPV alongside a low driving force, most attempts to reduce ΔECT achieve one and lose the other. To date, the most efficient fullerene-based OPVs exhibit ΔECTs between 0.2 and 0.3 eV.2
 Fig. 3  (a) Plots of PCEs against energy loss. (b) Plots of non-radiative recombination against the charge transfer state energy. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 55 and (b) ref. 57. (a) CC BY 4.0 and (b) copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
Except for the chemical substitution, electronic energy levels also can be tuned by controlling the morphology of BHJ active layers.67 Ran et al. has investigated the influence of molecular orientations on energy levels modulation by using planar heterojunction (PHJ) devices with a small molecule donor and a fullerene acceptor.68 The less ordered face-on donor film showed a lower HOMO level and thus the voltage loss was reduced. However, the results based on PHJ devices cannot reveal the real situation of BHJ blend films. A study was carried out by Ma et al. to investigate energy level modulations in BHJ blend films.69 They used UPS to probe the HOMO levels and UPS signals revealed that enhanced crystallinity of polymer donors caused upshifted HOMO levels, which is unfavourable. Meanwhile, the relationship between nanostructures and ECT was also studied by Vandewal and his co-workers.70 Their results showed an increased ECT value with the decrease in crystallinity of donor material. The study of Ran et al. depicted face-on orientation of blend film led to a higher ECT and a reduced driving force.68 As face-on orientation often forms a less ordered film, these two studies have drawn the same conclusion.67 Therefore, based on above studies, reduced crystallinity and improved face-on orientation might be important for reducing voltage loss.
As well as the voltage loss caused by ΔECT, Vnon-radloss should also be taken into consideration. Vandewal et al.71 and Brédas et al.72 both studied Vnon-radloss in fullerene-based OPVs. Based on their results, by decreasing the value of ΔECT, non-radiative recombination could be suppressed (Fig. 3b). However, as mentioned above, at least a medium ΔECT is necessary to support the process of charge generation in highly efficient fullerene-based OPVs. Achieving poor PCEs with an ultra-low Vnon-radloss has little value. Therefore, compared with inorganic photovoltaic cells, typical fullerene-based OPVs often exhibit a large Vnon-radloss of approximately 350 mV. As such, the industrialization of OPV technology seemed a significant challenge. However, around 2015, this situation was eventually changed by the development of NFA-based OPVs.
3.2 Non-fullerene-based OPVs
Fullerene derivatives have been widely used as acceptor materials since 1995, and they have dominated the OPV field for around two decades because of their excellent electron-withdrawing ability and electron mobility.73 However, several intrinsic deficiencies including low absorption in the near-infrared region, limited chemical modification, and large voltage losses, have hindered the improvement of PCEs.74 In the past few years, the rapid development of NFAs has satisfied the demand to replace fullerene derivatives. Currently, the most efficient OPVs are fabricated using NFAs. In the history of the development of NFAs, naphthalene diimides (NDIs) and perylene diimides (PDIs) are the most commonly-used acceptors (Fig. 4).74 A significant breakthrough in PDI-based OPVs was made by Yan et al. in 2016.40 They synthesized a novel polymer donor material named P3TEA, and fabricated devices using a PDI derivate named SF-PDI2. The voltage loss of the devices was studied in detail and a negligible driving force was found in this system. The CT state of the blend was not distinguished from the singlet state of the pure polymer. The ΔECT of this system was estimated to be 0.07 eV. However, transient absorption spectroscopy indicated that a sufficient charge generation process still existed in the blend, resulting in a PCE of 9.5% with a low voltage loss. This work demonstrated that it is feasible to eliminate driving force in NFA-based systems. After a long period of time, the design strategy of the “pull–push” structure in polymer synthesis was introduced to design novel NFAs.73 A major milestone in the development of NFAs is an A–D–A type acceptor known as ITIC.75 In 2016, our group combined ITIC with PBDB-T and investigated the photovoltaic performance.76 The devices showed a high JSC over 16.5 mA cm−2 at a low ΔECT 0.09 eV, which led to a high PCE of 11.21%. This work provided the first example in which NFA-based OPVs with a low ΔECT outperformed fullerene-based OPVs. Subsequently, more and more highly efficient NFA-based systems have achieved sufficient charge separation under a negligible ΔECT. Therefore, Vnon-radloss has become the main contributor toward total voltage loss in NFA-based photovoltaic cells and a further improvements in VOC could be accomplished by reducing Vnon-radloss in OPVs.
Fluorination is one of the most common and efficient methods to tune the chemical properties of NFAs.77 By incorporating F atoms into the end-capping group of ITIC, a novel NFA is produced, named IT-4F.78 In comparison with devices based on IT-M, devices based on IT-4F and PBDB-TF achieved significantly improved PCEs of 13.7%. However, Vnon-radloss of IT-4F-based OPVs is 0.13 V higher than that of IT-M-based OPVs. The introduction of F atoms results in enhancement of the intermolecular packing and thus the aggregation-caused quenching effect leads to an increased Vnon-radloss. Hou et al. reported a new method of suppressing non-radiative recombination by adding a third component.79 A small molecule with a large bandgap called NRM-1 was incorporated into the active layer of PBDB-T/IT-4F. The value of Vnon-radloss was reduced from 0.37 V to 0.32 V by changing the weight ratio of NRM-1 from 0 to 1.5. The reason is that NRM-1 tends to form a phase with IT-4F while it is almost immiscible with the donor, and then NRM-1 could restrain the excessive aggregation of IT-4F. Thus, EQEEL of the blend is increased from 2.0 × 10−7 to 5.0 × 10−6. Furthermore, the NRM-1 molecule was proven to be suitable for many systems and it provides a new pathway to decrease Vnon-radloss.
Organic semiconductors based on benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BT) often exhibit high EQEEL values and are popular in the field of OLEDs.80,81 IDTBR and its derivatives are a kind of important acceptors by using BT units as π bridges.82,83 The devices based on IDTBR derivatives often shows lower Vnon-radlosss than ITIC-based devices.84 Zhou et al. have done a lot of work about IDTBR derivatives.85–87 By changing BT unit with benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole (BTA) unit, they got a new acceptor named BTA1.85 Due to the weaker electron-withdrawing property of BTA, BTA1 shows a higher LUMO level than IDTBR. When combine it with P3HT, the devices showed a VOC of 1.02 V, which is around 0.3 V higher than IDTBR-based devices. After that, the same group has investigated the influence of end groups on VOC. They designed a new NFAs named BTA2, which has a different end group with BTA1.86 Compared with BTA1, the LUMO level of BTA2 was upshifted to −3.38 eV. A super high VOC of 1.22 V was obtained by using BTA2 and P3HT as BHJ materials. Very recently, they have investigated the voltage loss of BTA-based devices in detail.87 By changing the end group, they obtained a new acceptor named BTA3 with a low LUMO energy level. They chose four different conjugated polymers as donor materials. Both chlorinated polymer-based devices showed ultra-high VOCs of 1.29 V and quite low Vnon-radloss of around 0.15 V. These results demonstrate that the use of BT units in NFAs (IDTBR series) may be an effective way to reduce Vnon-radloss.
In order to further discover the potential of BT units in OPVs, Zou et al. introduced the BT unit into the fused center of a NFA to produce a novel acceptor named Y6.37 Compared to IT-4F, Y6 exhibited a wide and red-shifted absorption spectrum, demonstrating an increase of photon utilization. Although the PBDB-TF/Y6-based device has a slightly lower VOC than that of PBDB-TF/IT-4F-based device, the Y6-based device achieved a higher PCE of 15.7% with the help of an excellent JSC. Moreover, incorporation of BT unit increases the EQEEL value of the blend. Thus, the calculated Vnon-radloss of the Y6-based device is 0.14 V lower than that of the IT-4F-based device. Despite the low Vnon-radloss value achieved for the PBDB-TF/Y6 blend, we hypothesized whether the value of Vnon-radloss could be further decreased. Therefore, our group investigated the influence of replacing F atoms with Cl atoms in the end group of Y6.88 The chlorination caused a downshift in the HOMO (by 30 meV) and LUMO (by 100 meV), which resulted in a narrower bandgap. However, surprisingly, we found that the chlorinated acceptor-based devices, BTP-4Cl, achieved higher VOC values of 0.867 V compared to the Y6-based devices (0.834 V). A detailed analysis of Vloss demonstrates that the EQEEL of BTP-4Cl-containing blend is much higher and thus Vnon-radloss was reduced by 24 meV. However, the mechanism of the chlorination effect on the reduction in the value of Vnon-radloss requires further investigation.77 Furthermore, more efficient non-radiative recombination suppression methods should be proposed with a deeper understanding of Vnon-radloss in NFA-based OPVs.
 Fig. 4  Chemical structures of the electron donors and acceptors discussed in this review. 
3.3 Relationship Between ΔECT and Vnon-radloss
Vandewal et al.71 studied the application of a large number of materials in various combinations in fullerene-based OPVs and demonstrated that non-radiative recombination could be suppressed by increasing the CT state. Using the two-state model that contains the CT state and ground state shown in Fig. 5a, they demonstrated that the overlap of these two states decreased with increasing CT state, which reduces the possibility of non-radiative recombination. Gao et al. took the examples of low ΔECT NFA-based systems into consideration and studied the characteristics of non-radiative recombination in these systems.89 They found that the EQEEL values of BHJ blends were almost comparable to those of pristine material blends. Based on their calculations, they proposed that the rate of CT state back transfer to LE state is rapid due to a small ΔECT value, thus the emission properties could be significantly enhanced depending on the borrowing mechanism. Finally, a low Vnon-radloss value was accomplished in highly efficient NFA-based OPVs. However, the relationship between ΔECT and Vnon-radloss is not clear in NFA-based OPVs.
 Fig. 5  (a) The two-state model and (b) the three-state model to explain the relationship between high CT state energy and reduced non-radiative voltage loss. (c) EQE and EL spectrum of the blends of pure acceptor C8-ITIC and its combinations with different donors. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 56 and (b and c) ref. 70. Copyright (2015) Springer Nature and copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Nelson et al. designed a series of conjugated donor–polymer materials with different frontier molecular orbitals and investigated the voltage losses in OPVs based on different material combinations.90 They proposed that, in the low ΔECT NFA-based OPVs the CT state is hybridized with the local exciton (LE) state. In order to prove this hypothesis, they synthesized three PBDB-T congers with similar bandgaps but different HOMO energy levels. By increasing the number of incorporated F atoms, the HOMO was decreased from −5.33 eV (D-0F) to −5.46 eV (D-2F) and −5.63 eV (D-4F). After blending with the same acceptor, EQE and EL measurements were performed to investigate the effect of the altered HOMO levels of the different polymers on the CT state. As shown in Fig. 5c, in systems based on C8-ITIC with low ΔECT values, the sub-band gap absorption and emission represent the CT state. For blends based on D-0F, the EL spectrum exhibited a clear CT state. However, the D-2F and D-4F systems exhibited blue-shifted and an absence of CT state absorptions, respectively. This phenomenon demonstrated hybridization of the CT and LE states occurs in systems with low ΔECT. Next, they studied the influence of this hybridization on device performance using a three-state model, as shown in Fig. 5b. According to complicated calculations, a decrease in the ΔECT increases electronic coupling between the CT state and the singlet state, which means the hybridization of these two states. Finally, both the decrease in ΔECT and the increased hybridization result in an enhanced CT-to-ground state oscillator strength. However, when the coupling of two states with particular ΔECT values is increased, the radiative recombination rate clearly increases, which may result in low JSC and FF in D-4F-based devices; therefore, modest electronic coupling of two states will lead to the best PCEs. Gao et al. proposed two key factors to accomplish highly efficient OPVs: (1) a low energy offset between the donor and acceptor materials; (2) highly luminescent low bandgap materials.89 When considering hybridization, another key factor should be adopted: modest electronic coupling between the singlet and CT states.
4. ESP modulation: a potential molecular design strategy to reduce voltage loss
In the era of fullerene-based OPVs, the energy offset ΔECT is believed to be the driving force for charge generation. To separate free carriers efficiently, at least a medium ΔECT is necessary for fullerene-based systems. However, negligible ΔECT and high EQE could be obtained at the same time in high-efficiency NFA-based OPVs. The mechanism of this unique phenomenon is still under exploration. Thus, the concept of electrostatic potential (ESP) is introduced to explain this phenomenon. The molecular ESP is a real physical property of the molecular surface.91 When a molecule gets close to another molecule, their ESP and electron density will be influenced by each other,92 which may significantly affect the behavior of excitons. As such, we investigated the influence of ESP in the field of OPV in detail. In this section, some fundamental concepts, such as ESP and IEF, will be explained. Some recent studies about the impacts of ESP on charge separation and hybridization of CT and LE states will be discussed. These studies of ESP in OPVs will assist in designing novel materials and reducing voltage loss in NFAs-based OPVs.
4.1 Molecular electrostatic potential
Electrostatic potential (ESP) is produced by the nuclei and electrons within atoms and molecules.93–95 It is widely used to predict electrophilic sites because ESP can provide partial electron density information at some sites.96 As shown in eqn (3), at certain r, ESP can be divided into two parts:91 (3)where ZA is the charge of nuclei A at position RA, ρ(r′) is the electronic density of the molecule and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. As a derivate of the coulombic potential of a point charge, ESP(r) describes the interaction energy of a proton at position r with a molecule.97 The first part of the equation is the contribution of a positively charged nuclei to the ESP(r), while ρ(r′) is used to describe the effect of electrons. At any point, a positive or negative ESP(r) value mainly depends on whether the dominant effect arises from nuclei or electrons.91 The regions of negative ESP often have one of these three features:96 (1) electronegative atoms or groups (O, F, Cl, –NO2, etc.); (2) unsaturated systems with π electrons; (3) strained C–C bonds, while the positive ESP positions are often located near to the nuclei region. As such, this tool could be used to predict nucleophilic (positive position) and electrophilic reaction (negative position) sites.91 Furthermore, some non-covalent interactions are electrostatic interactions in nature. For example, in an H2O molecule, the ESP of O atom is negative due to its electronegativity and the ESP of H atom is always positive.96 Thus, electrostatic interaction between H atoms and O atoms of different molecules induces the formation of hydrogen bonds.
Intermolecular interaction widely exists in OPVs at the donor and acceptor molecule interface and is also due to electrostatic interactions. However, the study of ESP in OPV lags behind the rapid development of materials. Some research performed by our group illustrated the importance of ESP on the charge separation process and voltage loss reduction, and has attracted considerable attention.93,98,99 Specific examples will be discussed in the next two sections and we hope that these studies inspire more scientists to investigate the effect of ESP in OPV further.
4.2 Intermolecular electrostatic field (IEF) to drive charge separation at low ΔECT
The EQE of BHJ blends used to be extremely low when ΔECT is negligible in fullerene systems. However, this appears to be different in highly efficient NFA-based OPVs. Sufficient charge generation at low ΔECT enables these systems to achieve high PCEs;42,100 however, in the meantime, the mechanism behind charge separation has been focused on as a research question and placed in the spotlight. The existing theories focusing on fullerene-based OPVs are not suitable for NFA-based OPVs and the investigation of many more theories is requried.101,102 Our group has proposed that, IEF induced by different ESP values of donor and acceptor molecules facilitates charge separation in NFA-based OPVs.95 Several studies have been carried out to verify this theory.
An impressive study investigating the effect of ESP on charge separation was carried out by Yao et al., where PTO2 and IT-4F were combined.93 van der Waals surfaces (electron density isosurfaces of 0.001 a.u.) reflect the actual features of the molecule. Next, the ESP of PTO2 and IT-4F on their van der Waals surfaces was calculated (Fig. 6a). For donor materials PTO2, most of the conjugated backbone exhibited negative ESP values, especially in the BDT unit regions that contain a large number of aromatic rings with π electrons. IT-4F exhibited positive ESP values on most of its conjugated surfaces due to the presence of strong electron-withdrawing atoms and groups. The interaction energy between the two molecules was calculated to investigate the electrostatic attraction (Fig. 6b and c). The interaction energy is lowest when the IT-4F terminal groups with positive ESP values were packed onto the BDT units of PTO2. For comparison, the combination of PTO2/PCBM demonstrated a lower interaction energy due to the much lower ESP values of PCBM. The effect of different IEF on charge generation is investigated by calculating the charge density distribution of the lowest excited state of the two dimers with the lowest interaction energy. As shown in Fig. 6d, for PTO2/IT-4F, part of the hole density is located at the donor PTO2, which suggests that the charge transfer process occurs after the excitation of IT-4F. Whereas for PTO2/PCBM, the electron and hole densities are distributed entirely on PCBM. This difference may result from the IEF of different material combinations. The greater difference in ESP between PTO2 and IT-4F induces a stronger IEF, which drives the hole transfer to PTO2. The addition of an electric field to these two systems may provide crucial evidence. An electric field of 0.0025 a.u. is necessary for complete charge transfer in the PTO2/PCBM system. For PTO2/IT-4F, because of the stronger IEF, only a weak electric field of 0.0005 a.u. is required to transfer the hole to the donor molecule. The PTO2/PCBM system exhibited a modest PCE of 5.0% with a maximum EQE of 58%, which illustrated the insufficient charge separation process. In contrast, with the help of a stronger IEF, the PTO2/IT-4F-based device showed a maximum EQE of 87%, a high VOC of 0.91 V, and thus an excellent PCE of 14.7% with a negligible ΔECT.
 Fig. 6  (a) ESP distribution of PTO2, IT-4F and PCBM. The intermolecular binding energies between donor and acceptors (b) parallel to the donor backbone and (c) vertical with the backbone. (d) The hole/electron distributions of the lowest excited state between donor and acceptors without/with an additional electronic field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
In addition, many studies have verified the influence of ESP differences on charge separation in OPVs. For example, a larger difference in ESP between the end group of the acceptor and donor backbone facilitates exciton dissociation and increases the JSC.98 In NFA-based OPVs, when the traditional driving force ΔECT is low, the stronger IEF induced by the difference in ESP between the donor and acceptor may assist the dissociation of excitons without additional voltage losses, which leads to higher PCEs. As such, ESP tuning should be considered as a strategy for the design of novel OPV materials, which will support the improvement of VOC and hence the PCEs of OPVs.
4.3 Influence of ESP on hybridization tuning of CT and LE states
Currently, reducing Vnon-radloss has become the most effective way to further boost the PCEs of OPVs. As we already know, in the low ΔECT system, the CT state is hybridized with the LE state90 and the hybridization might be related to a reduction in Vnon-radloss. Therefore, it is essential to study the effect of different CT ratios in this hybridization on Vnon-radloss.
However, few reports focus on tuning the CT state ratio. In the research of CT compounds, it has been shown that the degree of charge transfer can be regulated by tuning the intermolecular interaction between donor and acceptor.103 As ESP is associated with intermolecular interactions in OPV materials, tuning ESP appears an effective route to tune the interactions and thus influence the CT state ratio in its hybridization with the LE state. Inspired by this, Xu et al. established the relationship between chemical structure and intermolecular interaction, and explored the effect of hybridization tuning on the performance of OPVs by tuning ESP.99 To begin with, they chose 3T and IC-XF (X = 0, 1, 2, 3) as the donor and acceptor to investigate how ESP influences intermolecular interaction. When F atoms were used to replace H atoms on the benzene ring, the ESP of IC-XF displayed much more positive values due to the electron-withdrawing properties of F atoms. Next, quantum calculation was carried out to study the interaction between 3T and IC-XF. Fig. 7b shows that the interaction energies gradually decreased in the presence of more F atoms, which is due to a greater difference in ESP. The results of optical experiments, such as IR, UV-vis and PL spectra, implied that the enhanced ESP difference leads to the stronger interactions between donor and acceptor. Therefore, the relationship between molecular structure and interaction has been established through the medium of ESP.
 Fig. 7  (a) ESP distributions of 3T and IC-XF. (b) Calculated intermolecular binding energies between 3T and IC-XF. (c) CT ratio and oscillator strength of PBDB-TF: BTP-XF. (d) Packing distances and interaction energies between PBDB-TF and BTP-XF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
Next, the relationship established using simple compounds was used to study systems containing OPV materials. Four NFAs BTP-XF (X = 0, 2, 4, 6) were synthesized by using IC-XF as the terminal group and a typical polymer donor PBDB-TF was combined with these NFAs. The interaction binding energy between PBDB-TF and BTP-XF was calculated using the former quantum calculation method. As shown in Fig. 7d, with an increase in the number of F atoms introduced on the acceptor end groups, the vertical stacking distance with the lowest energies decreased as well as the binding energy between donor and acceptor; both demonstrate the interaction was enhanced when more F atoms were introduced into BTP-XF. Except for the intermolecular interaction, differences in ESP also influence photovoltaic performance. Devices based on PBDB-TF and BTP-XF were fabricated and investigated; the increase in F atoms decreased the VOC of the BTP-XF based devices. The BTP-6F based devices displayed the lowest voltage of 0.81 V, which is 0.15 V lower than the highest. An increase in F atoms tended to increase the value of JSC. The JSCs of devices based on BTP-0F, BTP-2F, BTP-4F, BTP-6F are 15.2, 22.1, 25.3, 25.9 mA cm−2, respectively. To explore these phenomena, quantum calculations were carried out to survey the lowest excited states of different the combinations. The charge distribution in Fig. 7c shows some hole density extended to the surface of the donor in all four combinations, which demonstrated the lowest excited states of all combinations are the hybridized states of the CT and LE states. However, the ratio of CT state in hybridization varies substantially between combinations. When changing the system from PBDB-TF/BTP-0F to PBDB-TF/BTP-6F, the CT ratio in the hybridization gradually increased with an increasing ESP difference, resulting in more efficient charge separation. Whereas for the calculated oscillator strength, it decreased with the increase in CT ratio. The EQEEL value results that were obtained also prove this point. From PBDB-TF/BTP-0F to PBDB-TF/BTP-6F, the EQEEL decreased, which demonstrated the largest Vnon-radloss observed in a PBDB-TF/BTP-6F system and thus the lowest VOC. The above results illustrated that the difference in ESP has an effect on the CT and LE state hybridization, and then influences the PCE of OPVs. Based on these findings, the moderate ESP difference in PBDB-TF/BTP-4F accomplished a balance between efficient charge separation and low non-radiative voltage loss, which resulted in a high PCE of 16.7%.
The relationship between chemical structure and intermolecular interaction may be established by considering molecular ESP. A large difference in ESP increases the CT state ratio when hybridized with the LE state, which facilitates charge separation but increases non-radiative recombination. Regulation of ESP difference via chemical modification appears to be a rational method for tuning hybridization of the CT and LE states to obtain higher PCEs.
5. Conclusions
In summary, in the past few years substantial progress has been made in the field of OPVs as a result of the development of polymer donors and small molecular acceptors. The arising of NFAs has significantly decreased the radiative voltage loss, but in the meantime has triggered important questions about charge generation mechanisms within these systems. A significant amount of effort has been devoted to studying the underlying mechanism of sufficient charge separation.68,93,104 The ESP concept has been successfully introduced in the field of OPVs, and the induced IEF by ESP difference is believed to be the new driving force. With further investigation, ESP could reduce the non-radiative voltage loss by hybridization tuning of the CT and LE state ratio, which demonstrates the importance of ESP in the field of OPVs.
At present, the PCEs of OPVs still lag behind those of inorganic photovoltaic cells, which suggests that there is considerable room for improvement via the design of more donor and acceptor materials. Based on the above understandings, two key factors should be met: (1) the energy offset between donor and acceptor should be minimized; (2) the electroluminescence efficiency of the lower bandgap material should be maximized. To achieve this goal, careful moderation of the ESP of donor and acceptor molecules is essential to coordinate the trade-off between charge separation and non-radiative recombination. By taking these factors into consideration, PCEs of 20% are expected to be accomplished in the near future.105 As well as PCEs, many challenges remain in terms of the practical application of OPVs. For example, careful attention should be paid to the cost of state-of-the-art materials and device stability. Fortunately, a number of attempts and significant progress have been made in an effort to solve these problems.106,107 Therefore, we are optimistic that with the efforts of scientists all over the world, there is a bright future for OPVs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, and the Basic and Applied Basic Research Major Program of Guangdong Province (2019B030302007). JH thanks the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 21835006, 51673201, 51961165102, and 51961135103). HY would like to thank the financial support from the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS (No. 2018043) and the NSFC (21805287 and 22075301). This work was also supported by the Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS-CXXM-201903).
Notes and references
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Organic solar cells based on non-fullerene acceptors, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Polymer solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Heeger, 25th Anniversary Article: Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Understanding the Mechanism of Operation, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Low-Bandgap Near-IR Conjugated Polymers/Molecules for Organic Electronics, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12633–12665 CrossRef CAS .
I. Olle, Organic Photovoltaics over Three Decades, Adv. Mater., 2018, 0, 1800388 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Xu, Y. Cui, M. Sun and J. Hou, High-performance fullerene-free polymer solar cells with solution-processed conjugated polymers as anode interfacial layer, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 35, 219–229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Zou, H. Li, K. Lu, W. Yan and Z. Wei, Large-area, flexible polymer solar cell based on silver nanowires as transparent electrode by roll-to-roll printing, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 35, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, R. Peng, W. Song, J. Zhang, J. Huang, L. Zhu and Z. Ge, Optimization of Ethylene Glycol Doped PEDOT:PSS Transparent Electrodes for Flexible Organic Solar Cells by Drop-coating Method, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, H. B. Naveed, B. Lin, X. Zhou, J. Yuan, K. Zhou, H. Wu, R. Guo, M. A. Scheel, A. Chumakov, S. V. Roth, Z. Tang, P. Müller-Buschbaum and W. Ma, Hot Hydrocarbon-Solvent Slot-Die Coating Enables High-Efficiency Organic Solar Cells with Temperature-Dependent Aggregation Behavior, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Tang, B. Lin, K. Xian, B. Gao, C. An, P. Bi, W. Ma and J. Hou, Organic photovoltaic cell with 17% efficiency and superior processability, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1239–1246 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Material insights and challenges for non-fullerene organic solar cells based on small molecular acceptors, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, X. Du, F. Liu, W. Zhong, L. Ying, R. Xie, X. Tang, K. An, J. Xin, N. Li, W. Ma, C. J. Brabec, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Fine-tuning of the chemical structure of photoactive materials for highly efficient organic photovoltaics, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1051–1058 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Liu, T. Meng, C. Yi and X. Gong, Inverted organic photovoltaic cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2937–2975 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Efficient tandem polymer solar cells fabricated by all-solution processing, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Single-Junction Organic Photovoltaic Cells with Approaching 18% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Tang, B. Lin, K. Xian, B. Gao, C. An, P. Bi, W. Ma and J. Hou, 17% efficiency organic photovoltaic cell with superior processability, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 7, 1239–1246 CrossRef .
L. Zhan, S. Li, T.-K. Lau, Y. Cui, X. Lu, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, H. Li, J. Hou and H. Chen, Over 17% efficiency ternary organic solar cells enabled by two non-fullerene acceptors working in an alloy-like model, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 635–645 RSC .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Solar cell efficiency tables (Version 55), Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 28, 3–15 Search PubMed .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Organic and solution-processed tandem solar cells with 17.3% efficiency, Science, 2018, 361, 1094 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Yao and J. Hou, Recent Advances in Fullerene-free Polymer Solar Cells: Materials and Devices, Chin. J. Chem., 2019, 37, 207–215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, L. Xu, X. Hao and K. Gao, Energy Loss in Organic Solar Cells: Mechanisms, Strategies, and Prospects, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000130 CrossRef .
C. An, Z. Zheng and J. Hou, Recent progress in wide bandgap conjugated polymer donors for high-performance nonfullerene organic photovoltaics, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4750–4760 RSC .
S. N. Hood and I. Kassal, Entropy and Disorder Enable Charge Separation in Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4495–4500 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Charge Photogeneration in Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Molecular semiconductors in organic photovoltaic cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Polymer Photovoltaic Cells: Enhanced Efficiencies via a Network of Internal Donor-Acceptor Heterojunctions, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Aggregation and morphology control enables multiple cases of high-efficiency polymer solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Efficient organic solar cells processed from hydrocarbon solvents, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Relationship between energetic disorder and open-circuit voltage in bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, Open-circuit voltage limit caused by recombination through tail states in bulk heterojunction polymer-fullerene solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 113301 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, H. Yao, L. Ma, J. Wang and J. Hou, Efficient charge generation at low energy losses in organic solar cells:
a key issue review, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2020, 83, 082601 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Bergqvist, H. Yao, Y. Xu, B. Gao, C. Yang, S. Zhang, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Wide-gap non-fullerene acceptor enabling high-performance organic photovoltaic cells for indoor applications, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 768–775 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Organic photovoltaics - Polymer-fullerene composite solar cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. J. Jia and S. P. Williams, Polymer-Fullerene Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839–3856 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, Y. Wang, P. Cheng, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Acceptor–Donor–Acceptor Small Molecules Based on Indacenodithiophene for Efficient Organic Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8426–8433 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liang, K. Sun, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, G. Gao, X. Meng, Z. Wang, W. Ma and J. Hou, Perylene Diimide Trimers Based Bulk Heterojunction Organic Solar Cells with Efficiency over 7%, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600060 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Single-Junction Organic Solar Cell with over 15% Efficiency Using Fused-Ring Acceptor with Electron-Deficient Core, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Chen, Y. Qin, R. Yu, Y. Cui, B. Yang, S. Li, K. Zhang and J. Hou, Design and Synthesis of a Low Bandgap Small Molecule Acceptor for Efficient Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8283–8287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, H. Zhang, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Dialkylthio Substitution: An Effective Method to Modulate the Molecular Energy Levels of 2D-BDT Photovoltaic Polymers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3575–3583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganäs, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Fast charge separation in a non-fullerene organic solar cell with a small driving force, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, H. Yao, Y. Cui, L. Hong, C. He and J. Hou, Improved Charge Transport and Reduced Nonradiative Energy Loss Enable Over 16% Efficiency in Ternary Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902302 CrossRef .
S. Li, L. Zhan, C. Sun, H. Zhu, G. Zhou, W. Yang, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, J. Hou, Y. Li and H. Chen, Highly Efficient Fullerene-Free Organic Solar Cells Operate at Near Zero Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital Offsets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3073–3082 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Design, Synthesis, and Photovoltaic Characterization of a Small Molecular Acceptor with an Ultra-Narrow Band Gap, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, Molecular Optimization Enables over 13% Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierschner, J. Cornil and H. J. Egelhaaf, Optical Bandgaps of π-Conjugated Organic Materials at the Polymer Limit: Experiment and Theory, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 173–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Qian, Y. Cui, H. Zhang, J. Hou, K. Vandewal, T. Kirchartz and F. Gao, Optical Gaps of Organic Solar Cells as a Reference for Comparing Voltage Losses, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801352 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, J. Benduhn and V. C. Nikolis, How to determine optical gaps and voltage losses in organic photovoltaic materials, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 538–544 RSC .
V. C. Nikolis, J. Benduhn, F. Holzmueller, F. Piersimoni, M. Lau, O. Zeika, D. Neher, C. Koerner, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Reducing Voltage Losses in Cascade Organic Solar Cells while Maintaining High External Quantum Efficiencies, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700855 CrossRef .
J. Franck and E. G. Dymond, Elementary processes of photochemical reactions, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1926, 21, 536–542 RSC .
E. Condon, A Theory of Intensity Distribution in Band Systems, Phys. Rev., 1926, 28, 1182–1201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, T. Kirchartz, M. S. Vezie, M. A. Faist, W. Gong, Z. He, H. Wu, J. Troughton, T. Watson, D. Bryant and J. Nelson, Quantifying Losses in Open-Circuit Voltage in Solution-Processable Solar Cells, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 014020 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, Detailed Balance Limit of Efficiency of p-n Junction Solar Cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Ross, Some Thermodynamics of Photochemical Systems, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 4590–4593 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, On the origin of the open-circuit voltage of polymer–fullerene solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Menke, N. A. Ran, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Understanding Energy Loss in Organic Solar Cells: Toward a New Efficiency Regime, Joule, 2018, 2, 25–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie and H. Wu, Balancing charge generation and voltage loss toward efficient nonfullerene organic solar cells, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 5, 100048 CrossRef .
K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, Electroluminescence from Charge Transfer States in Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819–11824 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Relating the open-circuit voltage to interface molecular properties of donor:acceptor bulk heterojunction solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125204 CrossRef .
M. Wang, H. Wang, T. Yokoyama, X. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, T.-Q. Nguyen, S. Aramaki and G. C. Bazan, High Open Circuit Voltage in Regioregular Narrow Band Gap Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12576–12579 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. C. R. McGlynn, Energetics of molecular complexes, Chem. Rev., 1958, 58, 1113–1156 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, High-efficiency solution processable polymer photovoltaic cells by self-organization of polymer blends, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, A strong regioregularity effect in self-organizing conjugated polymer films and high-efficiency polythiophene:fullerene solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, Indene–C60 Bisadduct: A New Acceptor for High-Performance Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Nuzzo, G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, R. K. M. Bouwer, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and R. A. J. Janssen, Simultaneous Open-Circuit Voltage Enhancement and Short-Circuit Current Loss in Polymer: Fullerene Solar Cells Correlated by Reduced Quantum Efficiency for Photoinduced Electron Transfer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. H. Hendriks, A. Furlan, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, High Quantum Efficiencies in Polymer Solar Cells at Energy Losses below 0.6 eV, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2231–2234 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawashima, Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, I. Osaka and K. Takimiya, High-efficiency polymer solar cells with small photon energy loss, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10085 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Naveed, K. Zhou and W. Ma, Interfacial and Bulk Nanostructures Control Loss of Charges in Organic Solar Cells, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2904–2915 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Ran, S. Roland, J. A. Love, V. Savikhin, C. J. Takacs, Y.-T. Fu, H. Li, V. Coropceanu, X. Liu, J.-L. Brédas, G. C. Bazan, M. F. Toney, D. Neher and T.-Q. Nguyen, Impact of interfacial molecular orientation on radiative recombination and charge generation efficiency, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 79 CrossRef .
S. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, P. C. Y. Chow, Z. Wang, G. Zhang, W. Ma and H. Yan, A Wide-Bandgap Donor Polymer for Highly Efficient Non-fullerene Organic Solar Cells with a Small Voltage Loss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6298–6301 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Graham, G. O. N. Ndjawa, S. M. Conron, R. Munir, K. Vandewal, J. J. Chen, S. Sweetnam, M. E. Thompson, A. Salleo, M. D. McGehee and A. Amassian, The Roles of Structural Order and Intermolecular Interactions in Determining Ionization Energies and Charge-Transfer State Energies in Organic Semiconductors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601211 CrossRef .
J. Benduhn, K. Tvingstedt, F. Piersimoni, S. Ullbrich, Y. Fan, M. Tropiano, K. A. McGarry, O. Zeika, M. K. Riede, C. J. Douglas, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, D. Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Intrinsic non-radiative voltage losses in fullerene-based organic solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17053 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, X.-K. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Zheng and J.-L. Brédas, Charge-transfer electronic states in organic solar cells, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 689–707 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Nonfullerene Acceptor Molecules for Bulk Heterojunction Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, An Electron Acceptor Challenging Fullerenes for Efficient Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Fullerene-Free Polymer Solar Cells with over 11% Efficiency and Excellent Thermal Stability, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, J. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Recent Progress in Chlorinated Organic Photovoltaic Materials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 822–832 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Ye, S. Li, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, A High-Efficiency Organic Solar Cell Enabled by the Strong Intramolecular Electron Push–Pull Effect of the Nonfullerene Acceptor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707170 CrossRef .
Y. Qin, S. Zhang, Y. Xu, L. Ye, Y. Wu, J. Kong, B. Xu, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, Reduced Nonradiative Energy Loss Caused by Aggregation of Nonfullerene Acceptor in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901823 CrossRef .
G. M. Farinola and R. Ragni, Electroluminescent materials for white organic light emitting diodes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3467–3482 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Zhang, T.-K. Lau, G. Zhang, X. Lu, H.-L. Yip, S. K. So, S. Beaupré, M. Mainville, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, H. Chen, H. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Fused Benzothiadiazole: A Building Block for n-Type Organic Acceptor to Achieve High-Performance Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807577 CrossRef .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, C. B. Nielsen, M. Kirkus, J. A. Röhr, C.-H. Tan, E. Collado-Fregoso, A.-C. Knall, J. R. Durrant, J. Nelson and I. McCulloch, A Rhodanine Flanked Nonfullerene Acceptor for Solution-Processed Organic Photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 898–904 CrossRef CAS .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C.-H. Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, High-efficiency and air-stable P3HT-based polymer solar cells with a new non-fullerene acceptor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef CAS .
A. Classen, C. L. Chochos, L. Lüer, V. G. Gregoriou, J. Wortmann, A. Osvet, K. Forberich, I. McCulloch, T. Heumüller and C. J. Brabec, The role of exciton lifetime for charge generation in organic solar cells at negligible energy-level offsets, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 711–719 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, J. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Achievement of High Voc of 1.02 V for P3HT-Based Organic Solar Cell Using a Benzotriazole-Containing Non-Fullerene Acceptor, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602269 CrossRef .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, J. Yang, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, P3HT-Based Photovoltaic Cells with a High Voc of 1.22 V by Using a Benzotriazole-Containing Nonfullerene Acceptor End-Capped with Thiazolidine-2,4-dione, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 410–414 CrossRef CAS .
N. An, Y. Cai, H. Wu, A. Tang, K. Zhang, X. Hao, Z. Ma, Q. Guo, H. S. Ryu, H. Y. Woo, Y. Sun and E. Zhou, Solution-Processed Organic Solar Cells with High Open-Circuit Voltage of 1.3 V and Low Non-Radiative Voltage Loss of 0.16 V, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2002122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Over 16% efficiency organic photovoltaic cells enabled by a chlorinated acceptor with increased open-circuit voltages, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X.-K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, W. M. Chen, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Design rules for minimizing voltage losses in high-efficiency organic solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Eisner, M. Azzouzi, Z. Fei, X. Hou, T. D. Anthopoulos, T. J. S. Dennis, M. Heeney and J. Nelson, Hybridization of Local Exciton and Charge-Transfer States Reduces Nonradiative Voltage Losses in Organic Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6362–6374 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Murray and P. Politzer, The electrostatic potential: an overview, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2011, 1, 153–163 CAS .
J. S. Murray and P. Peter, Molecular electrostatic potentials and noncovalent interactions, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2017, 7, e1326 Search PubMed .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, D. Qian, C. S. Ponseca, A. Honarfar, Y. Xu, J. Xin, Z. Chen, L. Hong, B. Gao, R. Yu, Y. Zu, W. Ma, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, F. Gao and J. Hou, 14.7% Efficiency Organic Photovoltaic Cells Enabled by Active Materials with a Large Electrostatic Potential Difference, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7743–7750 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer and J. S. Murray, Molecular Electrostatic Potentials and Chemical Reactivity, Rev. Comput. Chem., 1991, 273–312,  DOI:10.1002/9780470125793.ch7 .
H. Yao, D. Qian, H. Zhang, Y. Qin, B. Xu, Y. Cui, R. Yu, F. Gao and J. Hou, Critical Role of Molecular Electrostatic Potential on Charge Generation in Organic Solar Cells, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 491–494 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Murray and P. Politzer, Statistical analysis of the molecular surface electrostatic potential: an approach to describing noncovalent interactions in condensed phases, THEOCHEM, 1998, 425, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer and J. S. Murray, The fundamental nature and role of the electrostatic potential in atoms and molecules, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2002, 108, 134–142 Search PubMed .
K. Xian, Y. Cui, Y. Xu, T. Zhang, L. Hong, H. Yao, C. An and J. Hou, Efficient Exciton Dissociation Enabled by the End Group Modification in Non-Fullerene Acceptors, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 7691–7698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Yao, L. Ma, L. Hong, J. Li, Q. Liao, Y. Zu, J. Wang, M. Gao, L. Ye and J. Hou, Tuning the hybridization of local exciton and charge-transfer states in highly efficient organic photovoltaic cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9004–9010 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, S. Qin, R. Wang, S. Chen, F. Pan, B. Qiu, Z. Shang, L. Meng, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, C. Yang and Y. Li, High Efficiency Polymer Solar Cells with Efficient Hole Transfer at Zero Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital Offset between Methylated Polymer Donor and Brominated Acceptor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1465–1474 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, W. Tress, J. Wang and O. Inganäs, Temperature Dependence of Charge Carrier Generation in Organic Photovoltaics, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 128701 CrossRef .
A. C. Jakowetz, M. L. Böhm, J. Zhang, A. Sadhanala, S. Huettner, A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, What Controls the Rate of Ultrafast Charge Transfer and Charge Separation Efficiency in Organic Photovoltaic Blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11672–11679 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, P. Hu, J. Ye, K. K. Zhang, Y. Long, W. Hu and C. Kloc, Tuning of the degree of charge transfer and the electronic properties in organic binary compounds by crystal engineering: a perspective, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1884–1902 RSC .
N. A. Ran, J. A. Love, C. J. Takacs, A. Sadhanala, J. K. Beavers, S. D. Collins, Y. Huang, M. Wang, R. H. Friend, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Harvesting the Full Potential of Photons with Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1482–1488 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, C.-Z. Li, M. Shi and H. Chen, New Phase for Organic Solar Cell Research: Emergence of Y-Series Electron Acceptors and Their Perspectives, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1554–1567 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, F. Pan, H. Bin, J. Zhang, L. Xue, B. Qiu, Z. Wei, Z.-G. Zhang and Y. Li, A low cost and high performance polymer donor material for polymer solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 743 CrossRef .
W. Yang, Z. Luo, R. Sun, J. Guo, T. Wang, Y. Wu, W. Wang, J. Guo, Q. Wu, M. Shi, H. Li, C. Yang and J. Min, Simultaneous enhanced efficiency and thermal stability in organic solar cells from a polymer acceptor additive, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1218 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Methods used to determine (a) Eonsetg and (b) Einterg. (c) Diagram of the energy of the ground state, the lowest excited state and charge transfer state as a function of a generalized coordinate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Diagram of energy losses in (a) inorganic photovoltaic cells and (b) organic photovoltaic cells. (c) A voltage loss diagram determined by the charge transfer state. Reproduced with permission from (a and b) ref. 58 and (c) ref. 44. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 Elsevier, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Plots of PCEs against energy loss. (b) Plots of non-radiative recombination against the charge transfer state energy. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 55 and (b) ref. 57. (a) CC BY 4.0 and (b) copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical structures of the electron donors and acceptors discussed in this review.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The two-state model and (b) the three-state model to explain the relationship between high CT state energy and reduced non-radiative voltage loss. (c) EQE and EL spectrum of the blends of pure acceptor C8-ITIC and its combinations with different donors. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 56 and (b and c) ref. 70. Copyright (2015) Springer Nature and copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  (a) ESP distribution of PTO2, IT-4F and PCBM. The intermolecular binding energies between donor and acceptors (b) parallel to the donor backbone and (c) vertical with the backbone. (d) The hole/electron distributions of the lowest excited state between donor and acceptors without/with an additional electronic field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) ESP distributions of 3T and IC-XF. (b) Calculated intermolecular binding energies between 3T and IC-XF. (c) CT ratio and oscillator strength of PBDB-TF: BTP-XF. (d) Packing distances and interaction energies between PBDB-TF and BTP-XF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
