Ionic behavior of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite based metal-oxide-semiconductor capacitors   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP01799E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP01799E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13002-13009Ionic behavior of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite based metal-oxide-semiconductor capacitors†

        
          
            Yucheng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuming 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tiqiang 
            Pang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ziyang 
            Hu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yuejin 
            Zhu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyan 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Suzhen 
            Luan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Renxu 
            Jia
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Microelectronics, Xidian University, Key Laboratory of Wide Band-Gap Semiconductor Materials and Devices, Xi'an 710071, China. E-mail: rxjia@mail.xidian.edu.cn
bDepartment of Microelectronic Science and Engineering, Ningbo Collabrative Innovation Center of Nonlinear Harzard System of Ocean and Atmosphere, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China. E-mail: huziyang@nbu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st March 2017
    , Accepted 19th April 2017First published on 20th April 2017AbstractOrganic–inorganic metal halide perovskites are promising semiconductors for optoelectronic applications. Despite the achievements in device performance, the electrical properties of perovskites have stagnated. Ion migration is speculated to be the main contributing factor for the many unusual electrical phenomena in perovskite-based devices. Here, to understand the intrinsic electrical behavior of perovskites, we constructed metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitors based on perovskite films and performed capacitance–voltage (C–V) and current–voltage (I–V) measurements of the capacitors. The results provide direct evidence for the mixed ionic–electronic transport behavior within perovskite films. In the dark, there is electrical hysteresis in both the C–V and I–V curves because the mobile negative ions take part in charge transport despite frequency modulation. However, under illumination, the large amount of photoexcited free carriers screens the influence of the mobile ions with a low concentration, which is responsible for the normal C–V properties. Validation of ion migration for the gate-control ability of MOS capacitors is also helpful for the investigation of perovskite MOS transistors and other gate-control photovoltaic devices.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites (OIMHPs) are emerging low-cost solution-processible materials that are relatively insensitive to defects, and they have attracted a great deal of interest for applications in high-performance optoelectronic devices.1–14 In the photovoltaic field, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has rapidly increased after only seven years of research.15,16 However, the low stability and a short lifetime of current OIMHP optoelectronic devices need to be overcome for further applications. Among the factors that affect the lifetime of optoelectronic devices, electrical behavior, especially ion migration within OIMHPs, cannot exist in device encapsulation. The unusual electrical behavior in OIMHPs had not attracted much interest until clear photocurrent hysteresis in perovskite solar cells was reported,8 despite ionic conduction in halide perovskite materials being investigated for over 30 years. In 2014, Hoke and Snaith reported anomalous photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis in OIMHP solar cells,9,10 and Snaith suggested that ion migration driven by the electric field is one of the possible origins of photocurrent hysteresis.9 In the same year, Xiao et al.11 discovered the giant switchable photovoltaic effect, where the photocurrent direction completely flips during scanning in OIMHP solar cells with a planar heterojunction structure and a symmetric electrode. This proved that the photocurrent hysteresis mainly originates from the ion migration effect. Tress et al.12 also suggested that ion migration contributes to photocurrent hysteresis, although no direct evidence for ion migration was provided. The intrinsic semiconductor properties have been further clarified with the advancement of OIMHP-based solar cells. OIMHP materials belonging to the p or n type of the semiconductor have been suggested.13 The long carrier diffusion length has been demonstrated.14,15 Although the reported Hall mobilities of the OIMHP materials (∼100 cm2 (V s)−1 for CH3NH3PbI3) are comparable with that of silicon, a high-mobility OIMHP transistor has not been realized. This can be explained by screening of the gate field by accumulation of migrated ions at the gate dielectric/perovskite interface.16,17 Chin et al.18 showed that cooling OIMHP transistor devices to freeze ion migration (<200 K) makes the CH3NH3PbI3 transistor work with reasonably good mobility. The photoinduced giant permittivity (∼106 for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and the static dielectric constant are dependent on the applied frequency.19,20 These unusual phenomena have been observed in OIMHP materials and devices, and they may also originate from the ion conduction behavior.
As mentioned above, ion migration accounts for many unusual phenomena, such as J–V hysteresis,9,10 the switchable photovoltaic effect,11 the degraded transistor behavior,16,17 and the very large dielectric constant.19,20 Recently, phase separation21 and the self-poling effect22 have been reported. Insight into the electrical behavior, especially ion migration, is highly significant for development of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices in the dark and under illumination. Part of the research of the J–V characteristics is based on a model structure of FTO/compact TiO2 (or mesoporous TiO2)/OIMHP/hole transporter layer (HTL)/Au (or Ag).9–13 Although the derived configuration from OIMHP solar cells has laid a solid foundation for high PCEs, exploring the intrinsic electrical properties of OIMHPs is not desirable. Unintentional introduction of TiO2 with photocatalysis and HTM Spiro-OMeTAD with doped Li+ ions also affects the original electrical properties of OIMHPs, especially under illumination.24–26 Previous reports have pointed out that a chemical reaction can be realized between Spiro-OMeTAD+ and I−, and Ti–I–Pb bonds are easily formed upon a reaction between CH3NH3I and PbI2.24,25 Some of the research studies are based on an inverted structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/OIMHP/electron transporter layer (ETL)/Al (or the composited cathode). The excellent ETL PCBM or an analogue is always applied, which can suppress ion migration in OIMHPs and eliminate the photocurrent hysteresis caused by ion migration.27,28 However, the modified interface for device application always masks the intrinsic properties of the OIMHP materials.
In this study, we exclude the complicated device configuration, such as the p–i–n photovoltaic structure, and ignore other problematic structures, such as PCBM and TiO2. A simple and well-recognized metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitor based on perovskite films was fabricated. We investigated the intrinsic electrical properties of the perovskite films by examining combination measurements of capacitance–voltage (C–V) and current–voltage (I–V) in established MOS capacitors. The results provide direct evidence for the mixed ionic–electronic conduction behavior in perovskite films. The mobile negative ions dominate the carrier transport properties despite frequency modulation in the dark, while the large amount of photoexcited free carriers accounts for the normal electrical properties under illumination.
Experimental
N-Type heavily doped Si (400 μm) with a SiO2 (150 nm) surface layer (capacitance 23 nF cm−2) was used as the substrate. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and lead chloride (PbCl2) were prepared according to previous work.23 To form the MAPbI3−xClx precursor solution, the substrate was subjected to ultraviolet (UV) ozone surface oxidation of the hydrophilic substrate. The precursor solution preheated at 70 °C was used to fabricate MAPbI3−xClx thin films. The CH3NH3PbI3−xClx precursor solution was then spin coated onto the treated substrate at a rate of 4000 rpm for 30 s. The wet perovskite film was then annealed on a hot plate using a multistep slow annealing procedure to complete crystallization. A perovskite film with a thickness of ∼300 nm was grown on SiO2. Finally, aluminum and gold were deposited by magnetron sputtering as the bottom and top electrode, respectively, to give the capacitor a structure of Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si/Al.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Cu Kα, New D8-Advance) were performed to identify the diffraction patterns of the crystallized CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films. The top view images and thicknesses of the deposited perovskite films were confirmed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU-70). The absorption spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films were recorded using a VARIAN Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy measurements were performed using a fluorescence spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 460 nm. All of the electrical tests were performed at room temperature, wherein light (10 mW cm−2) was incident through a fiber in a vacuum chamber. The C–V and I–V measurements were analyzed using a Keysight B1505A semiconductor parameter analyzer. The C–V data under constant light (light from a probe station) and in the dark at different frequencies (1 kHz and 1 MHz) are reported. The voltage applied to the Al electrode was swept in the sequence −10 → +20 → −10 V in the dark and −5 → +5 → −5 V under illumination while the Au electrode was grounded.
The electrical model of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si/Al capacitor is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), where CSi, CSiO2, Cit, CD, Git, and Z are the capacitance of Si, capacitance of SiO2, interface-state capacitance, perovskite capacitance, interface-state conductance, and series parasitic impedance, respectively. The capacitance of Si is ignored as it is heavily doped (see Model S1, ESI†).
Results and discussion
A SEM image of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (PVK)/SiO2/Si structure is shown in Fig. 1(a). We prepared MOS capacitors with the structure Au/PVK/SiO2/Si/Al, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The capacitance of Si is ignored because the Si layer is heavily doped with a conductivity of 20 S cm−1. To prevent other contact effects, ohmic contacts were formed at the Al/doped-Si and Au/PVK interfaces.29
 Fig. 1  (a) A SEM image of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si structure, and (b) the structure of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si/Al capacitor. 
For the PVK films, the thickness of the semiconductor depletion and accumulation zone is an important parameter. If the semiconducting layer is too thin, it will not absorb sufficient light and the depletion and accumulation zone may penetrate through the whole perovskite film. On the other hand, for a thick film, top illumination may not penetrate the whole film, and the bottom perovskite film will not be photoexcited and effectively modulate the carrier concentration. The optimum thickness of PVK is 300 nm, as shown by SEM in Fig. 1(a).
The light absorption data of the perovskite films are shown in Fig. 2(a). The absorption intensity in the UV and visible-light range (400–760 nm) reveals that the PVK layer is a good light absorber. To investigate the crystallinity and microstructure of the perovskite thin films prepared on SiO2/Si substrates, we recorded their XRD profiles (Fig. 2(b)). The strong peaks at 14.08°, 28.41°, and 43.19° can be assigned to the (110), (220), and (330) diffractions of CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. The PbI2 impurity phase is negligible because of the absence of a diffraction peak at 12.65°. The surfaces of the PVK films were further analyzed using SEM (Fig. 2(c)). The prepared perovskite films are very compact, indicating that they are ideal materials for device applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films on a glass substrate, (b) XRD data from crystallized CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films, (c) SEM images of crystallized CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films on SiO2/Si wafer. 
To understand the intrinsic electrical properties of the perovskite films, we used a combination of C–V and I–V measurements of the capacitor. Fig. 3 shows a representative set of C–V curves of a bottom-gate top-contact capacitor with forward and reverse scans. Measurements were performed both in the dark and under white-light illumination (power density 10 mW cm−2) with a high (1 MHz) and a low frequency (1 kHz). Different conditions (dark versus light and low frequency versus high frequency) are considered here to identify whether ions have an effect on the electrical properties. From the C–V curves, the value of the voltage (VCmin) is nearly 0 V when the capacitance reaches its minimum. Assuming that the PVK semiconductor is intrinsic or non-doped, the ideal VCmin will be −0.37 V according to the basic principle of semiconductors36 and eqn (1) and (2). (1) (2)where Φms is the metal (Al)–semiconductor (PVK) work function difference, Φm is the work function of the metal, which is 4.28 eV for Al, χ is the electron affinity of the semiconductor, which is 3.9 eV for CH3NH3PbI3, Eg is the energy band of PVK (1.5 eV), N is the carrier concentration, Φf is the Fermi potential, which is supposed to be 0 for an intrinsic semiconductor, and Xdt is the maximum depletion width, which can be ignored in the intrinsic state. The values of Φm,37χ,38 and Eg38 were taken from previous studies. A detailed explanation of the equations is given in Fig. S2 (ESI†). In Fig. 3, VCmin is nearly 0 V (greater than −0.37 V), suggesting that Φf should be positive. Φf is positive for the p-type MOS capacitor, while it is negative for the n-type MOS capacitor. Therefore, the capacitor is considered to be a weak p-type MOS capacitor owing to the weak p-type PVK material. The C–V curves also agree with those of p-type inorganic semiconductor capacitors. The weak p-type property of PVK originates from the amount of electrons being less than that of holes induced by self-doping or self-defects.13,30 The difference between weak p-type PVK and a normal p-type inorganic semiconductor is that in a normal p-type inorganic semiconductor the major carrier accounts for p-doping, while in the PVK semiconductor the major carrier accounts for self-doping or self-defects (such as vacancies). Currently, we cannot exclude other possible factors to explain the p-type properties of PVK despite what we have learned from the MOS C–V measurements.
 Fig. 3  
C–V data under dark condition at 1 MHz (a) and at 1 kHz (b), light condition at 1 MHz, and (c) at 1 kHz (d). 
As shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), part of the C–V curves of the capacitor show a large hysteresis loop in the dark when a positive gate voltage is applied, while the C–V curves overlap when a negative gate voltage is applied. A larger loop is obtained when a lower frequency is applied. Such a large loop usually does not occur in normal inorganic semiconductors like Si and GaAs, which suggests that other charge species may take part in the electrical balance. Because the loops only occur at V > 0, the negative charge is considered to move to the PVK/SiO2 interface. The negative species is sensitive to the frequency. In addition, the higher the frequency is, the smaller the loops are, as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). This is because of the different sensitivity and response of the carriers under different frequencies. The existence of negative species, such as ions, in PVK matches well with the low and high frequency response. Because I−, Pb2+ and CH3NH3+ ions are possibly present in PVK materials, the negative species is the I− ion. When the applied voltage is positive, these I− ions accumulate at the PVK/SiO2 interface23,24 and the amount of I− ions is dependent on the applied frequency. Compared with the reverse scan, the capacitance is lower for the forward scan when the applied voltage is positive.
The C–V curves measured in the dark indicate that the mobile I− ions dominate the carrier transport properties in spite of frequency modulation. However, under illumination, there are no loops in the C–V curves despite the different frequency, as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). Lots of electrons and holes are generated because of photoexcitation under light illumination. The large number of free carriers accounts for the normal electrical properties, and the effect of the ions is screened. We repeated the C–V measurements and obtained the same curves. This indicates that the mobile I− ions are reversible, which means that the I− ions accumulated at the interface can redistribute in grains for thermodynamic and electrodynamic balance. Recent research has shown grain boundary dominated ion migration in polycrystalline perovskite films.41 Considering that the polycrystalline PVK film is composed of a large number of crystalline grains, the mobile I− ions can directionally flow among crystalline grains with a low barrier under an applied bias. Therefore, these mobile I− ions can freely move within the whole PVK film.
To further investigate the electric properties of MOS, gate I–V curves were measured in the dark and under light illumination (Fig. 4). The hysteresis effect can be seen in the I–V curves in the dark (Fig. 4(a)), while the curves measured under light illumination are linear despite the scan range and step (Fig. 4(b)). Compared with the gate current in the dark, the photocurrent is two orders of magnitude higher under light illumination because of the large number of photogenerated carriers. The total current is only derived from the electron flow because ions cannot cross over the barrier of PVK/SiO2. Compared with the forward scan, a lower gate current is obtained in the reverse scan, as shown in Fig. 4(a). This can be explained by ion accumulation at the PVK/SiO2 interface. The I–V curves also indicate that mobile ions take part in carrier transport, especially in the dark. However, under light illumination, the large number of photoexcited electrons and holes screens the effect of the mobile ions, resulting in similar I–V curves for the forward and reverse scans, as shown in Fig. 4(b). These results are consistent with the conclusion of the C–V discussion.
 Fig. 4  
I–V curves under different conditions (a) in the dark (b) under illumination. 
The energy band diagrams of the capacitors with and without an applied voltage are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c). The SiO2 films can be considered to be the high barrier layer, while Au is the transport layer for both electrons and holes. In Fig. 5(a), PVK is nearly in the intrinsic state when no voltage is applied. When a negative voltage is applied, positive charge (mainly holes) will be attracted at the interface and negative charge (mainly electrons) will be repelled from the interface, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The energy band of PVK near the PVK/SiO2 interface is upward. From the C–V curves shown in Fig. 3, no change is observed in the dark and under light illumination when a positive voltage is applied. Hence, we believe that no positive ions move with the PVK layer in this state. Generally, in the accumulation state, the capacitance values of the MOS capacitor are the same and equal to those of the insulator SiO2. However, the capacitance values of the MOS capacitor are 110 pF and 150 pF with frequencies of 1 MHz and 1 kHz, respectively. This may originate from the dependence of the dielectric constant of the PVK materials on the frequency.19,20 According to published data, the calculated results are consistent with the measured values. The detailed calculation of the capacitor refers to Model S1 (ESI†). Fig. 5(c) shows the band diagram when a positive voltage is applied. If only electrons (without ions) accumulate at the interface, the capacitance will increase with increasing voltage. However, the actual capacitance decreases with increasing voltage, suggesting that negative I− ions are simultaneously attracted. These I− ions are free within the whole PVK film, and the capacitance will continuously decrease with increasing positive voltage, as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Therefore, the negative ions can migrate through the whole layer. All of the I− ions within the whole PVK layer take apart in carrier transport and result in the large hysteresis loops in the dark.
 Fig. 5  The energy band diagrams of Au/PVK/SiO2/Si/Al capacitors under (a) no voltage, (b) positive voltage, and (c) negative voltage at the side of SiO2. e− is the electron, and h+ is the hole. 
The effect of I− ions on the depletion zone near the interface of PVK/SiO2 is shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). In Fig. 6(a), the negative ions do not move within the perovskites, electrons are pulled to the interface, and holes are pushed away from the interface. In this state, the depletion layer broadens and a built-in electric field from PVK to SiO2 forms and increases until it reaches the same value as the applied electric field. In Fig. 6(b), when negative ion (I−) drifting is considered, the built-in electric field is enlarged by the mobile I− ions, and the balance between the applied and built-in electric fields is reached without accumulation of electrons at the interface. Therefore, the total capacitance decreases as Cit + CD decreases, as shown in Model S1 (ESI†). When the voltage is swept from positive to negative, the I− ions do not enlarge the depletion layer and electrons at the interface will be supplemented. Because the response sensitivities of electrons and ions to the applied frequency are different, a larger value of Cit + CD is obtained at a lower frequency.
 Fig. 6  The planar structure diagram of the Au/PVK/SiO2/Si/Al capacitor (a) without the effect of ions (b) with the effect of ions. 
Although many reports have shown that the mobile ion effect exists, the question that needs to be answered for ion migration is which ion or ions migrate in MAPbI3 films? Any of the constituting ions (i.e., I−, Pb2+ and CH3NH3+) may participate,24–28,35 and a number of studies have investigated the elemental composition using methods such as cathodoluminescence and shown that iodide ions do migrate.40 The different computational models gave very different activation energy values, and the consensus is that I− ions are theoretically more mobile than MA+ and Pb2+ ions.32–34 However, the first experimentally confirmed migrating species is CH3NH3+ after electric poling in a lateral PVK solar cell, although electromigration of Pb2+ or I− ions cannot be excluded because of the limited detectivity of the Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS).35 Here, we suggest that I− ions affect the electrical properties of the MOS capacitor. I− ions with low activation energy are readily mobile within the PVK films by migration of I− vacancies. These I− vacancies can also function as negative trap centers. The free electrons will be easily trapped by these I− vacancies. Thus, the intrinsic PVK materials with a small amount of carriers in the dark are a weak p-type semiconductor because holes are the major carrier. However, if the PVK materials are illuminated, the large number of photogenerated free electrons will fill these trap centers. The rest of the free electrons are still comparable with holes, which guarantees the intrinsic properties of the PVK materials under illumination. Therefore, in the dark, these I− vacancies are comparable with the free carriers and ion participation seriously affects the electrical behavior. Under illumination, the large number of free electrons and holes screens the small amount of ions and they completely fill the trap centers. Therefore, a more intrinsic PVK material is exhibited. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the C–V curve is symmetrical under the forward and reverse scans. The accumulation state is observed and the depletion state disappears. Our assumption also agrees well with the fact that the bulk PVK crystal device always shows low electrical hysteresis because of the small number of I− vacancies or self-defects.31 Because hybrid perovskites are ionic solids, where ion migration is allowed by either vacancies or interstitials, or the combination of both, charge extracting layers and their interaction with such ionic species have to be carefully considered when designing highly efficient and stable devices. Here, we exclude possible charge extracting layers or charge transport layers, and simplify the device structures to directly expose the original properties of the PVK materials. Therefore, care should be taken when reporting “hysteresis free” perovskite devices, which is not a completely appropriate description of such preformed devices.
The effect of I− ions on the MOS capacitor can be characterized by electric charge–voltage (Q–V) curves (Fig. 7(a)). The capacitance decreases as the positive voltage increases, which is because of the expansion of the depletion layer by I− drifting. Eqn (3) and (4) are used for calculations where the total capacitance is the series connection of the ion capacitance (Cion) and the capacitance at V = 0 (CV=0). The ion charge is obtained by integration of the capacitance and applied voltage. The total carrier concentration of PVK can be obtained by eqn (5), where Cdep is the depletion capacitance, A is the electrode area (1600 × 400 μm2), ξ is the dielectric constant, which is 32 for perovskites in the dark,39q is the electron charge, and N is the total carrier concentration, which is the total concentration of ions and electrons. C−2–V curves are shown in Fig. 7(b). The slopes of the C−2–V curves under frequency 1 kHz decrease as the applied voltage increases, which is because of the increase of the ion concentration (slope ∝ 1/N). (3) (4) (5)
 Fig. 7  (a) The quantity of electric charge–voltage (Q–V) curves of negative ions under 1 K and 1 MHz, (b) The C−2–V curves under 1 K and 1 MHz. 
Conclusion
We have prepared a Au/CH3NH3PbI3/SiO2/Si/Al MOS capacitor. C–V and I–V measurements of the capacitor show that there is an ion effect in the dark when voltage is applied. By differentiating the C–V data with V < 0 and V > 0, the negative ions are the only ions that can move and affect the electrical properties. From this perspective, the charges of the ions at different voltages are given. C−2–V curves show that the total concentration of carriers increases as the applied voltage increases, which is in agreement with the calculations. We believe that identifying the mobile species in PVK materials, their migration across the PVK materials, and their effect on the operational mechanism of the MOS capacitor could pave the way for a better understanding of the optoelectronic applications of the PVK-based materials.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51472196, 11304170).
References
D. Yamashita, T. Handa, T. Ihara, H. Tahara, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3186–3191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paek, I. Zimmermann, P. Gao, P. Gratia, K. Rakstys, G. Grancini and K. A. Alamry, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6068–6075 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, W. Tress, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. Tomas and H. Anders, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11382–11393 CAS .
G. Hu, W. Guo, R. Yu, X. Yang, R. Zhou, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jun, S. Keitaro, H. Liyuan and T. Yoshitaka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 554–561 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Dar, J. M. Abdi, N. Arora, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501358 CrossRef .
D. Bi, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Oveisi, J. Luo, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2910–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mizusaki, K. Arai and K. Fueki, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumüller and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Xie, L. Lyu, X. Liu, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163508 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238–8245 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mei, C. Zhang, Z. V. Vardeny and O. D. Jurchescu, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 106–112 CrossRef .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
Y. Deng, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500721 CrossRef .
K. C. Kwon, K. Hong, L. Q. Van, S. Y. Lee, J. Choi, K. B. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4213–4222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
M. De Bastiani, G. Dell'Erba, M. Gandini, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Neutzner, A. R. S. Kandada and M. Caironi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1501453 CrossRef .
S. Wang, W. Yuan and Y. S. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24791–24798 CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin and P. Kanjanaboos, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and A. F. De, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .

          D. A. Neaman, Semiconductor physics and devices, Irwin, Chicago,  1992 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, J. Xu, X. X. Sun, Y. Y. Du, H. K. Cai, J. Ni, J. Li, Z. Y. Hu and J. J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9811–9820 CAS .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Hentz, Z. Zhao and S. Gradecak, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Shao, Y. J. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. F. Dong, Y. H. Deng, Y. B. Yuan, H. T. Wei, M. Y. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. S. Hang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp01799eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A SEM image of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si structure, and (b) the structure of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/SiO2/Si/Al capacitor.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films on a glass substrate, (b) XRD data from crystallized CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films, (c) SEM images of crystallized CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films on SiO2/Si wafer.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  
C–V data under dark condition at 1 MHz (a) and at 1 kHz (b), light condition at 1 MHz, and (c) at 1 kHz (d).	 

 	Fig. 4  
I–V curves under different conditions (a) in the dark (b) under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  The energy band diagrams of Au/PVK/SiO2/Si/Al capacitors under (a) no voltage, (b) positive voltage, and (c) negative voltage at the side of SiO2. e− is the electron, and h+ is the hole.	 

 	Fig. 6  The planar structure diagram of the Au/PVK/SiO2/Si/Al capacitor (a) without the effect of ions (b) with the effect of ions.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  (a) The quantity of electric charge–voltage (Q–V) curves of negative ions under 1 K and 1 MHz, (b) The C−2–V curves under 1 K and 1 MHz.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp01799e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
