A catalyst-free amorphous silicon-based tandem thin film photocathode with high photovoltage for solar water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA02736E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02736E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15583-15590A catalyst-free amorphous silicon-based tandem thin film photocathode with high photovoltage for solar water splitting†

        
          
            Bofei 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhonghua 
            Jin
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Lisha 
            Bai
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Junhui 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qixing 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Caichi 
            Liu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Xiaodan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Photo Electronics thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University, Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China. E-mail: xdzhang@nankai.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 22-23499304;   Tel: +86-22-23499304
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
cInstitute of Semiconductor Materials, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300130, China
Received 
      15th April 2015
    , Accepted 15th June 2015First published on 16th June 2015AbstractNowadays, efficient production of storable clean hydrogen from abundant and sustainable solar energy is increasingly being identified as an essential route to realize the future sustainable hydrogen energy. Here we demonstrate a p-type amorphous silicon carbon (a-SiC:H) protected amorphous silicon/amorphous silicon germanium (a-Si/a-SiGe) tandem photocathode that is highly promising to realize a stable, large-scale, and efficient solar water splitting device. Our studies show that by electrically lossless coating a p-type a-SiC:H protection layer on an a-Si/a-SiGe tandem thin film solar cell with a preceding n-type narrow-gap μc-Si:H layer to improve the electron transfer, a high photocurrent onset potential can be achieved for the protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode. In comparison to reported intrinsic a-SiC:H protection layers and n-type layers in a-Si/a-SiGe tandem cells, the proposed p-type a-SiC:H protection layer shows a better hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalytic activity, which is comparable to amorphous molybdenum sulfide (a-MoS3) catalyzed unprotected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes even without any HER catalyst. Combined with the hybrid photoelectrode concept, this stable photocathode with high photovoltage is highly promising to form a wireless, highly stable, and efficient monolithic solar water splitting device for hydrogen production.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen, which stores energy in covalent bonds of hydrogen gas, is extremely attractive for the realization of a sustainable energy economy1,2 to meet the challenge of increasing energy demand on the global scale due to its cleanliness and easy-storability. Hydrogen has also been advocated to be a potential fuel for motive power, stationary power generation, and as an energy storage medium.3 Nowadays the main production of hydrogen from natural gas or coal4 is incompatible with the future prospect of a hydrogen economy.4,5 Among the possible renewable energy solutions, the conversion of the most abundant and sustainable solar energy on the Earth directly into solar hydrogen is a promising route to economically and renewably produce hydrogen and easily store solar energy. Solar water splitting, a process that was first demonstrated by Fujishima and Honda in 19726 with titanium dioxide (TiO2), can produce storable clean H2 fuels from another renewable resource, water, with only solar energy as the input. To compete with traditional chemical fuels and hydrogen from other approaches, developing cost-effective, highly efficient, and potentially economical solar water splitting devices to produce hydrogen has been the most important priority.
Intensive research has been carried out for decades to explore highly efficient photocathodes, photoanodes, and catalysts for solar water splitting.7–10 The complicated overall process in solar water splitting, including four main steps, that is, photon absorption, charge separation, charge transport, and catalysis at the semiconductor solution interface, makes the selection of suitable photoelectrode materials to achieve the maximum solar to hydrogen (STH) efficiency difficult.11 The stringent requirements for materials, including suitable band gaps for sufficient light harvest, great carrier transport properties, energetically suitable conduction and valence band positions for water reduction and oxidation, good catalytic activity at the semiconductor electrolyte interface, high stability etc., have seriously restricted the practical application of solar water splitting and available materials.
Nowadays, various materials, including p-doped phosphides, chalcogenides, silicon, and oxides, have been proposed as photocathodes in solar water splitting. Photocathodes based on P-GaInP2,12 CdTe,13 p-WS2,14 Pt–CdS-coated p-CuInS2 and p-Cu(In,Ga)S2,15 p-Si,16 p-Cu2O17etc. have been reported. However, so far, no material described in the literature has been capable of effectively performing all the aforementioned four steps by itself.11 Instead various tandem device configurations by combining different materials have been proposed.18–20 One promising approach is to use multi-junction solar cells as photocathodes to combine with photoanodes to form monolithic wireless solar water splitting devices, on account of the simultaneous combination of a better spectral splitting,21 high light absorption,22 high photovoltage,23 and potentially 100% carrier extraction for multi-junction solar cells in comparison to single-junction ones. Water splitting requires an applied potential of 1.23 V to provide the thermodynamic driving force.24 Considering the additional necessary overpotentials for water reduction or oxidation, a photovoltaic (PV) cell with a high open circuit voltage (Voc > 1.6 V) is needed.25 However, most of the reported photocathodes have a photovoltage lower than half of 1.23 V.12–17 Recently, Lin et al. reported a type of amorphous silicon (a-Si) photocathode with an onset potential of 0.93 V, which is still extremely lower than that of the needed thermodynamic voltage.26 In addition to the requirements for the photovoltage, the stability of photocathodes is also very important for a practical water-splitting device operating for several years. Therefore, how to realize highly stable and cost-effective photocathodes with high photovoltage is still challenging and significant.
Herein, we present our results on water splitting using a stable amorphous silicon/amorphous silicon germanium (a-Si/a-SiGe) tandem photocathode with a p-type amorphous silicon carbon (a-SiC:H) protection layer. Advantages of the low-temperature processing, large-area scalability, and high technical maturity of thin film solar cells make our proposed tandem photocathode practically feasible. The great processing compatibility with the proposed photocathodes, high stability in acidic and alkaline environments, earth-abundant silicon and carbon elements for p-type a-SiC:H films make them suitable for adoption as protection layers in our proposed photocathodes. Our proposed p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes exhibit a great hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity at a high onset potential and a maximum efficiency of 2.1% and is highly stable in an alkaline environment, thereby indicating high potential to realize highly stable and efficient monolithic water splitting devices.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Fabrication and characterization of a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes
A-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells and photocathodes were layer-by-layer fabricated on sputtered aluminum-doped zinc oxide (ZnO:Al) substrates developed in our laboratory. The substrates were chemically wet etched in 0.5% diluted HCl solution for about 20 s to prepare a textured surface morphology with suitable lateral and vertical feature sizes.27 All the layers of the a-Si top (with 200 nm intrinsic layers) and a-SiGe bottom component cells (with 160 nm intrinsic layers) were fabricated using radio-frequency plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (RF-PECVD). After n-type a-Si:H layers of a-SiGe bottom component cells were fabricated, a ZnO:B/Ag/Al back reflector (BR) structure with an active area of 0.25 cm2 was then utilized in a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells to improve the long-wavelength response and achieve a better current matching with a-Si top component cells. For a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes, n-type μc-Si:H and p-type a-SiC:H protection layers were then fabricated without the above back reflector.
The PECVD preparation of p-type a-SiC:H protection layers was carried out on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass and a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with a mixture of SiH4, H2, and additional dopant gases methane (CH4) and trimethyl borane (TMB). The intrinsic a-SiC:H layer was also deposited under an optimized process condition without adding TMB dopant gases. After the photocathodes were fabricated, a 200 nm thick Al strip was thermally evaporated on the pre-covered substrates for the effective collection of photo-generated carriers.
2.2 Synthesis of a-MoS3 catalysts
Amorphous molybdenum sulfide catalysts were prepared via a room temperature wet chemical synthesis with ammonium heptamolybdate (Mo7O24(NH4)6·4H2O), sulfuric acid (H2SO4), and sodium sulfide (Na2S) reagents. 0.6 g Mo7O24(NH4)6·4H2O reagents were added to 12 mL of 0.2 M H2SO4 in deionized water, and then mixed with 12 mL of 0.075 g Na2S added deionized water. Next, immediately generated nanoparticles suspending in the mixed solution were collected by centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 30 min and then removing the supernatant, and dispersed in 15 mL of isopropyl alcohol by means of 10 min sonication. Finally, the catalyst solution was drop-cast on a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes and FTO substrates and dried under low vacuum for several hours.
2.3 Photoelectrochemical characterization
In this study, photoelectrochemical (PEC) characterization of photocathodes was performed in a three-electrode configuration immersed in 100–120 mL of 1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) alkaline electrolyte solution (pH = 13) under 1-sun conditions [air mass (AM) 1.5, 25 °C, 100 mW cm−2] using a Wacom WXs-156s-l2 dual-beam solar simulator. An excellent simulation of the AM 1.5 spectrum was acquired from the superposition of the two adequately calibrated filtered light sources of the simulator. The potential of the working electrode was controlled with a Princeton potentiostat (PARSTAT 4000). A Pt counter electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (saturated KCl and AgCl solution), and photocathodes acting as the working electrode form the deployed three-electrode configuration. To characterize the PEC activity of single-layer photocathodes in an overall water splitting system, a type of serially wired water splitting device by placing single-junction solar cells (a-SiGe) side by side and connecting them to wires in series was adopted to provide sufficient open circuit voltage (Voc) for water reduction. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 were carried out to record the current density–potetial (J–E) data of photocathodes. To study the catalytic activity at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface of photocathodes, chopped chronoamperometry measurements (J–t) were also performed by cyclically switching illumination in 10 s period at 0 V vs. RHE with a mask. The J–t measurements under continuous illumination were also conducted for the stability test of photocathodes. Measurements of two-electrode illuminated current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of solar cells were carried out under 1 sum illumination to characterize the performance of a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells.
3. Results and discussion
As schematically shown in Fig. 1a, the tandem photocathode comprising of a AZO substrate, a-Si top and a-SiGe bottom component cells, an narrow-gap n-type μc-Si:H layer, and a p-type a-SiC:H protection layer is completely immersed in 1 M NaOH alkaline solution (pH = 13) and acts as the working electrode in a three-electrode configuration with Pt counter and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes. The lateral and vertical feature sizes of the front AZO substrates (sheet resistance Rs < 10 ohm sq−1), which are critical for efficiently scattering incoming light, were optimized to maximize the light absorption in a-Si top and a-SiGe bottom component cells. Then, the following films, including n- or p-type doped and intrinsic layers, were deposited by PECVD processing. The photoelectrical performance of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem cell was optimized to maximize the light absorption in absorbers and carrier extraction from the cell. Then, a 80 nm thick p-type a-SiC:H protection layer with a band gap of 2.0 eV and a dark conductivity of 10−7 S cm−1 was finally deposited on the tandem solar cell with an additional 40 nm n-type μc-Si:H layer. The colored SEM image in Fig. 1b displays the cross-section of the protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode. We can see that the rough surface morphology of the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer with a high area ratio (surface roughness RMS = 160 nm) may enlarge the active contact area of the protection layer with the electrolyte, thereby improving the HER rate at the photocathode/electrolyte interface.24 The combination of the wider band gap of the a-Si top (1.8 eV) cell and narrow band gap of the a-SiGe bottom component cell can efficiently split the incident AM 1.5 spectrum and fully absorb broadband photons. Photo-generated holes in a-Si and a-SiGe absorbers are then extracted and transported to the Pt counter electrode for water oxidation and electrons to the p-type a-SiC:H/electrolyte interface for water reduction. Therefore, our proposed photocathode design allows for the effective separation of the carrier generation and HER reaction.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode consisting of a ZnO:Al transparent conducting oxide substrate (AZO), an a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cell, an n-type μc-Si:H layer, and a p-type a-SiC:H protection layer. (b) Tilted view scanning electron microscope image (SEM) of the photocathode; cross-section is also shown and colored for distinguishing the layers. 
Considering the well known instability of silicon materials in alkaline solution, the p-type a-SiC:H layer was proposed to protect the exposed n-type materials (n-type a-Si:H) of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode immersed in the electrolyte. However, the additional p-type a-SiC:H layer may cause an obvious electrical loss of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode by forming a rectifying tunnel recombination junction (TRJ) with the preceding n-type a-Si:H layer, thereby blocking the carrier transfer from the cell to the semiconductor/solution interface. To electrically lossless interconnect the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer with our proposed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode, a narrow gap n-type μc-Si:H layer was then proposed to be sandwiched between the photocathode and the protection layer, as schematically shown in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the three-electrode configuration with an n-type μc-Si:H layer sandwiched between the a-Si/a-SiGe solar cell and the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer. (b) Illuminated and dark J–E plots of a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with or without n-type μc-Si:H layers in 1 M sodium hydroxide alkaline solution. (c) Illuminated J–E curves of a protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode at various light intensities. (d) Two-electrode J–V characteristics of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells with or without n-type μc-Si:H layers. 
The PEC properties of the p-a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with or without n-type μc-Si:H layers (PEC-1 and PEC-2 for short, respectively) were characterized in the three-electrode voltammetry configuration shown in Fig. 2a (a-Si/a-SiGe working electrode, Pt counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl reference electrode). A 40 nm thick n-type μc-Si:H layer with a band gap of 1.44 eV and a dark conductivity of 3 S cm−1 was sandwiched between the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cell and the p-a-SiC:H protection layer for the PEC-1 photocathode. Fig. 2b shows the plot of current densities as a function of the linearly swept applied potential, illumination (light or dark), and electrolyte conditions. The potential values versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (VAg/AgCl) were converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) (VRHE) using the relationship28VRHE = VAg/AgCl + V0Ag/AgClvs. NHE
Where V0Ag/AgClvs. NHE equals to 0.199 V at a temperature of 25 °C and in our case, VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.965 V (pH = 13). As shown in Fig. 2b, an extremely low cathodic current (<0.02 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) can be observed under the dark conditions. Under AM 1.5 simulated illumination, the magnitude of the photocathodic current densities J0 vs. RHE of the photocathodes is remarkably enhanced to 0.45 mA cm−2 and 5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE for the PEC-2 and PEC-1 samples, respectively. The photocurrent density of the PEC-1 sample also scales with the light intensity of the incident spectrum, as shown in Fig. 2c and Fig. S1,† proving that the observed cathodic current originates from the absorption and carrier extraction of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode. It is clear that a higher current output can be achieved with the additional n-type μc-Si:H layer. The two-electrode J–V characteristics of a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells shown in Fig. 2d indicate that the additional n-type μc-Si:H layer can obviously improve the performance of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cell with a p-type a-SiC:H layer. We attribute the performance improvement to the formation of an electrically lossless TRJ between the a-Si/a-SiGe photocathode and the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer, which effectively mitigates the accumulation of photo-generated electrons near the TRJ, thereby reducing the Voc losses and elevating the effective current output.29 The narrow-gap μc-Si:H layer can form an efficiently graded band gap profile with the adjacent n-type a-Si:H layer to accelerate the carrier transfer and improve the non-localized recombination of the carriers from the adjacent cells.30 It should be noted that the onset potential (Eon) values, which represent the required potential positive than the reversible potential (E(H2O/H2)) for water reduction, are measured to be 0.93 V vs. RHE (PEC-2) and 1.61 V vs. RHE (PEC-1). The differences between the two samples originate from the larger Voc losses at the bad TRJ of the PEC-2 sample. To our knowledge, the photocurrent onset potential (1.61 V) of our p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode is the highest value reported to date. Although the reported crystalline Si photocathodes, such as p-Si/W2C/Pt,31 Si nanowire/Pt32etc., can realize a higher photocathodic current output (>18 mA cm−2) and further adopt additional n+p junctions to elevate onset potentials,33 the general Eon values achieved for the photocathodes were lower than 0.6 V, which is extremely lower than the thermodynamic potential in demand (1.23 eV) for water splitting. Higher onset potentials by the photocathodes will mitigate the requirements on the additional photo-voltage provided by the photoanodes for water reduction and the unwanted overpotentials of the anodic and cathodic catalysts, thereby allowing for the adoption of narrow-gap photoanodes with higher overpotentials. Meanwhile, the onset potentials of our proposed a-Si/a-SiGe photocathodes can also be effectively tuned on account of the broad band gap range (from 1.1 eV to 1.8 eV) of the a-SiGe bottom cells.34 The high onset potential by our a-Si/a-SiGe photocathode originates from the high open circuit voltage (Voc) about 1.8 V of the a-Si/a-SiGe solar cells (see Fig. 2d). It should be noted that the current density at 0 V vs. RHE (5.0 mA cm−2) for the PEC-1 sample is lower than that (a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.67 mA cm−2) of the corresponding solar cell measured in a two-electrode configuration. The differences between the two values mainly result from the absence of the ZnO:B/Ag/Al back reflector in the PEC-1 sample in comparison to the counterpart solar cell, thereby causing the a-SiGe component cell turn into the current limiting cell in the PEC-1 sample.
To quantify the PEC performance of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode, the maximum efficiency ηPEC of the photocathode can be defined as26  where Jmax and Emax respectively correspond to the current density and potential at the maximum power point, ERHE is the Nernst potential of hydrogen generation, and I0 denotes the power density of the incident spectrum. We can find that a ηPEC value of 2.1% can be achieved for the p-a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode (PEC-1). The value is much higher than that (1.3%) provided by the intrinsic a-SiC:H protected a-Si/μc-Si photocathode reported by Han et al.35 It is noteworthy that there are no HER catalysts on our p-a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode. Actually, the effective current density at 0 V vs. RHE and the maximum efficiency of our protected tandem photocathode can be further improved by implementing advanced light-trapping architectures, such as back reflectors designed surface textures etc., to improve the absorption and carrier generation of the current limiting cell (a-SiGe cell). However, considering the highest current densities at 1.23 V vs. RHE reported protective metal oxide photoanodes so far, such as 3.6 mA cm−2 for bismuth vanadate (BiVO4)25 and 3 mA cm−2 for α-Fe2O336 WO3 photoanodes37etc., there is high potential for our proposed photocathode to couple with protective oxide photoanodes to form a highly stable monolithic PEC device in the future.
Advantages of large-area scalability and wide availability for a-Si/a-SiGe tandem thin film photocathodes23 make proposed solar water splitting devices economically feasible. In the past decades, to overcome the large water splitting overpotentials typically required for the highly reactive HER and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and facilitate the development of economical PEC systems, considering the limitation of the scarcity and high cost of best-known pure noble metal catalysts for hydrogen production, such as platinum, ruthenium, iridium etc., other nonprecious catalysts for low-cost hydrogen evolution, such as MoS2 and NiMo earth-abundant catalysts,26,38 have been developed to realize more cost-effective and highly reactive photocathodes. To highlight the interfacial properties and catalytic activity of the p-type a-SiC:H/electrolyte interface, an a-MoS3 catalyzed unprotected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode is also prepared for comparison. The adopted a-MoS3 catalysts show a better catalytic activity toward the HER in comparison to the FTO electrodes, as shown in the ESI Fig. S2.† The catalysts were directly fabricated on the n-type layer of the proposed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode by a room-temperature wet-chemical synthesis. In order to compare the effect of the p-a-SiC:H protection layer and a-MoS3 catalysts on the PEC properties of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode, the unprotected photocathode that the n-type μc-Si:H layer directly contacts with the electrolyte is also shown. Fig. 3a presents the J–E characteristics of unprotected, p-a-SiC:H protected, and a-MoS3 catalyzed photocathodes.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–E characteristics of unprotected, p-a-SiC:H protected, and a-MoS3 catalyzed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes in a three-electrode configuration under dark and simulated AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (b) Chopped chronoamperometry curves of the photocathodes at 0 V vs. RHE. 
The illuminated J–E curves shown in Fig. 3a indicate that a better HER activity (Eon = 1.61 eV and J0 vs. RHE = 5.0 mA cm−2) can be observed for the p-a-SiC:H protected photocathode in comparison to the unprotected one (Eon = 1.0 eV and J0 vs. RHE = 3.18 mA cm−2), which is nearly the same as the a-MoS3 catalyzed sample (Eon = 1.7 eV and J0 vs. RHE = 4.78 mA cm−2). We can see that the onset potential of the unprotected one is extremely lower than the two-electrode result (Voc = 1.8 V, see Fig. 2d), indicating that a large overpotential loss happens at the n-type μc-Si:H/electrolyte interface. However, the a-MoS3 catalyzed photocathode exhibits a positive shift in the onset potential and enhanced cathodic photocurrents, indicating that the a-MoS3 catalysts successfully reduce the overpotential loss and improve the HER activity of the unprotected one. Although there are no HER catalysts on the surface of the p-a-SiC:H protection layer, our proposed p-a-SiC:H protected photocathode still exhibits a similar HER activity in comparison to the a-MoS3 catalyzed unprotected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode.
The HER process in alkaline media can be explained by three possible reaction steps on various electrocatalystsH2O + e− + M → MHabs + OH− (I. Volmer step)H2O + MHabs + e− → M + H2 + OH− (II. Heyrovsky step)2MHabs → 2M + H2 (III. Tafel step)where M means an empty active site and MHabs represents an absorbed H intermediate. The HER procedure can be understood to proceed by one of the two mechanisms: Volmer and Heyrovsky steps or Volmer and Tafel steps. Consequently, it is clear that higher density active sites M and faster electron transfer may positively contribute to the HER process. To study the interfacial transport and catalytic activity of the photocathodes and explore the cause of the HER activity of the samples, the chopped chronoamperometry curves of the photocathodes were measured under cyclically on-off switched illumination in 10 s period at 0 V vs. RHE and are plotted in Fig. 3b. Obvious transient photocurrents can be found for the unprotected and a-MoS3 catalyzed photocathodes when light is turned on. However, no photocurrent transients appear on the chopped J–t curve of the p-a-SiC:H protected photocathode. We should note that a poor HER activity of the semiconductor/electrolyte interface may cause slow electron transfer across the interface, thereby giving rise to the transient accumulation of the photogenerated electrons at the interface and resulting in off-on photocurrent transients.39 Therefore, the slow kinetics of water reduction for a-MoS3 catalyzed and unprotected samples mainly causes stronger carrier recombination at semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces. This observation can also explain the difference in the J0 vs. RHE values of the three photocathodes with an elegant formulation first reported by Dotan et al.40Jph = Jabs × ηsep × ηcatwhere Jph is the total photocurrent density, Jabs means the photon-absorption rate expressed as current density, ηsep is the separation efficiency, and ηcat is the catalytic efficiency for water reduction. Lower ηcat values can be found for the a-MoS3 catalyzed and unprotected samples in comparison to the p-a-SiC:H protected one (see Fig. 3b), which lead to lower J0 vs. RHE values due to similar Jabs and ηsep values for the three photocathodes. Therefore, our proposed p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode shows a good interfacial activity even without any HER catalyst.
Intrinsic a-SiC:H films acting as protection layers and absorbers in back-side illuminated photocathodes simultaneously were also reported by Zhu et al.41 and Han et al.35 To identify more suitable protection layers, the J–E characteristics of p-type a-SiC:H, intrinsic a-SiC:H, and n-type μc-Si:H layers fabricated on FTO substrates were measured in a serial water-splitting device under illumination and are displayed in Fig. 4a. The wired water-splitting device comprising of three a-SiGe single-junction solar cells in series was deployed in a three-electrode configuration with a Pt counter electrode and the immersed catalyst electrodes acting as the working electrodes, as schematically shown in Fig. 4b. The three a-SiGe single-junction solar cells (Voc = 0.734 V) in series can provide a sufficient Voc value of 2.1 V for water splitting. The light incidents on the solar cells in series to provide the photo-generated carriers to the Pt counter electrode and the corresponding photocathodes. The dark and illuminated J–E curves of a Pt electrode are also shown here for reference.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–E characteristics of p-type a-SiC:H, intrinsic a-SiC:H, and n-type μc-Si:H layers measured in a serial water-splitting device under dark and simulated AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Dark and illuminated J–E curves of a Pt electrode are also shown here for reference. (b) Schematic diagram of the serial water-splitting device. (c) Chopped J–t curves of the photocathodes at 0 V vs. RHE. (d) The band energetics of the semiconductor/electrolyte contact after equilibration in the dark for the n-type and p-type semiconductors. 
Clearly, the p-type a-SiC:H photocathode exhibits an obvious positive shift in the onset potential (Eon = 1.5 V) and enhanced current output at 0 V vs. RHE (J0 vs. RHE = 3.0 mA cm−2), relative to the i-type a-SiC:H (Eon = 1.08 V and J0 vs. RHE = 2.58 mA cm−2) and n-type μc-Si:H (Eon = 1.11 V and J0 vs. RHE = 1.8 mA cm−2) photocathodes. Meanwhile, a better current output while keeping a similar onset potential can also be achieved for the i-type a-SiC:H photocathode in comparison to the n-type one. Although the p-type a-SiC:H photocathode still shows worse HER activity than the referenced Pt photocathode (Eon = 1.95 V and J0 vs. RHE = 3.33 mA cm−2), it should be noted that our work here aims at developing a type of large-scale and low-cost water splitting device. To characterize the catalytic activity of semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces of the photocathodes, chopped J–t curves of the photocathodes were also measured under cyclically on-off switched illumination in 10 s period at 0 V vs. RHE and are shown in Fig. 4c. It is clearly shown that for the n-type μc-Si:H and intrinsic a-SiC:H samples, extremely obvious on-off anodic (about 1.5 mA cm−2) and relatively weak off-on cathodic photocurrent transients can be found, relative to the stable J–t curve of the p-type a-SiC:H photocathode and the reference Pt electrode. According to the precious discussions, a slow kinetics of water reduction, that is, lower catalytic efficiency ηcat values, can be evaluated for the i-type a-SiC:H and n-type μc-Si:H photocathodes in comparison to the other ones. When light is turned off, slow photogenerated electron transfer across the semiconductor/electrolyte interface causes extracted electrons accumulate near the interface and recombine with free holes in the conduction band, thereby withdrawing holes from the external circuit and generating a transient anodic response, as shown in Fig. 4c. The band energetics displayed in Fig. 4d shows that the better HER activity of the p-type a-SiC:H photocathode in Fig. 4a originates from the strong interfacial electric field orienting from the electrolyte to the photocathode that helps electron flow into the positively charged acceptor species at the interface, however, the intrinsic and the n-type ones behave in an analogous manner. The intrinsic a-SiC:H materials generally show a weak n-type conductivity due to the background oxygen doping in PECVD systems. Based on aforementioned observations, we deduce that p-type a-SiC:H films are more suitable as protection layers in comparison to the reported intrinsic a-SiC:H protection layers,35,41 especially in the case of photocathodes free of catalysts.
This can also explain the observations in Fig. 3a and b, as shown in the HER reaction steps discussed above, even though highly catalytic a-MoS3 catalysts can provide more active sites M in comparison to the p-type a-SiC:H material, however, the slow electron transfer for the n-type μc-Si:H layer/electrolyte interface due to the reverse interfacial electric field may seriously limit the formation of MHabs intermediates needed for the Heyrovsky or Tafel steps, thereby deteriorating the HER activity of the a-MoS3 catalyzed unprotected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode. The faster electron transfer resulting from the helpful electrical field orientation for electrons and the optimized n-type μc-Si:H/p-type a-SiC:H TRJ for the p-type a-SiC:H protected one, however, may contribute to the HER procedure even without any HER catalyst with high-density active sites and achieve a comparable J–E curve with the a-MoS3 catalyzed unprotected one (see Fig. 3a), thereby highlighting the good HER activity of the p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode.
The stability of the proposed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode under illumination, which is the key of the industrialization application of solar water splitting devices, was also studied during the 2 hour chronoamperometry test in an alkaline electrolyte with pH = 13. The photocathode was tested at 0 V vs. RHE and Fig. 5a shows the photograph of the photocathode in test.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of the p-a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode acting as the working electrode in a three-electrode configuration. A potential of 0 V vs. RHE was applied. (b) J–t curves of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with a p-a-SiC:H protection layer. The photocathodes were immersed in an alkaline electrolyte (pH = 13) and tested under AM 1.5 illumination for 2 hours. Photograph of unprotected and protected photocathodes after the stability test (left and middle) and the as-deposited photocathode with a p-a-SiC:H protection layer (right) is also embedded in the figure for clarity. 
From the photograph shown in Fig. 5a we can observe that H2 gas continually bubbles up from the p-a-SiC:H protection layer at 0 V vs. RHE, indicating that the HER happens at the photocathode surface under illumination. The resulting J–t curve plotted in Fig. 5b illustrates that the proposed photocathode shows long-term stability in the alkaline electrolyte over the course of the two-hour reaction, relative to the instability of the unprotected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode (see Fig. S4†). The inset photograph in Fig. 5b displays the unprotected and p-type a-SiC:H protected photocathodes (left and middle) after the stability test and the as-deposited p-type a-SiC:H protected photocathode (right). The bright yellow surface immersed in solution of the unprotected photocathode is clearly etched during the 2 hour test. However, the purple surface of the p-type a-SiC:H protected photocathode is nearly unchanged in comparison to the as-deposited protected photocathode. The results obviously prove that the stability of our proposed photocathode originates from the p-type a-SiC:H coating. In comparison to other traditional protection coatings, such as TiO2etc.,42 our proposed PECVD deposited p-type a-SiC:H coatings have advantages of a great processing compatibility with silicon based thin film solar cells.
4. Conclusions
To summarize, we have demonstrated a stable p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode with high photovoltage for highly efficient water reduction. By electrically lossless connecting the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer to the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode with a narrow-gap n-type μc-Si:H layer, the charge transfer to the semiconductor/solution junction is improved, resulting in a lower photovoltage loss and a high onset potential. A relatively good HER catalytic activity, which is comparable to a-MoS3 catalyzed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes, can also be found for the proposed p-type a-SiC:H protection layer even without any HER catalyst, illustrating the possible implementation of a catalyst-free solar water splitting device. The entire fabrication process was carried out by technically matured PV processing, thus having great potential to achieve large-area fabrication of highly stable and efficient monolithic water splitting devices.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the supports from International cooperation projects of the Ministry of science and technology (2014DFE60170), and Specialized Research Fund for the Ph.D Program of Higher Education (20120031110039).
References
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov, W. I. David and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4356–4362 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Andrews and B. Shabani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 1184–1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cook, Eng. Sci. Educ. J., 2002, 11, 205–216 CrossRef .
G. W. Crabtree, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. V. Buchanan, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 39–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Barreto, A. Makihira and K. Riahi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 267–284 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 CAS .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. B. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. Fischer, Y. B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Sahlberg, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3676–3683 CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohashi, K. Uosaki and J. O. M. Bockris, Int. J. Energy Res., 1977, 1, 25–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Baglio, G. S. Calabrese, D. J. Harrison, E. Kamieniecki, A. J. Ricco, M. S. Wrighton and G. D. Zoski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 2246–2256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, M. Nonogaki, W. Septina, G. Gunawan, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1849–1854 CAS .
R. M. Candea, M. Kastner, R. Goodman and N. Hickok, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 2724–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Siripala, A. Ivanovskaya, T. F. Jaramillo, S. H. Baeck and E. W. McFarland, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, N. Matsuki, T. Ohmori, H. Mametsuka, M. Kondo, A. Matsuda and E. Suzuki, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 1167–1169 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Friedman, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 14, 131–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ganguly, T. Ikeda, T. Nishimiya, K. Saitoh, M. Kondo and A. Matsuda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4224–4226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, G. Yue, L. Sivec, J. Yang, S. Guha and C. S. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 113512 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, L. Bai, X. Zhang, D. Zhang, C. Wei, J. Sun and Y. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 128, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Hegedus, F. Kampas and J. Xi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 813–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Y. Hou, J. K. Arch, S. J. Fonash, S. Wiedeman and M. Bennett, Proceedings of the 22th IEEE PVSC,  1991, 1260–1264 Search PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, H. He, W. D. Chemelewski, H. Celio, A. Dolocan and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1535–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kargar, K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Choi, H. Jeong, G. Y. Jung and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9407–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, X. Liao, S. Han, H. Povolny and P. Agarwal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, I. A. Digdaya, T. W. Buijs, F. F. Abdi, Z. Huang, R. Liu and A. H. Smets, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4155–4162 CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6549–6552 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, I. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298–2303 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398–9404 CAS .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
F. Zhu, J. Hu, I. Matulionis, T. Deutsch, N. Gaillard, A. Kunrath and A. Madan, Philos. Mag., 2009, 89, 2723–2739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02736eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the p-type a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode consisting of a ZnO:Al transparent conducting oxide substrate (AZO), an a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cell, an n-type μc-Si:H layer, and a p-type a-SiC:H protection layer. (b) Tilted view scanning electron microscope image (SEM) of the photocathode; cross-section is also shown and colored for distinguishing the layers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the three-electrode configuration with an n-type μc-Si:H layer sandwiched between the a-Si/a-SiGe solar cell and the p-type a-SiC:H protection layer. (b) Illuminated and dark J–E plots of a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with or without n-type μc-Si:H layers in 1 M sodium hydroxide alkaline solution. (c) Illuminated J–E curves of a protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode at various light intensities. (d) Two-electrode J–V characteristics of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem solar cells with or without n-type μc-Si:H layers.	 
VRHE = VAg/AgCl + V0Ag/AgClvs. NHE

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–E characteristics of unprotected, p-a-SiC:H protected, and a-MoS3 catalyzed a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes in a three-electrode configuration under dark and simulated AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (b) Chopped chronoamperometry curves of the photocathodes at 0 V vs. RHE.	 
H2O + e− + M → MHabs + OH− (I. Volmer step)
H2O + MHabs + e− → M + H2 + OH− (II. Heyrovsky step)
2MHabs → 2M + H2 (III. Tafel step)
Jph = Jabs × ηsep × ηcat

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–E characteristics of p-type a-SiC:H, intrinsic a-SiC:H, and n-type μc-Si:H layers measured in a serial water-splitting device under dark and simulated AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Dark and illuminated J–E curves of a Pt electrode are also shown here for reference. (b) Schematic diagram of the serial water-splitting device. (c) Chopped J–t curves of the photocathodes at 0 V vs. RHE. (d) The band energetics of the semiconductor/electrolyte contact after equilibration in the dark for the n-type and p-type semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of the p-a-SiC:H protected a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathode acting as the working electrode in a three-electrode configuration. A potential of 0 V vs. RHE was applied. (b) J–t curves of the a-Si/a-SiGe tandem photocathodes with a p-a-SiC:H protection layer. The photocathodes were immersed in an alkaline electrolyte (pH = 13) and tested under AM 1.5 illumination for 2 hours. Photograph of unprotected and protected photocathodes after the stability test (left and middle) and the as-deposited photocathode with a p-a-SiC:H protection layer (right) is also embedded in the figure for clarity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02736e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
