Effects of A site doping on the crystallization of perovskite films  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08656H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08656H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1372-1394Effects of A site doping on the crystallization of perovskite films

        
          
            Caiyi 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanbo 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuesong 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tianhao 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qifeng 
            Han
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yiqiang 
            Zhang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Liyuan 
            Han
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Material Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: Han.qifeng@sjtu.edu.cn; han.liyuan@sjtu.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan Institute of Advanced Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
Received 
      3rd September 2020
    , Accepted 24th November 2020First published on 25th November 2020AbstractPerovskite materials with ABX3 chemical formula have a high absorption coefficient, high mobility and low exciton binding energies, and thus are promising candidates for the next generation of photovoltaic devices. Doping various cations on the A site has been reported to be beneficial for improving the performance and stability of perovskite solar cells. However, the mixed cation compositions make the perovskite crystallization mechanism complicated. To better manipulate perovskite crystallization, it is essential to understand the effects of A site doping on the perovskite crystallization. Four influences of A site doping on the crystallization of perovskite films are reviewed in this paper: (1) the influences on the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 layer; (2) nucleation and growth; (3) phase transition; (4) crystal orientation. At the end, we suggest that the influence of A site doping on the performance and stability of perovskite solar cells should be further studied with the help of advanced in situ characterization methods, theoretical computation and machine learning.Caiyi ZhangCaiyi Zhang obtained his B.S. degree from Wuhan University of Technology in 2018, and then continued his study as a PhD student at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His current research is focused on the fabrication of efficient and stable inverted perovskite solar cells via the optimization of perovskite crystallization and interface engineering.Qifeng HanQifeng Han received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He is now an associate professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His current research interests involve novel next-generation solar cells and solar cell materials design and fabrication, including perovskite solar cells, perovskite/chalcogenide tandem solar cells and perovskite single crystals.Liyuan HanLiyuan Han is the chair professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He received his PhD degree from the University of Osaka Prefecture in 1988, and then worked at SHARP Corporation and started research on solar cells. Afterwards, he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, and established a research center of next-generation solar cells. His current research interests involve fundamental research on perovskite solar cells and the fabrication of high-performance perovskite solar modules for commercialization.
1. Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) attract tremendous attention owing to their low-cost abundant raw material and remarkable power conversion efficiencies (PCE).1–3 The PCE of perovskite solar cells dramatically improved by over 25% in the past ten years, surpassing other thin-film solar cells, and they are expected to reach that of single crystal silicon solar cells.4 The excellent performance of PSCs is mainly attributed to the outstanding photovoltaic properties of perovskite materials, including the high absorption coefficient,5 high mobility,6 long carrier diffusion lengths,7,8 and low exciton binding energies.9
As shown in Fig. 1a, the crystal structure of a 3D perovskite adopts a general formula of ABX3, where A stands for a monovalent cation such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+) and cesium (Cs+), B is a divalent metal cation Pb2+ or Sn2+, and X represents a halide anion such as I−, Br− and Cl−. In the perovskite framework, Pb2+ is located at the center of the [BX6]4− octahedron lattice cell, and the monovalent cations occupy the eight vertex angles of a face-centered cubic lattice.
 Fig. 1  (a) ABX3 perovskite crystal structure and atomic structures of the three A site cations: cesium, methylammonium and formamidinium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.10 Diagram of (b) black (α-phase) and (c) yellow (δ-phase) FAPbI3 perovskites. The N and C ions of the formamidinium cations are shown as blue and green spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.11 (d) Phase instability of CsPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.12 
The Goldschmidt tolerance  can be utilized to predict the stability and distortion of the ABX3 crystal structure,13 where rA, rB and rX are the ionic radius of A, B, and X, respectively. A stable perovskite structure is expected with a t value between 0.8 and 1.0,14 while nonperovskite phases are formed when the value of t is larger than 1 or smaller than 0.8.15,16 In addition, the octahedral factor (μ = rB/rX) is important for predicting the stability of the structure, and a stable perovskite structure can be obtained when μ > 0.41.17–19 To date, the cations on the A site that could meet the requirements of a 3-dimensional perovskite structure are MA+, FA+ and Cs+.
At room temperature, MAPbI3 has a t value of 0.91 (ref. 20 and 21) and exhibits a tetragonal phase.22 The bandgap of MAPbI3 is 1.57 eV,23 which has the limitation to absorb the sunlight above 800 nm and hinders the development of the PCE. Moreover, MAPbI3 shows poor thermal stability due to the volatilization property.24 Compared with MAPbI3, FAPbI3 with an appropriate bandgap (1.48 eV) is thermally stable and exhibits a suitable tolerance factor of approximately 1.10 Although FAPbI3 shows great potential in the use of sunlight, the phase stability at room temperature is a big issue in that the black α-phase will gradually transform to the undesirable yellow δ-phase with a wide bandgap (Fig. 1b and c).11 Besides the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials, the pure inorganic perovskite CsPbI3 exhibits a bandgap of 1.73 eV, while its stable phase is the yellow δ-phase at room temperature, and the photoactive α-phase is only thermally stable at temperatures beyond 300 °C (Fig. 1d).25 Therefore, a single cation on the A site perovskite is difficult to simultaneously meet the requirements for thermal stability, structural stability and high efficiency. Controlling the size of the A site cation by mixing various cations can address this issue.
Doping small cations, such as MA26,27 or Cs,28 into FAPbI3 can reduce the tolerance factor to stabilize the α-phase. However, as MA (1.80 Å) is only slightly smaller than FA (1.90 Å), it is difficult to obtain the FA perovskite without traces of the yellow phase. In contrast, Cs is very effective in ‘‘pushing’’ FA into the beneficial α-phase due to the large size difference between Cs (1.67 Å) and FA (1.90 Å).29,30 Therefore, it is expected that perovskite films with better stability and a higher amount of the α-phase will be achieved when the organic molecule MA is replaced with the inorganic Cs atom.28,31,32 However, their bandgap is relatively large and leads to deficient light absorption. In order to achieve highly efficient and stable PSCs, co-doping MA and Cs into the FA perovskite seems reasonable because incorporating MA produces an appropriate bandgap and doping Cs could suppress the formation of the δ-phase.29 Inverted devices based on the FAMACs perovskite delivered a certified PCE over 22.3%.33,134 Higher efficiency of inverted devices based on FAMACs perovskite was reported at November.
Moreover, doping Rb+ and K+ on the A site have been proven to be an effective approach to improve the performance and stability of the device.34–38 However, too many doped cations on the A site make it difficult to control the crystallization mechanism of the perovskite complex or lead the perovskite crystallization.
Therefore, this review summarizes the effects of A site doping on the FAMA, FACs and FAMACs perovskite film crystallization: (1) the influences on the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 layer; (2) nucleation and growth; (3) phase transition and (4) crystal orientation. We hope this review could provide an in-depth understanding of the roles of A site doping on perovskite film crystallization processes, thus obtaining high-quality mixed cation perovskite films with a homogeneous distribution composition and preferred orientation pure α-phase crystals to produce highly efficient and stable devices, and promote the development of PSCs.
2 The fabrication of perovskite films
The fabrication of the high-quality perovskite films mainly includes the one-step (antisolvent) method39–41 and two-step spin-coating method,42–44 whose corresponding schematic diagram and the effects of A site doping on the perovskite crystallization are shown in Fig. 2. In the antisolvent method, the precursor solution was first obtained by dissolving the perovskite components (methylammonium iodide (MAI), formamidinium iodide (FAI), lead iodide (PbI2), cesium iodide (CsI)) in polar solvents (e.g., dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), gamma-butyrolactone (GBL)). Then, the precursor solution was spun at a low rotation rate for a certain amount of time on the substrate, which produced the intermediate I. Afterwards, the antisolvent (e.g., chlorobenzene (CB), toluene (TL), diethyl ether (DEE)) was dropped onto the intermediate I at a high rotation rate to extract the polar solvent and reduce the solubility of the solute, achieving a supersaturated solution. This induced the nucleation to produce intermediate II.45–47 Intermediate II exhibited various phases with different A site doping, as shown in the schematic diagram. This indicates that the A site molecules or atoms have strong influences on the phase transition, which will be discussed in Section 3.3. After further thermal annealing, the perovskite films were obtained through the crystallization of the intermediate II. The antisolvent method is a simple and effective way to fabricate compact and smooth perovskite films.45,48
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the one-step and two-step spin-coating methods of perovskite films, and the effects of A site doping on the perovskite crystallization, including the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 films, nucleation and growth, phase transition, the composition and structure of the intermediate and crystal orientation. 2H and 3C phases stand for the δ-phase, α-phase, respectively. 4H and 6H phases both belong to hexagonal polytypes. 
The two-step spin-coating method has attracted a great deal of attention for its high reproducibility.44,49,50 First, the PbI2 solution was spun onto the substrate to obtain the PbI2 films. Subsequently, the mixed solution (formamidine iodide (FAI), methylammonium bromide (MABr), methylammonium chloride (MACl) in isopropanol (IPA)) was dropped onto the surface of the PbI2 films during spinning, and DMSO molecules can be easily replaced by FAI to produce intermediate III.44 In the end, intermediate III underwent further thermal annealing to produce the final perovskite films.44,51 Different from the one-step method, the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 films can influence the crystallization of the perovskite films.
To prepare high-quality perovskite films, the following three requirements should be taken into considerations: (1) the higher amount of α-phase is beneficial for absorbing more sunlight;52 (2) a large grain reduces the grain boundaries and decreases the carrier recombination;53 (3) highly oriented perovskite crystals are able to promote carrier transport.54 To achieve these goals, it is essential to control the crystallization process by manipulating the phase transition and the composition structure of the intermediate.
3. Effects of A site doping on the crystallization of perovskite films
3.1 The influences on the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 layer
As mentioned in Section 2, in the two-step spin-coating method, the PbI2 solution was first deposited onto the substrate. Subsequently, the mixed solution (e.g., FAI, MABr) was spin-coated onto the PbI2 layer, and the reaction started from the surface of the PbI2 film to the bottom.42,44,49 Because of the small activation energy for the perovskite crystallization, tightly packed perovskite crystals are formed once the FAI is dropped onto the PbI2 surface. As a result, the penetration of FAI into the deeper layer is blocked by the tight perovskite top layer, leaving a substantial amount of unreacted PbI2. Therefore, it is essential to control the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 film for the full diffusion of FAI and sufficient conversion of the perovskite crystals.55
PbI2 interacted with CsI to form PbI3−, and then promoted the dissolution of PbI2 in DMF. This reaction changed the morphology of the PbI2 film, and then affected the nucleation and growth of the perovskite. Eventually, it increased the grain size of the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite films.56 To better understand the role of Cs on perovskite crystallization, the authors first studied the effect of CsI on the PbI2 solution. The PbI2 solution (mixed with CsI) and the pristine PbI2 solution were labeled as PbI2–CsI–DMF and PbI2–DMF, respectively. The absorption peak of PbI3− located at 330 nm exhibited enhanced intensity (Fig. 3a), which suggested that CsI was interacting with PbI2 to form PbI3− and increase the solubility of PbI2. Dynamic light scattering was employed to verify the size distribution of the dispersion in the precursor solutions. The authors observed that the particle size of PbI2–CsI–DMF was 488 nm, and the particle size of PbI2–DMF was 655 nm (Fig. 3b). This indicated that CsI promoted the growth of the dense and large-grained PbI2 film (Fig. 3d). This high-quality PbI2 layer reduced the nucleation sites for perovskite crystallizing in the second step, and was beneficial for obtaining well-defined and large-grained perovskite films (Fig. 3e).
 Fig. 3  (a) UV absorbance spectra of film-relevant precursor solutions prepared from PbI2 and PbI2 with CsI. (b) Size distributions of PbI2 complexes in the precursor solution detected by dynamic light scattering. Top-view SEM images of the PbI2 thin films obtained (c) without and (d) with CsI. Top-view SEM images of the (e) FAPbI3(Cl) and (f) FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl) films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.56 
Meng et al. reported that CsI would react with PbI2 and DMSO to form a coordinated intermediate phase (PbI2–DMSO–CsI).57 As depicted in Fig. 4a, a two-step method is used for the fabrication of perovskite film. Briefly, PbI2 solution in DMF/DMSO without or with CsI was deposited onto the TiO2 mesoporous substrates, followed by 30 minutes of vacuum treatment at room temperature to remove the residual solvents. Then, the mixed solution of MAI and FAI in IPA were dripped sequentially on the rotating surface of the obtained precursor film under ambient conditions. After annealing, the perovskite films were obtained. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed to understand the CsI influence on the PbI2–DMSO precursor films. As shown in Fig. 4b, a new peak appeared at 1108 cm−1 in the Cs-doped PbI2 film compared with the pure PbI2 film, suggesting that the incorporation of CsI in PbI2 would form a coordination interaction. In fact, the infrared absorption peaks at around 1107–1120 cm−1 indicated that sulfoxide can be coordinated via S atoms with a lone pair.58 Therefore, they believed that CsI would form a strong bond with the SO groups of DMSO via the S end, corresponding to the coordinated intermediate phase (PbI2–DMSO–CsI), which retarded the crystallization of PbI2 and then delayed the reaction between PbI2 and FAI, resulting in the efficient penetration of FAI. Based on this strategy, they obtained Cs0.1(MA0.4FA0.6)0.9PbI3 perovskite films with a flat surface, few defects and a large grain (Fig. 4e). Eventually, the champion device for Cs-doped films exhibited a PCE of 20.3%.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the two-step method-sequential multidrop-coating method for the fabrication of Csx(MA0.4FA0.6)1−xPbI3 perovskite films. (b) FTIR spectra of the PbI2–DMSO precursor films without and with 30% CsI as-prepared and after storing 10 h under ambient condition. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) top-view images of the prepared Csx(MA0.4FA0.6)1−xPbI3 perovskite films with (c) 0% CsI, (d) 5% CsI, (e) 10% CsI, and (f) 15% CsI in the precursor solutions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.57 
Built on this work, the effect of CsI on the morphology of the PbI2 films was further explored. Finally, a porous and intercrossed PbI2–(CsI)0.15 nanorod scaffold was prepared by integrating toluene dripping with CsI incorporation in ambient air.55 This PbI2–(CsI)0.15 film simultaneously featured high porosity and a dense precursor layer, facilitating the diffusion of FAI and eventually obtaining high-quality perovskite films.
They further added FAI and CsI in the PbI2 solution to obtain the PbI2–(CsI)0.15–(FAI)x intermediate complex, and observed the appearance of a broad and asymmetric photoluminescence (PL) peak at 600–800 nm. This suggested that the PbI2–(CsI)0.15–(FAI)x film existed in both crystalline and amorphous phases, which might be more helpful for the perovskite conversion and growth compared with the crystalline PbI2 film.59
Heremans et al. found that the amount of CsI in the PbI2 film can change the perovskite film morphology by the two-step method.60 They observed rod-like crystals and small grain sizes in perovskite films when the molar fraction of CsI compared with PbI2 was 20%, while there were larger crystals with the addition of 10 mol% CsI. Furthermore, adding CsF to the PbI2 film enhances the crystallinity of the perovskite films.61
Very recently, Lu et al. demonstrated that doping the Cs+ cation into the PbI2 precursors promotes the formation of δ-CsPbI3 and retards the crystallization of PbI2. This induces sparse nucleation sites during the dripping of FAI, which produces large grains with some pinholes. In order to eliminate pinholes, they incorporated GA+ (guanidinium ion) in the second step to accelerate the crystal growth via Ostwald ripening. This produced high crystallinity and large-grain perovskites. As a result, PSCs based on the high-quality films achieved a PCE over 23%.62
Smaller K+ cations were introduced into the PbI2 precursor solution to control the morphology of the PbI2 film by Chu et al.63 The pristine PbI2 film without doping was non-continuous with many pinholes, while the K+-doped PbI2 film featured rod shapes. These nanostructured morphologies of PbI2 induce the homogeneous nucleation and larger crystal sizes of the perovskite film. This uniform and compact perovskite film exhibits fewer charge traps and defects.
Friend et al. found that adding NaI to the PbI2 solution could also modify the morphology of the PbI2 layer.64 A rough and highly porous overlayer of PbI2 was observed, which facilitated the full conversion of PbI2 into the perovskite crystal.65
3.2 Nucleation and growth
It is significant to control the number of nucleation sites during the growth of the perovskite crystals. On the one hand, the fast nucleation rate will induce many nucleation sites, causing small grains. On the other hand, as for the slow nucleation rate, although it is beneficial to the large grain formation, it will also cause the film to have many uncovered pinhole areas.46,66 Furthermore, flattening the solubility of the most and least soluble components can induce homogeneous crystallization.
Very recently, Sargent et al. remarked that the incorporation of MA+ could change the solubility of the Br-perovskite phase of the precursor solution. This induced the homogeneous growth of perovskite, and then promoted the uniform distribution of the components, thereby improving the carrier diffusivity.67 To verify this, they measured the solubility of the mixed cation perovskite in a 4:1 mixture of DMF/DMSO. It is known that the perovskite nucleation occurs when the solute concentration of the solution exceeds the solubility. The solubility of ICsFA (2.5 M) was 5 times that of BrCsFA (0.5 M); that is, the solute concentration of BrCsFA reached the solubility faster compared with ICsFA when the solvents evaporated. Thus, the crystallization of the BrCsFA phase was faster than that of the ICsFA phase, resulting in the heterogeneous growth of the mixed IBrCsFA perovskite and uneven composition distribution of the final films. After the incorporation of MA+, the solubility of ICsMAFA was 4 M and the solubility of BrCsMAFA was 1.8 M. Compared with BrCsFA (0.5 M), the solubility of BrCsMAFA (1.8 M) was higher and effectively avoided the precipitation of the Br-rich phase in advance. Hence, it benefited the uniform growth of the perovskite crystals, and reduced the difference of the composition distribution in the perovskite films. In order to investigate the effect of MA+ on the composition distribution, antisolvents were added to the precursor solutions to induce rapid crystallization. The CsFA solution turned black after the formation of a red precipitate, while the CsMAFA solution directly turned black (Fig. 5a). The red precipitate was Cs- and Br-rich perovskite, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). This proved that the BrCsFA phase will precipitate in advance without MA+, resulting in an uneven composition distribution. Moreover, they acquired the elemental composition in the CsFA and CsMAFA films by XPS and EDX. Compared with the CsFAMA films, the CsFA films had a higher content of Br on the surface, as confirmed by XPS (Fig. 5b). In addition, there was a Br-rich region at the grain boundaries, as compared with the grain core in the CsFA films (Fig. 5c). Since the high Br content of this grain shell produced a higher bandgap and CBM (conduction band minimum) than the grain core in the CsFA films, there will be an energetic barrier for electron transfer between the grains in the CsFA films (Fig. 5d). This resulted in lower diffusivity in the CsFA films compared with the CsFAMA films (Fig. 5e). Moreover, the remaining electron will accumulate and produce a high electron density at the interface of the grain shell and grain core. This may improve the charge-carrier recombination rate.68,69
 Fig. 5  (a) Kinetics of the formation of perovskites. CsFA first forms a red wide-bandgap perovskite, while CsMAFA directly forms a black perovskite. (b) Angle-dependent XPS showing the high Br content (normalized to the Br content in the bulk) on the surface (60–70° from the normal to the surface) compared with the bulk (25–35° from the normal). The boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles. The median and mean are represented by the line dividing the boxes and the open square symbols, respectively. (c) EDX line scan mapping showing the high Br content. (d) Schematic illustration demonstrating the effect of trap densities (top panel) and gradient composition (bottom panel) on the carrier diffusivity. In the bottom panel, the core of the grain is made of a small-bandgap perovskite, and the shell is made of a wide-bandgap perovskite. (e) Diffusivity (red bars) and diffusion lengths (blue bars) for all perovskite thin films. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the diffusivity value fits. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.67 
In addition to MA+, FA+ affects the crystallization of the perovskite through the formation of an intermediate phase. Han et al. facilitated the homogeneous nucleation and modulated the growth of perovskite through the phase-pure (FAI)1−x–PbI2. Based on this method, they prepared uniform and ordered perovskite films.70 First, a solution of PbI2 and FAI in DMF was spun onto the substrate, and then annealed at different temperatures to form the (FAI)1−x–PbI2 intermediate film. They found that annealing at 135 °C could obtain the phase-pure (FAI)0.4–PbI2 solid solution (state II), while annealing at 95 °C produced state I with δ-FAPbI3 and (FAI)0.4–PbI2 by XRD. Annealing at 175 °C resulted in state III with three-type crystals (PbI2 + α-FAPbI3 + (FAI)0.4–PbI2). In addition, only state II exhibited uniform and homogeneous morphology. During the second step, these phase-pure (FAI)0.4–PbI2 intermediate films react with MAI to obtain the stacked FA0.4PbI2.4/MAI film. After the annealing process, the perovskite films with state II have a smaller distribution (300 ± 50 nm) compared with states I or III. However, they had a higher PL lifetime (78 ns) compared with state I (41 ns) or state III (19 ns).
Another approach to influence the crystallization has been explored, where a small amount of Cs results in better quality and purer α-phase perovskite films. Grätzel et al. reported that the addition of Cs can induce perovskite nucleation, and produce uniform and thermally stable perovskite films.29 Interestingly, they observed that the perovskite grains for the Cs5M (M-stands for mixed perovskite) devices tend to go from bottom to top (Fig. 6b), while the grains for the Cs0M tend to stack on top of each other (Fig. 6a). They hypothesized that the addition of Cs will induce perovskite seeds at room temperature, and then these seeds will transform into nucleation sites during the crystallization, which was beneficial to the presence of the uniform grains. To further illustrate the role of Cs, XRD and ultraviolet-visible absorption spectroscopy (UV-vis) were used to characterize the intermediate films before annealing. The Cs10M intermediate films showed a XRD peak of the perovskite phase and strong UV-vis absorption, yielding a black color (Fig. 6c). On the contrary, the Cs0M intermediate films with weak absorption were red, and no perovskite XRD peak was observed. Therefore, they concluded that the incorporation of Cs could promote the perovskite phase formation. Furthermore, the author explored the optimal content of Cs, and found that perovskite films with a suitable bandgap and black phase could be obtained when the Cs content was 5%. In the following mesoporous configuration, i.e., FTO/compact TiO2/mesoTiO2/(Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, the Cs5M device yielded a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.5 mA cm−2, an open circuit photovoltage (VOC) of 1.147 V, a fill factor (FF) of 78.5% and a PCE of 21.17%, which was 2.83% higher than the device without Cs.
 Fig. 6  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) Cs0M and (b) Cs5M devices. (c) Absorption spectra of the as-fabricated films (at room temperature) without the subsequent annealing step; the Cs0M film is red (red line, image of red film). Upon addition of cesium, the Cs10M film turns black (black line, image of black film). The inset XRD data show that Cs10M has the characteristic perovskite pattern, whereas Cs0M does not. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.29 
Similar to this work, the FAMACs films exhibited highly uniform and pinhole-free large grains with the addition of 5% Cs when prepared in the air.71 However, the grain sizes decreased when further increasing the concentration of Cs. This result may be correlated to the promotion of forming many nucleation sites by the high amount of Cs, which led to small size crystals.
In the two-step method, doping Cs was also proven to be beneficial to the formation of nucleation sites by Sargent et al.72 They added CsPbI3 to the PbI2 film and claimed that CsPbI3 seeds not only act as nuclei when the alkylammonium halides salts reacted with PbI2, but also facilitated the diffusion of alkylammonium halides into the layered PbI2via the PbI2/perovskite interface channels. This effect further promoted the perovskite formation, and the films with CsPbI3 seed exhibited a large grain size and preferential crystal plane orientation. To further investigate the role of the CsPbI3 seed, they carried out in situ PL imaging to monitor the perovskite crystallization process. The perovskite crystallization growth rate with the CsPbI3 seed reached about 1 μm s−1, which was much faster than the sample without CsPbI3. In particular, the random nucleation disappeared with the extra CsPbI3 seed.
As mentioned previously, Cs can promote nucleation site formation, but a high concentration of Cs reduced crystal grain size. In order to solve this issue, Cl− was introduced to retard the perovskite formation and reduce the nucleation site with CsCl additives.73 As a result, large-grain perovskite films were obtained with a Cs content of 10%. The champion device based on the CsFAMA films delivered an efficiency of 22.1% (reverse scan). More importantly, it maintained 90% of the initial efficiency after 4000 min tracking at the maximum power point under AM 1.5 G illumination.
A similar way to introduce Cl− was by adding methylammonium chloride (MACl) to delay Cs-doped perovskite crystallization, which finally enlarged the grain size of the FAMACs perovskites up to 2 μm.74 Based on the planar configuration, i.e., FTO/TiO2/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, the devices reached a high VOC of 1.24 V and a PCE of 21.65%. In addition, the devices can maintain 90% of the initial efficiency after 500 h under continuous illumination at 20 °C, demonstrating excellent stability.
In addition to Cs+, the smaller cation Rb was proven to influence the nucleation and growth of the perovskite.75 The addition of 5% RbI could eliminate the formation of the non-perovskite phase, and enhance the crystallinity of the perovskite.76 Furthermore, the perovskite film surface morphology was smoother and the grain sizes improved when the ratio of Rb increased from 0 to 0.2, which facilitated the carrier transport.77 Yadav et al. also found an increase in the grain size upon Rb cation addition when compared with the pristine samples. The Rb cation addition suppressed the defect recombination and led to a higher value of VOC (1.16 V) compared with the pristine device (1.12 V).78 In order to explore the effects of Rb on the conversion of the precursor into the perovskite, photoelectron spectroscopy was used to characterize the chemical distribution of the multi-cation perovskite materials.79 It was observed that doping Rb into the FAMA films resulted in less unreacted PbI2 and exhibited better crystallinity.
Segawa et al. observed the effect of potassium (K+) on the morphology of the FAMA perovskite. They found that tightly stacked and large grains could be formed with K+ doping (Fig. 7b), while apparent horizontal grain boundaries could be seen without K+ (Fig. 7a).80 A similar optimized morphology of the perovskite films was observed by Cheng et al. when adding K+ into the perovskite precursor solution.81 The incorporation of K+ decreased the activation energy for the crystallization, thereby promoting the crystallization of the KCs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite films, and resulting in a grain size of up to 1 μm. The incorporation of K+ would cause all of the XRD peak to shift to smaller angles, indicating the successful incorporation of K+. However, the exact position of K+ is still uncertain, and may be at the A or interstitial position of the perovskite lattice. The XRD peak intensity enhancement and larger grain sizes proved that K+ could promote the perovskite growth. Moreover, the enhanced absorption and a small red shift were seen in the KCsFAMA films observed in the UV-vis spectra, suggesting a reduced bandgap, and the grain size of the CsFAMA perovskite films became a little smaller compared with the FAMA perovskite films due to the presence of more nuclei caused by the addition of Cs ions.
 Fig. 7  Cross-sectional SEM images for the PSCs. (a) PSC of perovskite without K+. (b) PSC of perovskite with 5% K+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.80 
Another approach to introduce K+ has been reported by Cheng et al.,36 who doped K+ through the surface treatment of the SnO2 electron layer to control the nucleation process of perovskite. Different concentrations of KOH solutions were spin-coated onto the SnO2 film to introduce K+ onto the surface of the SnO2 electron layer (labeled as SnO2–KOH film). The K+-doped perovskite films had little residual PbI2, while the pristine perovskite films showed an obvious PbI2 XRD peak (Fig. 8a), which suggested that K+ could promote perovskite formation. They theorized that K+ reacted with the Br− at the surface of the perovskite film to form KBr, which preferentially linked to PbX2 and acted as a growth nucleus (Fig. 8b). More I− perovskites were formed due to the leaching of Br−, which is consistent with the red-shift of the UV-vis spectra (Fig. 8c). In addition, the author studied the effect of the K+ concentration on the crystallization process. They found that a low K+ concentration was beneficial to the large grain growth, while a high K+ concentration caused small grains because the high amount of K+ produced many nuclei. Based on the optimal amount of K+, the high-quality K+-doped perovskite films exhibited single-grain morphology (Fig. 8g). They also had a stronger PL intensity (Fig. 8d) and longer lifetime (Fig. 8e). The rigid devices delivered a PCE of 20.5%. More importantly, the (5 × 6) cm2 large-area flexible module devices achieved an efficiency of over 15%.
 Fig. 8  (a) XRD patterns of different SnO2 substrate-based perovskite films with or without thermal annealing. (b) A schematic of the perovskite growth process on different substrates. (c) UV-vis spectra of different SnO2 substrate-based perovskite films with/without thermal annealing. (d) The steady PL spectra of perovskites with/without interface potassium passivation. (e) The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of perovskites with and without interface potassium passivation. The inset plot shows the corresponding TRPL spectra when the excitation laser is incident from the glass side. (f) Cross-section SEM image of the pristine perovskite device. (g) Cross-section SEM image of the perovskite device with interface potassium passivation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.36 
Furthermore, they compared the effects of different cations on the grain size of the perovskite.82 It was found that only doping Cs into the FAMA films could reduce the grain size of the perovskite crystal, while incorporating Rb or K or Na into the perovskite led to the bigger crystals. Later on, Guo et al. compared the influence of the K+-functionalized carbon nanodots (CND@K) with KI on the morphology of the perovskite.83 The perovskite films with KI had much larger crystals and exhibited better crystallinity, while the films with CND@K had an increased surface flatness.
Similar to K+, Na+ can also promote the growth of larger perovskite crystals.65,84,85 Doping 0.5 mol% Na+ into the perovskite induced the growth of uniform films, as shown by Ouyang et al.84 Further increasing the Na+ ratio to 1 mol% achieved the large grain of micrometer size, but some pinholes appeared, which was detrimental to the device performance. Moreover, Liu et al. demonstrated that the addition of Na could induce the process of nucleation, which decreased the surface roughness (Rq = 8.99 nm) of the perovskite films and enlarged the average grain size (220 nm) compared with the reference (140 nm).86 These high quality films exhibit low trap state densities, and increased the built-in potential.
3.3 Phase transition
Perovskite films were obtained through the crystallization sequence, where the phase transition of 2H (δ-phase)–4H–6H–3C (α-phase) occured in the FAMA perovskite.87–89 However, the hexagonal polytypes (4H and 6H) are sensitive to the environment and difficult to convert completely into the 3C phase, which results in the perovskite films with bad reproducibility and some undesirable δ-phase. It is important to control the phase transition from intermediate films without annealing to annealed films in order to suppress the formation of hexagonal polytypes, and improve the phase purity and reproducibility of the final perovskite films. This issue will be discussed in Section 3.3.1. Moreover, in Section 3.3.2, we are going to talk about manipulating the composition and crystal structure of the intermediate phase by doping various cations on the A site.

3.3.1 Phase transition from intermediate films to annealed films. 
Nazeeruddin et al. first reported the existence of a hexagonal phase (4H and 6H) during the crystallization of the mixed cation FAMA perovskites.87 The author prepared the perovskite thin films by antisolvent method. Through in situ XRD, it was revealed that the FAMA phase transition sequence was the 2H–4H–6H–3C phase during the thermal annealing process. Furthermore, the addition of Cs (>3%) could inhibit the formation of the environmentally sensitive hexagonal phase (4H and 6H), so the phase transition sequence was changed to the 2H–3C phase. This work elucidates the origin of the improved reproducibility of the Cs+-doped mixed ion perovskites. However, this work only studied the transformation of the perovskite during the annealing process. Some studies found that the phase transformation occurred before thermal annealing, which meant that the perovskite phase (α-phase) could be formed without annealing.29,90
The incorporation of Cs can promote the formation of the perovskite phase, and change the process of the phase transition without annealing.88 For the perovskite without Cs, the crystallization sequence was the 2H–4H–6H–3C phase. However, for the films with Cs, the crystallization sequence was that the 2H phase directly transformed to the 3C phase, which was beneficial to extend the annealing window and obtain reproducible high-quality films. To identify the phase transition process, the author carried out grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to observe the crystallization process of the intermediate film, which continued to rotate for a period after the antisolvent drip. After 3 s rotation, the intermediate film without Cs showed the 2H phase (Fig. 9c), whereas the intermediate film with Cs had the 2H and 3C phases (Fig. 9g), indicating that the incorporation of Cs can promote the perovskite formation. After 36 s rotation, the intermediate film without Cs exhibited the 4H, 6H and 3C phases (Fig. 9d and i), which suggested that the crystallization sequence was the 2H–4H–6H–3C phase during the spinning process. In the meantime, the intermediate film with Cs quickly built up the α-phase during the spinning process (Fig. 9h and j), suggesting that the crystallization sequence was the 2H–3C phase. This result confirmed that the incorporation of a sufficient amount of Cs will change the phase transition process by suppressing 4H and 6H without annealing. In order to explore whether the non-perovskite phase (2H, 4H and 6H) will completely transform into the 3C phase during thermal annealing, intermediate films with different spinning times (0, 15, 30, and 100 s) after antisolvent drip were annealed. The annealed films without Cs exhibited the 2H and PbI2 phases (0 and 15 s), whereas the perovskite films without Cs showed the 4H and 6H phases (30 and 100 s) (Fig. 9k). Remarkably, the annealed films with 10% Cs exhibited a consistent perovskite phase, which seemed to be independent of the spinning times (0–100 s) (Fig. 9l). To further explain this result, the author performed a density functional theory (DFT) calculation. The formation energy of the perovskite phase was lowered with the incorporation of Cs+, thereby promoting the formation of the 3C phase. This work explores the role of Cs+ in the phase transition process from the in situ characterization and theoretical calculation, implying that Cs+ doping could suppress the yellow δ-phase formation.
 Fig. 9  (a–h) 2D GIWAXS patterns at different crystallization stages for films (a–d) without Cs+ and (e–h) with 10% Cs+ before annealing. (i and j) The intensity profiles along the qz direction for films (i) without Cs+ and (j) with 10% Cs+. (k and l) Ex situ XRD results for the corresponding annealed perovskite films (k) without Cs+ and (l) with 10% Cs+. α and + denote the identified peaks of the α-phase and PbI2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.88 
With a similar approach, Zhao et al. introduced δ-CsPbI3 to the PbI2 solution for promoting the perovskite crystallization, and finally obtained high-quality perovskite films.91 To prove that the addition of δ-CsPbI3 was beneficial for the perovskite formation, confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy were used to characterize the intermediate films. These intermediate films were prepared by the two-step method in that FAI solutions were spin-coated atop the PbI2 or PbI2–CsPbI3 layer, followed by heating at 100, 110, 120, and 130 °C for 1 min. They observed that the intermediate films based on PbI2–CsPbI3 exhibited a strong absorption (Fig. 10a and b) and a violet fluorescence (Fig. 10d), which meant that a lot of larger perovskite clusters were formed. They hypothesized that the addition of δ-CsPbI3 could provide the Cs and δ-phase crystal lattice. First, the incorporation of Cs avoided the non-perovskite phase formation, which meant that the δ-phase perovskite could directly generate the α-phase perovskite. Subsequently, the δ-phase crystals lattice partly eliminated the first crystal-formation stage (PbI2 → δ-phase), which reduced the average increment of the surface tension. Finally, the device based on δ-CsPbI3 achieved a PCE of 19.16% with a VOC of 1.11 V, a JSC of 24.49 mA cm−2 and a FF of 70.34%.
 Fig. 10  UV-vis absorption spectra of half-crystallized perovskite films (a) without and (b) with 10% CsPbI3 precursor under different temperatures. CLSM images for (c) the PbI2 film and (d) PbI2–CsPbI3 film before and after reacting with FAI/MABr. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.91 
As mentioned in Section 3.2, Cs facilitates the formation of the perovskite phase. Furthermore, recent work incorporated Rb into the Cs-doped perovskite to fabricate reproducible high-quality perovskite films. For example, doping Rb into the FACs perovskite resulted in monolithic and large grains.34 Moreover, a low concentration of Rb and Cs could not only decrease the amount of PbI2 and δ-phase, but also homogenize the halide distribution in the FAMA perovskite films.92
Amassian et al. explained the reason for the improved reproducibility and homogenized halide distribution in the FAMACsRb perovskite through in situ GIWAXS.89 They studied the crystallization of the perovskite with or without CB drip during the spinning process. First, the phase transition of the intermediate films was revealed with CB at 25 s drip before annealing. Although the individual incorporation of Cs facilitated the formation of the α-phase intermediate films, the films exhibited some solvated phase (Fig. 11a, b and h), which could not be transformed completely into the α-phase after thermal annealing. As a result, the annealed films with 5% Cs observed residual PbI2 and 4H phase (Fig. 11i). While the individual incorporation of Rb effectively suppressed the solvated phase, the hexagonal phase (2H and 6H) still existed in the intermediate films (Fig. 11c and h). Interestingly, the simultaneous addition of Cs and Rb suppressed both solvated phase and hexagonal phase (Fig. 11d), promoting the direct formation of the pure α-phase intermediate films (Fig. 11h), and eventually produced the homogenous distribution of the composition and pure α-phase annealed films (Fig. 11i). Secondly, they studied the natural crystallization of the perovskite precursor without CB drip during the spinning process (Fig. 11g). They discovered that no 3C phase was observed without doping. However, the 3C phase formed much earlier (180 s), and it was more prominent when doping only Cs compared with doping only Rb (400 s). Remarkably, with the incorporation of Rb and Cs together, the 3C phase appeared 120 s later than the case of pure Cs doping, which suggested that the addition of Rb and Cs retard the as-cast precursor film from crystallizing and thus extended the processing window. This explains why doping Rb and Cs into the FAMA perovskite can improve the reproducibility of the films. In particular, they observed the assignment of the phase in the mixed perovskite. The 2H phase was observed in the MA-FA and I-only films, while the 6H phase was observed in the FA-rich and Br-only compound. In addition, the 4H phase was regarded as an intermediate between the 2H and 6H phases, whereas the solvated phase was composed of MAPbI3·x, DMSO and PbI2–DMSO. Furthermore, the 3C phase is a mixed-halide mixed-cation phase. This work explores the role of Rb and Cs in the phase transition of perovskite, indicating that the combination of Cs and Rb increased the reproducibility and homogenized composition of the films.
 Fig. 11  (a–d) Time-resolved GIWAXS intensity map of the selected perovskite films: (a) pristine, (b) 5% Cs+-added film, (c) 5% Rb+-added film, and (d) 7% Cs+ and 3% Rb+-added film. Time-evolution trace of the (e) 3C and (f) 6H phases with CB drip at 25 s (indicated by a black arrow). (g) Time-evolution trace of the 3C phase without CB drip. (h) XRD of the selected as-cast films. (i) XRD of the selected annealed films. The films made from the mixed-halides and mixed-cations led to perovskites containing different amounts of Cs+ and Rb+: (0,0), (5,0), (0,5), and (7,3). The bottom part of each film in (a)–(d) represents the 3D intensity map of q versus time, in addition to the corresponding projection on the xy-plane on top. The GIWAXS measurement was carried out at room temperature in air (20–25% relative humidity). Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.89 
They further highlighted the importance of the sol–gel state of the as-cast film, which is the key for high reproducibility by the antisolvent method.93 The sol–gel lifetime can be further extended to 4 minute with Rb+ doping, while the sol–gel states of FAPbI3 last for 1 minute. This indicated that the cation engineering leads to a widening of the processing window for the fabrication of the perovskite films.
In addition, they found that K+-doped films naturally form 4H phases without annealing, while the 4H and 3C perovskite phase is formed with 5% Cs addition, whereas the 3C perovskite phase is present with 10% Cs.94 Following thermal annealing, the 4H phase was converted to the 3C phase.


3.3.2 Composition and crystal structure of the intermediate phase. 
The concept of the intermediate phase was first reported by Seok et al., who found that the intercalation of DMSO and MAI into PbI2 formed a highly ordered and smooth MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate (without annealing), which retarded the perovskite crystallization and finally produced homogeneous flat MAPbI3 films.45 Similar to the MA-based perovskite films, it is essential to control the composition and crystal structure of the intermediate phase for better quality crystals in FAMA, FACs and FAMACs perovskite films.
The perovskite phase of FAPbI3 could be stabilized by incorporating MAPbBr3 into FAPbI3.95 For the (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x perovskite films, although the α-FAPbI3 perovskite phase could be stabilized when x > 0.05, large voids can be seen between the grain boundaries. Fortunately, the compact and smooth perovskite films could be obtained when x = 0.15, suggesting that MAPbBr3 not only stabilized the α-phase, but modified the morphology of the perovskite films as well.
Based on previous work, Pang et al. reported that MA+ affected the composition of the intermediate films, and further influenced the phase purity, grain size and uniformity of the final mixed cation perovskite films.96 This approach involved the simple addition of excess MA+ into a stoichiometric precursor solution for the MA+-rich environment, which induced the MA+-rich intermediate (FA0.4MA0.6PbI3) to avoid the yellow δ-phase formation. Because the FA+-rich intermediates are more thermodynamically stable than the MA+-rich intermediate at high temperatures, FA+ gradually replaced MA+ and produced high-quality mixed perovskite films during the subsequent thermal annealing.
Following a similar strategy, Tan et al. explored the role of MA+ in fabricating the FA-based perovskite films by the two-step method.97 The mixed solution of FAI and MACl were dropped onto the surface of the PbI2 film. The addition of MACl benefited the formation of the FAI–MACl–PbI2–DMSO intermediate films. Subsequently, MACl was evaporated during thermal annealing, and uniform perovskite films composed of large crystals highly oriented along 〈100〉 were produced. Moreover, they found that the better crystallinity and morphology perovskite films could be obtained when mixing MACl with FAI, rather than FACl with FAI.
In addition to affecting the composition of the intermediate films, MA+ was found to change the structure of the intermediate films.98 For the stoichiometric precursor solution, the intermediate films exhibited the δ-phase (FA0.85MA0.15PbI3) after spin-coating, which did not completely transform into the α-phase during thermal annealing. As a result, there was residual δ-phase in the final films. However, the excess MA+ competed with FA+ to coordinate into [PbI6]4−, and produced both α-phase (MAPbI3) and δ-phase (FA0.85MA0.15PbI3) in the intermediate films. During further thermal annealing, the uncoordinated residual FA+ gained additional activation energy to replace MA+ in the α-phase framework to obtain the α-phase FAMA perovskite films. Therefore, they concluded that a small amount of excess MA+ promoted the pure α-phase formation. The activation energy for the cation change (FA+ replaces MA+) was calculated to be lower than the phase transformation (δ-phase to the α-phase), which meant that more α-phase could be formed in the MA+-rich environment. To verify the activation energy difference, they lowered the annealing temperature from 160 °C (requirement for phase transformation) to 130 °C. The perovskite films with excess MA+ showed a strong α-phase XRD peak and an absorption edge of 838 nm, confirming the smaller activation energy in the cation change compared with phase transformation.
Very recently, Kim et al. further explained the critical role of MA+ in the formation of a stable intermediate phase.41 Theoretical calculations estimated that the MA system had a lower formation energy because the MA cation showed a dipole moment that was 10 times that of the FA cation, which caused the volume shrinkage of the perovskite structure and enhanced the interactions between FA and I. This effect improved the stability of the perovskite structure via stabilizing the intermediate phase. The perovskite films were prepared with the addition of MACl into the FAPbI3 precursor solution by the antisolvent method. Without annealing, they observed that the MA-40 intermediate films (with the addition of MACl) exhibited the pure α-phase (Fig. 12a), while the pristine films (without the addition of MACl) showed some δ-phase and PbI2 (Fig. 12b). This suggested that the MACl additive could promote the α-phase formation before the annealing step. The MA-40 perovskite films featured a stronger α-phase peak after annealing (Fig. 12a), while some δ-phase and PbI2 could be detected in the pristine perovskite films (Fig. 12b). Besides improving the phase purity of the annealed films, MACl could influence the morphology of the final films. The grain size of the pristine films was approximately 250 nm (average) (Fig. 12c and i). However, the grain size of the perovskite films reached up to 1500 nm for the MA-40 (Fig. 12c–i). The optimized solar cells based on the high-quality MA-40 perovskite films were certified in Newport, which delivered a JSC of 25.63 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.145 V, a FF of 80.1% and a high PCE of 23.48%.
 Fig. 12  XRD data obtained from perovskite films prepared (a) with MA-40 and (b) without MACl before and after annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. (c–h) Top view of SEM images of devices prepared with different amounts of MACl: (c) pristine (without addition), (d) MA-10, (e) MA-20, (f) MA-30, (g) MA-40, and (h) MA-50. (i) Grain size distribution of the films as a function of the MACl contents (pristine, MA-10, MA-20, MA-30, MA-40, and MA-50). Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.41 
FACl has a higher sublimation temperature than MACl, which could form higher crystallinity films with a composition close to pure FAPbI3.99 Moreover, NH4+ (1.61 Å) was doped into the MAPbI3 crystal to induce the formation of the intermediate phase NH4PbX3, thereby improving the quality of the perovskite films. During the crystallization, NH4+ offset the deficient MA+ by occupying the cavity of the [PbI6] octahedron, resulting in the formation of the transient phase NH4PbX3. Later on, the temporarily remaining NH4+ was easily replaced by the precipitated MA+. Consequently, the highly crystalline perovskite films exhibited an enlarged grain size and lowered defects.100
In addition to the monovalent cation, incorporation of the divalent cation (MDA2+) was proven to stabilize the α-phase structure of the perovskite films.2 They hypothesized that MDA2+ (+H3N–CH2–NH3+) could form a lot of H bonds with I− because MDA2+ has more hydrogen atoms than FA and MA, thus stabilizing a-FAPbI3. Beyond that, they reported that the addition of MDA2+ had little effect on the bandgap due to the similar ionic radius of MDA2+ (262 Å) and FA+ (256 Å). Thus, an appropriate bandgap of 1.47 eV of the mixed perovskite films was obtained. The certified devices achieved a high JSC of 26.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.144 V and FF of 77.6% and a PCE of 23.7%. More importantly, the unencapsulated devices maintained more than 90% of their initial PCE when annealing for 20 hours at 150 °C in air.
Besides the organic cation, inorganic cations also influenced the phase purity and morphology of the perovskite films by affecting the composition of the intermediate. The DMSO–PbI2 intermediate was fabricated by controlling the amount of Cs, and transformed into the pure α-phase and uniform perovskite films.101 The van der Waals force of DMSO–PbI2 with Cs+ doping is weaker than the intermolecular electrostatic interaction of DMSO–PbI2–MAI without Cs+. This suggested that DMSO–PbI2 has a smaller energy barrier to transform into the α-phase compared with DMSO–PbI2–MAI, thus facilitating α-phase formation. XRD proved that the annealed films were pure α-phase with the high concentrations of Cs. This work indicates that the incorporation of Cs could suppress the formation of the yellow δ-phase by influencing the composition of the intermediate.
The concentrations of Cs were closely related to the amount of the intermediate by rapid spray plasma processing route, thus affecting the growth rate of the perovskite crystals.102 With the low incorporation of Cs (0.05 mol fractions), the amount of the intermediate was high, which meant that the growth rate of the intermediate crystalline phase was faster than the perovskite crystal structure. In contrast, at high Cs fractions (0.25 mol fractions), the intermediate crystalline phase was suppressed and the formation of the perovskite phase was facilitated.
Furthermore, Grätzel et al. stated that the incorporation of both Cs+ and Rb+ affected the intermediate films before annealing.90 RbCsMAFA intermediate films showed a narrow range emission, while MAFA intermediate films exhibited various emissive species observed in fluorescence microscopy measurements (Fig. 13a). This indicated that the RbCsMAFA intermediate films were more uniform and beneficial toward inducing homogeneous growth during the subsequent annealing step. In addition, they adopted PL, UV-vis and XRD to explore the role of Cs+ and Rb+ doping on the intermediate films. As shown in Fig. 13a, the RbCsMAFA intermediate films exhibited a narrow PL peak at 770 nm attributable to perovskite, while the MAFA intermediate films had several peaks ranging from 670 nm to 790 nm. Furthermore, the RbCsMAFA intermediate films showed stronger UV-vis absorption (Fig. 13a) and enhanced perovskite XRD peak intensity (Fig. 13b) compared with the MAFA intermediate films. Therefore, the incorporation of both Cs+ and Rb+ may facilitate the α-phase formation of intermediate films without annealing. Most importantly, they revealed that the RbCsMAFA annealed films exhibited no XRD peak of PbI2 and yellow δ-phase (Fig. 13d).
 Fig. 13  Characterization of unannealed and annealed films. (a) UV-vis (dashed lines) and PL (solid lines) of unannealed MAFA (black) and RbCsMAFA (red) films. The inset images show fluorescence microscopy measurements (image size ∼26 μm × 26 μm) of the MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. Each image is an overlay of three emission ranges sampled from 640 to 650 nm (assigned as green), 680 to 690 nm (blue), and 725 to 735 nm (red). The colors were chosen to ensure easily discernible features. (b) XRD data of the unannealed MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. (c) UV-vis (dashed lines) and PL (solid lines) of the MAFA (black) and RbCsMAFA (red) films annealed at 100 °C for 1 hour. (d) XRD data of the annealed MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. The PbI2 and yellow-phase peaks are denoted as # and δ, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.90 

3.4 Crystal orientation
As discussed in Sections 3.1–3.3, doped cations could optimize the crystallization on the macroscopic scale. Moreover, manipulating the microstructural arrangement of the perovskite crystals by the doped cation not only enhanced the crystallinity of the perovskite films,103,104 but also facilitated the carrier transportation.105,106
Wang et al. first fabricated smooth perovskite films oriented along the 〈112〉/〈200〉 directions when incorporating Cs+ into MAPbI3, facilitating the carrier transfer.54 DFT calculations suggested that doping Cs+ lowered the surface energy of the (112)/(200) plane that was convenient for the 〈112〉/〈200〉 directional growth during the perovskite crystal growth.
Furthermore, Han et al. reported a novel approach with MACl treatment to induce vertical recrystallization in FA-based perovskite films.103 First, the solution of FAI and PbI2 in DMF/DMSO was spun onto the FTO glass, and then CB was drop-cast quickly to obtain the yellow δ-FAPbI3 intermediate films (Fig. 14a). Subsequently, the MACl solution was spin-cast at the surface of the δ-FAPbI3 intermediate films, and the yellow films turned light-brown. This suggested that MACl transformed δ-FAPbI3 into the α-phase. After annealing at 100 °C, the films became dark brown with more MACl diffusing into the film, indicating the formation of the black α-phase, as verified by XRD. To decompose the residual MACl in the films, the films were subsequently annealed at 140 °C for 20 min to obtain the high-quality mixed perovskite films. In addition, they observed dense films with a single grain in the vertical direction via MACl treatment, while a small grain can be witnessed without MACl treatment. Finally, micrometer-sized grain crystals based on the optimized concentrations of MACl (5 mg ml−1) were applied to high-quality mixed perovskite films in the inverted device, achieving a VOC of 1.1 V, a JSC of 23.09 mA cm−2 and a FF of 81.4% for a PCE of 20.65%.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the vertical recrystallization method for the formation of the high-quality FAPbI3/MACl film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.103 
Furthermore, Zhou et al. manipulated the MA ratios in the FAMA perovskite to decrease the surface energy of the (001) plane. This produced preferable growth along the (001) plane for the perovskite crystals, and thus improved the carrier transportation and collection.105 The MA ratios (x) were defined as the molar ratio of MA and MA + FA. To explore the role of the MA ratios in the crystal microstructure of the mixed perovskite, they adopted GIWAXS to monitor the crystal orientation. As shown in Fig. 15a, they calculated the intensity of different crystal planes along the different azimuth angles exhibited in GIWAXS for visualizing and comparing the difference of the MA ratios. When the MA ratios increased from 0.13 to 0.57, the intensity of the (001) plane was strengthened (Fig. 15a), indicating the preferable growth of the crystallographic plane along the (001) plane. Meanwhile, the intensity ratio of (111)/(001) reduced with increasing MA ratio from 0.13 to 0.65. This also confirmed the preferred facet orientation along the (001) plane. To further explore the variation of the crystal plane stacking pattern, the GIWAXS pattern azimuthally along the ring at q = 10 nm−1 assigned to the (001) plane was considered as an example. As presented in Fig. 15b, with MA ratios from 0.13 to 0.38, the diffraction ring showed three peaks around 37°, 90°, and 143°, suggesting a disordered crystal orientation. Further increasing the MA ratios to 0.43, the peak located at 90° became dominant, while the other peaks (37° and 143°) disappeared. This indicated that the facet orientation of the (001) plane was dominant along the out-of-plane direction. To classify the mechanism for the variation of the crystal orientation induced by the MA ratios, the authors calculated the surface energies of the (001) and (111) planes of FAPbI3, MAPbI3 and FA0.5MA0.5PbI3 (Fig. 15c). They found that the surface energy of the (001) plane was significantly decreased when incorporating an appropriate amount of MA+ into the FAPbI3 perovskite, which favored the growth along the (001) plane (Fig. 15d). They illustrated the possible stacking pattern of the perovskite crystals with increasing MA ratio (Fig. 15e). In addition, the (001) orientation would improve the transport of the carrier in the bulk and across the interface. For this result, the authors hypothesized that the electron effective mass had the smallest value perpendicular to the (001) plane, thus facilitating the efficient electron transport along the [001] directions in the perovskite films. It is noteworthy that at the interface of spiro-OMeTAD and the perovskite along the (001) orientation, the electrostatic potential increased and the preferential hole distribution was large, yielding a stronger overlap of the electronic cloud, which promoted the electron–hole pair dissociation and the transfer of holes. Finally, the perovskite films exhibited the longest PL lifetime when the MA ratio was 0.43, indicating that an appropriate orientation could suppress recombination in the bulk and the surface. Based on this strategy, the devices delivered a PCE of 20.5%.
 Fig. 15  (a) GIWAXS intensity of (001) and GIWAXS intensity ratio of (111)/(001). (b) Integrated GIWAXS intensity plots azimuthally along the ring at q = 10 nm−1, with different MA ratios, assigned to the (001) plane of the corresponding perovskite films. (c) Surface energy of the perovskite films with different MA ratios (inset structures were the models used for the DFT calculation). (d) Schematic diagram of the evolution of the preferred crystal orientation along the (001) plane with increasing MA ratio. (e) The schematic diagram of the azimuth angle evolution of the (001) crystallographic plane with increasing MA ratio. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.105 
Zhou et al. also studied the effect of the inorganic cation in the crystal orientation, and discovered that the simultaneous incorporation of Cs, Rb and K could efficiently induce the preferred facet orientation, improving the photo carrier transportation.107 To monitor the crystal microstructure, they applied GIWAXS to characterize the films.
Moreover, the diffraction mottling shifted from the original azimuth angle of 49.44° (FAMA) to 59.82° (FAMACs), 67.75° (FAMACsRb) and 82.26° (FAMACsRbK), suggesting that the stacking patterns of the preferential crystal orientation along the (001) planes changed distinctly with the simultaneous doping of Cs, Rb and K. As a result, the FAMACsRbK films exhibited the highest mobility (8.5 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 S−1) compared with FAMA (0.37 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 S−1), FAMACs (1.9 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 S−1) and FAMACsRb (7.7 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 S−1), and it showed the shortest photo current decay time of 0.45 μs. This suggested that the simultaneous doping of Cs, Rb and K effectively enhanced the charge extraction and transportation. However, the FAMACsRbK films (4.0 μs) exhibited a shorter photovoltage decay time than the FAMACsRb films (6.84 μs), pointing out a greater unexpected recombination in the FAMACsRbK films. The authors theorized that the incorporation of K+ not only affected the stacking pattern of the crystal, but also influenced the charge carrier recombination process at the interface. Recently, the conjugated polyelectrolyte interlayer with K+ as the interfacial layer was reported to promote the vertical growth of the perovskite crystals and suppress the charge trap state recombination.108
Besides small ions, the large cation 2-thiophenemethylammonium (ThMA+) was introduced into the FAMA perovskite to induce the crystalline growth and orientation, which was beneficial for improving the carrier transport.109 XRD and GIWAXS were conducted to explore the role of ThMA+ on perovskite crystallization. With the addition of ThMA+, the perovskite films exhibited enhanced intensities for the (110) and (202) peaks, and a smaller full width at half maximum (FWHM) for the main (110) peak (Fig. 16a). This implied that the incorporation of ThMA+ strengthened the perovskite crystallinity. Furthermore, the pristine films without ThMA+ showed the broad Debye–Scherrer rings in GIWAXS (Fig. 16b), indicating that the perovskite crystals exhibited a disordered orientation. Conversely, the perovskite films with ThMA+ showed enhanced diffraction intensity with sharp, sporadic Bragg spots (Fig. 16c), suggesting that the crystals showed highly preferable orientation. They hypothesized that the incorporation of ThMA+ formed a 2D layer aligned perpendicular to the substrate (Fig. 16d), which induced the crystal orientation of the perovskite to explain this phenomenon. Based on the highly oriented perovskite films, the devices achieved a large VOC of 1.16 V, a JSC of 22.8 mA cm−2, and a FF of 81.0% for a PCE of 21.49%. More importantly, the encapsulated devices maintained 99% of the initial efficiency after 1680 h in the ambient atmosphere.
 Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns of the control and 2D/3D perovskite films. The inset shows the magnified graph of the main perovskite peaks between 14.1° and 14.5°. Asterisks denote the major reflections from PbI2. (b) GIWAXS of the control 3D perovskite film. (c) GIWAXS of the 2D/3D perovskite film. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed 2D/3D perovskite structure, where the organic layer was randomly inserted into the 3D perovskite and oriented perpendicular to the substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.109 
However, doping a larger cation (such as MDA, GA, ThMA, DMA) or smaller cation (such as MA, Cs, Rb) than FA into FAPbI3 will distort the Pb–I–Pb bonds by tilting the perovskite octahedron, and induces unwanted carrier trap states. To reduce the strain in the perovskite crystals, Seok et al. co-doped MDA and Cs into the FAPbI3 films. As a result, (FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x exhibited the preferential crystal orientations out of the plane in the directions [100]c and [200]c.110 The Urbach energy of (FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x (26.88 meV) is smaller than the pristine films (30.18 meV) from the UV-vis absorption spectra. In addition, the trap density of the (FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x-based device (4.76 × 1016 cm−3) is lower than that of the control device (8.86 × 1016 cm−3), according to the thermally stimulated current analysis. These results imply that the highly oriented (FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x perovskite crystals exhibited fewer defects compared with the control sample.
As mentioned before, A site doping manipulates the crystallization of the perovskite films to obtain the high-quality perovskite crystals (Table 1), which will improve the physical properties of the perovskite film to reduce the energy loss in the devices.
Segawa et al. found that the incorporation of Li+, Na+ or K+ could lower the VBM (valence band maximum) and CBM of the perovskite layer, thus decreasing the barrier at the interface of perovskite/TiO2.75 Moreover, Hacker found that the incorporation of Cs+ or K+ lowered the work function of the perovskite, and facilitated the electron collection from the perovskite to the TiO2 layer.111 For the interface of SnO2/Perovskite, Wang et al. upshifted the CBM of the perovskite from −4.43 eV to −4.33 eV by doping GA+, which modified the band alignment at the interface of the perovskite (−4.33 eV)/SnO2 (−4.26 eV).112
Furthermore, doping a cation at the A site affected the carrier dynamics, including the charge transport, collection and recombination. The incorporation of MA into FAPbI3 was found to cause lattice contraction, and enabled the long-range ordering of the perovskite crystals.113 This effect enhanced the crystallinity of the perovskite, thereby extending the PL lifetime.27,114 The larger cation GA+ (2.78 Å) was doped into the perovskite films based on FACs. Solid NMR measurements demonstrated that the GA-doped perovskites have a faster reorientation rate compared with the pristine films, which leads to a long carrier lifetime.115,116 The photovoltage of the devices was enhanced by 80 mV.78 In addition, doping GA+ could suppress the formation of the iodide vacancies through coordination with the iodine species at the grain boundaries.117 It should be noted that a small amount of GA is beneficial for device performance, while excess GA will induce phase separation and lower the absorbance of the films.118 Ning and co-workers introduced dimethylammonium (DMA) into MAPbI3 to increase the rigidity of the perovskite structure.119 This will enhance the lattice match between NiOx and the perovskite, and decrease defects at the interface. The MA1−xDMAxPbI3 inverted PSCs delivered a certified efficiency of 20.8%. In addition, Moore et al. found that the partial substitution of DMA at the A site of the FACs-based perovskite increases the bandgap because of the tilt of the perovskite octahedron.120 Besides the organic cation, the inorganic cation Cs+ also improved the carrier mobility-lifetime product of up to 1.2 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 compared with pristine films.121 Meanwhile, Rb+ was reported to reduce the trap state density and the charge recombination.90,122 Moreover, the fluorescence lifetime of Rb0.05FAPbI3 was enhanced compared with FAPbI3, thus exhibiting better perfoemance.77 In recent years, smaller cations (K+ or Na+-doping) were also reported to show enhanced luminescent intensity and prolonged carrier lifetime.63,86,123 The calculation of the charge transfer efficiency also demonstrated that K+ accelerated the carrier injection and extraction, and suppressed the recombination.124 Stranks et al. added KI into the perovskite precursor to introduce I− and K+.38 On the one hand, I− compensated for the halide vacancies to passivate the pathways of the non-radiative recombination. On the other hand, K+ combined with the excess halides to form a composite at the grain boundaries and surfaces, which inhibited the halide migration and the formation of decay from the interstitial halides. Park et al. demonstrated that K+ could prevent the Frenkel defect and eliminate the hysteresis of the devics.125 Later on, Sun et al. found that the K-rich phase at the grain boundaries was K2PbI4 by experimental characterization and DFT calculations.133 Huang et al. also found that Na+ from glass substrates could diffuse into the perovskite grain boundaries to passivate the trap states.126 Furthermore, the perovskite can be changed from n-type to p-type by incorporating Na+ cations.127
Incorporating a cation into the A site was also found to suppress the ion migration, and therefore improve the operational stability of the device. Zhao et al. demonstrated that the incorporation of Li, Na, K or Rb increased the ion migration barrier by DFT calculation. In particular, K+ reduced the hysteresis, weakened the poling effects, and improved the photo-stability of the perovskite.128 Later on, Cameron et al. doped GA into the perovskite, and found by ab initio simulations that the iodide ion transport was strongly suppressed because the activation energy for the ion transport increased.129 Conversely, Yadav et al. reported distinct results that the incorporation of GA into single-crystalline MAPbI3 decreased the ion activation energy.130 Recently, Yang et al. incorporated acetamidinium (2.77 Å) into MAPbI3 to distort the perovskite lattice, thereby impeding the migration pathways of the ions and improving the operational stability of PSCs.131
Table 1 Summary of the effects of A site doping on the crystallization of mixed cation perovskite films




Composition
Additive
Mechanism

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
References




Cs0.1FA0.9PbI2.865Br0.135
CsI


23.0
1.04
80.5
19.3

132



FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl)
CsI
Morphology of PbI2
22.63
1.11
74.32
18.66

56



Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3
FAI
Crystallinity of PbI2
22.7
1.00
62.9
14.2

59



Cs0.1(MA0.4FA0.6)0.9PbI3
CsI
Crystallinity of PbI2
23.3
1.086
80
20.3

57



GACsFA
CsI
Crystallinity of PbI2
24.8
1.16
81.3
23.5

62



FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3
CsI
Morphology of PbI2
22.82
1.01
65.78
15.09

55



FAxMAyCsz
CsF
Crystallization
23.99
1.134
74.59
20.29

61



MAPbI3
KCl
Morphology of PbI2
18.33
1.04
74.67
15.08

63



MAPbI3
NaI
Morphology of PbI2
22.97
0.90
73
15.14

64



Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45
MABr
Solubility of each phase









67



CsFAMA
MACl
Crystallization
23.2
1.193
78.2
21.65

74



Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
CsI
Nucleation
23.5
1.147
0.785
21.17

29



CsFAMA
CsCl
Nucleation
24.3
1.12
81.1
22.1

73



CsFAMA
CsI
Nucleation
23.6
1.14
77
20.8

71



CsFAMA
CsPbI3
Nucleation and growth
24.1
1.13
81
21.7

72



FAMA
RbI
Crystallization
22.86
1123
69.6
22.86

76



Rb0.05FA0.95PbI3
RbI
Crystallization
23.93
1.07
67
17.16

77



Rb5(Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95)Pb (I0.83Br0.17)3
RbI
Crystallization
23.21
1.16
78
21

78



KCs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3
KI
Crystallization activation energy
22.95
1.132
79
20.52

81



Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
KOH
Nucleation
22.6
1.146
79
20.46

36



K5FAMA
KI
Crystallization
22.34
1.124
76.4
19.15

82



MAPbI3
CND@K
Crystallization
22.69
1.1
84
21.01

83



MAPbI3
KI
Crystallization
20.95
0.94
79
15.31

84



MAPbI3
KI
Nucleation
20.88
1.1
78
17.81

86



MAPbI3
NaI
Nucleation
19.2
0.96
77
14.2

65



MAPbI3
GAI
Crystallization
21.24
1.07
75.3
17.13

117



CsFAMA
CsPbI3
Phase transition









87



Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
CsI
Phase transition
22.81
1.14
76.1
19.79

88



CsFAMA
CsPbI3
Phase transition
24.49
1.11
70.34
19.16

91



RbCsFAMA
RbI
Phase transition






20.1

89



FAMACsRbPbI2.55Br0.45
RbI
Phase transition
22.8
1.13
73.5
18.85

93



FAMAKPbI2.55Br0.45
KI
Phase transition
22.95
1.06
70.45
17.15

94



RbCsFAMA
RbI


22.7
1.10
76
19

92



Rb5Cs10FAPbI3
RbI


25.06
1.08
75.5
20.44

34



FA0.8MA0.2PbI3
MACl
Composition of intermediate
22.44
1.07
76.5
18.4

96



FA1−xMAxPbI3
MAI
Composition of intermediate
22.8
0.97
78.5
17.4

98



FA1−xMAxPbI3
MACl
Composition of intermediate
25.63
1.145
80.1
23.48

41



FAPbI3
FACl


23.4
1.15
78.3
21.2

99



MAPbI3
NH4Br
Composition of intermediate






20.61

100



Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3
CsI
Content of intermediate









102



FA3/4Cs7/40MA3/40
CsI
Composition of intermediate
22.8
1.09
74.6
18.6

101



Rb5(Cs5MAFA)95
RbI
Composition of intermediate
22.8
1.18
81
21.8

90



FA1−xMAxPbI3
MACl
Crystal orientation
23.09
1.10
81.4
20.65

103



FA1−xMAxPbI2.87Br0.13(Cl)
MACl
Crystal orientation
23.35
1.099
79.0
20.26

105



(FAMACs)100−xRbx
RbI
Crystal orientation
22.61
1.151
80.7
20.99

107





ThMAI
Crystal orientation
22.8
1.16 V
81.0
21.49

109



(FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x
CsI, MDACl2
Crystal orientation
26.17
1.162
80.1
24.4

110





4. Conclusions and outlook
Incorporating various cations on the A site shows great potential for fabricating highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. However, too many cations make the perovskite crystallization complicated. In order to understand and manipulate the perovskite crystallization processes, this review summarized the effects of A site doping on the crystallization of perovskite films, and obtained the following conclusions.
First, doping 10–15 mol% Cs can modify the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 films, which further facilitates the diffusion of FAI and the conversion of perovskite crystals in the two-step spin-coating method. Second, cations doped on the A site have great impacts on the perovskite nucleation and growth. Doping MA+ and Cs can induce the homogeneous growth of perovskite crystals and facilitate the nucleation of perovskite, respectively. In addition, the incorporation of K+ is good for promoting the perovskite crystallization quality. Third, the phase transition process could be controlled by doping various cations on the A site. The incorporation of both Cs and Rb avoids non-perovskite phase formation, and improves the reproducibility and efficiency of the devices. At last, the perovskite crystal orientation can be manipulated by controlling the surface energy of the specific plane with the incorporation of the cation. For the FA-based perovskite films, a preferential crystalline orientation can be observed when simultaneously doping MA, Cs, Rb and K.
Looking into the future, four perspectives should be taken into consideration.
(1) A suitable composition of the perovskite is key for achieving highly efficient and stable PSCs. However, the experimental processes of exploring a suitable cation on the A site are complicated and inefficient. Computation simulation and machine learning should be introduced to guide the experimental exploration for appropriate A site doping cations.
(2) Influences of A site doping on the phase separation, local strain and crystal orientation studies should be carried out to reduce the deep trap states for the purpose of improving VOC.
(3) Advanced in situ characterization methods should be introduced to study the A site cation effects on the perovskite crystallization processes. For example, in situ transmission electron microscopy and photoemission electron microscopy are expected to be utilized for monitoring the crystal growth procedure to help look for state-of-the-art halide perovskite films.
(4) Small-area perovskite devices exhibit excellent performance. However, there is still a large efficiency gap between the large-scale and small area devices. In-depth fundamental research of the A site doping effects on large-area perovskite film crystallization is essential for achieving a smooth, uniform and well-crystallized large-scale perovskite film.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11834011, 11674219).
References
Y. Wang, T. Wu, J. Barbaud, W. Kong, D. Cui, H. Chen, X. Yang and L. Han, Science, 2019, 365, 687–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 629–638 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T. W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Z. Liu, M. Waqas, T. L. Leung, H. W. Tam, X. Q. Lan, B. Tu, W. Chen, A. B. D. Prime and Z. B. He, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700387 CrossRef .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Burger, M. G. Ehrenreich and G. Kieslich, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21785–21793 RSC .
O. J. Weber, B. Charles and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15375–15382 RSC .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. X. Sun, D. S. Yuan, X. L. Liu, W. Q. Lu, G. F. Liu, H. B. Xia and X. T. Tao, Crystengcomm, 2015, 17, 665–670 RSC .
W. J. Yin, J. H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. F. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
C. K. MØLler, Nature, 1958, 182, 1436 CrossRef .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
L. K. Ono, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. B. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30197–30246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lin, N. Sakai, P. Da, J. Wu, H. C. Sansom, A. J. Ramadan, S. Mahesh, J. Liu, R. D. J. Oliver, J. Lim, L. Aspitarte, K. Sharma, P. K. Madhu, A. B. Morales-Vilches, P. K. Nayak, S. Bai, F. Gao, C. R. M. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, J. G. Labram, J. R. Durrant, J. M. Ball, B. Wenger, B. Stannowski and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2020, 369, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan, Z. Huang, K. Song, J. Liu, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, C. Zhou, Y. Lin, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, A. K. Johnston, N. Wei, M. N. Hedhili, M. Wei, A. Y. Alsalloum, P. Maity, B. Turedi, C. Yang, D. Baran, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, Z.-H. Lu, O. F. Mohammed, F. Gao, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yadav, M. I. Dar, N. Arora, E. A. Alharbi, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701077 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bu, J. Li, F. Zheng, W. Chen, X. Wen, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, J. Zhong, Y.-B. Cheng and F. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4609 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, A. J. Pearson, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2671–2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703852 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Xiao, F. Z. Huang, W. C. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. C. Shao, Q. F. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. B. Yuan, C. G. Wang, Y. L. Gao and J. S. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Yadavalli, Y. Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 63–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, H. Yu, J. Li, D. Wang and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, M. Li, Y.-M. Xie, Y. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Cheng, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6126–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Li, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Small, 2017, 13, 1700484 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, J. Wu, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Shi, Y. Li, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9503–9513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Cotton, R. Francis and W. D. Horrocks, J. Phys. Chem., 1960, 64, 1534–1536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Ma, Y.-M. Xie, Y. Cheng, Y. Tian, M. Li, Y. Ma, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7731–7740 RSC .
W. Qiu, A. Ray, M. Jaysankar, T. Merckx, J. P. Bastos, D. Cheyns, R. Gehlhaar, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700920 CrossRef .
X. Yi, Z. Zhang, A. Chang, Y. Mao, Y. Luan, T. Lin, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, F. Wang, S. Cao, C. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, H. Xue, H. Zhang, H. Hu, K. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Qin, J. Ma, H. Zhu, K. Yan, G. Fang, G. Li, U. S. Jeng, G. Brocks, S. Tao and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Boopathi, R. Mohan, T. Y. Huang, W. Budiawan, M. Y. Lin, C. H. Lee, K. C. Ho and C. W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1591–1597 RSC .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. I. Dar, A. Sadhanala, S. P. Senanayak, M. Franckevicius, N. Arora, Y. Y. Hu, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and R. H. Friend, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502472 CrossRef .
S. Bag and M. F. Durstock, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5053–5057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. C. Shao, Y. B. Yuan, Z. G. Xiao and J. S. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, K. Williams, M. Wei, A. Johnston, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Vafaie, J. M. Pina, A. H. Proppe, Y. Hou, G. Walters, S. O. Kelley, W. A. Tisdale and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 412–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, H. Li, Y. Shang, W. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Cheng, Q. Chen, L. Chen and Z. Ning, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wolff, F. Zu, A. Paulke, L. P. Toro, N. Koch and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700159 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Shirai, X. Yang, Y. Yue, W. Chen, Y. Wu, A. Islam and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4918–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Singh and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1700677 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan, C. S. Tan, J. Hofkens, D. Yu, Q. Zhao and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Fu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803095 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, M. Saliba, P. Yadav, P. Holzhey, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802646 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, S. Uchida, T. Bessho, T. Kinoshita, H. Wang, F. Awai, R. Jono, M. M. Maitani, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, H. K. Mulmudi, H. Shen, Y. Wu, C. Barugkin, Y. O. Mayon, H. T. Nguyen, D. Macdonald, J. Peng, M. Lockrey, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Park, I. Jeong, S. Bae, H. J. Son, P. Lee, J. Lee, C. H. Lee and M. J. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605988 CrossRef .
D. Prochowicz, M. M. Tavakoli, A. Kalam, R. D. Chavan, S. Trivedi, M. Kumar and P. Yadav, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8218–8225 RSC .
B. Philippe, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa-Baena, U. B. Cappel, S. H. Turren-Cruz, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3589–3596 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Tang, T. Bessho, F. Awai, T. Kinoshita, M. M. Maitani, R. Jono, T. N. Murakami, H. B. Wang, T. Kubo, S. Uchida and H. Segawa, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12183–12189 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bu, X. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yi, X. Huang, L. Luo, J. Xiao, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Zhong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2509–2515 RSC .
T. Bu, X. Liu, J. Li, W. Li, W. Huang, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 635–642 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, F. Wang, C. Liu, F. Gao, L. Shen and W. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22359–22365 RSC .
J. J. Chang, Z. H. Lin, H. Zhu, F. H. Isikgor, Q. H. Xu, C. F. Zhang, Y. Hao and J. Y. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16546–16552 RSC .
Y. Okamoto, M. Sumiya and Y. Suzuki, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1823–1831 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Zhao, Z. Yao, F. Y. Yu, D. Yang and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700331 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, P. Schouwink, J.-H. Yum, J.-N. Audinot, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2686–2693 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, K. Tse, T.-K. Lau, Y. Li, C.-J. Su, G. Yang, J. Chen, J. Zhu, U. S. Jeng, G. Li, H. Chen and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901284 CrossRef .
H. X. Dang, K. Wang, M. Ghasemi, M.-C. Tang, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Dauzon, D. Barrit, J. Peng, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf and A. Amassian, Joule, 2019, 3, 1746–1764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Jin, Y. Qi, P. Liu, Y. Xia, Y. Jiang, R.-X. He, B. Chen, Y. Liu and X.-Z. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908343 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, Y. Luo, T. M. Brenner, J. Snaider, S. Sun, X. Li, M. A. Jensen, N. T. P. Hartono, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, J. R. Poindexter, S. Wang, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang, B. Lai, M. V. Holt, Z. Cai, M. G. Bawendi, L. Huang, T. Buonassisi and D. P. Fenning, Science, 2019, 363, 627–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, M.-C. Tang, H. X. Dang, R. Munir, D. Barrit, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808357 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-C. Tang, Y. Fan, D. Barrit, R. Li, H. X. Dang, S. Zhang, T. J. Magnanelli, N. V. Nguyen, E. J. Heilweil, C. A. Hacker, D.-M. Smilgies, K. Zhao, A. Amassian and T. D. Anthopoulos, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000272 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Chang, Y. Zong, L. Etgar, G. Cui, N. P. Padture and S. Pang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7674–7678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Q. Guo, H. Zhang, Y. Bai, F. Wang, L. Liu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 248–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Xie, B. Yu, C. Ma, X. Xu, Y. Cheng, S. Yuan, Z.-K. Wang, H. T. Chandran, C.-S. Lee, L.-S. Liao and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9081–9088 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, M. Sponseller, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803587 CrossRef .
H. Si, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, G. Zhang, Y. Ou, S. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Wu, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, T. Zhang, X. Meng, W. K. Ng, Y. Yang, K. S. Wong, H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21858–21865 RSC .
M. Q. Hovish, N. Rolston, K. Bruning, F. Hilt, C. Tassone and R. H. Dauskardt, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 169–176 RSC .
F. Xie, C.-C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942–1949 RSC .
X. Lian, J. Chen, M. Qin, Y. Zhang, S. Tian, X. Lu, G. Wu and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9409–9413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, N. Li, G. Tang, G. Zheng, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Li, N. Zhou, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900390 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yin, D. Cortecchia, A. Krishna, S. Chen, N. Mathews, A. C. Grimsdale and C. Soci, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1396–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zheng, C. Zhu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, G. Tang, R. Li, Y. Chen, L. Li, J. Hu, J. Hong, Q. Chen, X. Gao and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2793 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, J.-E. Jeong, J. Hong, K. Lee, M. J. Lee, H. Y. Woo and I. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12328–12336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Lai, T. Liu, D. Lu, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901242 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, D. Y. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M.-C. Tang, Y. Fan, R. Li, N. V. Nguyen, K. Zhao, T. D. Anthopoulos and C. A. Hacker, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34402–34412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ngoc Duy, C. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, S. Zhang, G. Will, A. Bou, J. Bisquert, P. E. Shaw, A. Du, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806479 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, P. Pechy, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10055–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, M. Saski, P. Yadav, D. Q. Bi, N. Pellet, J. Lewinski, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3345–3351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. De Marco, H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Y. Sun, Z. H. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. S. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Xiong, J. Li and W. A. Daoud, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9486–9496 RSC .
H. Chen, Q. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, F. Wang, A. Johnston, Y. Hou, Z. Peng, K. Xu, W. Zhou, Z. Liu, L. Qiao, X. Wang, S. Xu, J. Li, R. Long, Y. Ke, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, K. H. Stone, L. E. Mundt, T. H. Schloemer, S. N. Habisreutinger, S. P. Dunfield, L. T. Schelhas, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1856–1864 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nazarenko, S. Yakunin, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh and M. V. Kovalenko, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e373 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. Park, S. Seo, M. A. Park, S. Lee, D. H. Kim, K. Zhu, H. Shin and J. Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41898–41905 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, S. Svanström, V. Andrei, J. P. H. Rivett, N. Kornienko, B. Philippe, U. B. Cappel, H. Rensmo, F. Deschler and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13548–13557 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, W. Yin, M. Kim, M. Han, Y. J. Song, T. K. Ahn and H. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7905–7911 RSC .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, X. P. Zheng, B. Chen, H. T. Wei and J. S. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1400–1406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. P. Zou, Y. X. Pei, X. Bai, W. B. Jin and D. Chen, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C. P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Ferdani, S. R. Pering, D. Ghosh, P. Kubiak, A. B. Walker, S. E. Lewis, A. L. Johnson, P. J. Baker, M. S. Islam and P. J. Cameron, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2264–2272 RSC .
A. Mahapatra, R. Runjhun, J. Nawrocki, J. Lewinski, A. Kalam, P. Kumar, S. Trivedi, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz and P. Yadav, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 11467–11473 RSC .
S. Tan, I. Yavuz, N. De Marco, T. Huang, S.-J. Lee, C. S. Choi, M. Wang, S. Nuryyeva, R. Wang, Y. Zhao, H.-C. Wang, T.-H. Han, B. Dunn, Y. Huang, J.-W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
L. Kuai, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qin, T. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Li, T. Song, X. Gao, L. Wang and B. Sun, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900053 CrossRef .
F. Li, X. Deng, F. Qi, Z. Li, D. Liu, D. Shen, M. Qin, S. Wu, F. Lin, S.-H. Jang, J. Zhang, X. Lu, D. Lei, C.-S. Lee, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20134–20142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Caiyi Zhang	Caiyi Zhang obtained his B.S. degree from Wuhan University of Technology in 2018, and then continued his study as a PhD student at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His current research is focused on the fabrication of efficient and stable inverted perovskite solar cells via the optimization of perovskite crystallization and interface engineering.
Qifeng Han	Qifeng Han received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He is now an associate professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His current research interests involve novel next-generation solar cells and solar cell materials design and fabrication, including perovskite solar cells, perovskite/chalcogenide tandem solar cells and perovskite single crystals.
Liyuan Han	Liyuan Han is the chair professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He received his PhD degree from the University of Osaka Prefecture in 1988, and then worked at SHARP Corporation and started research on solar cells. Afterwards, he joined the National Institute for Materials Science, and established a research center of next-generation solar cells. His current research interests involve fundamental research on perovskite solar cells and the fabrication of high-performance perovskite solar modules for commercialization.

 	Fig. 1  (a) ABX3 perovskite crystal structure and atomic structures of the three A site cations: cesium, methylammonium and formamidinium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.10 Diagram of (b) black (α-phase) and (c) yellow (δ-phase) FAPbI3 perovskites. The N and C ions of the formamidinium cations are shown as blue and green spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.11 (d) Phase instability of CsPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.12	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the one-step and two-step spin-coating methods of perovskite films, and the effects of A site doping on the perovskite crystallization, including the morphology and crystallinity of the PbI2 films, nucleation and growth, phase transition, the composition and structure of the intermediate and crystal orientation. 2H and 3C phases stand for the δ-phase, α-phase, respectively. 4H and 6H phases both belong to hexagonal polytypes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV absorbance spectra of film-relevant precursor solutions prepared from PbI2 and PbI2 with CsI. (b) Size distributions of PbI2 complexes in the precursor solution detected by dynamic light scattering. Top-view SEM images of the PbI2 thin films obtained (c) without and (d) with CsI. Top-view SEM images of the (e) FAPbI3(Cl) and (f) FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl) films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.56	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the two-step method-sequential multidrop-coating method for the fabrication of Csx(MA0.4FA0.6)1−xPbI3 perovskite films. (b) FTIR spectra of the PbI2–DMSO precursor films without and with 30% CsI as-prepared and after storing 10 h under ambient condition. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) top-view images of the prepared Csx(MA0.4FA0.6)1−xPbI3 perovskite films with (c) 0% CsI, (d) 5% CsI, (e) 10% CsI, and (f) 15% CsI in the precursor solutions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.57	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Kinetics of the formation of perovskites. CsFA first forms a red wide-bandgap perovskite, while CsMAFA directly forms a black perovskite. (b) Angle-dependent XPS showing the high Br content (normalized to the Br content in the bulk) on the surface (60–70° from the normal to the surface) compared with the bulk (25–35° from the normal). The boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles. The median and mean are represented by the line dividing the boxes and the open square symbols, respectively. (c) EDX line scan mapping showing the high Br content. (d) Schematic illustration demonstrating the effect of trap densities (top panel) and gradient composition (bottom panel) on the carrier diffusivity. In the bottom panel, the core of the grain is made of a small-bandgap perovskite, and the shell is made of a wide-bandgap perovskite. (e) Diffusivity (red bars) and diffusion lengths (blue bars) for all perovskite thin films. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the diffusivity value fits. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.67	 

 	Fig. 6  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) Cs0M and (b) Cs5M devices. (c) Absorption spectra of the as-fabricated films (at room temperature) without the subsequent annealing step; the Cs0M film is red (red line, image of red film). Upon addition of cesium, the Cs10M film turns black (black line, image of black film). The inset XRD data show that Cs10M has the characteristic perovskite pattern, whereas Cs0M does not. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.29	 

 	Fig. 7  Cross-sectional SEM images for the PSCs. (a) PSC of perovskite without K+. (b) PSC of perovskite with 5% K+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.80	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) XRD patterns of different SnO2 substrate-based perovskite films with or without thermal annealing. (b) A schematic of the perovskite growth process on different substrates. (c) UV-vis spectra of different SnO2 substrate-based perovskite films with/without thermal annealing. (d) The steady PL spectra of perovskites with/without interface potassium passivation. (e) The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of perovskites with and without interface potassium passivation. The inset plot shows the corresponding TRPL spectra when the excitation laser is incident from the glass side. (f) Cross-section SEM image of the pristine perovskite device. (g) Cross-section SEM image of the perovskite device with interface potassium passivation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.36	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–h) 2D GIWAXS patterns at different crystallization stages for films (a–d) without Cs+ and (e–h) with 10% Cs+ before annealing. (i and j) The intensity profiles along the qz direction for films (i) without Cs+ and (j) with 10% Cs+. (k and l) Ex situ XRD results for the corresponding annealed perovskite films (k) without Cs+ and (l) with 10% Cs+. α and + denote the identified peaks of the α-phase and PbI2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.88	 

 	Fig. 10  UV-vis absorption spectra of half-crystallized perovskite films (a) without and (b) with 10% CsPbI3 precursor under different temperatures. CLSM images for (c) the PbI2 film and (d) PbI2–CsPbI3 film before and after reacting with FAI/MABr. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.91	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–d) Time-resolved GIWAXS intensity map of the selected perovskite films: (a) pristine, (b) 5% Cs+-added film, (c) 5% Rb+-added film, and (d) 7% Cs+ and 3% Rb+-added film. Time-evolution trace of the (e) 3C and (f) 6H phases with CB drip at 25 s (indicated by a black arrow). (g) Time-evolution trace of the 3C phase without CB drip. (h) XRD of the selected as-cast films. (i) XRD of the selected annealed films. The films made from the mixed-halides and mixed-cations led to perovskites containing different amounts of Cs+ and Rb+: (0,0), (5,0), (0,5), and (7,3). The bottom part of each film in (a)–(d) represents the 3D intensity map of q versus time, in addition to the corresponding projection on the xy-plane on top. The GIWAXS measurement was carried out at room temperature in air (20–25% relative humidity). Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.89	 

 	Fig. 12  XRD data obtained from perovskite films prepared (a) with MA-40 and (b) without MACl before and after annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. (c–h) Top view of SEM images of devices prepared with different amounts of MACl: (c) pristine (without addition), (d) MA-10, (e) MA-20, (f) MA-30, (g) MA-40, and (h) MA-50. (i) Grain size distribution of the films as a function of the MACl contents (pristine, MA-10, MA-20, MA-30, MA-40, and MA-50). Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.41	 

 	Fig. 13  Characterization of unannealed and annealed films. (a) UV-vis (dashed lines) and PL (solid lines) of unannealed MAFA (black) and RbCsMAFA (red) films. The inset images show fluorescence microscopy measurements (image size ∼26 μm × 26 μm) of the MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. Each image is an overlay of three emission ranges sampled from 640 to 650 nm (assigned as green), 680 to 690 nm (blue), and 725 to 735 nm (red). The colors were chosen to ensure easily discernible features. (b) XRD data of the unannealed MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. (c) UV-vis (dashed lines) and PL (solid lines) of the MAFA (black) and RbCsMAFA (red) films annealed at 100 °C for 1 hour. (d) XRD data of the annealed MAFA and RbCsMAFA films. The PbI2 and yellow-phase peaks are denoted as # and δ, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.90	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the vertical recrystallization method for the formation of the high-quality FAPbI3/MACl film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.103	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) GIWAXS intensity of (001) and GIWAXS intensity ratio of (111)/(001). (b) Integrated GIWAXS intensity plots azimuthally along the ring at q = 10 nm−1, with different MA ratios, assigned to the (001) plane of the corresponding perovskite films. (c) Surface energy of the perovskite films with different MA ratios (inset structures were the models used for the DFT calculation). (d) Schematic diagram of the evolution of the preferred crystal orientation along the (001) plane with increasing MA ratio. (e) The schematic diagram of the azimuth angle evolution of the (001) crystallographic plane with increasing MA ratio. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.105	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns of the control and 2D/3D perovskite films. The inset shows the magnified graph of the main perovskite peaks between 14.1° and 14.5°. Asterisks denote the major reflections from PbI2. (b) GIWAXS of the control 3D perovskite film. (c) GIWAXS of the 2D/3D perovskite film. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed 2D/3D perovskite structure, where the organic layer was randomly inserted into the 3D perovskite and oriented perpendicular to the substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.109	 

Cs0.1FA0.9PbI2.865Br0.135	CsI	
	23.0	1.04	80.5	19.3	
132

FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl)	CsI	Morphology of PbI2	22.63	1.11	74.32	18.66	
56

Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3	FAI	Crystallinity of PbI2	22.7	1.00	62.9	14.2	
59

Cs0.1(MA0.4FA0.6)0.9PbI3	CsI	Crystallinity of PbI2	23.3	1.086	80	20.3	
57

GACsFA	CsI	Crystallinity of PbI2	24.8	1.16	81.3	23.5	
62

FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3	CsI	Morphology of PbI2	22.82	1.01	65.78	15.09	
55

FAxMAyCsz	CsF	Crystallization	23.99	1.134	74.59	20.29	
61

MAPbI3	KCl	Morphology of PbI2	18.33	1.04	74.67	15.08	
63

MAPbI3	NaI	Morphology of PbI2	22.97	0.90	73	15.14	
64

Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45	MABr	Solubility of each phase	
	
	
	
	
67

CsFAMA	MACl	Crystallization	23.2	1.193	78.2	21.65	
74

Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	CsI	Nucleation	23.5	1.147	0.785	21.17	
29

CsFAMA	CsCl	Nucleation	24.3	1.12	81.1	22.1	
73

CsFAMA	CsI	Nucleation	23.6	1.14	77	20.8	
71

CsFAMA	CsPbI3	Nucleation and growth	24.1	1.13	81	21.7	
72

FAMA	RbI	Crystallization	22.86	1123	69.6	22.86	
76

Rb0.05FA0.95PbI3	RbI	Crystallization	23.93	1.07	67	17.16	
77

Rb5(Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95)Pb (I0.83Br0.17)3	RbI	Crystallization	23.21	1.16	78	21	
78

KCs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3	KI	Crystallization activation energy	22.95	1.132	79	20.52	
81

Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	KOH	Nucleation	22.6	1.146	79	20.46	
36

K5FAMA	KI	Crystallization	22.34	1.124	76.4	19.15	
82

MAPbI3	CND@K	Crystallization	22.69	1.1	84	21.01	
83

MAPbI3	KI	Crystallization	20.95	0.94	79	15.31	
84

MAPbI3	KI	Nucleation	20.88	1.1	78	17.81	
86

MAPbI3	NaI	Nucleation	19.2	0.96	77	14.2	
65

MAPbI3	GAI	Crystallization	21.24	1.07	75.3	17.13	
117

CsFAMA	CsPbI3	Phase transition	
	
	
	
	
87

Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	CsI	Phase transition	22.81	1.14	76.1	19.79	
88

CsFAMA	CsPbI3	Phase transition	24.49	1.11	70.34	19.16	
91

RbCsFAMA	RbI	Phase transition	
	
	
	20.1	
89

FAMACsRbPbI2.55Br0.45	RbI	Phase transition	22.8	1.13	73.5	18.85	
93

FAMAKPbI2.55Br0.45	KI	Phase transition	22.95	1.06	70.45	17.15	
94

RbCsFAMA	RbI	
	22.7	1.10	76	19	
92

Rb5Cs10FAPbI3	RbI	
	25.06	1.08	75.5	20.44	
34

FA0.8MA0.2PbI3	MACl	Composition of intermediate	22.44	1.07	76.5	18.4	
96

FA1−xMAxPbI3	MAI	Composition of intermediate	22.8	0.97	78.5	17.4	
98

FA1−xMAxPbI3	MACl	Composition of intermediate	25.63	1.145	80.1	23.48	
41

FAPbI3	FACl	
	23.4	1.15	78.3	21.2	
99

MAPbI3	NH4Br	Composition of intermediate	
	
	
	20.61	
100

Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3	CsI	Content of intermediate	
	
	
	
	
102

FA3/4Cs7/40MA3/40	CsI	Composition of intermediate	22.8	1.09	74.6	18.6	
101

Rb5(Cs5MAFA)95	RbI	Composition of intermediate	22.8	1.18	81	21.8	
90

FA1−xMAxPbI3	MACl	Crystal orientation	23.09	1.10	81.4	20.65	
103

FA1−xMAxPbI2.87Br0.13(Cl)	MACl	Crystal orientation	23.35	1.099	79.0	20.26	
105

(FAMACs)100−xRbx	RbI	Crystal orientation	22.61	1.151	80.7	20.99	
107


	ThMAI	Crystal orientation	22.8	1.16 V	81.0	21.49	
109

(FAPbI3)1−x(MDA–Cs)x	CsI, MDACl2	Crystal orientation	26.17	1.162	80.1	24.4	
110


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
