Molecule occupancy by a n -butylamine treatment to facilitate the conversion of PbI 2 to perovskite in sequential deposition   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP05791A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP05791A
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 981-984Molecule occupancy by a n-butylamine treatment to facilitate the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite in sequential deposition†

        
          
            Zheng 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Chen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenping 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongxu 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiming 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tingting 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiguang 
            Xie
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Pengyi 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aSiyuan Laboratory, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Vacuum Coating Technologies and New Energy Materials, Guangdong Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Vacuum Coating Technologies and New Energy Materials, Department of Physics, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. E-mail: wgxie@email.jnu.edu.cn; tlpy@email.jnu.edu.cn
bGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Fiber Sensing and Communications, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China
Received 
      7th November 2019
    , Accepted 20th December 2019First published on 21st December 2019AbstractHerein, we propose a new approach of molecule occupancy via a vapor treatment to facilitate the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite in sequential deposition. We have shown that the morphology of PbI2 and the subsequent crystallization of perovskite can be effectively tuned, thus leading to the elimination of residual PbI2 and promotion of perovskite growth.
Owing to their excellent optoelectronic properties (suitable bandgap, long carrier lifetime, low trap density, etc.), hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites have been widely used in different applications, such as photodetection, light-emitting diodes, and solar cells.1–3 Among them, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have aroused extensive interest from researchers due to their unprecedented photovoltaic performance improvements in recent years.4–7
In PSCs, the perovskite light absorbing layer has an important impacts on the device performance. The preparation of perovskite (typically MAPbI3) usually includes the one-step deposition and sequential deposition method. In the one-step deposition, high-quality perovskite films can be produced using a mixture of PbI2 and MAI in a common solvent, usually combined with additional antisolvent processing. However, large morphological variations are often observed in the resulting films due to the uncontrolled precipitation of perovskite.8 In contrast, the sequential deposition method introduces the PbI2 layer beforehand and subsequently converts it into perovskite by reacting with MAI. This method permits much better control over the perovskite morphology, and has been proven to be one of the most effective ways to fabricate high-performance PSCs thus far. However, it suffers from several challenging issues. When MAI begins to contact with PbI2, it first reacts with shallow PbI2, and the perovskite formed thereafter hinders the deep diffusion of MAI, which often results in residual PbI2 at the bottom of the perovskite layer. Therefore, PbI2 usually takes a considerable amount of time to react with MAI and be converted into perovskite completely. However, prolonging the reaction time may destroy the perovskite lattice and degrade its crystallinity, resulting in rather unsatisfactory device performance.9
To address these challenges, various strategies have been used to facilitate the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite, such as: (i) PbI2 morphology control10 to increase the MAI diffusion efficiency; (ii) PbI2 composition additives or solvent optimization11 to manipulate the crystallization process; (iii) MAI optimization including composition and deposition method12 to promote the reaction and perovskite surface morphology; and (iv) perovskite annealing condition engineering13 to enhance the crystallization of perovskite.
In this work, we improved the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite by controlling the structure of PbI2 nanolayers at the molecular level. By using saturated n-butylamine (BA) vapor to process PbI2, we found that the film conversion was significantly promoted, together with the elimination of residual PbI2. We ascribe this phenomenon to the enlarged distance between the PbI6 nanolayers in the formed intermediate by BA molecule occupancy, which can provide more space for the diffusion and reaction of MAI, thus facilitating the formation of perovskite and removal of the residual PbI2. Using this strategy, an improved photovoltaic performance was achieved for the PSCs fabricated via the sequential deposition process.

Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the experimental process of our molecule occupancy method. Firstly, we prepared dense PbI2 films via the spin-coating technique. After cooling to room temperature, the PbI2 substrate was facing upwards to be treated by saturated BA vapor with varying durations through home-made equipment. Then, the obtained samples simultaneously reacted with MAI vapor to be converted into perovskite films. Here, PbI2 is a layered semiconductor with weak van der Waals force between adjacent nanolayers. These nanolayers consist of edge-sharing PbI6 octahedron frameworks. Experiments show that PbI2 is almost insoluble in BA (see Fig. S1, ESI†), which suggests its lead framework can be retained in the presence of BA.14,15 Therefore, we speculate that BA will be prone to enter and occupy the space between the PbI6 nanolayers as a guest molecule due to the strong interaction between Pb and the amino group of BA,16 self-assembling to form an alternating stacking intermediate or complex with the lead frameworks. In the meantime, the edge-sharing nature of lead framework was maintained. To verify this speculation, we studied the properties of the intermediate by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy (see Fig. S2, ESI†). Note that XRD and absorption results of the intermediate are to some extent similar to that of the 2-dimensional (2D) perovskite BA2PbI4, which may be ascribed to their similar layered structures.17 One inherent difference between them is the maintenance or collapse of the lead framework. For the 2D perovskite, the iodine ions of BAI will drive the edge-sharing PbI6 octahedrons to a corner-sharing structure along the equatorial direction, together with the insertion of BA ions,18 which is different from the edge-sharing lead framework in the PbI2·xBA intermediate.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of PbI2 engineering by BA vapor treatment and the conversion process to perovskite films. 
After establishing the formation of the intermediate, we studied its influence on the film conversion to perovskite. Due to the enlarged distance between the PbI6 nanolayers by BA occupancy, MAI vapor may have more space to permeate and react with PbI2, leading to promoted perovskite formation. To verify this hypothesis, we compared the film conversion process with different BA treatment durations, as shown in Fig. 2a. The reference PbI2 films showed a bright yellow color. When the BA processing time was increased, the color became slightly deeper and eventually light orange, which is attributed to the formation of the PbI2·xBA intermediate. When exposed to MAI vapor, the BA-processed PbI2 film was converted into black brown perovskite at a higher speed. The longer the BA processing time, the faster the film conversion. These observations indicate the promotion effect of the BA molecule occupancy on perovskite formation, which directly supports our hypothesis. More evidences will be presented later.
 Fig. 2  Film conversion characterization from PbI2 to perovskite. (a) Photographs of film conversion with varying BA treatment durations. The duration was varied from 0 to 60 min, and labeled as BA-3 min, BA-10 min and BA-60 min, respectively. The optimized MAI reaction time was 25 min. (b and d) X-ray diffraction patterns of PbI2 and perovskite films, respectively. (c and e) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra of PbI2 and perovskite films, respectively. 
To understand the film conversion process, first we studied the reaction products of PbI2 and BA vapor. As shown in Fig. 2b, the XRD results of PbI2 show additional diffraction peaks at ∼6.5° after BA molecule intercalation. These peaks originate from the layered structure of the resultant intermediate, which is discussed in Fig. S2 (ESI†). When the BA processing time was extended, the intensity of the peak at ∼6.5° increased gradually, accompanied by weakening of the peak fir PbI2 (located at 12.7°). This indicates the conversion from pristine PbI2 to the PbI2·xBA intermediate. In addition to the XRD results, the UV-vis absorption spectra further support the formation of the PbI2·xBA intermediate. As shown in Fig. 2c, a prominent absorption shoulder at ∼510 nm can be observed in the BA-processed PbI2 films, which should be ascribed to the excitonic behavior of the layered intermediate.14,19 Therefore, BA treatment converted PbI2 into a layer-structured intermediate.
Then, we investigated the influence of the intermediate on the perovskite properties. Fig. 2d displays the XRD patterns of the resultant perovskite films by reacting PbI2 with MAI vapor. For the reference PbI2, diffraction peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° appeared after the reaction with MAI, which correspond to the (110) and (220) facets of 3D cubic MAPbI3 perovskite, respectively. However, the diffraction peak of PbI2 (located at 12.7°) was also observed, indicating the residual PbI2. Furthermore, prolonging the MAI reaction time in a rational range still could not eliminate the residual PbI2 (see Fig. S3, ESI†), which may be attributed to the insufficient diffusion of MAI in the thick PbI2 layers. In contrast, no diffraction peak of PbI2 was detected for the BA-processed samples, which indicates the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. This is likely due to the enlarged distance between the PbI6 nanolayers by BA molecule occupancy, which provided more space for the diffusion and reaction of MAI with PbI2, as discussed above. Fig. 2e exhibits the UV-vis spectra of the perovskite films. The absorption was dominated by the typical MAPbI3 with an edge at 780 nm, and slightly enhanced by using BA treatment. The enhancement in light absorption also suggests that more PbI2 could be converted to perovskite under the assistance of BA vapor. In brief, the intermediate formation can facilitate the reaction between PbI2 and MAI, leading to accelerated perovskite growth and elimination of the residual PbI2.
The surface morphology of PbI2 and the perovskite films were revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown in Fig. 3. The pristine PbI2 film has a morphology full of voids between the PbI2 grains (see Fig. 3a), which is consistent with previous reports.10 When processed by BA vapor for 3 min, the PbI2 surface appeared to collapse with layered edges (see Fig. 3b). As the processing time increased, PbI2 began to transform into small layered nanoflakes with some orientations (see Fig. 3c and d), which could be understood considering the layered structure of the intermediate. The SEM images of the corresponding perovskite are shown in Fig. 3e–h. The perovskite grains growing from the reference PbI2 were generally small and uneven (see Fig. 3e). The morphology characteristics had no obvious change when PbI2 was processed by BA within 10 min (see Fig. 3f and g). However, when the BA processing time increased to 60 min, some larger perovskite grains seemed to appear (see Fig. 3h). This is likely due to the increased distance between the PbI6 inorganic layers by BA occupancy, which provided considerable space for the large-grained perovskite growth. These results show that, compared to their significant influence on film conversion speed, BA-processed PbI2 films may have limited influence on the perovskite surface morphology unless a long processing period is utilized. One conceivable explanation for this phenomenon is that the shallow BA molecules in the intermediate films evaporated when contacting with the hot MAI vapor, resulting in a similar surface morphology of the perovskite films. Further studies on this process require more characterization analyses, which were beyond the scope of this work.
 Fig. 3  Film morphology characterization of PbI2 (a–d) and the corresponding perovskite (e–h) top-view SEM images. 
Next, we used steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurement to analyse the film luminescence properties. The PbI2 and perovskite films were deposited on a TiO2-coated fluorine tin oxide (FTO) substrate. The PL spectra from both the surface side and FTO side (with the excitation of 325 nm) were almost invariant. Fig. 4a shows the PL spectra of the PbI2 films. As the processing time increased, a gradually enhanced peak located at about 520 nm was clearly resolved, suggesting the formation of the PbI2·xBA intermediate. Fig. 4b shows the PL spectra of the corresponding perovskite films. A prominent peak at 780 nm was detected for all the samples, which is the typical signal of 3D perovskite MAPbI3. This indicates that the 3D cubic structure completely dominated in the resultant perovskite film. Besides, the peak intensity was enhanced with an increase in the BA processing time. For the BA-3 min and BA-10 min samples, the intensity enhancement was reasonable since more PbI2 was converted to perovskite under the assistance of BA. For the BA-60 min sample, the enhancement may be ascribed to the decrease in non-radiative recombination20,21 since the perovskite grains were enlarged, as illustrated in Fig. 3h. These PL measurements are in good agreement with the absorption results in Fig. 2. In summary, the PL results further confirm the existence of an intermediate, which promoted the conversion of PbI2, thus leading to enhanced luminescence intensity in the resultant MAPbI3 films.
 Fig. 4  Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) characterization of the (a) PbI2 and (b) perovskite films. (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the PSCs. (d) Statistical graph of device efficiencies. 
Generally, improved PbI2 conversion can contribute to the photovoltaic performance of PSCs fabricated in sequential deposition. Thus, to examine this, we fabricated PSCs with the conventional structure of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/gold (Au). Here, TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD functioned as the electron- and hole-selective contacts, respectively. All devices were prepared from the same batch and measured under simulated air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Fig. 4c shows a comparison of the J–V curves of the PSCs, and the their detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1, ESI.† The reference device without BA treatment exhibited a PCE of 14.52%, with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.71 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.989 V, and fill factor (FF) of 74.44%. A champion PCE of 17.63% (with Jsc of 22.36 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.031 V, and FF of 76.42%) was achieved when PbI2 was processed for 10 minutes. Large improvements in the Voc and Jsc were obtained, which are likely due to the elimination of the residual PbI2 and the enhancement of perovskite growth, as discussed above. The steady power output at the voltage bias of 0.8 V near the maximum power point is displayed in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). However, further increasing the BA processing time to 60 minutes led to the deterioration of the device performance. The deterioration probably originated from the trace amount of intermediate or low-dimensional perovskite residue (see discussion in Fig. S6, ESI†) in the MAPbI3 films. Although BA molecules could be replaced by MA or evaporated from the film, it is reasonable that slight BA residue existed in the resultant perovskite films considering the long processing duration. As a result, the residual BA molecules would stay between the PbI6 nanolayers, forming low-dimensional perovskites with inferior charge transport ability. A statistical graph of the device PCEs is shown in Fig. 4d. Detailed statistical data about the Voc, Jsc, and FF can be found in Fig. S7 (ESI†). The J–V profiles of the devices measured with both the reverse scan (from positive to negative bias) and forward scan (from negative to positive bias) are displayed in Fig. S8 (ESI†).
In conclusion, we established a new protocol of molecule occupancy by BA vapor treatment to facilitate the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. We found that this method could effectively promote the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite by forming an intermediate, thus leading to the elimination of residual PbI2. This is ascribed to the enlarged distance between the PbI6 nanolayers in the PbI2 film by BA occupancy, which can provide more space for MAI diffusion and reaction. These results provide an alternative approach to control the growth and morphology of perovskite for the fabrication of efficient PSCs via the sequential deposition process.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 61674070, 11804117), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 21619318, 21618313).
Notes and references
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang and C. Yan, Nature, 2018, 562, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Q. Hu, T. Liu, L. Zhao, D. Luo, J. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, F. Liu and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10718–10724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee and D. Huh, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
Best research-cell efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png.
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Q. Hu, J. Wu, K. Chen, L. Zhao, F. Liu, C. Wang, H. Lu, S. Jia and T. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501890 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 1 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, Y. Rakita, Y. Orr, E. Klein, I. Feldman, M. Elbaum, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6501–6510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. C. Zheng, Y. Hou, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6705–6710 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, D. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9705–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Jain, B. Philippe, E. M. J. Johansson, B.-w. Park, H. Rensmo, T. Edvinsson and G. Boschloo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2630–2642 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, P. Wu, W. Yang, R. Su, D. Luo, X. Yang, Y. Tu, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 411–418 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 1–17 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05791a‡ Z. L. and K. C. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of PbI2 engineering by BA vapor treatment and the conversion process to perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Film conversion characterization from PbI2 to perovskite. (a) Photographs of film conversion with varying BA treatment durations. The duration was varied from 0 to 60 min, and labeled as BA-3 min, BA-10 min and BA-60 min, respectively. The optimized MAI reaction time was 25 min. (b and d) X-ray diffraction patterns of PbI2 and perovskite films, respectively. (c and e) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra of PbI2 and perovskite films, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Film morphology characterization of PbI2 (a–d) and the corresponding perovskite (e–h) top-view SEM images.	 

 	Fig. 4  Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) characterization of the (a) PbI2 and (b) perovskite films. (c) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the PSCs. (d) Statistical graph of device efficiencies.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05791a
‡ Z. L. and K. C. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
