Metal–organic framework glass composites  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00315E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00315E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 4149-4172Metal–organic framework glass composites

        
          
            Rijia 
            Lin†
a, 
      
        
          
            Milton 
            Chai†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yinghong 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vicki 
            Chen
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Thomas D. 
            Bennett
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jingwei 
            Hou
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: Jingwei.hou@uq.edu.au
bSchool of Dentistry, The University of Queensland, Herston, QLD 4006, Australia
cUniversity of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
dDepartment of Materials Science and Metallurgy, Cambridge University, CB3 0FS, Cambridge, UK
Received 
      20th January 2023
    First published on 19th June 2023AbstractThe melting phenomenon in metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) has been recognised as one of the fourth generation MOF paradigm behaviours. Molten MOFs have high processibility for producing mechanically robust glassy MOF macrostructures, and they also offer highly tunable interfacial characteristics when combined with other types of functional materials, such as crystalline MOFs, inorganic glass and metal halide perovskites. As a result, MOF glass composites have emerged as a family of functional materials with dynamic properties and hierarchical structural control. These nanocomposites allow for sophisticated materials science studies as well as the fabrication of next-generation separation, catalysis, optical, and biomedical devices. Here, we review the approaches for designing, fabricating, and characterising MOF glass composites. We determine the key application opportunities enabled by these composites and explore the remaining hurdles, such as improving thermal and chemical compatibility, regulating interfacial properties, and scalability.
Rijia Lin
Rijia Lin is an Australian Research Council (ARC) DECRA Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland (Australia). He received his Bachelor's degree in Polymeric Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2010 and his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland in 2016. Dr Lin's current research focuses on the development and design of metal–organic framework composites for membrane separation and catalysis.
Milton Chai
Milton Chai received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of New South Wales in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. Vicki Chen and Prof. Greg Leslie. Currently, he is working as a postdoc at the University of Queensland under the supervision of Dr Jingwei Hou. He was a recipient of the early career researcher award from the Australian Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering in 2022. His research focuses on MOF materials for critical minerals recovery, catalysis and membrane applications.
Yinghong Zhou
Yinghong Zhou is a senior research fellow at the School of Dentistry, University of Queensland, where she leads the Translational ImmunoEngineering for Regenerative Dentistry research team. Dr Zhou seeks to understand the mechanisms for bone repair and periodontal tissue regeneration, with a particular interest in stem cell-based therapy and biomaterial application. She has been awarded the prestigious NHMRC Early Career Fellowship (2016–2020) to investigate the role of cell signaling cues in periodontal tissue regeneration, an Endeavour Research Fellowship (2017), and a BridgeTech Program Fellowship (2021) to advance research towards commercialisation.
Jingwei Hou
Dr Jingwei Hou received his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of New South Wales in 2015. He then joined the UNESCO Centre for Membrane Science and Technology (2015–2017) and the University of Cambridge (2017–2019) for this post-doctoral research. In 2019, he returned to Australia as an ARC DECRA Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, University of Queensland. In 2021, he was named the ARC Future Fellow. He is currently a senior lecturer and group leader of the Functional Materials Engineering (fme) Laboratory.

Key learning points
1. Common MOF glass composite configurations and their fabrication methods.
2. Methods for fine-tuning the interface of MOF glass composites to achieve the desired characteristics.
3. Advanced techniques help us to understand the bulk and interface of the MOF glass composites.
4. Emerging applications of MOF glass composites for ionic conduction, optics, molecular separation, catalysis, and energy storage.
5. Current challenges and opportunities in the construction and application of MOF glass composites.

1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordination polymers (PCPs), are hybrid materials formed by the coordination bonding between metal nodes and organic linkers. In the past two decades, this subject has experienced considerable growth, with an emphasis on optimising the MOF structure and chemistry for specific applications. The majority of MOFs are synthesised in their powder form, and integration of MOF powders into macroscopic architectures is typically necessary for device implementation. This is usually achieved through compositing with secondary components. Recently, the macroscopic solid–liquid phase transition (melting) behaviour of a small number of MOFs has been discovered, which further facilitates the formation of MOF glass by quenching the molten liquid MOF.1–3 This melt-quenching behaviour is known as one of the paradigm properties of the fourth generation MOF materials.4 Aside from eliciting great scientific interest in the structure, phase transition behaviour, and dynamic properties of meltable MOFs, the highly processible MOF glass also provides exciting opportunities for the integration of MOFs and other functional materials into engineered composite structures and devices.
Several types of MOF glass-based composites have been reported thus far, with MOF glass serving as matrices for MOF particles and other functional nanoparticles, or as fillers and surface coatings in/on other types of substrates.5–7 These composites have been developed using a variety of different approaches, with some of them being highly scalable. They also demonstrate improved mechanical properties, processibility, porosities, catalytic activity, transport behaviours, and adequate protection for encased functional components.7–10
Composite materials are often composed of two (or more) separate components with distinct operational objectives. In the early stages of MOF glass composite research, the glass phase is used as a substrate for dispersed MOF fillers, in a similar manner to polymer–MOF mixed matrix composite materials. For the well-studied conventional polymer–MOF composites, organic matrices are used to provide mechanical resilience to MOF structures. The inclusion of MOFs into polymers requires consideration of how MOFs would affect polymer properties such as mechanical strength, durability, and environmental stability.11 At the same time, most of the polymer substrates are insufficiently compatible with MOFs, resulting in particle aggregation, pore blockage, and even loss of porosity for the MOF constituents.12 Functionalisation of polymers or MOFs can indeed circumvent these problems but it usually comes at the price of the overall stability of the composites. Despite reports of the impregnation of polymers with inherent microporosity (PIMs) with MOFs, regulating the transport behaviour within the polymer phase and, in particular, at the interface between two phases remains particularly difficult, not to mention the gradual aging and plasticisation of the porous polymeric matrices and broader chemical robustness issues.13
According to current research, MOF glass composites have the ability to overcome the aforementioned challenges associated with polymeric substrates. MOF glasses have highly tunable physicochemical properties (e.g., viscosity, melting behaviour, porosity, inertness and reactivity), with transient undercoordinated metal nodes and organic ligands present in the molten phase, permitting excellent interfacial bonding and subsequent ideal compatibility within composites.10 After quenching, the glass phase exhibits a similar chemical coordination network and stability to their mother crystal phases.14,15 Furthermore, forethought can be put into designing the chemical function, microporosity, and phase transition behaviours of the glass substrates, resulting in controllable morphology, structure, and function of the end product. The ability to obtain MOF glasses at relatively more moderate temperatures (350–450 °C) in particular is a crucial breakthrough. These characteristics drive the rapid growth of MOF glass composites, which began with MOF–MOF crystal glass composites, MOF–MOF glass blends, MOF flux melting composites, and have recently been extended to MOF–perovskite composites, MOF glass thin film coatings, and MOF glass electrodes, with numerous applications demonstrated in adsorption, membrane, optics, catalysis, ion conduction and sensing.
This tutorial review identifies and describes three general MOF glass composite approaches: (1) MOF glass matrices, in which functional components are dispersed in MOF glass substrates; (2) MOF glass fillers, in which MOF glass is dispersed in another form of continuous matrix; and, finally, (3) MOF glass coating on substrates. Rather than offering a comprehensive overview of MOF glass formation, phase transition, characterisation, and functionalisation, as has been carried out in some recent excellent reviews,4,16–20 this tutorial review focuses on the growing field of MOF glass composites. Knowledge on the existing analysis technique in particular for probing composite properties and emergent application opportunities is provided. We expect that the immense promise and potential of MOF glass composites will be captured by more researchers through this review, particularly the perspective section, resulting in the advancement of fundamental condensed phase sciences and the realisation of unprecedented application opportunities.
2. Glass-forming MOFs
When being heated, most MOF crystals undergo irreversible thermal decomposition and framework collapse without going through a molten state. This is typically attributed to the stronger coordination bonds between metal nodes and organic linkers than the covalent bonds within linkers. A few types of MOFs, such as zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), phosphate–azolate frameworks, thiocyanate and nitrile-based frameworks, and metal-bis(acetamide) frameworks, can produce a molten amorphous state at temperatures lower than their thermal decomposition temperatures. MOF solid–liquid transition (melting) originates from the transient breakage and reformation of metal–ligand coordination bonds, while the original inorganic and organic building units remain in the liquid state. For example, the melting of ZIF-4 involves rapid dissociation and reassociation of Zn metal centres to imidazolate linkers, which has been probed using first-principles molecular dynamics simulation (MD) (Fig. 1a and b).21 Melting occurs when the thermal atomic vibrations exceed a critical fraction of the bond distance to the nearest atomic neighbour (Fig. 1c).22,23 While it is apparent that metal–ligand bonding strength is a significant factor in determining the glass-forming ability of MOFs, other crucial factors including porosity and interionic interactions also determine the meltability of MOFs. Gaillac et al. proposed that the energy barrier for the dissociation of imidazolate ligands from metal cations during melting is linked to the porosity of the ZIF framework.22 For example, the dense framework of ZIF-4 enables the de-coordinated ligands to maintain good contact with other ligands and to be stabilised by dispersive interactions, while for highly porous ZIF-8, the de-coordinated ligands are substantially isolated in the intermediate state, resulting in a high energy barrier, which also results in melting of ZIF-8 above its thermal decomposition temperature (Td). However, the melting points of ZIF-8, as well as some glass-forming ZIFs (ZIF-76 and ZIF-62), can be lowered by incorporating guest components such as ionic liquids, which offers opportunities for the family of meltable MOFs to be further extended through host–guest interactions.24,25
 Fig. 1  Formation of MOF glass. (a) Illustration of the exchange event of imidazolate ligand in ZIF-4 during melting. (b) Calculated distribution of zinc coordination numbers in ZIF-4 as a function of temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (c) The occurrence of melting for ZIFs when the atomic Zn vibration exceeds a critical fraction (0.15) of the distance to the nearest Zn neighbour. Adapted with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Following melting, the disordered node-linker arrangement can be retained by cooling the molten MOF fast enough to avoid re-crystallisation. This process is known as quenching, or rapid cooling. Several factors such as the use of asymmetrical or sterically bulky organic ligands, as well as high viscosity of the melt can prevent structural reordering during cooling.2,26 This correlates to a higher glass forming ability (GFA), which is the tendency of the material to form a glass and is measured through the ratio of glass transition (Tg) temperature to melting temperature (Tm).27 Empirically, Tg of glass is about 2/3 of the crystal's Tm based on the Kauzmann “2/3 law”, and MOFs with Tg/Tm above 2/3 are considered to have high GFA.14 Although the long-range organisation of the crystalline components is not maintained after melt-quenching, the resulting glass has a partially-continuous framework and the short-range order (length scale <10 Å) is invariant. When compared to their crystalline counterparts, liquid and glass MOFs possess distinct physicochemical properties, including porosity, processability, reactivity, mechanical rigidity and ductility, and optical responsiveness.28–31
Hitherto, the melt-quenching process remains the most widely used method for MOF glass formation. Recently, a new route to obtain glassy MOFs has been presented via stimuli-induced amorphisation of crystalline MOFs, followed by heating to a super-cooled liquid state and subsequent quenching.32 This pathway offers a way to avoid potential thermal decomposition during melting, through the selection of appropriate stimuli (e.g., water vapour) to initiate the establishment of continuous random networks for subsequent glass formation. Further exploration of this new strategy may see rapid expansion in the range of glass-forming MOFs.
3. MOF–glass composites
An important advancement in the last three years for glass-forming MOFs is the creation of a composite MOF glass with other materials to generate novel composites/hybrids, which exhibit unprecedented properties and functions of the individual parental components. The phase transitions of MOFs to a liquid state allow for the fabrication of a variety of glass hybrids and composites in a similar manner to the conventional polymer-based mixed matrix composites. The current reported MOF glass composites can be classified into three types based on their configuration: (i) MOF glass used as a matrix to host the dispersed functional materials; (ii) MOF glasses as the dispersed phase in a matrix (e.g., polymer); and (iii) MOF glass composited with macroscopic substrates (e.g., as coating) (Fig. 2). This section summarises the existing strategies and experimental approaches applied for the fabrication of MOF glass composites with these configurations.
 Fig. 2  Three types of MOF glass composites based on different configurations. 
3.1 MOF glass matrices composited with second MOF components

3.1.1 MOF glass blends. 
MOF glass blends are fabricated by combining two glass-forming MOF crystals, heating the mixture above their melting temperatures to concurrently melt both components, followed by subsequent quenching to get the blend (Fig. 3a). Longley et al. chose Zn-ZIF-4 (melting temperature, Tm = 580 °C) and Zn-ZIF-62 (Tm = 445 °C) crystals as the parental glass-forming MOFs for blending.30 Zn-ZIF-4 and Zn-ZIF-62 were physically mixed by ball-milling and melt-quenched at 590 °C for 2 min under argon, which resulted in ZIF glass blends. The blend exhibited a single glass transition temperature (Tg) value between the original Tg values of the two ZIF liquid phases, indicating that parent phases were homogeneously mixed during the melting process, instead of forming separate domains. The Tg value of ZIF glass blends can be tuned by altering the Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 ratio (Fig. 3b). Microscopic investigation revealed the preservation of separated phases within the composite (Fig. 3c), possibly due to the high viscosity of Zn-ZIF-4 and Zn-ZIF-62 liquids. Further investigation of the coordination environment of the glass blend at a subwavelength spatial resolution also showed that the electronic structure of the parent ZIF phases was retained.33 This suggests that the macroscopic properties observed is a combination of the interactive effects between different MOF domains that are interlocked in the glass material.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of (a) blended MOF glass and (d) flux melted MOF glass. Adapted with permission from ref. 20, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Evolving Tg of ZIF glass blend by altering the Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 ratio. (c) X-Ray energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of a Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 glass blend showing Zn (blue) and Co (red) domains with sharp interfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (e) In situ WAXS diffraction of ZIF-8/ZIF-62 flux melted glass. (f) X-ray EDS elemental mapping of a Co-ZIF-67/Zn-ZIF-62 flux melted glass showing inter-diffused Zn (blue) and Co (red) domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.2 Flux melted MOF glass. 
Most MOFs experience thermal decomposition before reaching their theoretical melting point. Flux melting is an alternate approach for lowering the melting points and enable the melting of non-glass forming MOFs.34,35 The term “flux” here denotes a meltable MOF used to facilitate a non-glass forming MOF's access to the liquid phase. Flux melted MOF glasses are created by heating a glass-forming MOF with a non-glass forming MOF, followed by quenching from a temperature above the Tm of the glass-forming MOF. The molten, liquid MOF contributes to stabilisation of the dissociated intermediates, hence lowering the Tm of the non-glass forming MOFs, and showing monolith morphology with no remnant distinct MOF particles on a microscopic scale (Fig. 3d). As expected, the thermal decomposition temperature (Td) of the non-glass forming MOFs should be greater than the Tm of the glass-forming MOF component.
Longley et al. fabricated a flux melted MOF glass by heating a mixture of 20 wt% ZIF-8 and 80 wt% ZIF-62 to 500 °C in an argon atmosphere before quenching.34 The flux melted glass displayed a single Tg and Tm, which was higher than that for pure ZIF-62. In situ wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) shows that the amorphisation of ZIF-62 occurs at 600 K, and the amorphisation of ZIF-8 happens at 650 K (Fig. 3e). In contrast to glass blends, where there is minimal diffusion at the interface between domains due to the high viscosities of the parent phases, flux-melted glass results in more significant interdiffusion at the interfaces. This was revealed by using quantitative elemental nano-tomography, where phase-segregated domains of Co-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 glass blends and inter-diffused domains of flux-melted Co-ZIF-67/Zn-ZIF-62 were examined (Fig. 3f).34 Furthermore, the flux melted glass also presented higher porosity for H2 compared to the pure ZIF-62 glass. These observations all indicate well inter-diffused MOF domains. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the viscosity of the parent phases and different ligand interactions may also play a key role in regulating the interface properties, and thus further quantitative characterisation studies are still required.


3.1.3 MOF crystal–glass composites. 
MOF crystal–glass composites (CGCs) are a type of hybrid glass that is made up of a dispersed crystalline MOF phase and an MOF glass matrix. In a MOF CGC, MOF glass serves as the matrix, in a similar manner to the polymeric phase in MOF mixed matrix membranes (MMMs), and the crystalline MOF works as the filler phase. The dispersed MOF phase preserves its original crystal structure after melt-quenching. To make a MOF CGC, the crystalline MOF should have a higher Td compared to the Tm of the glass-forming MOF, and the MOF glass matrix must be stable across a wide temperature range. Meanwhile, when melting the glass-forming MOF matrix, the flux melting between the two components must be prevented, otherwise the crystallinity cannot be maintained.
Hou et al. first reported the synthesis of a MOF crystal–glass composite by incorporating a flexible crystalline MOF MIL-53(Al) [Al(OH)(bdc)](bdc, 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate, C8H4O42−) into a ZIF-62 glass matrix.7 MIL-53(Al) and ZIF-62 crystals were mixed by ball milling followed by a thermal treatment (Fig. 4a). Pure MIL-53(Al) spontaneously returns to a narrow-pore phase upon cooling after the thermal treatment. Within the ZIF-62 glass matrix, the chemical structure and coordination bonding of the MIL-53 crystalline phase were retained after the melt-quenching procedure. Despite being separate phases, the interfacial interaction stabilises the high-temperature open-pore phase of MIL-53 at ambient settings (Fig. 4b). This led to a considerable improvement in gas adsorption.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of MOF CGC formation showing the MIL-53 retained open-pore crystalline phase within the ZIF-62 glass matrix (notes for different MIL-53 phases: as: as-synthesized; np: narrow pore and lp: large pore). Adapted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Expanding on Hou's work, Ashling et al. further investigated the effect of MIL-53(Al) loading on the composite properties.36 They discovered that the upper limit for MIL-53(Al) loading within the composite is 60 wt% before the emergence of the narrow-pore MIL-53(Al) phase under ambient conditions. This further demonstrates that interfacial interaction is the key factor for regulating the composite properties. Given the satisfactory compatibility of the two phases, up to 80 wt% loading of MIL-53(Al) can be achieved within the composite. This holds great promise for the compositing of MOF glasses with other types of functional MOF crystals.

3.2 MOF glass matrices composited with non-MOF components
Glass-forming MOFs offer significant opportunities to composite with a wider variety of materials including inorganic glasses, organic polymers, and perovskites. These types of composites enable fine tuning of the interfacial properties, which further enables an array of unprecedented properties and functions.

3.2.1 MOF glass composites with perovskites. 
Glassy MOFs offer not only protection to nanofillers against external stresses, but the interfacial bonding may also effectively passivate the interfacial defects. Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) are a family of important semiconducting materials with highly tunable bandgaps and optoelectronic efficiency. They are considered as promising candidates for solar panels, LEDs and sensors. However, MHPs are highly susceptible to external environments including heat, light, polar solvents and oxygen. The polymorphic nature of the material also imposes a challenge for their phase control: CsPbI3 has a suitable bandgap for solar panels and red-light LEDs, but its functional crystal phases are only stable at temperatures higher than 320 °C. MHP–MOF glass composites have been fabricated through liquid phase sintering of the two components.10 The mechanochemically synthesised CsPbI3 was mixed with ZIF-62 glass followed by sintering at different temperatures (up to 350 °C) and then quick quenching with liquid nitrogen (Fig. 5a). The sintering temperature offered a viable and facile approach for interfacial engineering: the metastable, optoelectronically active perovskite phase of CsPbI3 was stabilised within the composite via interfacial bonding formed between two distinct phases. It also effectively passivates the surface defects of MHPs, leading to orders of magnitude higher optoelectronic efficiency for the embedded perovskites (Fig. 5b). The functional MOF glass substrates meanwhile offer satisfactory protection to the fillers: the composite shows stability against soaking in organic solvents, water and exposure to air, light and heat. The microporous MOF glass substrates also suppressed the leaching of heavy metal ions. This family of MOF glass composites represents a breakthrough in the application of MHPs and other semiconducting materials.
 Fig. 5  Formation of MOF glass–MHP composites. (a) Phase transition of pure and CsPbI3 within the MHP–MOF glass composite at various temperatures. (b) Photoluminescence spectra for MHP–MOF glass composites fabricated at various sintering temperatures showing orders of magnitude higher optoelectronic efficiency for embedding perovskites in ZIF glass matrix prior to sintering. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing. 


3.2.2 MOF glass composites with inorganic glasses. 
MOF glasses can be composited with inorganic glasses due to their processability, which could lead to the formation of new composite materials with combined chemical versatility from MOFs and thermal, chemical, and mechanical capabilities from inorganic glasses.37 In the inaugural work on MOF glass–inorganic glass composites, Longley et al. combined an equal weight of ZIF-62 with a phosphate glass.38 One criterion for fabricating a MOF–inorganic glass composite is that the Tg of the inorganic component needs to be close to the Tm of the glass-forming MOF, which facilitates the formation of interfacial bonding. In this work, (1 − x)([Na2O]z[P2O5]) − x([AlO3/2][AlF3]y was selected as the inorganic glass component because ZIF-62's melting temperature (437 °C) falls in its glass transition temperature range (310–450 °C). The composite showed two distinct Tg values assigned to ZIF-62 and inorganic glass, suggesting separated phases within the composite (Fig. 6a). The chemical compatibility between the phosphate groups of inorganic glass and the imidazole of ZIF-62 can prevent the decomposition of imidazole ligands during the compositing process. The undercoordinated Zn sites and relatively electron-rich N sites produced from the breaking of Zn-N bonds during the melting of ZIF-62, both form interfacial bonds with the phosphates glass (Fig. 6b). The formation of N–Na coordination bonds and P–N bonds were indicated by Raman and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, respectively. The Zn–O–P correlations were also expected due to the charge balance and the maintenance of tetrahedral coordination around Zn centres. The composite glass therefore had significantly enhanced mechanical properties due to the formation of interfacial bonding.
 Fig. 6  Formation and interfacial bonding for MOF–inorganic glass composites. (a) Glass transition behaviour of ZIF-62 glass–inorganic glass composites, showing two distinct Tg values assigned to ZIF-62 and inorganic glass. (b) Schematic illustration of potential interfacial bondings between ZIF-62 glass (yellow) and inorganic glass (blue) domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 

3.3 MOF glass as the dispersed phase
Besides serving as the bulk substrate, MOF glass can be used as a binder or a filler to improve the performance of other materials. Given the porosity of the MOF glass, it has been successfully composited with polymers for thin film fabrication, leading to enhanced separation and ionic conduction.5,9,39,40
Mixed matrix membranes (MMMs) are a typical example of MOF–polymer composites that take advantage of the mechanical strength of the polymer and separation capabilities of the MOFs. However, intrinsic differences between MOFs and polymeric phases could lead to non-selective void formation (defects) at the MOF/polymer interface, degrading the membrane selectivity.41 The viscous flowing state and reactivity of a MOF liquid offer an opportunity to regulate the interfacial properties of MMMs in situ. In situ melting and vitrification of ZIF-62 were proposed within 6FDA-DAM polyimide [6FDA = 2,2-bis(3,4-carboxyphenyl)-hexafluoropropanedianhydride, DAM = 2,4,6-trimethyl-m-phenylenediamine] for a MOF glass MMM.5In situ vitrification of ZIF-62 within polymeric matrix resulted in the formation of new bonds between ZIF-62 and polyimide. Focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) also revealed a reduction of 79% in the volume fraction of interfacial voids after thermal treatment. ZIF-62 glass particles have also been embedded into cellulose acetate, resulting in rigidified MMMs with higher CO2 plasticization resistance compared to pure cellulose acetate membranes.39
Jiang et al. grinded a mixture of glassy ZIF-4, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and the polymer polytetrafluoroethylene and rolled it into a 100 μm film to fabricate a quasi-solid-state electrolyte film for a Li-metal battery.9 The lack of grain boundaries in ZIF-4 glass enables isotropic pathways for ion migration, resulting in high Li+ conductivity. Despite having an ultralow Li content of 0.12 wt% in the ZIF-4 glass/polymer film, it exhibited higher Li+ conductivity compared to crystalline ZIF-4 counterparts with high Li contents (0.32–5.4 wt%) and plasticiser contents (30–70 wt%).
3.4 MOF glass composited with macroscopic substrates
MOF glass has the potential to overcome the processibility challenge of crystalline MOFs. For example, the deposition of MOF thin films on diverse substrates is a common strategy for developing MOF devices for membranes, electronics, and chemical sensors. MOF glass thin films can be created by direct growth or deposition of glass-forming MOF crystals on a substrate, followed by melt-quenching to form a continuous glassy film. The substrates can offer mechanical support to generate robust composite films, but they must be thermally stable (Td > Tm of MOF). In order to avoid the development of fractures and defects on the MOF glass film, the substrates should have strong interaction and good wettability with the MOF liquid.
One typical route is the in situ solvothermal synthesis of glass-forming MOFs followed by melt-quenching. Substrates are placed in the MOF precursor solution to generate crystalline MOF films, followed by thermal treatment to melt MOF crystals, forming a continuous thin film that serves as selective membranes (Fig. 7a).6 The melt-quenching process effectively removes the intergrain boundary defects, leading to significantly higher separation factors for multiple gas pairs.
 Fig. 7  MOF glass films on substrates. (a) Solvothermal synthesis of polycrystalline ZIF-62 on inorganic substrates followed by melt-quenching. Adapted with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) MOF glass–polymer composite membrane fabrication by a hot-pressing method. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Melt-quenching of MOF glass electrolyte on carbon fibre electrode with improved interfacial contact. Adapted with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The access to the liquid phase also facilitates the processing of MOF films with traditional fabrication techniques. Li et al. employed the hot-pressing method to fabricate MOF glass membranes for molecular separation.42 Glass-forming Zn-P-dmbIm (5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole) powder was deposited on the surface of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) substrates and then hot pressed (Fig. 7b). The Zn-P-dmbIm glass layer can penetrate completely into the porous PTFE support due to its low melting point and the low viscosity of its liquid form, rendering a thin film of 70 μm.
Apart from polymeric substrates, Ma et al. also applied a glass-state MOF, [Zn3(H2PO4) (H2O)3](1,2,3-benzotriazole), on the carbon fiber electrodes of a solid-state H+ battery.43 A low melting temperature of 114 °C of the MOF allowed both the carbon fiber anode and cathode to be immersed into the liquid phase of MOFs at 120 °C and subsequently quenched, enabling optimum contact between electrodes and glass. The absence of grain boundaries or discontinuities at the electrode–glass interface facilitated rapid proton transport where the glassy MOF acted as a solid electrolyte (Fig. 7c), demonstrating great potential of the MOF device for energy storage applications.
Other techniques for depositing nanoparticle coatings on substrates, including mechanochemical syntheses, electrochemical syntheses, layer-by-layer, spin/dip coating, could be used as alternative strategies for producing MOF glass thin films.
4. Understanding the properties of MOF glass composites
The rich physiochemical properties and interfacial interactions within the MOF glass composite provide great opportunities to implement and develop cutting-edge material characterisation techniques. Table 1 summarises the cutting-edge characterisation techniques for MOF glasses and MOF glass composites and detailed information can be obtained from these techniques. This section will begin with a brief introduction of frequently-used techniques for characterising the thermal behaviour, structure, and morphology of MOF glass and composites, followed by a detailed review of existing techniques to probe the interfacial properties of the MOF glass composites.
Table 1 Characterisation techniques for MOF glasses and MOF glass composites




Properties
Techniques
Information obtained
Ref.




Thermal behaviours
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
• Thermal stability

1 and 30



• Desolvation


• Decomposition


Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
• Melting processes

14, 44 and 45



• Melting temperature (Tm)


• Glass transition temperature (Tg)


• Domain distribution in MOF glass composites (e.g. MOF glass blends, flux melted MOF glasses, MOF glass–inorganic glasses)

30, 34 and 38



Nanoscale, microscale and atomic-scale structure
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS)
• Local density difference (SAXS)

1



• Confirm the loss/emergence of long-range order (WAXS)

1, 28 and 30



• Crystal distortion, lattice parameters, and preferential orientation (WAXS by refinement)


• Volume-weighted fraction of the particles (SAXS)

28 and 30



• (In)homogeneity and internal surface roughness (SAXS)

30



• Particle size/particle coarsening (SAXS)

10 and 30



Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD)
• Macroscopic phase transition of the glassy MOFs

7, 10, 36 and 46



• Evolution of crystal phases (e.g. MOF glass CGCs)


• Crystal structure distortion, lattice parameters, average crystalline domain size and quantitive ratios (PXRD pattern refinement of the mixed crystal composites)


X-Ray total scattering and pair distribution functions (PDF)
• Short- and mid-range structure for amorphous materials

36 and 47



Chemical environment within the composite
Terahertz/far-infrared spectroscopy (THz/far-IR)
• Quasi-localised features

8, 10 and 48



• Collective framework dynamic properties


• Reaction/bonding formation during melting


Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)
• Element-specific chemical environment within the MOF glass composites (both bulk and interfacial regions)

8, 10, 28 and 49



• Interactions of linker-linker and host–guest in MOF glass composites


• Short-range disorder of the coordination environment of metal in MOFs (upon melting)

15



X-Ray absorption spectroscopies (XAS)
• Electronic structure (XANES): valence states/average oxidation state

8, 50 and 51



• Coordination environments (EXAFS): metal's bond distances of neighbour atoms, chemical bonding information, coordination number


Microscopic structure
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
• Phase distribution information for composites (nanometer-level, ADF)

7, 10, 36 and 52



• Elemental distribution (EDS)


• 3D structural information (reconstruct a tomography surface-rendered, ADF/EDS)


• Spatial-resolute chemical bonding information (bulk and interface, EELS)

7



• Map the crystalline and amorphous region (SED)

7 and 36



• Split the different amorphous domains (map the changes in the short-range order, ePDF)

52



Mechanical properties
Constant strain-rate nanoindentation
• Young's modulus and hardness of MOF glasses

53



Constant load and hold indentation creep tests and strain-rate jump experiments
• Creep resistance of MOF glasses

53



Single-edge precracked beam method
• Fracture toughness of MOF glasses

29



Strain rate-dependent uniaxial micropillar compression tests
• Plasticity of MOF glasses

53



Microindentation and nanoindentation paired with laser scanning microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM)
• Fracture and deformation behaviours of MOF glasses

54 and 55



Other properties
Gas adsorption techniques and PALS
• Surface area, porosity, pore size distribution, gas storage capacity

8, 56 and 57



FIB-SEM
• Phase distribution (3D surface-render views)

5



• Defect volume


Gas permeation module
• Pure gas permeation of MOF glass membranes (paired with pressure transducers)

5 and 6



• Testing mixed gas separation (paired with a gas chromatography)


Spectrophotometer
• Transmittance

58



Becke line method
• Refractive index

58



Fluorescence spectrophotometer
• Photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved fluorescence emission spectra

10





4.1 Thermal behaviours
Thermal analysis can precisely and accurately provide the information on phase transition, relaxation and interfacial reaction within the composites. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) can be applied to evaluate the thermal stability and reveal the desolvation and decomposition processes of the MOF glass materials. However, the amorphisation and melting processes of glass-forming MOFs do not accompany a mass loss event, so it is necessary to combine the information obtained from TGA with the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) profiles to confirm such transitions. DSC is the most common technique used to study the thermodynamic events of glass-forming MOFs and their composites, including melting, glass transition and interfacial bonds.44 The melting temperature (Tm) of a typical glass-forming MOF can be determined by observing the endothermic event during the first upscan, while its glass transition (Tg) can be observed during the second upscan shown by the shift in thermal capacity.14,45 DSC is a powerful tool to confirm the phase transitions and domain distribution information in complex MOF glass composites. For example, the crystalline Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 blend prepared by ball milling showed two individual melting endotherms at 445 °C and 580 °C in the first heating scan, which was in good agreement with the inherent melting temperatures of pure Zn-ZIF-4 and Zn-ZIF-62, respectively (Fig. 8).30 The subsequent upscan showed only one Tg between the Tg values of the inherent parental phases. In comparison, a control experiment with a physical mixture of Zn-ZIF-4 and Zn-ZIF-62 glasses displayed two Tgs. This suggests that the co-melting of the MOF blend would generate a homogeneous mixture of two ZIF liquid phases. In the case of flux melted MOF combining 20 wt% ZIF-8 and 80 wt% crystalline ZIF-62, during the first upscan, it displayed a single Tm with a higher value than the Tm of pure ZIF-62 due to the force melting of ZIF-8.34 This flux melted MOF after melt-quenching also exhibited a single Tg that was higher than that of pure ZIF-62. A different phenomenon was observed in the case of MOF glass–inorganic glass composites, where two Tgs were observed due to the preservation of two separate domains.38
 Fig. 8  The crystalline Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 blend prepared shows two individual melting endotherms in the first DSC upscan. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. 
4.2 Nanoscale, microscale and atomic-scale structures
MOF glass composites feature rich structural information with good electron density contrast for atoms. Therefore, various X-ray based techniques have been implemented to reveal the key information on this family of materials. Variable temperature small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) have been performed to investigate the amorphisation process and evolution of nanoscale structures during the melting process.1,28,30 SAXS shows the contrast in MOF particle density not only on the surface, but also within the bulk phase, which changes upon melting due to the viscous flowing nature of the liquid phase (Fig. 9a). This is accompanied by the loss of long-range order as reflected in the WAXS pattern (Fig. 9b).1,28,30 In comparison, during heating the SAXS/WAXS patterns of non-melting MOFs (e.g., ZIF-8) remained largely unchanged prior to thermal amorphisation/decomposition.1 WAXS testing is usually performed concurrently with SAXS, so that these two highly complementary techniques can better reveal structural changes in complex composites covering the range from the long-range ordered structure to nano-scale structures. Similar to powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), WAXS can detect information about the crystal structure of samples. By refining the scattering pattern, it can provide information on crystal distortion, lattice parameters, and preferential orientation. In addition, the grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GI-WAXS) can shed light on the depth-dependent structural profile of crystal phases present in the composite. The volume-weighted fraction of the particles, particle size, (in)homogeneity and internal surface roughness on a nanoscale can be retrieved from the SAXS pattern, through fitting the intensity pattern (ISAXS) using the power law behaviour of the form q−α. For example, the α value reduced from 3.9 to 3.4 during the melting of ZIF-62, consistent with the rougher internal surface upon heating.30 Combined with the SAXS pattern, this α value can be used to compute the volumetric particle distribution and the internal particle radii, showing a dramatic drop to near zero upon homogeneous melting. This can be extended to composites also, where the (Co-ZIF-4) and (Zn-ZIF-62) mixture exhibits an α value of 3.66 at room temperature, being lower than that of pure Zn-ZIF-62 (α = 3.9) given the presence of different particle sizes and internal voids within the mixture.30 The α value increases to 4 when heating to 340 °C due to the amorphisation of Co-ZIF-4, and then decreases to 3.1 owing to both the recrystallisation of Co-ZIF-4 and melting of Zn-ZIF-62, clearly showing the process of internal structure evolution (Fig. 9c).30 Similarly, SAXS was applied to study the continuous evolution of particle coarsening during the MOF glass–perovskite liquid phase sintering process (Fig. 9d), given that the atomic density between different phases is sufficient.10 In addition, using Porod's Law to fit the SAXS pattern would reveal the interfacial properties of composites, such as the thickness of the atomic interdiffusion layer. But this requires careful sample preparation and data fitting, given the complexity of the MOF composites.
 Fig. 9  (a) ISAXS profiles with Lorentzian fits and three-dimensional plot for ZIF-4. (b) WAXS data for ZIF-4 showing major loss of Bragg diffraction at 642 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Temperature-resolved SAXS profile for a Co-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 mixture. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (d) Evolution of perovskite particle size during the sintering of MOF glass-perovskite composites fitted from in situ SAXS patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing. 
Powder X-ray diffraction provides the crystal lattice information of the MOF and their composites. Typically, after amorphisation or melting of crystalline MOFs, the distinct Bragg peaks corresponding to crystalline MOFs disappear due to the absence of long-range order, leaving several broad diffusion peaks. This can be used to trace the macroscopic phase transition of the MOF. In addition, PXRD can offer critical information on crystal–glass MOF composites, such as the evolution of crystal phases (Fig. 10a). Further refinement of the PXRD pattern can shed light on the crystal structure distortion, lattice parameters, average crystalline domain size and quantitative ratios for mixed crystal composites.7,10,36,46
 Fig. 10  (a) Contour plots of in situ synchrotron PXRD for MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 CGC during heating from room temperature to 450 °C, showing the evolution of MIL-53(Al) crystalline phases. (b) PDF D(r) for MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 crystal mixtures (blue) and CGC (red), showing the short-range structure information of MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 CGC before and after thermal treatment. Inset: Scheme for PDF peak assignment. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
The atomic structure of the MOF glass composite can be studied using X-ray total scattering and pair distribution functions (PDFs). The X-ray diffusion pattern towards the high scattering vector region can be inversely Fourier transformed to extract the short- and mid-range structure information. To achieve a high resolution, a higher scattering vector (q) is required for the measurement, which involves the use of high energy X-ray beamlines (such as synchrotron X-rays) and sensitive detectors. This technique overcomes the limitation of X-ray diffraction where a long-range regularity is required to retrieve structural information, making it particularly useful for the study of amorphous materials. It has therefore been applied to the study of amorphous MOFs (Fig. 10b).36,47 Currently, the use of PDFs for MOF glass composite study is still relatively rare, mostly due to the complexity of structural fitting, the complexity of the interfacial bonding and the difficulty in achieving sufficiently high-resolution PDF patterns.
4.3 Chemical environment within the composite
Glass-forming MOFs present an unprecedented range of possibilities for compositing with other materials because of their rich chemical and physical properties. To effectively regulate the composite performance, the interfacial properties must be fully understood and subsequently tuned with care. However, it is still relatively challenging to gain access to the experimental characterisation of interfacial interactions and understand the impact of the contact between different phases using conventional characterisation methods. The following section will focus on introducing cutting-edge techniques profiling the interfacial information of MOF glass composites.
Terahertz/far-infrared (THz/far-IR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for studying the quasi-localised features and collective framework dynamic properties of glass-forming MOFs. The high-quality synchrotron THz/far-IR beam further allows the in situ investigation during the formation of composites. Hou et al. first used THz/far-IR to study the dynamic behaviours of MOF melting and halogenation reaction in the liquid MOF phase,48 which demonstrated the formation of Zn–F bonds in fluorinated ZIF glasses (containing fluorobenzimidazolate ligands), suggesting a reaction between the uncoordinated Zn and the F on the benzene ring within the liquid phase (Fig. 11a and b). Furthermore, in situ THz/far-IR has been applied to study the correlation between the melting point of ZIF glasses and the thermally-induced deformation of the ZnN4 tetrahedra, showing a good fit to the Bose-Einstein distribution (Fig. 11c–e). The technique can also reveal the formation of new metal–organic bonds in the Fe-containing Co-ZIF-62 glass.8 The advancement in these lines of research enables us to qualitatively monitor the interfacial bonding within MOF glass composites. In one of our recent work, temperature-resolved THz/far-IR was applied to probe the formation of interfacial bonding within the CsPbI3 perovskite/ZIF-62 MOF glass composite during the sintering process.10 It is worth mentioning that the assignment of THz/far-IR spectroscopy modes can be particularly challenging as most of them are a collective motion of the frameworks. Therefore, density functional theory (DFT) calculation is usually required to fully understand the interfacial bonds in the combination of the spectroscopic profile.
 Fig. 11  (a) THz/far-IR spectra of fluorinated ZIF crystals and glass with the inset showing the second derivative of the spectra, which revealed a new shoulder peak at ∼440 cm−1 corresponding to Zn–F bond formation after melt-quenching. (b) Illustration of the deformation modes of ZnN4 tetrahedra (left) and aromatic rings (right) in fluorinated ZIF glass. Zn, blue; F, green; N, orange; C, gray; and H, white. (c) Temperature-resolved in situ synchrotron THz/far-IR spectra for fluorinated ZIF glass. (d and e) Shifts in peak position for the Zn–N stretching and aromatic ring deformation modes in fluorinated ZIF glass during thermal treatment. Adapted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy allows for probing the element-specific chemical environment within the MOF glass composites. Because the nature of NMR allows for the capture of entire material information rather than simply the surface region, it can reflect the bonding information for both bulk and interfacial regions within composites. In our recent work, crystalline Co-ZIF-62 was deposited on carbon cloth substrates followed by melt-quenching to fabricate working electrodes for the oxygen evolution reaction. 1H magic-angle-spinning (MAS) NMR was applied to reveal the interfacial interaction between Co-ZIF-62 glass and carbon cloth substrates (Fig. 12a).8 Two-dimensional spin-diffusion NMR can determine the proximity of different organic components based on the polarization transfer rate between their protons, revealing the interactions of linker–linker and host–guest in MOF glass composites.28,49 In a recent study, 67Zn solid-state NMR has also been used to detect the short-range disorder of the coordination environment of Zn in ZIFs upon melting (Fig. 12b and c).15 Admittedly, the sensitivity of NMR spectroscopy is strongly element-dependent considering the differences in isotope abundance. But this issue can be circumvented by applying isotope labelled precursors, or selectively probing the naturally abundant element within the composite, such as 133Cs in CsPbI3 and ZIF-62 composite glass (Fig. 12d).10
 Fig. 12  (a) 1H MAS NMR spectra of Co-ZIF-62 glass, carbon cloth, and Co-ZIF-62 glass coated on carbon cloth. Vertical dashed lines correspond to the protons on imidazolate linkers within Co-ZIF-62 glass. The inset shows the removal of protons on carbon cloth during the coating process, indicating the chemical interaction between Co-ZIF-62 and carbon cloth. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b and c) 67Zn MAS NMR spectra for ZIF-4, ZIF-62 crystals and glasses. Adapted with permission from ref. 15, Copyright 2020 AAAS Publishing. (d) 133Cs MAS NMR spectra of CsPbI3–MOF glass composites before and after sintering at 275 °C, dagger symbol (†) corresponds to CsI. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing. 
X-Ray absorption spectroscopies (XAS), including the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), can reveal information on the electronic structure (valence states) and coordination environments of the metals in the glass composites. The average oxidation state of the metal can be determined by XANES. The bond distances between a metal and neighbouring atoms and the coordination number can be determined by EXAFS.51 For example, XAS has been applied to confirm the formation of Fe–N bonds in the Co-ZIF-62-Fe glass hybrid, fabricated with ferric coordination complexes and Co-ZIF-62 precursors.8 These techniques, in combination with more conventional characterisations like X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and Raman spectroscopy, can collectively shed light on the chemical bonding information within the composite.
4.4 Transmission electron microscopy
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) provides access to the microscopic structure, elemental distribution, and chemical environment of the MOF glass composites. Despite the requirement of highly specialised expertise and equipment, STEM is considered particularly suitable for MOF composite research. If different components show good atomic contrast, annular dark-field (ADF) STEM can offer a quick and facile way to examine the phase distribution information for composites with a nanometer-level resolution. STEM energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) is usually applied to provide information regarding the elemental distribution of different components, revealing the phase distribution within the composite. Both ADF- and EDS-STEM information can be used to reconstruct a tomography surface-rendered or cross-sectional view of the composite, offering 3D structural information on a nanoscale (Fig. 13a). When paired with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), STEM has also been recently applied to study the spatial-resolute chemical bonding information for MOF glass composites. For example, the carbon K ionisation edge spectra of a selected area can reveal the distinctive fingerprints of the organic ligands of the MOF domains with a resolution of 10 nm.7 This approach can give information on the bonding of both the bulk material and, potentially, the interface inside composites if the interdiffusion at the interface is more significant than the EELS probe resolution. STEM scanning electron diffraction (SED) identifies the crystalline and amorphous regions in the crystal-glass.36 SED is an effective way to assess the location of crystalline phases by mapping the number of Bragg diffraction peaks measured in the diffraction pattern recorded at each probe position when the electron probe scans the sample (Fig. 13b). In addition, the detailed electron diffraction pattern can be analysed with the neutral network to identify different crystalline phases, generating a crystalline phase mapping on a nanoscale. This is particularly useful for MOF glass containing polymorph crystalline fillers.
 Fig. 13  (a) STEM–EDS mapping and reconstructed three-dimensional tomography of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC (Scale bar is 400 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (b) Crystallinity intensity of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC mapping the number of Bragg diffraction peaks measured in the SED data at each probe position. Adapted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) STEM-ADF image of inorganic-ZIF-62 glass composites with rectangles indicating the regions for area-averaged reduced ePDFs. Independent component analysis (ICA) loading maps for inorganic glass and ZIF-62 glass. (d) ICA component profiles and corresponding area-averaged reduced ePDFs for inorganic glass (red) and ZIF-62 glass (blue). Adapted with permission from ref. 52, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, the rich information from the MOF glass composites offers a great platform for the development of cutting-edge STEM techniques. Recently, STEM pair distribution function analysis using electron scattering (ePDF) has been used to probe the nanovolumes in a composite containing ZIF-62 glass and 0.67([Na2O]0.9[P2O5])–0.33([AlO3/2][AlF3]1.5) inorganic glass. The STEM–ePDF was applied at low electron fluences (10 e− Å−2) to minimise irreversible changes in organic components after electron beam exposures.52 Atomic PDF information generated from the total electron scattering can have high resolution given the small wavelength of electron beam (in comparison to the X-ray and neutron beams). By combining with machine learning, it is able to map the changes in the short-range order (ca. 5 nm) and split the MOF glass and inorganic glass domains based on atomic structure differences (Fig. 13c and d), showing abrupt changes in the atomic structure at the composite interface but preserved atomic structure of the two phases near composite interfaces.
4.5 Other properties
As novel materials, the properties of MOF glass and glass composites are not well understood. These characteristics include mechanical properties, porosity, optical properties, and transport behaviour. For example, numerous techniques have been introduced to understand the mechanical properties of MOF glass. The Young's modulus and hardness of glasses have been studied through constant strain-rate (CSR) nanoindentation experiments.53 The creep resistance of melt-quenched glasses was investigated through constant load and hold (CLH) indentation creep tests and strain-rate jump (SRJ) experiments.53 The fracture toughness of MOF glasses was measured by a single-edge precracked beam method.29 Plasticity of MOF glasses can be investigated through strain rate-dependent uniaxial micropillar compression tests.59 The fracture and deformation behaviours of MOF glasses have been investigated using microindentation and nanoindentation. Laser scanning microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM) can be applied for the indent shape analysis, determining the changes in morphology and volume during indentation.54,55 Our current understanding of MOF glass such as ZIF-62 shows that it can exhibit mechanical properties that are distinct from conventional organic, metallic and oxide glasses, including having pronounced nanoductility but with low fracture toughness on a macroscale arising from the rupturing of weak metal–ligand coordination bonds.29 Blending of MOF glass with another type of glass such as inorganic glass can produce a new amorphous material with specific mechanical properties (e.g., hardness, Young's modulus) intermediate between the two members, which is highly beneficial in industrial applications.38
Surface areas, porosity, and pore size distributions of MOF glass and composites have been determined using gas adsorption techniques and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS).8,56,57 Focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy can be used to conduct the segmentation of individual phases in MOF glass composites via image thresholding, therefore providing 3D surface-render views and phase distributions of the composites.5 A permeation module with constant volume and variable feed pressure paired with pressure transducers can be used to measure the pure gas permeation of MOF glass membranes. For the tests involving mixed gas separation, gas chromatography is required to detect the gas components of the permeate.5,6
The tunable transparency of MOF glasses enables their application in optics. The transmittance of polished MOF glass samples can be measured using a spectrophotometer. The refractive index can be measured using the Becke line method.58 Photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved fluorescence emission spectra can be further collected by using a fluorescence spectrophotometer.10
5. Applications of MOF glass composites
Emerging applications of MOF glass composites primarily exploit their processability, mechanical durability, microporosity, control of grain-boundaries, and ability to tailor interfacial characteristics. It should be mentioned that this field of study is still in its infancy. However, the current state of research has illuminated several promising paradigms, which are summarised in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the benefits of incorporating MOF glass into composites and their key features for various applications




Applications
Glass-forming MOF
Compositing material
Fabrication technique
Advantage of adding MOF glass
Key features of composite
Ref.




Gas adsorption
ZIF-62 (Zn or Co based)
MIL-118; UL-MOF-1; MIL-53(Al); FeIII acetylacetonate
Ball milling or adsorption + melt-quenching
• Retains open-pore phase of MIL-53
Increased microporosity and gas adsorption capacity (CO2, H2)

7, 8 and 60



• Forms a macroporous interface region with MIL-118 and UL-MOF-1




• Forms less densely packed framework with inclusion of Fe


Zn-ZIF-62
ZIF-8
Flux melting + quenching
• Facilitates melting of ZIF-8 with an inaccessible melting temperature
Gas adsorption properties are approximately a weighted average of its parent components

34



MOF glass membranes for gas separation
Zn-ZIF-62; Zn-TIF-4; hybrid Zn-ZIF-8/ZIF-62
Alumina membrane substrate
Solvothermal synthesis + melt-quenching
• Forms a gas sieving MOF film with no grain boundary defects on membrane
Enhanced separation of gases (H2/CH4, CO2/N2, and CO2/CH4, C3H6/C3H8) with performance exceeding that of most polycrystalline MOF membranes

6, 61 and 62



Zn-ZIF-62; M-phosphate-azolate (M = Zn, Cd, Cu and Mn)
Polymer membrane matrix (6FDA-DAM; PTFE)
Stirrer mixing, casting + melt-quenching; Hot-pressing
• Fills up voids at MOF/polymer interface and rigidifies polymer chains through new coordination bonds between MOF glass and polymer
Significantly enhanced gas selectivity (CO2/N2) with only a slight decrease in permeability. Complete recovery of gas selectivity in cracked membranes possible through melt-quenching

5 and 42



Optics
Zn-ZIF-62
CsPbI3 perovskites
Ball milling + melt-quenching
• Forms strong interfacial bonds and physically confines CsPbI3, which counters the thermodynamic factors promoting its conversion to the inactive non-perovskite phase
Exhibits high stability against immersion in water and organic solvents as well as exposure to heat, light, air, and ambient humidity

10



Zn-azolate; Cd-azolate; ZnCl2(HbIm)2
Inorganic phosphors (yellow, red, blue, green); organic dyes
Mixing in epoxy resin/mixing + melt-quenching
• The rigid MOF glass environment reduces non-radiative transitions of triplet excitons
Room temperature phosphorescence with ultralong lifetime and high PLQY. Moulding of glass into fibres with anisotropic structures generates polarised photoluminescence.

63 and 64



• Moldable into different shapes (fiber, sheet, and cotton-like MOF glass)


Metal-carboxylate-azolate (Cd or Zn based)
MOF is converted into core–shell composites with metal oxide core and organic shell
Ultrafast melting by femtosecond laser pulses
• The structural elements of MOF glass can be reoriented and reassembled into new structures
Enhanced nonlinear optical response

65



Ion conduction
Zn-ZIF-4; Zn-phosphate-azolate
Lithium salt; acid molecules
Grinding or melt doping
• Provides grain boundary-free and isotropic pathways for ion migration
Enhanced ion conductivity and dendrite suppression. Incorporation of photoacids provides switchable conductivity by light irradiation.

9 and 66



• Accessible liquid state upon heat treatment enables direct doping of acid molecules


Zn-ZIF-62
Solid-state electrolyte (NASICON)
Spin coating + melt-quenching
• Acts as compatible interlayer between NASICON and Na anode
Enhanced cycling stability in Na metal battery due to homogeneous Na+/e− transport kinetics

67



ZnPIm + ZnPBIm
Mixed composite of two MOF glasses
Ball milling + melt-quenching
• Forms homogeneously mixed glass due to reversible solid-to-liquid phase transition
Controllable ion conductivity by changing ratio of glass components

68



Zn-phosphate; Zn-phosphate-azolate
Electrode (carbon fibre; Pt/C carbon paper)
Melt-quenching
• Acts as anhydrous solid-state electrolyte for battery and fuel cell
Enhanced charge transfer kinetics at electrode–electrolyte interface

43 and 69



• No discontinuities or flaws at MOF glass/electrode interface


Co-ZIF-62
Carbon black + polymer binder
Mixing + melt-quenching
• Acts as anode in lithium ion battery
Enhanced lithium storage capacity, cycling stability and rate performance

70



• Forms additional channels for Li+ diffusion during cycling due to distortion or breakage of weak Co-N bonds


Catalysis
Co-ZIF-4; Co-ZIF-62;
Fe containing components, deposited on carbon cloth substrate
Ball milling (coating) + melt-quenching
• Provides catalytic active sites from coordination defects generated during amorphisation
Enhanced catalytic efficiency as indicated by reduced overpotential for oxygen evolution reaction, and reduced charge transfer resistance at electrode interface

8 and 71



• Provides good interfacial contact with carbon cloth electrode due to access to liquid state




5.1 Gas adsorption
Using glass MOFs, instead of crystalline MOFs, for gas adsorbents may seem unattractive at first glance due to the collapse of MOF pores after vitrification. This may lead to a loss of porosity and an increase in mass transfer resistance. Yet the MOF glass enables new opportunities still under-explored for this application. It offers superior mechanical rigidity and the capability of forming monoliths, circumventing the common issue of compaction for powder based absorbents and allowing easier regeneration and handling. In addition, they also enable the formation of nanocomposites with enhanced gas adsorption capacity and designated selectivity.
While ZIF glasses show nearly no adsorption for N2 at 77 K due to the limitation of gas diffusion into the narrow pores,1,27,48 the quantification of microporosity in MOF glasses can be performed through CO2 sorption (smaller kinetic diameter) at 195 K to facilitate the gas diffusion.56 CO2 sorption at 195 K also allows the sorption to reach saturation due to much higher relative pressure (p/p0) compared to the widely applied CO2 sorption at 273 K (p/p0 ∼ 0.03 at 100 kPa). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface areas, micropore volume, and the apparent density of MOF glasses can be determined through the low-temperature (195 K) CO2 sorption isotherms.
The gas adsorption of the inherent MOF glass can be enhanced/tuned by introducing mixed linkers. ZIF glasses such as ZIF-62 possess permanently accessible porosity for H2, CO2, CH4 and several hydrocarbons.27,28,34 For the pure MOF glass, the kinetic sorption studies revealed that ZIF-62 glasses adsorb more rapidly against C3H6 over C3H8, and the diffusion rate could be adjusted by altering the imidazole (Im)/benzimidazole (bIm) ratio.27 Their gas adsorption behaviour can be further tuned by incorporating functional groups (e.g., halogenated ligands) (Fig. 14a).48 CO2 adsorption measurement also demonstrates an increased BET surface area and CO2 adsorption capability for Co-ZIF-62 glass after the incorporation of Fe ions (Fig. 14b).8
 Fig. 14  (a) CO2 gas adsorption–desorption isotherms for halogenated ZIF glasses at 273 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) CO2 adsorption–desorption isotherms for Co-ZIF-62 glass and Co-ZIF-62 glass incorporated with Fe at 194.7 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Adsorption–desorption isotherms of benzene vapour for nitrile-based MOF glass at 298 K, showing a gate-opening adsorption behaviour. Adapted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High pressure CO2 adsorption–desorption isotherms for the MIL-53/ZIF-62 mixture and CGC at 303 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
Besides ZIF glasses, nitrile-based MOFs [Ag(mL1)(CF3SO3)]·2C6H6 [mL1 = 1,3,5-tris(3-cyanophenylethynyl)benzene] and [Ag(pL2)(CF3SO3)]·2C6H6 [pL2 = 1,3,5-tris(4-cyanophenylethynyl)benzene] exhibit permanent porosity characterized by CO2 adsorption after mechanical induced vitrification.72,73 Furthermore, both MOF glasses show a gate-opening adsorption behaviour during benzene vapour uptake (Fig. 14c), and glass-to-crystal transformation upon exposure to benzene vapour.
MOF glasses can also serve as a functional binder to composite with other crystalline MOFs, targeting enhanced adsorption performance. This will not only provide satisfactory mechanical properties leading to a composite monolith, but also regulate the porosity through interfacial engineering. We first reported the MOF crystal-glass composite (CGC), with crystalline MIL-53 dispersed in the ZIF-62 glass substrate. The interfacial interaction between two phases stabilised the high-temperature, metastable large pore phase of the crystalline fillers, leading to significantly higher CO2 capacity compared with either of the parental phase (Fig. 14d).7 A recent study reported the synthesis of two MOF CGCs by incorporating 50 wt% MIL-118C or 50 wt% UL-MOF-1 within ZIF-62 glass.60 Both CGCs exhibit higher H2 uptake than either of their parent components. In addition, CO2 isotherms of both CGCs show no hysteresis which is observed for ZIF-62 glass and individual crystalline MIL-118C and UL-MOF-1. This indicates that the MOF CGCs reached equilibrium faster than their individual MOF components.
5.2 MOF glass membranes
MOFs have been regarded as prominent candidates for molecular sieving membranes, and the majority of research focuses on their crystalline phase. However, to realise precise and efficient molecular sieving, the formation of a pinhole-free thin MOF film is a must, imposing significant challenges in MOF membrane fabrication and subsequent up-scaling. Glass-forming MOFs are promising candidates for this application due to their high processability in the molten phase, well-maintained porosity, and broad design space for structural tunability and composition diversity. In particular, the flowing MOF liquid allows for the formation of pinhole-free continuous MOF coatings on substrates, or a free-standing thin film via hot pressing/casting.42 They also offer the potential to eliminate the intergrain boundary defects (such as crystal lattice mismatch and voids) (Fig. 15a and b), that are almost unavoidable in crystalline MOF membranes. The derived Zn-P-dmbIm glass membrane shows exceptional H2 permeability, with separation efficiencies for H2/N2, H2/CO2 and H2/CH4 far exceeding the Robeson upper bounds (Fig. 15c). Due to the low viscosity of Zn-P-dmbIm liquid, the membrane is capable of self-healing when its pieces are re-heated. The resulting membrane is integrated and crack-free with a full recovery of separation performance. A grain-boundary-free crystal-glass monolith has been prepared through a facile hot-press process followed by surface crystallisation via solvent treatment.72 A crystalline layer (ca. 20 μm thick) forms on top of the glass phase (ca. 120 μm thick), which could be useful for membrane separation but has not been explored.
 Fig. 15  MOF glass for membrane separation applications. (a) The photograph of the Zn-P-dmbIm membrane (top) and SEM images of Zn-P-dmbIm pellet and glass membrane (bottom). (b) Cross-section SEM images of the Zn-P-dmbIm glass membrane. (c) Comparison of the H2/CO2 separation performances of Zn-P-dmbIm glass membrane with state-of-the-art membranes. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Long term stability of TIF-4 glass membrane for CO2/CH4 mixture separation. Adapted with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) XRD patterns ZIF-8/ZIF-62 polycrystalline membrane (without melting) and glass membranes (after melting). (f) Top-view SEM images of ZIF-8/ZIF-62 polycrystalline membrane (without melting) and (g) glass membrane (after melting). Adapted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h and i) SEM images captured under backscattered electrons imaging mode with contrast difference of interfacial defects (black), polymer (grey), and filler (white) for ZIF-62/6FDA-DAM MMMs before (h) and after (i) in situ melting. Arrows indicate the interfacial defects. (j and k) Surface-rendered view of the segmented FIB-SEM tomograms for interfacial defects (shown in red) in ZIF-62/6FDA-DAM MMMs before (j) and after (k) in situ melting. Adapted with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Jiang's group reported the first MOF glass membrane for gas separation in 2020.6 This was prepared by melt-quenching polycrystalline ZIF-62 that was synthesised solvothermally in situ on a porous alumina support. After vitrification, the ZIF-62 glass membrane became isotropic and free of grain boundaries (Fig. 7a). The membrane showed effective molecular sieving ability for CO2/N2, H2/CH4 and CO2/CH4 mixtures, with separation factors of 34.5, 50.7 and 36.6, respectively, outperforming the ZIF-62 membrane prior to vitrification and surpassing the corresponding Robeson upper bounds. The same method for making glass membranes was also applied to TIF-4 due to its ultrahigh glass forming ability, which consists of zinc(II) connected by imidazole and 5-methylbenzimidazole.61 In this work, the eminent operational stability of MOF glass membranes was reported, where a separation factor of 30 for CO2/CH4 was maintained for 10 months (Fig. 15d).
Another significant advancement in this field is using MOF glass as the matrix to incorporate fillers for enhanced membrane performance, in a similar manner to the conventional polymer-based mixed matrix membranes (MMMs). Given the rich chemistry and structure profiles of MOF glass, it is expected to replicate the successful trajectory of the polymer of intrinsic microporosity (PIM) membranes, generating a considerable number of new types of nanocomposite membranes. In one of the initial reports, ZIF-8 was mixed in ZIF-62 glass for MMM development on an alumina support. ZIF-8 was melted with the flux of ZIF-62 (Fig. 15e–g), which effectively enhanced the C3H6/C3H8 ratio from 2.5 for the pure ZIF-62 glass membrane to 17.62
For conventional MOF-polymer MMMs, controlling the interfacial defects is critical. It is usually achieved via the functionalisation of either (or both) the substrate and MOF fillers. Glass MOFs offer another new avenue to control the interfacial defects for MOF MMMs through in situ melting. The dynamically under-coordinated metal nodes and organic ligands in the MOF liquid state can promote the bonding between MOF fillers and polymeric substrates, and when coupled with the flowing state of the MOFs, can effectively reduce undesired interfacial defects. A MOF glass mixed matrix membrane was fabricated by in situ melting and vitrification of ZIF-62 within the polyimide 6FDA-DAM matrix.5 The formation of Zn–O and Zn–F bonding between ZIF-62 and 6FDA-DAM was confirmed after in situ melting, which promoted the rigidity of the polymeric matrix. The in situ melting of ZIF-62 within the polymer matrix effectively fills the voids at the MOF/polymer interface in the mixed matrix membrane (Fig. 15h–k), which leads to a significantly enhanced CO2/N2 selectivity.
5.3 Optics
Conventional (inorganic, organic and metallic) glass materials have been deemed prominent candidates for optical devices. MOF glass has seen a rapid progress in this field of research. Bimetallic glassy MOFs with photoluminescence and nonlinear optical properties have been reported in recent years. Furthermore, a transparent, glassy MOF (ZIF-62) has been discovered to serve as a protective matrix capable of stabilising and extending other optoelectronically active components, paving the way for their practical applications.
Lead halide perovskites have exceptional optoelectronic properties, but their application is hindered by their inherent polymorphism, phase segregation, instability to polar solvents, and tendency to leach toxic lead ions. We managed to effectively stabilise the photoactive phase of CsPbI3 (γ-phase) by forming a composite with glassy ZIF-62 via liquid-phase sintering.10 It was found that interfacial interactions, coupled with the physical confinement effect provided by the glass matrix, counteracted the strong thermodynamic factors driving the conversion of CsPbI3 to the yellow, inactive δ-phase. The composite exhibited high stability against immersion in organic solvents and water, as well as exposure to air, light, heat and ambient humidity (Fig. 16a). In comparison, pure CsPbI3 particles were converted to an inactive phase or totally decomposed instantly when exposed to these conditions. In addition, the optoelectronic efficiency of the embedded lead halide perovskites was enhanced by 2–3 orders of magnitude. This study paves the way for the use of lead halide perovskites in optoelectronic applications, resulting in much longer device lifetimes.
 Fig. 16  Emerging optical applications enabled by MOF glass. (a) CsPbX3/MOF glass composites and pure CsPbX3 under bright field and 365 nm UV light, where the composite retained 80% of the photoluminescence even after immersing in water for 10000 hours. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing. (b) Moldable Zn-4,5-dicyanoimidazole glass showing ultralong room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP) with high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of up to 75%. Adapted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Complex core–shell morphology produced from ultrafast melting of MOF by femtosecond IR laser pulses with enhanced nonlinear optical response. Adapted with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) ([Cu(PPh3)2][Au(CN)2]n glass showing high transparency and strong green emission at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Qiu's group highlighted another important application for composite MOF glass in the formation of polarised light sources, which is realised by the moldability of glass in the molten form.63 They prepared glassy MOFs (ZnCl2(HbIm)2) doped with organic dyes in the form of fibres and sheets, which exhibited polarised photoluminescence emissions.63 The polarised emission was attributed to the molecular orientation of dyes in the molded glass fibres and sheets, as bulk glass doped with dyes does not emit polarised light. As a further effort to expand the photonic functionalities of MOF glass, inorganic phosphors were also incorporated using MOF glass as a stable and inert host.63 The luminescence performance can be preserved in the phosphor–MOF glass composite for application in LEDs.
On top of compositing with various optical functional materials, the MOF glass can be modified with luminescence and nonlinear optical responses. Composites of these glass materials are expected to have synergistic effects with the active fillers. For example, a blue-emitting Zn-DCI (DCI = 4,5-dicyanoimidazole) MOF glass was composited with yellow phosphor (Ba, Sr)2SiO4:Eu2+ and red phosphor (Ca, Sr)AlSiN3:Eu2+ for a white light LED (Fig. 16b).64 In another line of research, broadband mid-infrared luminescence in bimetallic MOF glasses (Zn/Co-ZIF-62) was discovered.74 The luminescence originated from the d–d transition of Co ions and increased in intensity with higher Co concentration. The emission bands of Zn/Co-ZIF-62 cover about 3.3 μm of the mid-IR range, and also feature a near-infrared nonlinear-optical (NIR-NLO) response upon a femtosecond laser excitation.31 These scientific advances present exciting opportunities for the application of composite MOF glass in ultrafast lasers, optical modulators and other nonlinear optical devices.
The access to the dynamic phase transition of MOF glass enables the formation of nanocomposites using MOF glass as a precursor. Kulachenkov et al. utilised femtosecond laser pulses to rapidly melt MOFs, resulting in a new form of MOF derivative with a core–shell structure comprising a metal oxide dendrite core and an amorphous organic shell (Fig. 16c).65 The resonant interaction of this new spherical derivative with light exhibited an enhanced second harmonic generation and three-photon luminescence for nonlinear nanophotonics.
The first transparent and luminescent glasses of gold thiolate MOFs were reported by Vaidya et al.75 The MOF glasses are formed via simple mechanical pressurisation of 1D amorphous gold thiolate MOFs, yielding glass pellets with a transmittance of up to 26%. The MOF glasses all show red emission at 93 K under UV light irradiation. Other emission colours have also been reported for different MOF glasses. Recently, a MOF glass composed of d10 metal cyanides and triphenylphosphine was shown to exhibit strong green emission under UV light irradiation (365 nm) and a transmittance of over 80% in the visible to near-infrared region (Fig. 16d).76 The emission is attributed to the metal-to-metal-to-ligand charge transfer.76 These MOF glasses have the potential to be applied in the field of lighting and optoelectronic devices.
5.4 Ion conduction
The glassy state of MOFs is generally favoured over their crystalline state for ion conduction/transport. This is due to the absence of grain boundaries in glass, which allows for fast, unimpeded ion migration pathways. Moreover, the melting behaviour of glassy MOFs can be utilised to dope functional molecules/components (e.g., ionic electrolytes) into the matrix, further improving the ion conductivity. The melting of MOF glass can also improve the interfacial contact with electrodes, effectively reducing the transport resistance.
In 2016, Chen et al. first reported the unique physical functions of the glassy state of Cd2+ MOFs, including anhydrous proton conductivity and dielectric constants that were two orders of magnitude higher than those of the crystalline form.50 This is not completely unexpected given that fast proton conduction in glassy state materials is known in the field of solid-state ionics.78 In crystalline MOFs, the acidic groups (H2PO4− in this case) can form extended hydrogen-bonded networks that provide a proton hopping pathway.50 One might question that the absence of long-range ordering in MOF glass can impede effective proton hopping, so how does the conductivity improve? Actually, the distortion and enhanced mobility of the ligands in the glassy structure along with the fact that the acidity of H2PO4− is enhanced after vitrification, all contributed to the higher proton conductivity.50 The high proton conductivity of MOF glass can be retained across a wide range of viscosities (106–101 Pa·s) (Fig. 17a), enabling their implementation in a more rigid state and overcoming the common trade-off issue between conducting and mechanical properties.69
 Fig. 17  (a) High conductivities for H+ were observed in MOF glasses across a wide range of viscosities. Adapted with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) Proton hopping along the H2PO4 group in Zn–H2PO4−/H3PO4 coordination polymer networks. Adapted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Li+ ion conduction in crystalline and glassy MOFs where the absence of grain boundaries resulted in homogeneous ion flux in glassy ZIF-4. Adapted with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic representation of the structural origin of the Li-ion storage capacity enhancement in ZIF glass anode after cycling. Adapted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
An effective way to modulate the bulk-phase proton transport properties of glassy MOFs is to mix two chemically compatible MOF glasses with overlapping molten states and change the ratio of each component, essentially forming a tunable mixed glass.68 Another effective method is to utilise the melting behaviour to incorporate functional molecules into the glass matrix. This was demonstrated by Nagarkar et al. for the first time using a zinc-phosphate-azolate MOF, where an enhancement in proton conductivity was observed after doping in acid molecules due to the increased number of mobile protons and generation of local defects in the glass.66 Interestingly, doping of a photo-acid molecule (pyranine) into the melted MOF also enabled a switchable proton conductivity through light irradiation. The extension of this melt doping strategy to other glass-forming MOFs would clearly be limited by the temperature window between melting and decomposition, and the ease of doping the functional molecule at the melting temperature. Nevertheless, a distinct benefit of this strategy is that it provides a pathway for doping functional molecules that otherwise cannot be incorporated without the high reactivity of the MOF melt.
In a new approach to develop an MOF glass with exclusive proton conductivity, Ogawa et al. directly synthesised MOF glass from a protic ionic liquid, (dema)(H2PO4), and metal ions.79 A major drawback of protic ionic liquids as proton conductors is the conduction of both protons and counterions due to the high mobility of both dema cation and H2PO4− anions, which results in a lower open-circuit voltage in fuel cells. The formation of MOF glass captured free bulky dema cations and some H2PO4−/H3PO4 anions within the Zn-H2PO4−/H3PO4 coordination network (Fig. 17b).79 Remarkably, the MOF glass showed proton dominated conduction and a higher proton conductivity of 13.3 mS cm−1 compared to the protic ionic liquid itself (6.5 mS cm−1), which was attributed to the prevention of dimer formation in H2PO4− that is unfavourable for proton conduction.79
An important application of ion conductive MOF glass is in safe and efficient solid electrolytes. Horike's group utilised a glassy-state MOF, [Zn3(H2PO4)6(H2O)3](1,2,3-benzotriazole), with a high proton conductivity in a rechargeable all-solid-state H+ battery. This battery operates in the 25–110 °C temperature range, and is the first solid-state H+ battery to operate in this range.43 The battery can potentially be used for applications at elevated temperatures, such as space exploration and measure-while-drilling (MWD) equipment in the oil and gas industries.
Jiang et al. incorporated lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) into glassy ZIF-4 to generate quasi-solid-state electrolytes (QSSE) for lithium-metal batteries.9 It should be noted that LiTFSI was mixed into ZIF-4 after melt-quenching, likely due to the higher melting temperature of ZIF-4 crystals (578 °C) compared to the decomposition temperature of LiTFSI (360 °C). One would expect greater incorporation of LiTFSI if it was mixed with the crystalline form first due to the much higher porosity, which can be explored in future studies using MOFs with lower melting points, such as ZIF-62 at a low bIm ratio. Nevertheless, in comparison to crystalline ZIF-4 based QSSE, glassy ZIF-4 based QSSE showed significant improvement in ionic conductivity. In addition, the grain boundary-free and isotropic properties also provided glassy ZIF-4 based QSSE with homogeneous Li+ ion flux that suppressed dendrite formation (Fig. 17c), ensuring a satisfactory operating performance.
Another interesting approach to homogenise ion transport kinetics in solid-state batteries using meltable MOFs was demonstrated by Miao et al. for a Na-metal battery.67 In this approach, Zn-ZIF-62 was melted on the surface of a NASICON SSE pellet (Na/Na super ionic conductor solid-state electrolyte), followed by further heating to 650 °C yielding a decomposed interlayer between the SSE and metallic Na anode. There are ZnO/N-heteroatom active sites uniformly distributed in the decomposed carbon matrix owing to the formation of a molten state for ZIF-62, and this was observed to enhance the wettability with the Na anode and homogenise transported Na+/e− flux.67 This can be extended to other metals such as Co-based ZIF-62 or even bimetallic Zn/Co ZIF-62, which can be further investigated.
Apart from the implementation of MOF glass as a solid-state electrolyte, these materials can also be utilised as the anode of lithium ion batteries (LIBs). A particularly unusual lithium storage performance was reported recently by Gao et al., where the Li-ion storage capacity of the Co-ZIF-62 glass anode increased steadily with charge–discharge cycling and tripled after 1000 cycles.70 This was attributed to the high-energy state of ZIF glass that makes the network structure vulnerable to distortion and depolymerisation during lithiation and delithiation cycles, forming new channels for Li+ ion diffusion and storage (Fig. 17d). It is likely that the lithium storage capacity can be further optimised by tuning the metal–ligand bonding.
6. Catalysis
Crystalline MOF-based catalysis has been extensively investigated given their high efficiency and selectivity, usually enabled through the host–guest configurations. Composite MOF glass catalysts offer additional advantages: the metal–ligand bonding breakage during MOF melting generates transient uncoordinated metal sites, which can be used to generate active sites for catalysis, such as missing ligands or metal vacancies. In addition, the presence of secondary components would allow the formation of bi-metallic or even multi-metal framework structures, offering unique behaviours as catalysts. For the glass phase, the amorphous framework facilitates charge transfer and promotes electrochemically active surface areas when compared with the crystalline counterparts. The retained metal–organic bonding environment also enables regulation of the electron density for the metal nodes, creating additional active sites.80
For example, a Fe-Co bimetallic MOF glass hybrid was fabricated by melt-quenching Co-ZIF-62 with the adsorbed ferric coordination complex (iron(III) acetylacetonate).8 The high-temperature Co-ZIF-62 liquid is chemically reactive with the ferric agent, enabling the incorporation of Fe into the framework of Co-ZIF-62 through coordination bonds between Fe and imidazolate ligands (Fig. 18a). The Co–Fe bimetallic MOF glass showed a much higher oxygen evolution reaction activity compared to the benchmark Co-ZIF-62 crystals, and carbonised Co–Fe biometallic MOFs (Fig. 18b and c). In addition, the high processibility of MOF glass can facilitate the electrode assembly: through a simple, scalable and versatile binder-free mechanochemical technique, the MOF glass catalysts were coated on carbon cloth substrates, generating flexible electrodes with good interfacial contact between substrates and the vitrified MOF glass (Fig. 18a).71
 Fig. 18  (a) Construction of bimetallic Co–Fe MOF glass electrodes through mechanochemical coating and melt-quenching process. (b) Oxygen evolution reaction polarisation curves in 0.1 M KOH for Co-ZIF-62 and Co-ZIF-62-Fe crystals and glasses coated on a carbon cloth substrate. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) versus RHE for Co-ZIF-62 and Co-ZIF-62-Fe crystals and glasses coated on a carbon cloth substrate. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
7. Perspectives
MOF glasses, similar to traditional organic, inorganic and metallic glasses, provide a wide range of design options for the structure, component, and functions towards glass composite design and fabrication. The combination of processability, tunable transparency, and accessible porosity, along with the liquid-state reactivity of glass-forming MOFs, allows for flexible ways to create composites and devices by engineering with diverse functional materials, including other polymers, metals, inorganics, MOFs and other hybrid materials. Over the last few years, MOF glasses and MOF glass composites have been investigated for use in adsorption, membrane gas separation, optics, ion conduction, and catalysis. Alhough the application of MOF/CP glasses as a platform for making composites is evolving rapidly, it is still in its infancy. Following this section, potential future directions for developing new MOF glass composites, understanding their properties and exploring their applications will be discussed.
When developing MOF glass composites, the thermal behaviour, structure, and chemical environment of the glass-forming material should be carefully considered, since this is directly associated with the success and performance of the composites. Current research on MOF glass composites, however, is limited to a small number of glass-forming MOFs/CPs, such as certain ZIFs and phosphate–azolate frameworks. More alternative glass-forming MOFs/CPs with varied thermal behaviour and structure are required. Mechanochemical techniques such as ball milling provide a facile and rapid way for the discovery and synthesis of glassy MOFs, vitrification of the crystalline MOF and further fabrication of composites.8,10,81,82 However, the lack of understanding of mechanochemical transformations of MOF glass materials limits the design and control of the composite synthesis. A time-resolved in situ monitoring of the mechanochemical reactions would be very useful.83 In addition, a detailed understanding of the structure profiles of mechanochemically synthesised MOF would guide the fabrication of more types of meltable MOFs.
The range of meltable MOFs can also be expanded by pursuing strategies to reduce the melting point of MOFs to below their thermal decomposition temperature. This was recently demonstrated by the incorporation of ionic liquids into MOF structures (ZIF-8 and ZIF-76) to stabilise the rapidly dissociating linkers during heat treatment and facilitate their successful melting.24,25 Although this strategy appears to be limited for MOFs with more robust metal-linker bonds like MIL-68, it is expected that it would generally still be applicable for other MOFs outside the ZIF family with relatively weak linkers (e.g., sulfonates, esters, amides, and nitriles) but have limited meltability due to their porosity.24,25,84 This needs to be further explored to advance the field.
In addition, there have been recent developments in the vitrification of MOFs that bypass the melting process completely by utilising a chemical stimulus or a volatile solvent/modulator.32,85–87 This can offer a more universally applicable route for glass formation in other types of MOFs such as carboxylate-based MOFs, and also enables the incorporation of temperature-sensitive biological or polymeric materials. It is possible to induce the formation of a super-cooled liquid phase in MOFs using an appropriate chemical stimulus (e.g., water vapour), which can then be subsequently quenched to form a glass.32 A greater understanding of the selection choice of chemical stimuli for different frameworks will be necessary to expand the range of glass-forming MOFs. Furthermore, vitrification can also be achieved by utilising a volatile solvent/modulator (m-cresol, ethanol) to suppress crystallisation during its gradual removal by evaporation.85–87 Nevertheless, this can be a time-consuming process (up to 1 month), and thus further effort should be directed toward the optimisation of the solvent/modulator removal process.87
The stability of MOFs and MOF composites is often a concern for many applications. The stability differences between crystalline and glassy MOFs/MOF composites are worth investigating; however, they have not been systematically studied. From a thermodynamic perspective, the stability of MOFs could be reduced after the crystalline-to-amorphous/glass transition due to the higher entropy of amorphous MOFs. In addition, the collapse of the framework should result in reduced stability, particularly thermal stability due to the introduction of possible defective sites. A decrease in the thermal stability of ZIF-8 upon amorphisation by ball-milling was identified by Cao et al.88 The decomposition temperature decreased from 486 °C for crystalline ZIF-8 to 418 °C for amorphous ZIF-8. On the other hand, the structural disorder, reduced surface area and more compact structure may be advantageous for stabilising amorphous/glassy MOF composites kinetically. This can improve their stability in specific applications, such as in aqueous media or exposure to humidity conditions. Partial amorphisation of ZIF-8 by ball-milling was found to significantly enhance the stability of IL-impregnated ZIF-8 towards exposure to ambient humidity (∼45%) levels. Nozari et al. studied the high Na+ conductivity of IL-impregnated ZIF-8.89 The partial collapse of frameworks reduces the IL discharge and exchange with the ambient environment, resulting in a much less decrease in ion conductivity for the partially amorphized sample compared to the crystalline sample.
The configuration of the composites warrants further consideration when aiming for designated applications. More types of structural configurations should be introduced, such as MOF glass core–shell structures (applied as either a core or a shell), layer-by-layer coatings for molecular and ionic transport. The configuration should also be accompanied by the expansion of the materials. Potential materials, such as metal/metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs), polyoxometalate, and carbon, which have been previously composited with crystalline MOFs, could be extended to glassy MOF systems to form new types of composites with unique properties and functions. For example, the incorporation of metastable metal oxide nanoparticles such as Cu2O with high catalytic activity in crystal MOFs is still challenging due to their poor stability in solution and requires some extensive preparation strategies. A core–shell nanocrystalline copper-based MOF (nHKUST-1) encapsulated in ZIF-8 is required to generate CuxO NPs@ZIF-8 heterostructures through controlled calcination.90 In another line of research, a protective silica shell around Cu2O nanocubes is needed before encapsulation in ZIF-8, after which the silica layer is selectively etched with NaOH.91 We envision that a strategy similar to our recent study, where we employed glassy ZIF-62 to stabilise metastable lead halide perovskites,10 can be used for metastable NPs. This could involve ball milling metastable NPs with ZIF-62 glass under inert environments, followed by melt-quenching for protection and stabilisation. The viscosity of the melt can prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles.
Apart from metastable nanoparticles, this strategy/configuration could also be extended for polyoxometalates which also face the drawbacks of easy solubility in water and aggregation.92 Furthermore, MOF glass/carbon composites could also hold great potential for electrochemical applications. Previously, crystalline MOFs have been combined with carbon materials like graphene,93 carbon nanotubes and macroporous carbon to accelerate electron transfer.94 Given the absence of grain boundaries in glassy MOFs, the enhancement in electrocatalytic activities with the integration of carbon materials could be even more significant compared to crystalline MOFs.
The interface between MOF glass and the functional material plays a critical role in determining the composite performance. The design of interfacial interactions utilising the liquid-state reactivity of MOF glass affords the potential to acquire combined properties that are superior to those of the individual components, or result in unique features. Understanding the interfacial interactions, particularly for the high-temperature MOF liquids, and the structure–performance correlations is therefore critical. Theoretical simulations to probe the interfacial interaction between MOF glass and the other components should also be encouraged.
Furthermore, advanced characterisation techniques are welcomed as composite materials offer great opportunities to develop and apply cutting-edge technologies. More ex situ/in situ characterisation techniques, including TeraHz FIR spectroscopy, X-ray/neutron total scattering and transmission electron microscopy, are desired to explore the phase diffusion of host MOF glass and guest components during the melting process, as well as the local structure variations rather than the bulk structure of the composite. For example, Sapnik et al. applied SED to map and determine the domain size of crystalline nanoparticles and amorphous matrix in Fe-BTC (BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate), followed by probing the spatially separated atomic structure of the amorphous components using ePDF.95 Such techniques could be useful for the investigation of mixed disordered/crystalline structures in MOF glass composites.
In terms of application, the development of MOF glasses and composites with accessible porosity opens a new avenue for fabricating a new class of functional MOF devices. To date, only a few crystalline MOFs (e.g., MIL-53,7,36,46 MIL-118 and UL-MOF-160) have been composited with ZIF-62 glass for the development of porous MOF CGC. This may be a result of the structural integrity issue of crystalline MOFs at the temperature required for CGC fabrication, as not many MOF candidates remain stable at a melting temperature of ZIF-62 (ca. 437 °C). This problem can be circumvented by reducing the phase transition temperature of the glassy substrates as discussed above.
The retention and control of the porosity of MOF glasses remain challenging due to the partial collapse of the framework network structure during the melt-quenching process. Recent studies show that applying different metal centres and doping a second metal can alter the porosity of ZIF-62.8,96 Techniques for introducing porosity in traditional glasses could be transferred to MOF glasses, such as incorporation of chemical additives (e.g., polymer additives) and decomposing them during glass formation.97 The pore structure regulation becomes more complicated in the presence of a secondary component. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of the structure evolution and the molecular transport behaviour within the composite and particularly in the interface region is crucial, as this will guide the development of MOF glass composites with higher diffusivity and selectivity toward the targeted molecules. In addition, it is expected that the kinetics and selectivity of adsorption can be enhanced through surface and interfacial engineering, such as post-synthetic modification.98
Given the successful application of MOF glass membranes for gas separation (CO2/N2, H2/CH4, and CO2/CH4) with performances exceeding those of most pure polycrystalline MOF membranes,5,6 opportunities exist to further extend this to ion separation applications. Recently, we explored a polycrystalline, bilayer MOF-on-MOF membrane for lithium separation, which showed remarkable lithium selectivity among other chemically similar monovalent ions.99 The high selectivity was attributed to the effect of asymmetrical pore properties (pore size and chemistry) in the interfacial region of MOF-on-MOF. We envision that this can be further extended using MOF glass by synthesising either a crystal-glass bilayer MOF film or a glassy MOF-on-MOF film to create different interfacial structures that may be promising for efficient ionic separation.
The uses of glassy MOF composites can potentially also be extended to thermoelectric applications. MOF glasses such as agZIF-4(Zn) and agZIF-62(Zn) possess very low thermal conductivities, while the electrical conductivity can be improved through host–guest interaction, the formation of a composite with conductive MOF, or the incorporation of Fe in the azolate framework which is known to yield high electrical conductivities.100,101 These properties are favourable for the thermoelectric setting, which allow MOF glass composites to be an interesting next generation tunable thermoelectric material.
Porous MOF glasses could also be used to composite with semiconductor photocatalysts, providing platforms to assemble the existing large arrays of photocatalysts into macroscopic photocatalytic devices. Currently, the assembly of semiconductor nanoparticles is a bottleneck for their practical application, which typically requires the use of specific substrates with strict deposition conditions. The new composite materials will overcome these limitations by utilising MOF glasses’ high level of processability, transparency and tunable bandgaps. The integration of photocatalysts and/or photosensitiser across the MOF glass matrix should enable better catalyst exposition to light, reduced formation of catalyst aggregates, better contact between reactants and the catalyst, and ease of catalyst recovery. In addition, it is worth investigating how the synthesis conditions of glass transformation (e.g., heating and quenching rate) influence the defect sites in MOF glass/MOF glass composites, especially for MOF glass catalytic materials. Depending on the ramping rate, the defect sites in MOF glasses, including missing ligands and metal vacancies, may vary. The reproducibility of the defect formation also needs to be confirmed using the advanced characterisation technologies presented earlier in this tutorial review.
Traditional glass materials such as mesoporous bioactive glasses (MBGs) have been applied to promote blood vessel formation, bone tissue engineering and periodontal regeneration.102–105 This suggests that porous MOF glasses could be the next generation of promising candidates for biomedical applications such as biosensors, drug carriers and imaging contrast agents due to their unique chemical and physical properties including high porosity with a wide range of pore sizes, high loading capacities, chemical functionality, and target cell affinities. Unlike traditional glasses, coordination chemistry enables the utilization of rational design principles to precisely tailor the desired properties of MOFs for biomedical applications. Although few CPs/MOFs in the glassy state have been reported so far, they demonstrate a variety of benefits that are complementary to their crystalline counterparts, including enhanced mechanical properties, optical properties, mass transport, and the capacity to form grain-boundary-free monoliths.18 Because porous MOF glasses have a limited aqueous and chemical stability, they can be quickly biodegraded. The major disadvantage of crystalline porous MOFs is their short drug delivery kinetics caused by their porous structures.106 The release time may be slightly extended by using core–shell microspheres or hydrogel systems, but neither of these delivery vehicles can easily enter cells or reach the smallest capillaries. Some parameters, such as particle sizes, shape, functional groups, types of metals and cross-linkers, and solvent systems, are known to contribute to the toxicity of MOFs. The development of biocompatible and stable MOFs using bioactive linkers may be the focus of future research to enable effective and efficient biomedical applications.
Last but not least, it is worthwhile to investigate the large-scale fabrication of composite MOF glass devices. Due to the viscous nature of the molten MOFs, conventional material processing techniques such as hot pressing, fibre spinning, casting, and moulding should be readily transferrable to the new MOF composite materials. The scalable fabrication of MOF glass and fillers is clearly a prerequisite for their composite development, necessitating additional investigation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. H. acknowledges the financial support from the Australian Research Council (FT210100589) and the University of Queensland Knowledge Exchange & Translation (Kx & T) and HaBS – EAIT ECR Collaboration Seed Funding. This research was supported by the AINSE Ltd. Early Career Researcher Grant (ECRG). T. D. B. thanks the Royal Society for the University Research Fellowship (URF\R\211013), and the Otto Schott Institute of Materials Research, University of Jena, for a Jena Excellence Fellowship. Y. Z. thanks the funding from International Team for Implantology Foundation (1699-2022).
Notes and references
T. D. Bennett, J.-C. Tan, Y. Yue, E. Baxter, C. Ducati, N. J. Terrill, H. H. M. Yeung, Z. Zhou, W. Chen, S. Henke, A. K. Cheetham and G. N. Greaves, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett, Y. Yue, P. Li, A. Qiao, H. Tao, N. G. Greaves, T. Richards, G. I. Lampronti, S. A. Redfern, F. Blanc, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, A. K. Cheetham and D. A. Keen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3484–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Umeyama, S. Horike, M. Inukai, T. Itakura and S. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 864–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Horike, S. S. Nagarkar, T. Ogawa and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6652–6664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, J. Hou, M. Li, Z. Wang, L. Ge, S. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu, T. D. Bennett and V. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3609–3612 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Jin, Q. Ma, K. Mo, H. Mao, A. Feldhoff, X. Cao, Y. Li, F. Pan and Z. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4365–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, C. W. Ashling, S. M. Collins, A. Krajnc, C. Zhou, L. Longley, D. N. Johnstone, P. A. Chater, S. Li, M. V. Coulet, P. L. Llewellyn, F. X. Coudert, D. A. Keen, P. A. Midgley, G. Mali, V. Chen and T. D. Bennett, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2580 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lin, X. Li, A. Krajnc, Z. Li, M. Li, W. Wang, L. Zhuang, S. Smart, Z. Zhu, D. Appadoo, J. R. Harmer, Z. Wang, A. G. Buzanich, S. Beyer, L. Wang, G. Mali, T. D. Bennett, V. Chen and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202112880 CAS .
G. Jiang, C. Qu, F. Xu, E. Zhang, Q. Lu, X. Cai, S. Hausdorf, H. Wang and S. Kaskel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, P. Chen, A. Shukla, A. Krajnc, T. Wang, X. Li, R. Doasa, L. H. G. Tizei, B. Chan, D. N. Johnstone, R. Lin, T. U. Schülli, I. Martens, D. Appadoo, M. S. Ari, Z. Wang, T. Wei, S.-C. Lo, M. Lu, S. Li, E. B. Namdas, G. Mali, A. K. Cheetham, S. M. Collins, V. Chen, L. Wang and T. D. Bennett, Science, 2021, 374, 621–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, V. Chernikova, Y. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Belmabkhout, O. Shekhah, C. Zhang, S. Yi, M. Eddaoudi and W. J. Koros, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 283–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Knebel, A. Bavykina, S. J. Datta, L. Sundermann, L. Garzon-Tovar, Y. Lebedev, S. Durini, R. Ahmad, S. M. Kozlov, G. Shterk, M. Karunakaran, I. D. Carja, D. Simic, I. Weilert, M. Kluppel, U. Giese, L. Cavallo, M. Rueping, M. Eddaoudi, J. Caro and J. Gascon, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1346–1353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghalei, K. Sakurai, Y. Kinoshita, K. Wakimoto, A. P. Isfahani, Q. Song, K. Doitomi, S. Furukawa, H. Hirao, H. Kusuda, S. Kitagawa and E. Sivaniah, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17086 CrossRef .
A. Qiao, T. D. Bennett, H. Tao, A. Krajnc, G. Mali, C. M. Doherty, A. W. Thornton, J. C. Mauro, G. N. Greaves and Y. Yue, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6827 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Madsen Rasmus, A. Qiao, J. Sen, I. Hung, K. Chen, Z. Gan, S. Sen and Y. Yue, Science, 2020, 367, 1473–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett and S. Horike, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 431–440 CrossRef .
J. Fonseca, T. Gong, L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10562–10611 RSC .
N. Ma and S. Horike, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4163–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, L. Tang, N. Ma, S. Horike and W. Chen, Coordin. Chem. Rev., 2022, 469, 214646 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tuffnell, C. W. Ashling, J. Hou, S. Li, L. Longley, M. L. Rios Gomez and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8705–8715 RSC .
R. Gaillac, P. Pullumbi, K. A. Beyer, K. W. Chapman, D. A. Keen, T. D. Bennett and F. X. Coudert, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gaillac, P. Pullumbi and F.-X. Coudert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6730–6736 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, T. D. Bennett and Y. Yue, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601705 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nozari, C. Calahoo, J. M. Tuffnell, D. A. Keen, T. D. Bennett and L. Wondraczek, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nozari, O. Smirnova, J. M. Tuffnell, A. Knebel, T. D. Bennett and L. Wondraczek, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, 7, 2200343 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Nagarkar, H. Kurasho, N. T. Duong, Y. Nishiyama, S. Kitagawa and S. Horike, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5455–5458 RSC .
L. Frentzel-Beyme, M. Kloss, P. Kolodzeiski, R. Pallach and S. Henke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12362–12371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, L. Longley, A. Krajnc, G. J. Smales, A. Qiao, I. Erucar, C. M. Doherty, A. W. Thornton, A. J. Hill, C. W. Ashling, O. T. Qazvini, S. J. Lee, P. A. Chater, N. J. Terrill, A. J. Smith, Y. Yue, G. Mali, D. A. Keen, S. G. Telfer and T. D. Bennett, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5042 CrossRef PubMed .
T. To, S. S. Sorensen, M. Stepniewska, A. Qiao, L. R. Jensen, M. Bauchy, Y. Yue and M. M. Smedskjaer, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Longley, S. M. Collins, C. Zhou, G. J. Smales, S. E. Norman, N. J. Brownbill, C. W. Ashling, P. A. Chater, R. Tovey, C.-B. Schönlieb, T. F. Headen, N. J. Terrill, Y. Yue, A. J. Smith, F. Blanc, D. A. Keen, P. A. Midgley and T. D. Bennett, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2135 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ali, X. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ren and J. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 8380–8386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, Y. Zhao, S. Wan, J. Yang, Z. Shi, S.-X. Peng, M.-Z. Chen, T.-Y. Xie, T.-W. Zeng, O. Yamamuro, M. Nirei, H. Akiba, Y.-B. Zhang, H.-B. Yu and M.-H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 13021–13025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Collins, D. M. Kepaptsoglou, K. T. Butler, L. Longley, T. D. Bennett, Q. M. Ramasse and P. A. Midgley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17862–17866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Longley, S. M. Collins, S. Li, G. J. Smales, I. Erucar, A. Qiao, J. Hou, C. M. Doherty, A. W. Thornton, A. J. Hill, X. Yu, N. J. Terrill, A. J. Smith, S. M. Cohen, P. A. Midgley, D. A. Keen, S. G. Telfer and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3592–3601 RSC .
S. M. Collins, K. E. MacArthur, L. Longley, R. Tovey, M. Benning, C.-B. Schönlieb, T. D. Bennett and P. A. Midgley, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 091111 CrossRef .
C. W. Ashling, D. N. Johnstone, R. N. Widmer, J. Hou, S. M. Collins, A. F. Sapnik, A. M. Bumstead, P. A. Midgley, P. A. Chater, D. A. Keen and T. D. Bennett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15641–15648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chester, C. Castillo-Blas, L. Wondraczek, D. A. Keen and T. D. Bennett, Chem. - Eur. J., 2022, 28, e202200345 CAS .
L. Longley, C. Calahoo, R. Limbach, Y. Xia, J. M. Tuffnell, A. F. Sapnik, M. F. Thorne, D. S. Keeble, D. A. Keen, L. Wondraczek and T. D. Bennett, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mubashir, L. F. Dumee, Y. Y. Fong, N. Jusoh, J. Lukose, W. S. Chai and P. L. Show, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 415, 125639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mubashir, R. Ashena, A. Bokhari, A. Mukhtar, S. Saqib, A. Ali, R. Saidur, K. S. Khoo, H. S. Ng, F. Karimi, C. Karaman and P. L. Show, Chemosphere, 2022, 291, 133006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, B. Hernandez, L. Ge and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 293–312 RSC .
J. Li, J. Wang, Q. Li, M. Zhang, J. Li, C. Sun, S. Yuan, X. Feng and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21304–21309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, S. Kosasang, A. Yoshida and S. Horike, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 5818–5824 RSC .
Q. Zheng, Y. Zhang, M. Montazerian, O. Gulbiten, J. C. Mauro, E. D. Zanotto and Y. Yue, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7848–7939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Bumstead, M. F. Thorne and T. D. Bennett, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 225, 210–225 RSC .
S. Li, S. Yu, S. M. Collins, D. N. Johnstone, C. W. Ashling, A. F. Sapnik, P. A. Chater, D. S. Keeble, L. N. McHugh, P. A. Midgley, D. A. Keen and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 9910–9918 RSC .
A. F. Sapnik, I. Bechis, A. M. Bumstead, T. Johnson, P. A. Chater, D. A. Keen, K. E. Jelfs and T. D. Bennett, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, M. L. Rios Gomez, A. Krajnc, A. McCaul, S. Li, A. M. Bumstead, A. F. Sapnik, Z. Deng, R. Lin, P. A. Chater, D. S. Keeble, D. A. Keen, D. Appadoo, B. Chan, V. Chen, G. Mali and T. D. Bennett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3880–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohara, A. Hinokimoto, W. Chen, T. Kitao, Y. Nishiyama, Y.-L. Hong, S. Kitagawa and S. Horike, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6859–6862 RSC .
W. Chen, S. Horike, D. Umeyama, N. Ogiwara, T. Itakura, C. Tassel, Y. Goto, H. Kageyama and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5195–5200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bordiga, F. Bonino, K. P. Lillerud and C. Lamberti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4885–4927 RSC .
J. E. M. Laulainen, D. N. Johnstone, I. Bogachev, L. Longley, C. Calahoo, L. Wondraczek, D. A. Keen, T. D. Bennett, S. M. Collins and P. A. Midgley, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 16524–16535 RSC .
S. Li, R. Limbach, L. Longley, A. A. Shirzadi, J. C. Walmsley, D. N. Johnstone, P. A. Midgley, L. Wondraczek and T. D. Bennett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Qiao, T. To, M. Stepniewska, H. Tao, L. Calvez, X. Zhang, M. M. Smedskjaer and Y. Yue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 16923–16931 RSC .
M. Stepniewska, K. Januchta, C. Zhou, A. Qiao, M. M. Smedskjaer and Y. Yue, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 10149–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Frentzel-Beyme, P. Kolodzeiski, J. B. Weiss, A. Schneemann and S. Henke, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 7750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Thornton, K. E. Jelfs, K. Konstas, C. M. Doherty, A. J. Hill, A. K. Cheetham and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3750–3753 RSC .
A. Qiao, H. Tao, M. P. Carson, S. W. Aldrich, L. M. Thirion, T. D. Bennett, J. C. Mauro and Y. Yue, Opt. Lett., 2019, 44, 1623–1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Widmer, A. M. Bumstead, M. Jain, T. D. Bennett and J. Michler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 20717–20724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Ashling, L. K. Macreadie, T. J. F. Southern, Y. Zhang, L. N. McHugh, R. C. Evans, S. Kaskel, S. G. Telfer and T. D. Bennett, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8386–8393 RSC .
H. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zhang, H. Song, J. Hu, Y. Huang and Y. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 655, 120611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Xia, P. Gao, Y. Cao, H. Jin and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 9548–9551 RSC .
M. A. Ali, X. Liu, H.-T. Sun, J. Ren and J. Qiu, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 2476–2483 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, Z. Qi and D. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202208735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Kulachenkov, S. Bruyere, S. A. Sapchenko, Y. A. Mezenov, D. Sun, A. A. Krasilin, A. Nominé, J. Ghanbaja, T. Belmonte, V. P. Fedin, E. A. Pidko and V. A. Milichko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1908292 CrossRef .
S. S. Nagarkar, S. Horike, T. Itakura, B. Le Ouay, A. Demessence, M. Tsujimoto and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4976–4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Miao, P. Wang, R. Sun, J. Li, Z. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Bai, R. Hao and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102396 CrossRef CAS .
C. Thanaphatkosol, N. Ma, K. Kageyama, T. Watcharatpong, T. Tiyawarakul, K. Kongpatpanich and S. Horike, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 6064–6067 RSC .
T. Ogawa, K. Takahashi, T. Kurihara, S. S. Nagarkar, K. Ohara, Y. Nishiyama and S. Horike, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 5832–5841 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, Z. Jiang, S. Qi, P. Wang, L. R. Jensen, M. Johansen, C. K. Christensen, Y. Zhang, D. B. Ravnsbaek and Y. Yue, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2110048 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lin, Y. Yao, M. Y. B. Zulkifli, X. Li, S. Gao, W. Huang, S. Smart, M. Lyu, L. Wang, V. Chen and J. Hou, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2221–2229 RSC .
C. Das, T. Ogawa and S. Horike, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8980–8983 RSC .
C. Das and S. Horike, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 225, 403–413 RSC .
M. A. Ali, J. Ren, T. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Hua, Y. Yue and J. Qiu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 12081–12087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vaidya, O. Veselska, A. Zhadan, M. Diaz-Lopez, Y. Joly, P. Bordet, N. Guillou, C. Dujardin, G. Ledoux, F. Toche, R. Chiriac, A. Fateeva, S. Horike and A. Demessence, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 6815–6823 RSC .
Z. Fan, C. Das, A. Demessence, R. Zheng, S. Tanabe, Y.-S. Wei and S. Horike, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 3281–3287 RSC .
Z. Fan, C. Das, A. Demessence, R. Zheng, S. Tanabe, Y. S. Wei and S. Horike, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 3281–3287 RSC .
T. Minami, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1985, 73, 273–284 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogawa, K. Takahashi, S. S. Nagarkar, K. Ohara, Y. L. Hong, Y. Nishiyama and S. Horike, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5175–5181 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Wang, J. Wan, Y. Cheng, R. Huang, C. Zhang, W. Hu, G. Wei and C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3630–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Thorne, M. L. R. Gómez, A. M. Bumstead, S. Li and T. D. Bennett, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2505–2512 RSC .
M. F. Thorne, A. F. Sapnik, L. N. McHugh, A. M. Bumstead, C. Castillo-Blas, D. S. Keeble, M. Diaz Lopez, P. A. Chater, D. A. Keen and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 9272–9275 RSC .
A. A. L. Michalchuk and F. Emmerling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. D. McGillicuddy, H. Vuong, S. Tao, A. H. Slavney, M. I. Gonzalez, S. J. L. Billinge and J. A. Mason, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2801–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Y. Lee, N. Becknell, O. M. Yaghi and C. A. Angell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10818–10821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, N. Hanikel, K. A. Lomachenko, C. Atzori, A. Lund, H. Lyu, Z. Zhou, C. A. Angell and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202300003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ali, W. M. W. Winters, M. A. Mohamed, D. Tan, G. Zheng, R. S. K. Madsen, O. V. Magdysyuk, M. Diaz-Lopez, B. Cai, N. Gong, Y. Xu, I. Hung, Z. Gan, S. Sen, H. T. Sun, T. D. Bennett, X. Liu, Y. Yue and J. Qiu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202218094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, T. D. Bennett, D. A. Keen, A. L. Goodwin and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7805–7807 RSC .
V. Nozari, C. Calahoo, J. M. Tuffnell, P. Adelhelm, K. Wondraczek, S. E. Dutton, T. D. Bennett and L. Wondraczek, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, H. Ye, F. Zhao and B. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20407–20414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, J. G. Ma and P. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6834–6837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Qin, D. Y. Du, W. Guan, X. J. Bo, Y. F. Li, L. P. Guo, Z. M. Su, Y. Y. Wang, Y. Q. Lan and H. C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7169–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Bo, A. Nsabimana, C. Han, M. Li and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 732–738 RSC .
A. F. Sapnik, C. Sun, J. E. M. Laulainen, D. N. Johnstone, R. Brydson, T. Johnson, P. A. Midgley, T. D. Bennett and S. M. Collins, Commun. Chem., 2023, 6, 92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Frentzel-Beyme, M. Kloß, R. Pallach, S. Salamon, H. Moldenhauer, J. Landers, H. Wende, J. Debus and S. Henke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 985–990 RSC .
L. N. McHugh and T. D. Bennett, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 19552–19559 RSC .
A. M. Bumstead, I. Pakamore, K. D. Richards, M. F. Thorne, S. S. Boyadjieva, C. Castillo-Blas, L. N. McHugh, A. F. Sapnik, D. S. Keeble, D. A. Keen, R. C. Evans, R. S. Forgan and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 2187–2196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdollahzadeh, M. Chai, E. Hosseini, M. Zakertabrizi, M. Mohammad, H. Ahmadi, J. Hou, S. Lim, A. Habibnejad Korayem, V. Chen, M. Asadnia and A. Razmjou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2107878 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Schneider, D. Ukaj, R. Koerver, A. A. Talin, G. Kieslich, S. P. Pujari, H. Zuilhof, J. Janek, M. D. Allendorf and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 7405–7412 RSC .
L. Sun, C. H. Hendon, S. S. Park, Y. Tulchinsky, R. Wan, F. Wang, A. Walsh and M. Dinca, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4450–4457 RSC .
Y. Zhou, S. Han, L. Xiao, P. Han, S. Wang, J. He, J. Chang, C. Wu and Y. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 3274–3284 RSC .
Y. Zhou, M. Shi, J. R. Jones, Z. Chen, J. Chang, C. Wu and Y. Xiao, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 392–414 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ur Rahman, M. A. Tahir, S. Noreen, M. Yasir, I. Ahmad, M. B. Khan, K. W. Ali, M. Shoaib, A. Bahadur and S. Iqbal, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 21413–21419 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Yang, X. Qi, S. Li, C. Liu and X. Li, Int. J. Biol. Sci., 2019, 15, 2156–2169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, L. Wu, X. Li, H. Sun, T. Xiong, J. Liu, C. Huang, H. Xu, H. Sun, W. Chen, R. Gref and J. Zhang, Acta. Pharm. Sin. B, 2021, 11, 2362–2395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These two authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Rijia Lin
	Rijia Lin is an Australian Research Council (ARC) DECRA Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland (Australia). He received his Bachelor's degree in Polymeric Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2010 and his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland in 2016. Dr Lin's current research focuses on the development and design of metal–organic framework composites for membrane separation and catalysis.

Milton Chai
	Milton Chai received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of New South Wales in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. Vicki Chen and Prof. Greg Leslie. Currently, he is working as a postdoc at the University of Queensland under the supervision of Dr Jingwei Hou. He was a recipient of the early career researcher award from the Australian Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering in 2022. His research focuses on MOF materials for critical minerals recovery, catalysis and membrane applications.

Yinghong Zhou
	Yinghong Zhou is a senior research fellow at the School of Dentistry, University of Queensland, where she leads the Translational ImmunoEngineering for Regenerative Dentistry research team. Dr Zhou seeks to understand the mechanisms for bone repair and periodontal tissue regeneration, with a particular interest in stem cell-based therapy and biomaterial application. She has been awarded the prestigious NHMRC Early Career Fellowship (2016–2020) to investigate the role of cell signaling cues in periodontal tissue regeneration, an Endeavour Research Fellowship (2017), and a BridgeTech Program Fellowship (2021) to advance research towards commercialisation.

Jingwei Hou
	Dr Jingwei Hou received his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of New South Wales in 2015. He then joined the UNESCO Centre for Membrane Science and Technology (2015–2017) and the University of Cambridge (2017–2019) for this post-doctoral research. In 2019, he returned to Australia as an ARC DECRA Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, University of Queensland. In 2021, he was named the ARC Future Fellow. He is currently a senior lecturer and group leader of the Functional Materials Engineering (fme) Laboratory.

Key learning points
1. Common MOF glass composite configurations and their fabrication methods.
2. Methods for fine-tuning the interface of MOF glass composites to achieve the desired characteristics.
3. Advanced techniques help us to understand the bulk and interface of the MOF glass composites.
4. Emerging applications of MOF glass composites for ionic conduction, optics, molecular separation, catalysis, and energy storage.
5. Current challenges and opportunities in the construction and application of MOF glass composites.


 	Fig. 1  Formation of MOF glass. (a) Illustration of the exchange event of imidazolate ligand in ZIF-4 during melting. (b) Calculated distribution of zinc coordination numbers in ZIF-4 as a function of temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (c) The occurrence of melting for ZIFs when the atomic Zn vibration exceeds a critical fraction (0.15) of the distance to the nearest Zn neighbour. Adapted with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Three types of MOF glass composites based on different configurations.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of (a) blended MOF glass and (d) flux melted MOF glass. Adapted with permission from ref. 20, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Evolving Tg of ZIF glass blend by altering the Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 ratio. (c) X-Ray energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of a Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 glass blend showing Zn (blue) and Co (red) domains with sharp interfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (e) In situ WAXS diffraction of ZIF-8/ZIF-62 flux melted glass. (f) X-ray EDS elemental mapping of a Co-ZIF-67/Zn-ZIF-62 flux melted glass showing inter-diffused Zn (blue) and Co (red) domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of MOF CGC formation showing the MIL-53 retained open-pore crystalline phase within the ZIF-62 glass matrix (notes for different MIL-53 phases: as: as-synthesized; np: narrow pore and lp: large pore). Adapted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Formation of MOF glass–MHP composites. (a) Phase transition of pure and CsPbI3 within the MHP–MOF glass composite at various temperatures. (b) Photoluminescence spectra for MHP–MOF glass composites fabricated at various sintering temperatures showing orders of magnitude higher optoelectronic efficiency for embedding perovskites in ZIF glass matrix prior to sintering. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  Formation and interfacial bonding for MOF–inorganic glass composites. (a) Glass transition behaviour of ZIF-62 glass–inorganic glass composites, showing two distinct Tg values assigned to ZIF-62 and inorganic glass. (b) Schematic illustration of potential interfacial bondings between ZIF-62 glass (yellow) and inorganic glass (blue) domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  MOF glass films on substrates. (a) Solvothermal synthesis of polycrystalline ZIF-62 on inorganic substrates followed by melt-quenching. Adapted with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) MOF glass–polymer composite membrane fabrication by a hot-pressing method. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Melt-quenching of MOF glass electrolyte on carbon fibre electrode with improved interfacial contact. Adapted with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Thermal behaviours	Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)	• Thermal stability	
1 and 30

• Desolvation
• Decomposition
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)	• Melting processes	
14, 44 and 45

• Melting temperature (Tm)
• Glass transition temperature (Tg)
• Domain distribution in MOF glass composites (e.g. MOF glass blends, flux melted MOF glasses, MOF glass–inorganic glasses)	
30, 34 and 38

Nanoscale, microscale and atomic-scale structure	Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS)	• Local density difference (SAXS)	
1

• Confirm the loss/emergence of long-range order (WAXS)	
1, 28 and 30

• Crystal distortion, lattice parameters, and preferential orientation (WAXS by refinement)
• Volume-weighted fraction of the particles (SAXS)	
28 and 30

• (In)homogeneity and internal surface roughness (SAXS)	
30

• Particle size/particle coarsening (SAXS)	
10 and 30

Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD)	• Macroscopic phase transition of the glassy MOFs	
7, 10, 36 and 46

• Evolution of crystal phases (e.g. MOF glass CGCs)
• Crystal structure distortion, lattice parameters, average crystalline domain size and quantitive ratios (PXRD pattern refinement of the mixed crystal composites)
X-Ray total scattering and pair distribution functions (PDF)	• Short- and mid-range structure for amorphous materials	
36 and 47

Chemical environment within the composite	Terahertz/far-infrared spectroscopy (THz/far-IR)	• Quasi-localised features	
8, 10 and 48

• Collective framework dynamic properties
• Reaction/bonding formation during melting
Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)	• Element-specific chemical environment within the MOF glass composites (both bulk and interfacial regions)	
8, 10, 28 and 49

• Interactions of linker-linker and host–guest in MOF glass composites
• Short-range disorder of the coordination environment of metal in MOFs (upon melting)	
15

X-Ray absorption spectroscopies (XAS)	• Electronic structure (XANES): valence states/average oxidation state	
8, 50 and 51

• Coordination environments (EXAFS): metal's bond distances of neighbour atoms, chemical bonding information, coordination number
Microscopic structure	Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)	• Phase distribution information for composites (nanometer-level, ADF)	
7, 10, 36 and 52

• Elemental distribution (EDS)
• 3D structural information (reconstruct a tomography surface-rendered, ADF/EDS)
• Spatial-resolute chemical bonding information (bulk and interface, EELS)	
7

• Map the crystalline and amorphous region (SED)	
7 and 36

• Split the different amorphous domains (map the changes in the short-range order, ePDF)	
52

Mechanical properties	Constant strain-rate nanoindentation	• Young's modulus and hardness of MOF glasses	
53

Constant load and hold indentation creep tests and strain-rate jump experiments	• Creep resistance of MOF glasses	
53

Single-edge precracked beam method	• Fracture toughness of MOF glasses	
29

Strain rate-dependent uniaxial micropillar compression tests	• Plasticity of MOF glasses	
53

Microindentation and nanoindentation paired with laser scanning microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM)	• Fracture and deformation behaviours of MOF glasses	
54 and 55

Other properties	Gas adsorption techniques and PALS	• Surface area, porosity, pore size distribution, gas storage capacity	
8, 56 and 57

FIB-SEM	• Phase distribution (3D surface-render views)	
5

• Defect volume
Gas permeation module	• Pure gas permeation of MOF glass membranes (paired with pressure transducers)	
5 and 6

• Testing mixed gas separation (paired with a gas chromatography)
Spectrophotometer	• Transmittance	
58

Becke line method	• Refractive index	
58

Fluorescence spectrophotometer	• Photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved fluorescence emission spectra	
10


 	Fig. 8  The crystalline Zn-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 blend prepared shows two individual melting endotherms in the first DSC upscan. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) ISAXS profiles with Lorentzian fits and three-dimensional plot for ZIF-4. (b) WAXS data for ZIF-4 showing major loss of Bragg diffraction at 642 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Temperature-resolved SAXS profile for a Co-ZIF-4/Zn-ZIF-62 mixture. Adapted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (d) Evolution of perovskite particle size during the sintering of MOF glass-perovskite composites fitted from in situ SAXS patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Contour plots of in situ synchrotron PXRD for MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 CGC during heating from room temperature to 450 °C, showing the evolution of MIL-53(Al) crystalline phases. (b) PDF D(r) for MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 crystal mixtures (blue) and CGC (red), showing the short-range structure information of MIL-53(Al)/ZIF-62 CGC before and after thermal treatment. Inset: Scheme for PDF peak assignment. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) THz/far-IR spectra of fluorinated ZIF crystals and glass with the inset showing the second derivative of the spectra, which revealed a new shoulder peak at ∼440 cm−1 corresponding to Zn–F bond formation after melt-quenching. (b) Illustration of the deformation modes of ZnN4 tetrahedra (left) and aromatic rings (right) in fluorinated ZIF glass. Zn, blue; F, green; N, orange; C, gray; and H, white. (c) Temperature-resolved in situ synchrotron THz/far-IR spectra for fluorinated ZIF glass. (d and e) Shifts in peak position for the Zn–N stretching and aromatic ring deformation modes in fluorinated ZIF glass during thermal treatment. Adapted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) 1H MAS NMR spectra of Co-ZIF-62 glass, carbon cloth, and Co-ZIF-62 glass coated on carbon cloth. Vertical dashed lines correspond to the protons on imidazolate linkers within Co-ZIF-62 glass. The inset shows the removal of protons on carbon cloth during the coating process, indicating the chemical interaction between Co-ZIF-62 and carbon cloth. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b and c) 67Zn MAS NMR spectra for ZIF-4, ZIF-62 crystals and glasses. Adapted with permission from ref. 15, Copyright 2020 AAAS Publishing. (d) 133Cs MAS NMR spectra of CsPbI3–MOF glass composites before and after sintering at 275 °C, dagger symbol (†) corresponds to CsI. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) STEM–EDS mapping and reconstructed three-dimensional tomography of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC (Scale bar is 400 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (b) Crystallinity intensity of MIL-53/ZIF-62 CGC mapping the number of Bragg diffraction peaks measured in the SED data at each probe position. Adapted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) STEM-ADF image of inorganic-ZIF-62 glass composites with rectangles indicating the regions for area-averaged reduced ePDFs. Independent component analysis (ICA) loading maps for inorganic glass and ZIF-62 glass. (d) ICA component profiles and corresponding area-averaged reduced ePDFs for inorganic glass (red) and ZIF-62 glass (blue). Adapted with permission from ref. 52, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Gas adsorption	ZIF-62 (Zn or Co based)	MIL-118; UL-MOF-1; MIL-53(Al); FeIII acetylacetonate	Ball milling or adsorption + melt-quenching	• Retains open-pore phase of MIL-53	Increased microporosity and gas adsorption capacity (CO2, H2)	
7, 8 and 60

• Forms a macroporous interface region with MIL-118 and UL-MOF-1	

• Forms less densely packed framework with inclusion of Fe
Zn-ZIF-62	ZIF-8	Flux melting + quenching	• Facilitates melting of ZIF-8 with an inaccessible melting temperature	Gas adsorption properties are approximately a weighted average of its parent components	
34

MOF glass membranes for gas separation	Zn-ZIF-62; Zn-TIF-4; hybrid Zn-ZIF-8/ZIF-62	Alumina membrane substrate	Solvothermal synthesis + melt-quenching	• Forms a gas sieving MOF film with no grain boundary defects on membrane	Enhanced separation of gases (H2/CH4, CO2/N2, and CO2/CH4, C3H6/C3H8) with performance exceeding that of most polycrystalline MOF membranes	
6, 61 and 62

Zn-ZIF-62; M-phosphate-azolate (M = Zn, Cd, Cu and Mn)	Polymer membrane matrix (6FDA-DAM; PTFE)	Stirrer mixing, casting + melt-quenching; Hot-pressing	• Fills up voids at MOF/polymer interface and rigidifies polymer chains through new coordination bonds between MOF glass and polymer	Significantly enhanced gas selectivity (CO2/N2) with only a slight decrease in permeability. Complete recovery of gas selectivity in cracked membranes possible through melt-quenching	
5 and 42

Optics	Zn-ZIF-62	CsPbI3 perovskites	Ball milling + melt-quenching	• Forms strong interfacial bonds and physically confines CsPbI3, which counters the thermodynamic factors promoting its conversion to the inactive non-perovskite phase	Exhibits high stability against immersion in water and organic solvents as well as exposure to heat, light, air, and ambient humidity	
10

Zn-azolate; Cd-azolate; ZnCl2(HbIm)2	Inorganic phosphors (yellow, red, blue, green); organic dyes	Mixing in epoxy resin/mixing + melt-quenching	• The rigid MOF glass environment reduces non-radiative transitions of triplet excitons	Room temperature phosphorescence with ultralong lifetime and high PLQY. Moulding of glass into fibres with anisotropic structures generates polarised photoluminescence.	
63 and 64

• Moldable into different shapes (fiber, sheet, and cotton-like MOF glass)
Metal-carboxylate-azolate (Cd or Zn based)	MOF is converted into core–shell composites with metal oxide core and organic shell	Ultrafast melting by femtosecond laser pulses	• The structural elements of MOF glass can be reoriented and reassembled into new structures	Enhanced nonlinear optical response	
65

Ion conduction	Zn-ZIF-4; Zn-phosphate-azolate	Lithium salt; acid molecules	Grinding or melt doping	• Provides grain boundary-free and isotropic pathways for ion migration	Enhanced ion conductivity and dendrite suppression. Incorporation of photoacids provides switchable conductivity by light irradiation.	
9 and 66

• Accessible liquid state upon heat treatment enables direct doping of acid molecules
Zn-ZIF-62	Solid-state electrolyte (NASICON)	Spin coating + melt-quenching	• Acts as compatible interlayer between NASICON and Na anode	Enhanced cycling stability in Na metal battery due to homogeneous Na+/e− transport kinetics	
67

ZnPIm + ZnPBIm	Mixed composite of two MOF glasses	Ball milling + melt-quenching	• Forms homogeneously mixed glass due to reversible solid-to-liquid phase transition	Controllable ion conductivity by changing ratio of glass components	
68

Zn-phosphate; Zn-phosphate-azolate	Electrode (carbon fibre; Pt/C carbon paper)	Melt-quenching	• Acts as anhydrous solid-state electrolyte for battery and fuel cell	Enhanced charge transfer kinetics at electrode–electrolyte interface	
43 and 69

• No discontinuities or flaws at MOF glass/electrode interface
Co-ZIF-62	Carbon black + polymer binder	Mixing + melt-quenching	• Acts as anode in lithium ion battery	Enhanced lithium storage capacity, cycling stability and rate performance	
70

• Forms additional channels for Li+ diffusion during cycling due to distortion or breakage of weak Co-N bonds
Catalysis	Co-ZIF-4; Co-ZIF-62;	Fe containing components, deposited on carbon cloth substrate	Ball milling (coating) + melt-quenching	• Provides catalytic active sites from coordination defects generated during amorphisation	Enhanced catalytic efficiency as indicated by reduced overpotential for oxygen evolution reaction, and reduced charge transfer resistance at electrode interface	
8 and 71

• Provides good interfacial contact with carbon cloth electrode due to access to liquid state

 	Fig. 14  (a) CO2 gas adsorption–desorption isotherms for halogenated ZIF glasses at 273 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) CO2 adsorption–desorption isotherms for Co-ZIF-62 glass and Co-ZIF-62 glass incorporated with Fe at 194.7 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Adsorption–desorption isotherms of benzene vapour for nitrile-based MOF glass at 298 K, showing a gate-opening adsorption behaviour. Adapted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High pressure CO2 adsorption–desorption isotherms for the MIL-53/ZIF-62 mixture and CGC at 303 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  MOF glass for membrane separation applications. (a) The photograph of the Zn-P-dmbIm membrane (top) and SEM images of Zn-P-dmbIm pellet and glass membrane (bottom). (b) Cross-section SEM images of the Zn-P-dmbIm glass membrane. (c) Comparison of the H2/CO2 separation performances of Zn-P-dmbIm glass membrane with state-of-the-art membranes. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Long term stability of TIF-4 glass membrane for CO2/CH4 mixture separation. Adapted with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (e) XRD patterns ZIF-8/ZIF-62 polycrystalline membrane (without melting) and glass membranes (after melting). (f) Top-view SEM images of ZIF-8/ZIF-62 polycrystalline membrane (without melting) and (g) glass membrane (after melting). Adapted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h and i) SEM images captured under backscattered electrons imaging mode with contrast difference of interfacial defects (black), polymer (grey), and filler (white) for ZIF-62/6FDA-DAM MMMs before (h) and after (i) in situ melting. Arrows indicate the interfacial defects. (j and k) Surface-rendered view of the segmented FIB-SEM tomograms for interfacial defects (shown in red) in ZIF-62/6FDA-DAM MMMs before (j) and after (k) in situ melting. Adapted with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Emerging optical applications enabled by MOF glass. (a) CsPbX3/MOF glass composites and pure CsPbX3 under bright field and 365 nm UV light, where the composite retained 80% of the photoluminescence even after immersing in water for 10000 hours. Adapted with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2021 AAAS Publishing. (b) Moldable Zn-4,5-dicyanoimidazole glass showing ultralong room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP) with high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of up to 75%. Adapted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Complex core–shell morphology produced from ultrafast melting of MOF by femtosecond IR laser pulses with enhanced nonlinear optical response. Adapted with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) ([Cu(PPh3)2][Au(CN)2]n glass showing high transparency and strong green emission at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2022 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) High conductivities for H+ were observed in MOF glasses across a wide range of viscosities. Adapted with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) Proton hopping along the H2PO4 group in Zn–H2PO4−/H3PO4 coordination polymer networks. Adapted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Li+ ion conduction in crystalline and glassy MOFs where the absence of grain boundaries resulted in homogeneous ion flux in glassy ZIF-4. Adapted with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic representation of the structural origin of the Li-ion storage capacity enhancement in ZIF glass anode after cycling. Adapted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Construction of bimetallic Co–Fe MOF glass electrodes through mechanochemical coating and melt-quenching process. (b) Oxygen evolution reaction polarisation curves in 0.1 M KOH for Co-ZIF-62 and Co-ZIF-62-Fe crystals and glasses coated on a carbon cloth substrate. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) versus RHE for Co-ZIF-62 and Co-ZIF-62-Fe crystals and glasses coated on a carbon cloth substrate. Adapted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 
Footnote
† These two authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
