Photogalvanic cells based on lyotropic nanosystems: towards the use of liquid nanotechnology for personalised energy sources   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03169H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03169H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6541-6551Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotogalvanic cells based on lyotropic nanosystems: towards the use of liquid nanotechnology for personalised energy sources†

        
          
            Jonathan E. 
            Halls‡
* and 

        
          
            Jay D. 
            Wadhawan
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The University of Hull, Cottingham Road, Kingston-upon-Hull, HU6 7RX, United Kingdom. E-mail: j.e.halls@bath.ac.uk; j.wadhawan@hull.ac.uk
Received 
      14th November 2011
    , Accepted 24th January 2012First published on 23rd February 2012AbstractA lightweight, autonomous and practical, proof-of-concept electrical power source is developed within this work. It comprises a photoredox-active material embedded within the non-ionic surfactant subphase, with a second redox reagent present within the aqueous pseudophase of a lamellar (Lα) lyotropic liquid crystal framework, which is sandwiched between two electrodes, one of which acts in a sacrificial manner. This quasi-biphasic, entirely new-concept, electrochemical cell, based on electron transfer, rather than ion transfer, is shown to act as a photogalvanic device which, under violet light, is demonstrated to exhibit maximum light-to-electrical power conversion efficiency of ca. 2% (fill factor of 15%), with additional ability to act as an electrically-rechargeable electrochemical capacitor of voltage efficiency ∼85% and power efficiency ∼80%, and with estimated maximum energy density of ∼1 W h kg−1 at a power density of ∼1 kW kg−1.

Broader context
Modern lifestyle requirements for 24/7 information/communication accessibility have encouraged massive developments in mobile computing devices such as smartphones, tablets, etc. – the personalised technology revolution. These systems require efficient, readily rechargeable and lightweight power sources capable of being moulded into whichever spatial geometry and volume are required for the pragmatic and ergonomic technology (typical energy consumption rates between μW h day−1 and mW h day−1 [G. Dennler et al., Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 947], with, for example, wireless videostreaming on a laptop consuming ~35 W, calling on a mobile costing 3 W, with texting costing 0.4 W [P. Somavat and V. Namboodiri, J. Green Eng., 2011, 1, 447]). The integration of solar-rechargeable batteries (such as liquid photogalvanic cells) into such devices increases their portability through reducing dependence on accessible shore power. However, although photogalvanic cells can theoretically afford 18% solar-to-electrical power-conversion efficiency, most systems struggle to approach even 0.5% conversion. Herein, we employ lamellar liquid crystals consisting of alternating hydrophobic/hydrophilic nanometric strata as a framework medium for liquid photogalvanic cells. The short transport pathlengths and high reagent solubility, coupled with the use of a sacrificial counterelectrode, empower such engineered devices to overcome limitations of conventional systems; our cell is over five times more solar-to-electrical-power-conversion-efficient-per-pound-sterling than dye-sensitised photovoltaic solar cells, whilst being an electrochemical capacitor of high voltage and power efficiency.

1. Introduction
Humankind's insatiable thirst for energy has motivated much of the ongoing development of electrochemical technologies to provide “green”, clean and efficient sustainable systems to meet the demands of a burgeoning consumer culture dependent upon mobile, portable and rechargeable power sources.1,2 This, in turn, has empowered developments in electron/hole transporting nanomaterials, since these key charge carrying structured systems may be designed to be auto-assembling, lightweight, flexible and self-annealing;3 characteristics which are epitomized by dynamic, soft-matter “liquid nanotechnology” systems.4 Micropower sources based on such systems are highly attractive to realise Nocera's transformative concept of personalised energy,5 thereby assisting in the personalised technology revolution that is currently taking place within global corporations, driven by requirements to engage in cost-effective and ecopreneurial business.6
We have been interested in monitoring charge transport within three-dimensional lyotropic liquid crystal platforms, since these attractive and versatile nanosystems are synthetically inexpensive to formulate, whilst allowing for the population of micellar ensembles or aqueous pseudophases with redox-active compounds, thereby opening–up the possibility for long-range charge transfer processes to be initiated through electrochemical perturbation.7 Moreover, the system fluidity renders these media with macroscopic flexibility, whilst allowing them to form via co-operative self-assembly, and maintain this long-range structural order, even upon mechanical perturbation, through self-reconstruction.
In this work, we examine the application of these framework, liquid nanosystems, when suitably “doped” with photoredox-active molecules and ionic electrolyte as photogalvanic cells, and take a pragmatic and critical assessment of the performance of these materials for utilisation as micropower sources. Photogalavanic cells for solar energy conversion have been studied since the early seminal work by Rabinowitch.8 These power-producing systems operate through altering the chemical composition of a galvanic cell through a photochemically-induced redox reaction, so that, unlike photovoltaic systems, it is a Faradaic reaction at the electrode | electrolyte interface which gives rise to the observed photocurrents.9–12 However they are not currently fashionable as a method for efficient solar-to-electrical energy conversion, in spite of their early promise: the Archer and Albery theoretical, albeit sanguine, maximum power conversion efficiency of9e 18% under air mass 2.0 (AM2) conditions, for homogeneous systems, has yet to be approached; efficiencies well below 1% are normally observed under laboratory conditions (typically using monochromatic light).9–12 In part, their impracticality stems from a combination of (1) small transport rates requiring the cells to be microfabricated effectively and reproducibly, and (2) a requirement for the occurrence of differential electrode kinetics of the involved species.9 This latter caveat was essentially noted earlier by Rabinowitch,8c,d who observed that biphasic cells, in which reactants and products could partition between the two phases, gave rise to higher energy conversion efficiencies, assisted by the enhanced solubility of the dye system employed for the photo-induced electron transfer in the non-aqueous part of the cell. Indeed, following that pioneering work, Volkov,13 and Fermín and Girault14 have endeavoured to exploit the interface between two immiscible liquids for solar energy conversion, but such work has been plagued by low photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (typically ca. 0.1%), and medium quality devices (fill factors of ca. 30%). Accordingly, we develop a photogalvanic cell based on the Lα phase of a lyotropic liquid crystal, populating both the aqueous subphase and the surfactant pseudophase with photoredox-active molecules, and doping the aqueous subphase with a salting-out electrolyte to ensure the phase is electrically conductive. We note that this engineered system has the opportunity to overcome both limitations of conventional photogalvanic cells, and show, to a proof-of-concept, that the system has an unoptimised maximum power conversion efficiency of ca. 2% under monochromatic conditions, employing light in the lowest wavelength end of the visible spectrum (350 nm centre band). We additionally illustrate the characteristics of the system when operating as an electrically-rechargeable micropower source in the dark.
2. Concept
The normal lamellar (Lα) liquid crystalline phase (see Fig. 1a) is a three-dimensional, dynamic, nano-restricted liquid system consisting of alternating hydrophobic (surfactant) and hydrophilic (aqueous) subphases.15 It is, quintessentially, a multi-stacked quasi-biphasic ensemble that can be optically clear (if aligned into monodomains), whilst exhibiting optical- (birefringence) and diffusional-anisotropy. We consider an idealised scenario in which this liquid crystalline framework is sandwiched between two electrodes, one being in contact with the aqueous subphase, with the other touching only the surfactant pseudophase. If this framework is doped with photoredox-active reagents, these will partition between the two subphases. We consider the extreme case where the hydrophobic species A and its one-electron oxidised form B are only soluble in the surfactant part, whilst the hydrophilic species C and its one-electron reduced partner D only solubilise in the aqueous subphase, so that we have what tantamounts to a “skyscraper” liquid nanosystem that contains spatially-separated redox reagents which are free to engage in a liquid | liquid electron transfer across the pseudophase | pseudophase interface, viz. B + D ⇄ A + C. If the forward reaction is spontaneous (ΔE0' = E0'A|B − E0'D|C > 0), then the extent of this reaction impacts on the open circuit voltage through the Nernstian change in the concentration ratios of A/B and D/C, and under load, current will flow – the system will do electrical work upon discharge. Whilst such a system can be charged electrically, there is also the possibility to charge-up the system using light – if species A is photoactive, there is a possibility to drive the endoergic reaction with light. This is a quasi-biphasic photogalvanic cell, which allows light energy to be converted in to electrical energy, thereby acting as a solar cell. The practical utility of the electrical discharge of this framework is examined when it is charged with light or electricity; Electronic Supplementary Information 1 (ESI 1)† outlines theoretical principles pertaining to the open circuit voltage within biphasic, photo-rechargeable galvanic systems (q.v.Fig. 1b) which can be regarded as a crude mimic of the general concept; a future work will examine the maximum possible power obtainable in such systems.16
 Fig. 1  (a) Cartoon of the normal lamellar (Lα) lyotropic liquid crystal phase, sandwiched between two electrodes. (b) Exploded view illustration of a biphasic battery in which photo-induced electron transfer occurs only at the interface between two immiscible electrolyte systems. Note the electrodes have been cut to reveal the two liquids. The illuminated electrode has potential EL; the potential of the dark electrode is ED. 
3. Experimental
All chemical reagents (Brij 30, dichloromethane, N-methylphenothiazine, AgNO3, AlCl3·6H2O, Ce(NH4)4(SO4)4·2H2O, EuCl3·6H2O, KCl, MgSO4, NiSO4·7H2O, ZnCl2) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar in the purest commercially-available grade, and used as received. Water, with a resistivity of not less than 18 MΩ cm, was taken from an Elgastat system (Vivendi, Bucks., UK). Argon was obtained from BOC Gases, U.K. Electrode materials were obtained from Alfa Aesar, Goodfellow or Advent (for metal foils of Al, Ag, Ni, Pt or Zn), or UQG, Cambridge for tin-doped indium oxide (ITO, of resistance 20 Ω per square, of thickness 25 nm on soda lime float with SiO2 layer). Metal electrodes were cleaned and polished using wetted carborundum paper (P1200 grade, Presi, France) and stored under degassed, distilled water prior to use; ITO electrodes were rinsed with both ethanol and water, and dried immediately prior to deployment.
The pink cation radical of N-methylphenothiazine was prepared as the chloride salt through a liquid | liquid oxidation, using ammonium cerium(IV) sulfate in aqueous 0.1 M KCl, with the organic reagent in dichloromethane. The salt was isolated through separation of the organic phase followed by drying over magnesium sulfate, filtration and evaporation of the solvent.
The Lα phase was prepared15 by mixing approximately 5 g of Brij 30 with 5 mL water, together with relevant masses of the electroactive dopants, followed by heating with stirring to approximately 345 K for approximately 2 h so as to allow the mixture to melt into the isotropic micellar surfactant phase, thereby achieving homogenisation. For the cases requiring electrolyte doping of the surfactant subphase, the water was replaced with an aqueous solution of 0.1 M potassium chloride – a salting-out electrolyte15b which is known to encourage the demixing of surfactant and aqueous subphases. For the cases where oxygen was required to be rigorously excluded, the micellar isotropic phase at 345 K was formed under a stream of argon. An aliquot of the hot isotropic mixture was then poured into the cavity that had been prepared by gluing a Teflon (of thickness 1.0 mm or 5.0 mm) or silicone separator (of thickness 0.5 mm), with known dimensions onto the dark electrode (ITO, platinum, silver, nickel, zinc or aluminium foil), and which had been positioned within an horizontal field from a ferromagnet The field strength was determined to be 1.1 gauss using a home-made Hall probe. This solution was allowed to cool slowly (typically over the course of two hours) to furnish the required phase, either on the open bench, or within a polythene bag filled with argon, This approach was anticipated to encourage surfactant chains to lower the gas | solution surface tension (enabling the dark electrode to be in contact with the aqueous subphase), whilst also allowing for the magnetic alignment of the planar bilipid bilayers into the required phase. Optical microscopy (undertaken using an Olympus BH-2 polarising microscope) confirmed the existence of this phase through the characteristic texture. The phase was measured to have a density of 0.99 g mL−1. Last, an ITO electrode was allowed to cover the phase, and contact with the surfactant subphase, and the two-electrode cell sealed with a low melting depilatory wax. This electrode had been masked with magic tape, so as to only allow the exposure of the material within the cavity to the electrode surface. Electrical connection to both electrodes was achieved through the use of copper tape with conductive adhesive underside (RS).
All electrochemical experiments were undertaken at ambient conditions of temperature of 296 ± 2 K. Open circuit potentials, and chronopotentiograms were recorded using a computer-controlled potentiostat/galvanostat (μAutolab Type III, Eco Chemie); current–voltage characteristics of the device under illumination were recorded manually by connecting the cell, in parallel to a Farnell DM141 multimeter acting as a voltmeter, and in series with a UNI-T UT50A multimeter acting as ammeter connected to a series variable load resistor. Readings were taken after both current and voltage had reached steady values. A 75 W Cairn Research Optosource xenon arc lamp equipped with monochromator was employed to introduce monochromated violet light (of centre-band 350 nm and bandwith 30 nm) to the system. The light intensity was monitored in each experiment using a radiometer calibrated at 365 nm (UVP, Cambridge), and was attenuated by varying the current flowing in the lamp power supply. In typical experiments, the light was focused onto the electrode cavity, and under typical working distances, the light intensity was observed to be ∼2 mW cm−2.
Numerical simulations, undertaken through program encoding in GNU FORTRAN using the freely available G77 compiler, were executed on an Intel Pentium processor (of speed, 2.4 GHz, with 1.98 GB of random access memory) and employed uniform spatial and temporal finite difference grids. Converged simulations typically took around 3 min of CPU time.
4. Results and discussion
We first summarise the main findings from the theoretical treatment of the maximum open circuit voltage (electromotive force, emf) of a biphasic battery given in ESI 1† since this may impact on the maximum possible power that may be engineered using these systems, and subsequently, exploit those fundamental insights through the exploration of the development of un-optimised systems based on Lα lyotropic liquid crystals.
4.1 Maximum open circuit photovoltage in biphasic batteries
The numerical calculations in ESI 1† for a biphasic photogalvanic cell of the type illustrated in Fig. 1:Dark electrode | D,C (phase β) | B,A (phase α) | Light electrodesuggest that the maximum cell emf under illumination occurs when the exogonic dark electron transfer between the redox couples in the phases α and β, viz. the reaction B + D → A + C, occurs with kinetics within the Marcus-inverted region.17 This allows for the spontaneous discharge process to take place as pathologically-slowly as possible. Moreover, any facet which allows for the introduction of a degree of electron transfer irreversibility in the redox reaction will be an advantageous fillip to the performance of the system under discharge conditions, although this may result in requiring longer charging-up time periods under constant capacity evaluation, a consequence which is not necessarily unwelcomed if charging occurs under illumination. In this light, then, there are at least two ways in which these notions may be made to empower the engineered system: (1) one of the redox couples has an intrinsic slowness for self-exchange (which could be through subtle influences such as electron transfer non-adiabaticity, large inner-sphere reorganisation energies, changes in co-ordination/solvation geometry leading to non-Marcus-type effects,18 solvent non-adiabticity, et hoc genus omne), and (2) one redox reaction, during charge, involves a phase change such as nucleation. Indeed, and noteworthy, should the latter process involve nucleation of solid particles at the liquid | liquid interface,19 it is possible that the interfacial energy may be additionally stored during the charging process – particles are known to lower the interfacial energy at fluid | fluid interfaces,20 so that this energy (typical oil | water surface tensions are ∼50 mN m−1 = 5 μJ cm−2) may be recovered during discharge. Whilst this additional energy is small, the use of stackedelectrode1 | liquid1 | liquid2 |… | liquidn-1 | liquidn | electrode2systems may provide an opportunity to recover more of this energy at constant electrode size. An additional mechanistic nuance, realised by Rabinowitch,8c for this type of pathway, albeit at non-polarised interfaces, revolves around the use of a photoredox species that is insoluble in one phase in one redox-form, and partitions in the other oxidation state between the two phases, thereby allowing for an intrinsic asymmetry in the reactions kinetics to be embedded within the system.
It should be stressed that, all other things being equal, both phases need to have similar mass transport rates for the reacting species, so that the maximum possible open circuit voltage is observed for a fixed pair of redox couples. Practically, this is not easy to accomplish for conventional liquid | liquid systems. Neither, for that matter, is the ability to construct the very thin liquid | liquid interfaces required by the above model. However, it is important to realise that diffusive transport is not restricted to physical translation; charge carrier hopping may also be described by the transport equations solved in ESI 1.†21 In this case, the diffusion coefficient is then a function of analyte concentration, and increases with the latter, above a critical percolation threshold.21b Thus, in this regime, varying the concentration of one redox couple allows for both alteration in the rate of the bimolecular charge/discharge processes, and the ability to “fine-tune” transport rates, so that the latter may be matched within both phases. In a previous work,7a we illustrated that such processes may occur within lyotropic liquid crystals doped with redox-active molecules, since micellar occupancy can be treated in terms of Poisson statistics. It is to whether we may utilise these framework materials for energy conversion and storage through electrochemical means which we will next examine experimentally.
4.2 Photogalvanic cells constructed using the Brij 30/H2O Lα phase

4.2.1 Formulation of stacked Lα frameworks. 
Brij 30 (polyethylene glycol dodecyl ether, now known as Brij L4) is an inexpensive non-ionic surfactant manufactured by Croda International, Plc. It was chosen for this work since its phase diagram and alignment properties have been studied (at least for the case of pure Brij 30/H2O mixtures), whilst being uncharged, thereby allowing the electrical migration of the surfactant monomers to be assumed to be negligible during the experiments (vide infra). At approximately 50: 50 wt.% ratios of surfactant-to-water, Brij 30 micelles self-assemble, at room temperature, into the multi-stacked, planar bilayer sheets, separated by water layers, of the normal lamellar (Lα) lyotropic liquid crystalline phase.15 This phase may be aligned using a magnetic field (q.v. §3), by virtue of the negative anisotropy of the diagmagnetic susceptibility of the individual surfactant monomers, in a co-operative manner – the molecules align perpendicular to the field.15 Note that, in this work, the weak and stationary magnetic field employed may not fully align the molecules into monodomains.15c,d In a manner similar to its homologue species, Brij 56, the phase boundaries of the lyotropic liquid crystals formulated are affected by the nature and concentration of other species that may be added to dope the lyotropic liquid crystal framework.22 However, as in other work,15,22 the use of small concentrations of these for non-ionic surfactants, with salting-out electrolytes such as potassium chloride (in 0.1 M concentrations), tends to shift phase boundaries minimally, as evidenced through the Lα characteristics and textures observed through polarising microscopy for all mixtures employed in this work. Note that the nature of the Lα phase is strictly not a multistacked biphasic system – the micellar palisade layer (of estimated length15eca. 9.2 Å, and in which most aromatic-based dopants reside, as evidenced through spectrofluorimetry,23 likely due to unfavourable interactions between the liquid-like hydrocarbon micellar cores and aromatic rings), with microviscosities15 on the order of 80 cP, and local dielectric constants on the order of 25, cause subtle, but significant changes in pseudo-biphasic electron transfer kinetics, as discussed in detail by Fayer.24


4.2.2 Preliminary studies employing N-methylphenothiazine and Eu3+. 
Using Brij 30/H2O based lyotropic liquid crystals aligned in parallel with the electrodes as ordered, flexible, self-assembled frameworks to exploit the insights obtained from the simulations, we chose to employ N-methylphenothiazine (PMe, of width25 5 Å and length 12 Å) as our photoredox-active species. This pale green substance is insoluble in water (estimated n-octanol/H2O partition coefficient of26 1.07 × 104), but is known to partition between aqueous and organic phases as the pink, cation-radical form.26 Whilst the latter species absorbs27 green light (ca. 545 nm), to produce a powerful oxidising agent (in homogeneous solution),27 the reduced form absorbs violet light25 (ca. 350 nm), to form a short-lived25a (ca. 1 ns) singlet, which rapidly intersystem crosses to the triplet state, by virtue of the heavy atom, which is known to be a powerful reducing agent,25 at least in optically isotropic media, where it is known to reduce25a,b Eu3+ to Eu2+, and to reduce chloroform.25c–f Based on the literature data for the half-wave potential for chloroform reduction in 75% dioxane,28 this suggests that . We, accordingly, sought to examine whether photo-induced electron transfer between PMe (in the surfactant pseudophase) and Eu3+ (in the aqueous subphase) is possible within the Lα phase of Brij 30/H2O, using a cell of the typeITO | EuIIICl3(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITO
From an energy storage perspective, the slow self-exchange kinetics of EuII/EuIII in aqueous solutions (due to inner-sphere reorganisation energy, by virtue of a ca. 0.2 Å increase in the Eu–O bond lengths in going from Eu3+ to Eu2+, and an increase in the number of co-ordinated aquo ligands from 8 to ca. 9)18b,29 may be highly useful for photogalvanic cells, since, this allows for the inter-subphase electron transfer kinetics for discharge to be intrinsically slow, provided the Marcus cross-relation is valid at these interfaces.17
It is clear from Fig. 2a that significant photoelectrochemical effects are observed upon illumination of cells constructed from sandwiching this phase between two ITO plates, with an increase in the potential of the illuminated electrode with respect to the dark electrode, as expected for heterogeneous reduction of photochemically-generated PMe+• taking place at the light electrode. It was observed that the magnitude of this photovoltage varied with light intensity, as (data not shown). However, disappointingly, the overall change in the open circuit voltage is small (typically ∼45 mV), with also a small photovoltage of the illuminated electrode with respect to the dark electrode (ca. −0.21 V), in spite of the large difference between the formal electrode potentials (in acetonitrile;25a in aqueous acidic solution30). Although this indicates that this particular cell may not be suitable for pragmatic applications, it is noteworthy that the (1) the change in the cell emf as a result of illumination is rapid, reaching a pseudo-stationary state within 20 s, and (2) the open circuit decay of this photovoltage takes place very slowly, typically requiring over 5 min for the cell to return to its initial potential, even after merely 100 s of illumination, which is encouraging. It should be stressed here that the response observed in the presence of light may not be solely attributed to photo-induced electron transfer; Girault31 examined thermal effects at liquid | liquid interfaces, and observed the occurrence of small (∼20 mV), and negative emfs as Seebeck effects. Control experiments on our system in the absence of any other redox species apart from PMe, for cells of the typePt | KCl(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITOyielded only comparable small changes in open circuit cell potential (ca. 40 mV, Fig. 2b). However, illumination of the system causes the cell emf to decrease, and shows faster relaxation times cf.Fig. 2a. This opposing change in the direction of the illuminated open circuit cell voltage was also observed when oxygen was allowed to be present in the system together with PMe, that is using a control cell of the form,Pt | O2,KCl(aq)/O2,PMe(Brij 30) | ITOalbeit with smaller overall changes (data not shown). These results suggest that that thermal effects are not dominant in the data presented in Fig. 2a and b; we suggest that there is a photo-induced electron transfer process occurring, and speculate that, under the assumption that the surfactant subphase is primarily in contact with the ITO electrode, the data in Fig. 2a and b stem from two types of reactions, illustrated in Fig. 3. In the absence of a secondary redox couple (control experiments), given that only a small photovoltage develops, photochemically generated 3PMe* may donate an electron into the partially-filled conduction band of the ITO, since we estimate , noting that the workfunction for ITO is reported32 to be between 3.7–5.1 eV, typically 4.7 eV. The illuminated electrode then becomes negatively charged as a result of the development of this Dember voltage. We additionally note that since PMe is a micellar palisade resident, and the half apolar part of a Brij 30 bilayer is15e ∼10 Å, the long range electron transfer kinetics (attenuation constant33 β ∼1 Å−1) will be slower unless the molecule moves deeper into the surfactant subphase. Indeed, the extent of this can be controlled by the degree of ionic doping of the lyotropic phase.7 The second type of process, observed in Fig. 2a, is from the photo-induced electron transfer from 3PMe* to a redox-active species present within the micellar palisade layer, to afford the PMe+• cation radical which will likely partition between both surfactant and aqueous subphases,7a,26 and which can be reduced at the illuminated electrode, which then becomes positive. The consequences of this are (1) the partitioning causes an offset in the anticipated photovoltage according to the Nernst equation, and (2) such processes are not restricted to the layer closest to the illuminated electrode – there is the possibility of pseudophase | pseudophase electron transfer between photogenerated 3PMe* (in the surfactant subphase) and PMe+• (in the aqueous pseudophase), as explained elsewhere.7a Note that in both cases of Fig. 3, the discharge process when the light is turned off is simply the reverse process, with the source of the electrons for the reduction of the cation radical being either the electrode (for the first case), or through back reaction with the initially-reduced redox species (in the second case).
 Fig. 2  Variation of the open circuit voltage of several types of galvanic cells based on the Lα phase of Brij 30 in the presence of chopped light at 350 nm (bandwidth 30 nm), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2. The phase was doped with 0.1 mmol PMe and 0.1 mmol EuCl3 (a), or 0.2 mmol PMe (b), or (c) 0.4 mmol PMe, 0.4 mmol PMe+•Cl−, 40 μmol ZnCl2. The liquid crystals in panels (b) and (c) had the aqueous subphase doped with potassium chloride and had oxygen rigorously removed from the devices. The devices were constructed using an ITO illuminated electrode, and a dark electrode constructed from (a) ITO, (b) Pt and (c) Zn. The electrode separation was (a) 5.0 mm or (b, c) 1.0 mm. The arrow indicates the variation of the dark cell emf immediately prior to illumination. 
 Fig. 3  Cartoon illustrations of the development of a photo-Dember voltage (a), and a photogalvanic voltage (b) at the illuminated electrode. The aqueous subphase (23.1 Å) is smaller than the lipid bilayer15e (37.8 Å); 3PMe* is indicated by burgundy bananas, redox-species from the aqueous subphase are indicated by green spheres. The arrows representing light have been purposely drawn out of place to emphasise the photochemical electron transfer nature of the process; the red arrows indicate the electron flow pathways. 


4.2.3 Maximisation of the open circuit voltage. 
Recognising that the constructed cells are reasonably thick (ranging from ∼0.5–5.0 mm), so that light will be absorbed primarily by those layers close to the illuminated electrode, we chose to increase the measured experimental open circuit voltage by employing a sacrificial dark electrode. This allows the cell emf to be dominated by its potential, and suggests that the size of the non-Dember photovoltage should change with changing the metal of the dark electrode (and the nature of the Mn+ ions with which it exits in potential-determining equilibrium). Thus cells of the typeM | Mn+(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITOwere constructed for the cases where M = Zn (, Fig. 2c), Ag, Ni, or Al (, , , ESI 2†), and their voltage-time characteristics recorded under open circuit conditions in the presence of chopped light, as indicated in Fig. 2c, and in ESI 2.† It is apparent from these data that, in general, the more electropositive the metal, the larger the dark cell emf, and the greater the stationary photovoltage under illumination, with the zinc system reaching open circuit voltages over 1.0 V under illumination. It is notable that, with the exception of the silver system, the steady-state photovoltage developed is very much smaller than that anticipated through application of the Nernst expression. Accordingly, it is instructive to enquire as to what is the chemical nature of the species that is reduced through photo-induced electron transfer, specifically, whether photoreduction of the metal salt takes place within the micellar palisade layer. Whilst photoreduction of metal salts has been noted within the literature,34 we have been unable to visualise or identify metal particles within these systems that directly provide evidence of metal nucleation occurring at a pseudo-liquid | liquid interface or a liquid | liquid interface.16 Other work on the photoionisation of PMe in the presence of Ni2+ suggested that Ni+ was a product,25d although no evidence was obtained to verify its formation. Likewise, although Zn+ has been proposed as a reaction intermediate in a number of literature processes,35 no evidence has been given to support its existence. Whilst some of the data presented in Fig. 2c and ESI 2† were recorded in media that had not been degassed, the notion of dioxygen as electron acceptor from 3PMe* was ruled out since the change in the open circuit voltage upon illumination increases when oxygen is rigorously excluded from the system, as expected for oxygen quenching of excited states. Although these results then may be interpreted as suggesting that the mechanism of operation is not that proposed through liquid | liquid interfacial electron transfer, but rather through the redox participation of surfactant monomers15c (such as the reductive cleavage of the polyether36), this explanation does not account for why the voltage change for the nickel system is significantly greater than those observed for either the zinc or aluminium systems. However, in noting that both the PMe and the Mn+ ions will be present within the micellar palisade layer, together with two types of water (surfactant-bound, and ion-bound),7a and that the acid dissociation constant for the bulk aqua metal ions at 298 K are:37a Al3+ (pKa ∼ 5); Eu3+ (pKa ∼ 8.5); Zn2+ (pKa ∼ 9); Ni2+ (pKa ∼ 9.9); Ag+ (pKa ∼ 11), and that water-exchange kinetics (for the bulk aqua species) are:37b Al3+ (∼1 s−1); Ni2+ (∼104 s−1); Zn2+ (∼107 s−1), we suggest that the photo-induced electron transfer is from 3PMe* to the water of hydration of the metal ligand, to liberate H•within the micellar palisade layer, and ultimately H2.38 This then allows the following envisaged reactions to take place.

Near the light electrode:  

Within the micellar palisade layer:3PMe*(surf) + Mn+(OH2)x(aq) ⇄ PMe+•(surf) + Mn+(OH2)x-1(HO−)(aq) + H•(aq)H•(aq) → ½H2(aq)H2(aq) ⇄ H2(surf)PMe+•(surf) ⇄ PMe+•(aq)

At the light electrode:PMe+•(surf) + e− ⇄ PMe(surf)

At the dark electrode:1/nM(s) − e− ⇄ 1/nMn+(aq)
Whilst charge-transfer-to-solvent excitations are well known for ions such as Fe2+, Cr2+, Ce3+ and Eu2+, with such absorption bands typically observed only within the high energy UV region;39 it is only with Eu2+ that H2 production occurs with light of wavelengths above39 350 nm. We suggest that the nano-restricted and partially-desolvated state of the micellar palisade layer facilitates this; an account of the thermodynamics of electroless proton reduction in partially-desolvated states is given in ESI 3.† Thus, the worse performance of the aluminium system compared with the zinc system (even after Nernstian concentration effects are accounted) may be understood by the occurrence of polymerisation-type processes for the former case (as for nickel),40 coupled with the higher likelihood of a thin oxide layer being present on the metal electrode surface for reactive aluminium. Note that the alternative explanation25b invoking heavy atom quenching of 3PMe* does not allow for the observation of reduction at the illuminated electrode. We then interpret the smaller than expected value for the open circuit photovoltage as being due to the occurrence of partition kinetics of the PMe+• species within the multistacked layers, with little change in layer structure.


4.2.4 Performance characteristics of the Zn | Zn2+(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITO photogalvanic cell. 
Irrespective of the mechanism, it is pertinent to examine the efficiencies of these chemistries when operating within a device. Accordingly, we chose to examine the current–voltage characteristics of only the zinc and aluminium systems, since these furnished the biggest open circuit voltages. Typical results are illustrated in Fig. 4 and Table 1. It is clear from these data that, although the fill factors (the ratio of maximum power observed to the product of the cell emf and current at short circuit) for these systems are modest (∼15%), maximum power conversion efficiencies of up to ca. 2% are found for zinc systems doped with aqueous electrolyte and containing both PMe and PMe•+ which had been fabricated under conditions of rigorous O2 exclusion through argon degassing and the use of closed Ar environments. We suggest that the higher efficiencies of this system results from good electrical conductivities of both subphases – we also note the possibility of a photo-initiated self-exchange process allowing for a change in the partition equilibrium of PMe•+ between surfactant and aqueous subphases providing some current flow, although the extent of this partitioning process will be affected by counter ion transport within the psueodphases, since Cl− ions control the non-polarised Galvani potential drop across the pseudophase | pseudophase interface (which could give rise to an additional polarisation loss). It is noteworthy that the quoted fill factors and efficiency values remained unchanged, even after the cell had been electrically treated through a deep discharge regime (ca. 100 μA cm−2 – close to 60% of the short-circuit current density, vide infra), highlighting the self-reconstruction of the system, and suggesting that this approach has potential for utilisation as portable energy conversion sources.
 Fig. 4  Electrical characteristics (current-photovoltage (a), power-photovoltage (b)) of the cell in Fig. 2(c) under violet light (350 nm centre band, bandwidth 30 nm), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2. Open circles are the characteristics of a freshly-made device; filled symbols represent those after the device had been extensively discharged (see text). 
Table 1 Performance of various galvanic cells constructed using the Lα phase of Brij 30/H2O under 350 nm light (centre band, bandwidth 30 nm, intensity of 1.8 mW cm−2). Data presented were averaged over at least three different constructed cells




Conditions

aEoc/V

bjsc/μA cm−2

cEm/V

dPm/μW cm−2
Fill factor (%)
Maximum power conversion/%





a Cell emf.
b Current density of cell at short circuit.
c Cell potential difference at maximum power.
d Maximum power density.
e 
Not degassed refers to the non-exclusion of molecular oxygen from the experiment.
f 
KCl refers to the doping of the aqueous subphase with 0.1 M KCl.
g 
Degassed refers to the rigorous exclusion of oxygen from the experiment (see experimental section).





Zn | Lα (0.7 mmol PMe, 98 μmol ZnCl2, | ITO Not degassede
1.11
17.2
0.31
2.73
14.2
0.15


Zn | Lα (0.1 mmol PMe, 0.1 mmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Not degassede
0.99
48.6
0.26
6.90
14.3
0.37


Zn | Lα (0.7 mmol PMe, 95 μmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Degassedg
0.99
118.7
0.67
20.81
17.6
1.11


Zn | Lα (0.4 mmol PMe, 0.4 mmol PMeCl, 40 μmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Degassedg
1.19
172.3
0.61
34.4
16.3
1.83


Al | Lα (0.5 mmol PMe, 3.0 mmol AlCl3, KClf) | ITO Degassedg
0.85
264.8
0.26
18.5
8.21
0.99




We next examine the performance of these systems as electrically-rechargeable energy storage systems.

4.3 Lyotropic liquid crystals as frameworks for flexible, redox batteries
We only consider the case of the most efficient zinc system, owing to its superior performance as a photogalvanic cell. Considering only the masses of the electroactive components (PMe/PMe•+: 213.8 g mol−1; Zn2+/Zn: 65.4 g mol−1), the theoretical specific capacity of this system is 96.0 mA h g−1, which is comparable to that of the lead/acid accumulator (83.5 mA h g−1) and a lithium-ion battery comprising a lithiated graphite anode (LiC6) and a LiMn2O4 cathode (103.1 mA h g−1), based on the following processes:charge: positive electrode: PMe − e− ⇄ PMe+• and,negative electrode: ½Zn2+ + e− ⇄ ½Zn with,discharge: negative electrode: ½Zn − e− ⇄ ½Zn2+ and,positive electrode: PMe+• + e− ⇄ PMe, so that,  noting that the formal open circuit voltage of this system is +1.62 V. Fig. 5a illustrates chronopotentiograms corresponding to constant current electrical charging of the system at current densities of 51 μA cm−2 (∼30% of the current density under illuminated short-circuit discharge), with discharge at current densities ranging from 51 nA cm−2 to 102 μA cm−2. It is clear from these data that the charging potential (∼1.8 V) is close to that expected from the Nernst equation for the effective concentrations7 of species employed. We suggest that the occurrence of higher voltages under this mode of charge compared with the photochemical method is due to the breakdown of the lyotropic liquid crystal state during the charge and discharge processes by the electrical field; electroporation of lipid membranes is a well-known phenomenon.41 The shape of the discharge curves follows that anticipated with several regimes readily identifiable – initially the potential decreases rapidly due to capacitative discharing, with abrupt changes due to Ohmic losses only observable for high discharge rates, and which is followed by exhaustive consumption of the electroactive species within the compartments probed occurring after potentials of ca. 1.5 V, leading to the tail in the cell voltage to zero, especially under conditions of deep discharge. All experiments were undertaken with the charge time limited to 100 s (a constant capacity of 0.28 μA h). Given that zinc ions are the limiting reagent within this system, it is notable that this charging regime is only to ∼7% of the total capacity of the device (4.2 μA h). This clearly indicates that, as in the performance of the device under illumination, it is only a fraction of the liquid crystal that is involve in the potential-determining equilibria within these relatively thick (1.0 mm) devices. Discharge of the system to ca. 1.5 V did not cause a significant change in the capacity of the system (typically ∼25 nA h), leading voltage efficiencies (the ratio of cell voltage between charge and discharge cycles) of 85.9 ± 4.6% and power efficiencies (the ratio of power between discharge and charge processes) of ca. 83% for the above state of charge. Noting that this system is essentially static, these figures-of-merit are reasonable for redox batteries.42
 Fig. 5  (a) Chronopotentiograms illustrating the electrical characteristics of the cell in Fig. 2(c) under conditions of charge (the first 100 s at 50.9 μA cm−2), and discharge at various current densities: 127.3 (black), 101.9 (red), 50.9 (blue), 25.5 (green), 10.2 (cyan), 5.1 (magenta), 0.51 (yellow), 0.05 (orange) μA cm−2. (b) Ragone plots for the cell in Fig. 2(c): (i) normalisation using a total mass of electroactive species of 339.1 μg; (ii) re-normalisation of the data in (b)(i) using an effective mass of 38.1 μg; key: red circles correspond to dark charge (at 100 s), blue squares correspond to illuminated charge (to a steady open-circuit value, using 350 nm light (centre band, 30 nm bandwidth), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2. 
In order to compare the performance of this system with other battery technologies, Ragone plots were constructed through integrating the discharge curves between 1.5 and 1.8 V to estimate the energy density, determining the average power density through normalisation of the energy density by the discharge time, and are illustrated in Fig. 5b. Note that such plots are conventionally constructed in terms of specific energy and power densities, which relies on the masses of the electroactive species involved in the potential-determining equilibria, and ignoring the electrode mass;42a this convention was followed, in spite of the sacrificial electrode employed, since its activity is independent of its mass.43 However, this causes a quandary, given that less than 10% of the electroactive material engages in the Faradaic process within these thick systems. Accordingly, we illustrate the Ragone plots when normalised by the total mass of the electroactive species (339.1 μg) in Fig. 5b(i), with normalisation in Fig. 5b(ii) by 38.1 μg, a value obtained through consideration of a conservative estimate for a working electroactive diffusion layer equivalent to , where τ = 100 s, and D = 10−7 cm2 s−1, a value typical for redox active species within these types of system,7 assuming electroporation effects occur within the bilipid bilayers in the presence of an electrical field. The data all show a decrease in energy density at low loads (<1 W kg−1 for Fig. 5b(i); <10 W kg−1 for Fig. 5b(ii)), but appear to operate efficiently (no loss in energy density at between 0.1–1.0 W h kg−1) for power densities up to at least 0.1 kW kg−1 (Fig. 5b(i)) or 1.0 kW kg−1 (Fig. 5b(ii)). Also shown in the Ragone plots are the performance of the devices under electrical discharge when 350 nm (centre band) light is employed to recharge the system. It is clear that this mode of recharge is not as efficient as electrical recharge, likely as a result of fewer layer contributing to the cell response in both charge and discharge modes (there is little perturbation of the phase nanostructure): the devices appear to operate efficiently with comparable energy densities (0.1–1.0 W h kg−1) with lower power densities (1.0–100 W kg−1). Thus, bearing in mind the assumptions regarding the working mass of the device, considering the energy density of these micropower sources range from 10−2–100 W h kg−1, with power densities in the range 10−1–103 W kg−1, the systems, the devices fall into the case of a mid-ranging electrochemical capacitor (for which the energy density is typically in the range 10−2–102 W h kg−1, with power densities in the range 101–106 W kg−1).44 Accordingly, we estimate from these data that the specific pseudocapacitance of these devices are in the range 0.8–7.0 F g−1 (based on estimates of the mass as above), or around 1.4 mF cm−2, when the data are normalised with respect to the surface area of the exposed electrodes, with volumetric pseudocapacitances in the range 14–124 mF cm−3. Although these specifications indicate that the performance of these devices is much lower than hard-matter based systems, we recognise that they are merely cautious estimates of performance for our un-optimised system.
5. Conclusions
A proof-of-concept rechargeable energy device has been developed in this work, based on the use of a lyotropic liquid crystal framework, exploiting a photoactive redox probe as one redox compartment, and a sacrificial counter electrode. The system has been demonstrated to outperform conventional photogalvanic solar energy devices under monochromatic conditions, whilst additionally showing promise, under a conservatively-assumed estimate, for application as an electrochemical capacitor. The performance of our system is competitive with current state-of-the-art flexible electrical power systems42 and photo-rechargeable batteries.45 Moreover, this is the first report which utilises three-dimensional soft matter nanosystems as multifunctional frameworks for energy conversion and storage; we observe these materials to be complementary to the hard matter systems currently available,46 with potential to be adapted to afford flexible, self-assembling and self-healing micropower systems. Although we have not examined the performance of the device under simulated solar conditions, we note that the charging of the cell in the violet (which accounts for 2.7% of the solar light spectrum under AM 2.0 conditions9k), to form PMe+•, may be the cause of rapid discharge in the green (which accounts for 16% of AM 2.0 solar light9k), this may be offset by any kinetic asymmetry (due to the occurrence of partition equilibria) as a result of the heterogeneity built-into the system. Nevertheless, importantly, it is noteworthy that, at current prices, assuming all other things (electrodes, quantities of materials, costs of all non-photoactive materials) are comparable, the cost-normalised efficiency of Grätzel's dye-sensitised solar cell (maximally ca. 15% efficient under AM 1.5 conditions, with dye costs for the cheapest dye,47a N719, at £10561.60 for 50 g) provides over five times less solar-to-electrical power-conversion-efficiency-per-pound-sterling compared with the system developed in this work (maximally 2% efficient under monochromatic conditions of violet light that is about 50 times less bright than AM 1.5, with dye costs for N-methylphenothiazine at47b £94.10 for 25 g), suggesting our system has potential for pragmatic exploitation in cost-effective devices suitable for the personalised energy market. In this light, we are currently verifying the proposed operational mechanism, and investigating the possibility of improving both the electrical performance, and, in particular, the power conversion efficiency through the use of smaller volumes of reagent via miniaturised devices, whilst additionally engaging in studies to test the life-cycle capacity of these types of devices. We further note the versatility of these multi-junction systems to allow for doping of the framework with a plethora of dyes, thereby allowing their potential utilisation over panchromatic solar light.
Acknowledgements
We express gratitude to the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council for financing this work (grant number EP/G020833/1).
References
See, for example, P. Odru, Le Stockage de l'Energie, Dunod, Paris,  2010 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development/International Energy Agency, Solar Energy Perspectives, OECD Publishing, Paris,  December 6, 2011 accessed through http://www.oecdbookshop.org/on on December 31, 2011 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/38/13/46674411.pdf, accessed April 1, 2011.
See, for example,   J. C. Hindson, B. Ulgut, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham, B. Norder, A. Kotlewski and T. J. Dingermans, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 937 Search PubMed .
For a recent review, see,   F. Marken, J. D. Watkins and A. M. Collins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10036 Search PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10001 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) See, for example, Special Report: Personal Technology, The Economist,  2011, 401, October 8, 2011 Search PubMed; 
  (b) D. C. Gibbs, Green Manag. Int., 2009, 55, 63 Search PubMed .

  (a) See, for example   J. E. Halls, N. S. Lawrence and J. D. Wadhawan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 6509 Search PubMed  , and references cited therein; 
  (b) J. E. Halls and J. D. Wadhawan, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 997 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) L. A. Evans, M. J. Thomasson, S. M. Kelly and J. Wadhawan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8901 Search PubMed .

  (a) E. Rabinowitch, J. Chem. Phys., 1940, 8, 551 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Rabinowitch, J. Chem. Phys., 1940, 8, 560 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. G. Mathai and E. Rabinowitch, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 663 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Françkowiak and E. Rabinowitch, J. Phys. Chem., 1966, 70, 3012 Search PubMed .

  (a) M. D. Archer, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1975, 5, 17 CAS ; 
  (b) C.-T. Lin and N. Sutin, J. Phys. Chem., 1976, 80, 97 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. J. Albery and M. D. Archer, Electrochim. Acta, 1976, 21, 1155 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) W. J. Albery and M. D. Archer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 688 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) W. J. Albery and M. D. Archer, Nature, 1977, 270, 399 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) W. J. Albery and M. D. Archer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 86, 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) W. J. Albery and M. D. Archer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 86, 19 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) W. J. Albery and A. W. Foulds, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 41 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) 
            M. D. Archer and M. I. C. Ferreira, in Photochemical Conversion and Storage of Solar Energy, ed. J. Connoly, Academic Press, San Diego,  1980, p. 201 Search PubMed ; 
  (j) W. J. Albery, Acc. Chem. Res., 1982, 15, 142 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) 
            M. D. Archer, Specialist Periodical Reports on Photochemistry,  1995, volume 6, The Chemical Society, London, p.739 Search PubMed .

  (a) R. Gomer, Electrochim. Acta, 1975, 20, 13 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) W. D. K. Clark and J. A. Eckert, Sol. Energy, 1975, 17, 147 CrossRef ; 
  (c) D. E. Hall, J. A. Eckert, N. N. Lichtin and P. D. Wildes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1705 CAS ; 
  (d) P. D. Wildes and N. N. Lichtin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6568 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. C. M. Brokken-Zijp and M. S. de Groot, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1980, 76, 1 CrossRef ; 
  (f) J. C. M. Brokken-Zijp, M. S. de Groot and P. A. J. M. Hendriks, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1981, 81, 129 Search PubMed .

  (a) A. K. Jana, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 132, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. R. Genwa and M. Genwa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 522 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) K. R. Genwa and N. C. Khatri, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 1024 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) K. M. Gangotri and M. K. Bhimwal, Int. J. Energy Res., 2011, 35, 545 Search PubMed .

  (a) For systems developed in the solid state, see   H. Hada, K. Takaoka, M. Saikawa and Y. Yonezawa, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1981, 54, 1640 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Yonezawa, M. Okai, M. Ishino and H. Hada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1983, 56, 2873 CAS ; 
  (c) M. Sharon, P. Veluchamy, C. Natarajan and D. Kumar, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 1107 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            S. Licht, in S. Licht, A. J. Bard, M. Stratmann (ed.), Encyclopædia of Electrochemistry,  2002, volume 6, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, p.317 Search PubMed .

  (a) A. G. Volkov, M. I. Gugeshashvili and D. W. Deamer, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2849 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            O. S. Ksenzhek and A. G. Volkov, Plant Energetics, Academic Press, San Diego,  1998 Search PubMed .

  (a) D. J. Fermín, H. D. Duong, Z. Ding, P. F. Brevet and H. H. Girault, Electrochem. Commun., 1999, 1, 29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. J. Fermín, H. D. Duong, Z. Ding, P. F. Brevet and H. H. Girault, J. Phys. Chem., 1999, 121, 10203 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) R. Lahtinen, D. J. Fermín, K. Kontturi and H. H. Girault, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 483, 81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Jensen, J. J. Kakkassery, H. Nagatani, D. J. Fermín and H. H. Girault, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10943 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. Samec, N. Eugster, D. J. Fermín and H. H. Girault, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 577, 323 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. A. Méndez, R. Partovi-Nia, I. Hatay, B. Su, P.-Y. Ge, A. Olaya, N. Younan, M. Hojeij and H. H. Girault, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15163 RSC .

  (a) D. J. Mitchell, G. J. T. Tiddy, L. Waring, T. Bostock and M. P. McDonald, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 975 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Dong and J. Hao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4978 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. S. Poulos, D. Constantin, P. Davidson, M. Impéror, B. Pansu, P. Panine, L. Nicole and C. Sanchez, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6285 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. S. Poulos, D. Constantin, P. Davidson, M. Impéror and B. Pansu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 220 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) W. Zhuang, X. Chen, J. Cai, G. Zhang and H. Qiu, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 318, 175 Search PubMed .

          J. E. Halls and J. D. Wadhawan, manuscript in preparation.

  (a) M. Tsionsky, A. J. Bard and M. V. Mirkin, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17881 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Tsionsky, A. J. Bard and M. V. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10785 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. L. Barker, P. R. Unwin, S. Amemiya, J. Zhou and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7260 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) F. Li, A. L. Whitworth and P. R. Unwin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 602, 70 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. Ding, D. J. Fermín, P.-F. Brevet and H. H. Girault, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 458, 139 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) N. Eugster, D. J. Fermín and H. H. Girault, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3428 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) P. Sun, F. Li, Y. Chen, M. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Gao and Y. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9600 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Blumberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16065 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. C. Henstridge, Y. Wang, J. G. Limon-Petersen, E. Laborda and R. G. Compton, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 517, 29 Search PubMed .
H. L. T. Ho and R. A. W. Dryfe, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11318 RSC .

Colloid Particles at Liquid Interfaces, ed. B. P. Binks and T. S. Horozov, Cambridge University Press,  2006 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
Molecular Design of Electrode Surfaces, ed. R. W. Murray, Wiley, New York,  1992 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. N. Blauch and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 3323 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett, B. Gollas, S. Guerin and J. Marwan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 3835 RSC .
M. Kumbhaka, T. Goel, T. Mukherjee and H. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14168 Search PubMed .
H. L. Tavernier, F. Laine and M. D. Fayer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 8944 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Moroi, A. M. Braun and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 567 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Moroi, P. Infelta and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 573 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Chang, R. Koodali, R. M. Krishna and L. Kevan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5579 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) V. Kurshev, A. M. Prakash, R. M. Krishna and L. Kevan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2000, 34, 9 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Y. Bae, O.-H. Park, J.-I. Jung, K. T. Ranjit and R.-S. Bae, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 67, 265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. Xiang and L. Kevan, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 860 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Georges and A. Berthold, Electrochim. Acta, 1983, 28, 735 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Minero, E. Pramauro, E. Pellzzetti and D. Melsel, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 399 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Morol, H. Noma and R. Matuura, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 872 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. J. Horn, A. Watson, M. Lewis, T. McCreedy and J. D. Wadhawan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1384 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J.-C. Moutet and G. Reverdy, Tetrahedron Lett., 1979, 20, 2389 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-C. Moutet and G. Reverdy, Nouv. J. Chim., 1983, 7, 105 Search PubMed .
M.v. Stackelberg and W. Stracke, Z. Elektrochem., 1949, 53, 118 Search PubMed .

  (a) See, for example,   E. L. Yee, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Weaver, Inorg. Chem., 1983, 22, 3465 Search PubMed  , and references cited therein; 
  (b) N. Sabbatini, S. Dellonte, A. Bonazzi, M. Ciao and V. Balzani, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 1738 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. L. Yee, R. J. Cave, K. L. Guyer, P. D. Tyma and M. J. Weaver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 1131 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Elmsley, The Elements, 2nd edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1991 Search PubMed .
H. H. Girault, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2147 RSC .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, E. Maisonhaute, B. Schollhorn and J. Wadhawan, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1321 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. K. Oster and G. Oster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1959, 81, 5543 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Harada and H. Einaga, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2371 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) See, for example,   H. Wan, S. Li, T. A. Konovalova, Y. Zhou, J. S. Thrasher, D. A. Dixon and S. C. Street, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5358 Search PubMed  , and references cited therein.

          R. J. Brodd and J. Werth, in Standard Potentials in Aqueous Solution, ed. A. J. Bard, R. Parsons and J. Jordan, IUPAC, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1985, p. 249 Search PubMed .

          J. March, Advanced Organic Chemistry, 4th edn, Wiley, New York,  1992, p. 443 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            D. D. Perrin, Dissociation Constants of Inorganic Acids and Bases in Aqueous Solution, IUPAC, Butterworths, London,  1969 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Eigen, Pure Appl. Chem., 1963, 6, 97 CAS .

  (a) E. Rabinowitch, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1942, 14, 112 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. J. Marcus, Science, 1956, 123, 399 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) F. S. Dainton and D. G. L. James, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 649 RSC .

  (a) D. D. Davis, K. L. Stevenson and G. K. King, Inorg. Chem., 1977, 16, 670 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. R. Darwent, P. Douglas, A. Harriman, G. Porter and M.-C. Richoux, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1982, 44, 83 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Burgess, Ions in Solution, Horwood, Chichester,  1999, p. 69 Search PubMed .
See, for example, T. Hianik, in Bioelectrochemistry, ed. P. N. Bartlett, Wiley,  2008, p. 87 Search PubMed .

  (a) H.-K. Song and G. T. R. Palmore, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1764 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Nyström, A. Razaq, M. Strømme, L. Nyholm and A. Mihranyan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3635 CrossRef .
C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716 CrossRef CAS .
See, for example,   T. Nguyen and R. F. Savinell, Interface, 2010, 19, 54 Search PubMed .

  (a) A. K. Pandey, P. C. Deakin, R. D. Jansen-van Vuuren, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3954 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            P. Liu, H. X. Yang, X. P. Ai, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Electrochem. Commun., in press:  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2011.11.035.
D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long, J. C. Lytle, A. E. Fischer, C. P. Rhodes, T. M. McEvoy, M. E. Bourg and A. M. Lubers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226 RSC .

  (a) 
            http://www.dyesol.com/, accessed October 24, 2011; 
  (b) 
            http://www.alfa.com/, accessed October 24, 2011.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03169h‡ Present address: Department of Chemistry, The University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United KingdomThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
Modern lifestyle requirements for 24/7 information/communication accessibility have encouraged massive developments in mobile computing devices such as smartphones, tablets, etc. – the personalised technology revolution. These systems require efficient, readily rechargeable and lightweight power sources capable of being moulded into whichever spatial geometry and volume are required for the pragmatic and ergonomic technology (typical energy consumption rates between μW h day−1 and mW h day−1 [G. Dennler et al., Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 947], with, for example, wireless videostreaming on a laptop consuming ~35 W, calling on a mobile costing 3 W, with texting costing 0.4 W [P. Somavat and V. Namboodiri, J. Green Eng., 2011, 1, 447]). The integration of solar-rechargeable batteries (such as liquid photogalvanic cells) into such devices increases their portability through reducing dependence on accessible shore power. However, although photogalvanic cells can theoretically afford 18% solar-to-electrical power-conversion efficiency, most systems struggle to approach even 0.5% conversion. Herein, we employ lamellar liquid crystals consisting of alternating hydrophobic/hydrophilic nanometric strata as a framework medium for liquid photogalvanic cells. The short transport pathlengths and high reagent solubility, coupled with the use of a sacrificial counterelectrode, empower such engineered devices to overcome limitations of conventional systems; our cell is over five times more solar-to-electrical-power-conversion-efficient-per-pound-sterling than dye-sensitised photovoltaic solar cells, whilst being an electrochemical capacitor of high voltage and power efficiency.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Cartoon of the normal lamellar (Lα) lyotropic liquid crystal phase, sandwiched between two electrodes. (b) Exploded view illustration of a biphasic battery in which photo-induced electron transfer occurs only at the interface between two immiscible electrolyte systems. Note the electrodes have been cut to reveal the two liquids. The illuminated electrode has potential EL; the potential of the dark electrode is ED.	 
Dark electrode | D,C (phase β) | B,A (phase α) | Light electrode
electrode1 | liquid1 | liquid2 |… | liquidn-1 | liquidn | electrode2
ITO | EuIIICl3(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITO
Pt | KCl(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITO
Pt | O2,KCl(aq)/O2,PMe(Brij 30) | ITO

 	Fig. 2  Variation of the open circuit voltage of several types of galvanic cells based on the Lα phase of Brij 30 in the presence of chopped light at 350 nm (bandwidth 30 nm), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2. The phase was doped with 0.1 mmol PMe and 0.1 mmol EuCl3 (a), or 0.2 mmol PMe (b), or (c) 0.4 mmol PMe, 0.4 mmol PMe+•Cl−, 40 μmol ZnCl2. The liquid crystals in panels (b) and (c) had the aqueous subphase doped with potassium chloride and had oxygen rigorously removed from the devices. The devices were constructed using an ITO illuminated electrode, and a dark electrode constructed from (a) ITO, (b) Pt and (c) Zn. The electrode separation was (a) 5.0 mm or (b, c) 1.0 mm. The arrow indicates the variation of the dark cell emf immediately prior to illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cartoon illustrations of the development of a photo-Dember voltage (a), and a photogalvanic voltage (b) at the illuminated electrode. The aqueous subphase (23.1 Å) is smaller than the lipid bilayer15e (37.8 Å); 3PMe* is indicated by burgundy bananas, redox-species from the aqueous subphase are indicated by green spheres. The arrows representing light have been purposely drawn out of place to emphasise the photochemical electron transfer nature of the process; the red arrows indicate the electron flow pathways.	 
M | Mn+(aq)/PMe(Brij 30) | ITO

 		 
3PMe*(surf) + Mn+(OH2)x(aq) ⇄ PMe+•(surf) + Mn+(OH2)x-1(HO−)(aq) + H•(aq)
H•(aq) → ½H2(aq)
H2(aq) ⇄ H2(surf)
PMe+•(surf) ⇄ PMe+•(aq)
PMe+•(surf) + e− ⇄ PMe(surf)
1/nM(s) − e− ⇄ 1/nMn+(aq)

 	Fig. 4  Electrical characteristics (current-photovoltage (a), power-photovoltage (b)) of the cell in Fig. 2(c) under violet light (350 nm centre band, bandwidth 30 nm), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2. Open circles are the characteristics of a freshly-made device; filled symbols represent those after the device had been extensively discharged (see text).	 


Zn | Lα (0.7 mmol PMe, 98 μmol ZnCl2, | ITO Not degassede	1.11	17.2	0.31	2.73	14.2	0.15
Zn | Lα (0.1 mmol PMe, 0.1 mmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Not degassede	0.99	48.6	0.26	6.90	14.3	0.37
Zn | Lα (0.7 mmol PMe, 95 μmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Degassedg	0.99	118.7	0.67	20.81	17.6	1.11
Zn | Lα (0.4 mmol PMe, 0.4 mmol PMeCl, 40 μmol ZnCl2, KClf) | ITO Degassedg	1.19	172.3	0.61	34.4	16.3	1.83
Al | Lα (0.5 mmol PMe, 3.0 mmol AlCl3, KClf) | ITO Degassedg	0.85	264.8	0.26	18.5	8.21	0.99
charge: 
positive electrode
: PMe − e
−
 ⇄ PMe
+•
 and,
negative electrode
: ½Zn
2+
 + e
−
 ⇄ ½Zn with,
discharge: 
negative electrode
: ½Zn − e
−
 ⇄ ½Zn
2+
 and,
positive electrode
: PMe
+•
 + e
−
 ⇄ PMe, so that,

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chronopotentiograms illustrating the electrical characteristics of the cell in Fig. 2(c) under conditions of charge (the first 100 s at 50.9 μA cm−2), and discharge at various current densities: 127.3 (black), 101.9 (red), 50.9 (blue), 25.5 (green), 10.2 (cyan), 5.1 (magenta), 0.51 (yellow), 0.05 (orange) μA cm−2. (b) Ragone plots for the cell in Fig. 2(c): (i) normalisation using a total mass of electroactive species of 339.1 μg; (ii) re-normalisation of the data in (b)(i) using an effective mass of 38.1 μg; key: red circles correspond to dark charge (at 100 s), blue squares correspond to illuminated charge (to a steady open-circuit value, using 350 nm light (centre band, 30 nm bandwidth), of intensity 1.8 mW cm−2.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03169h
‡ Present address: Department of Chemistry, The University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
