Over 28% efficiency perovskite/Cu(InGa)Se 2 tandem solar cells: highly efficient sub-cells and their bandgap matching   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00869J View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00869J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article Over 28% efficiency perovskite/Cu(InGa)Se2 tandem solar cells: highly efficient sub-cells and their bandgap matching†
Xinxing Liu‡
a, 
Junjun Zhang‡a, 
Liting Tang‡a, 
Junbo Gong‡*a, 
Wang Lia, 
Zengyang Maa, 
Zexin Tua, 
Yanyan Lia, 
Ruiming Lia, 
Xuzhi Hua, 
Chen Shena, 
He Wangb, 
Zhiping Wanga, 
Qianqian Lina, 
Guojia Fanga, 
Sheng Wanga, 
Chang Liua, 
Zengming Zhangb, 
Jianmin Li*a and 
Xudong Xiao*a
aSchool of Physics and Technology, and Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of Ministry of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: gongjunbo@whu.edu.cn; ljmphy@whu.edu.cn; xdxiao@whu.edu.cn
bThe Center for Physical Experiments, School of Physics Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
Received 
19th March 2023
, Accepted 26th June 2023First published on 28th June 2023AbstractThe perovskite/Cu(InGa)Se2 (PSC/CIGS) tandem configuration is an attractive way to achieve an ultra-high efficiency and cost-effective all-thin-film solar cell. However, the imbalanced efficiencies of the constituent sub-cells and the bandgap mismatch generally limit the achieved overall power conversion efficiency (PCE). Herein, by combining Cl bulk incorporation and piperazinium iodide (PDI) surface treatment for the CsFAPb(IBr)3 system, we have successfully reduced the bulk and interface defect densities and greatly enhanced the open-circuit voltage and thus the PCE of the 1.67 eV-bandgap PSCs. The accompanied high activation energy of ion migration has also led to high photostability with suppressed phase segregation. By integrating a highly efficient and highly infrared transparent 1.67 eV PSC top cell with various bandgap CIGS solar cells of comparable efficiency, we have demonstrated that a 1.04 eV CIGS bottom cell achieved ideal bandgap matching and realized a four-terminal tandem cell with a calculated tandem efficiency of 28.4%, currently the highest for PSC/CIGS tandem cells. The PSC device showed no degradation after 600 h of operation at 50 °C and was attenuated by only ∼10% at 1300 h. Moreover, the achieved well-matched Jsc between top and bottom sub-cells and the adopted inverted-PSC configuration have paved the way for producing highly efficient monolithic two-terminal PSC/CIGS tandem devices in the near future.

Broader context
Tandem solar cells are drawing intensive attention due to their potential to overcome the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit. All-thin-film perovskite/Cu(InGa)Se2 (PSC/CIGS) tandem solar cells have unique advantages compared to Si based tandem solar cells as they can be manufactured on thin, lightweight, and flexible substrates in a cost-effective manner, and are a good candidate in space and indoor applications. In this work, by combining a 1.67 eV PSC top sub-cell with a bandgap nearly-matched 1.04 eV-CIGS bottom sub-cell, we have successfully realized the highest tandem efficiency of 28.4% for PSC/CIGS tandem cells. The bandgap matching close to the best theoretical values for double junction tandem solar cells was realized. The PSC device showed no degradation after 600 h of operation at 50 °C and dropped by only ∼10% at 1300 h. This inverted configuration used for wide-bandgap PSCs and the nearly perfect photocurrent density matching realized in this study pave the way for the application of thin film tandem solar cells.

The last two decades have witnessed rapid advances in both laboratory development and field deployment of photovoltaic technology. However, as the record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single junction crystalline Si (c-Si) solar cells (26.7%),1 polycrystalline thin-film Cu(InGa)Se2 (CIGS) solar cells (23.4%),2 and perovskite solar cells (PSC, 25.7%)3 approaches close to the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit (∼33%),4 new technology routes with PCE potentially beyond the S–Q limit are in demand. Among various possibilities, a double junction tandem solar cell, which may offer a theoretical PCE limit of 46% when one ideal top sub-cell with a wide bandgap of ∼1.61 eV and another ideal bottom sub-cell with a narrow bandgap of ∼0.96 eV are appropriately stacked together, is the simplest solution and has become an emergent research frontier of next generation photovoltaic technology.5,6
There are various combinations of materials that can be used for tandem solar cells. While tandem solar cells made of III–V compound semiconductors have demonstrated a PCE higher than the single-junction S–Q limit despite the costly epitaxial growth technology and the expensive substrate, the bandgap tunability of the recent halide perovskite material made it fit well with c-Si (Eg ∼ 1.12 eV) and CIGS (Eg ∼ 1.02–1.68 eV) in double junction tandem solar cell configurations. The thin film technology employed by both PSC and CIGS solar cells has provided a further advantage to the PSC/CIGS tandem solar cells and can offer the possibility of using roll-to-roll processing to produce flexible and light weight photovoltaic devices. Moreover, their common properties such as good radiation resistance and superior weak-light performance make the PSC/CIGS tandem solar cell a good candidate in space and indoor applications.
There exist several studies on PSC/CIGS tandem cells, with configuration either in the four-terminal (4-T) form, which offers the freedom of removing current matching between sub-cells, or in the two-terminal (2-T) form, which requires current matching between sub-cells. Despite the successful demonstration of the concept of both types of devices, previous studies have suffered from a few problems: (i) the used single junction sub-cells normally do not have their respective PCE optimized, (ii) the top PSC cell blocks a significant amount of infrared light in the solar spectrum by its transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode, and (iii) the bandgaps are not collaboratively optimized. For example, in the 4-T configuration, Bailie et al. in 2015 first successfully demonstrated a PSC/CIGS tandem solar cell with a 12.7% PCE semi-transparent PSC based on silver nanowire contact.7 Shen et al. in 2018 showed a tandem solar cell of 23.9% efficiency using a semi-transparent PSC of ∼1.62 eV bandgap with 18.1% efficiency and a CIGS solar cell of ∼1.16 eV bandgap with 16.5% efficiency.8 By coupling a semi-transparent 1.68 eV perovskite top cell with a 1.12 eV CIGS bottom cell, Kim et al. in 2019 obtained 25.9% efficiency.9 In the two record setting reports of 2-T configuration, Han et al. in 2018 used a ∼1.59 eV perovskite top cell and a ∼1.02 eV CIGS bottom cell to realize a 22.43% tandem cell,10 Jošt et al. in 2022 used a 1.68 eV perovskite top cell and a 1.10 eV CIGS bottom cell to realize a 24.2% tandem cell.11 Paetzold et al. very recently used a 1.59 eV perovskite top cell and a 1.03 eV CIGS bottom cell to realize a 24.9% tandem cell.12 Aside from fabrication quality issues which have limited the PCEs of the sub-cells, all the above works have suffered significantly from unmatched current densities between top and bottom sub-cells either due to none collaboratively matched bandgaps or due to poor infrared transmittance of the top sub-cell.
In this work, we set to first advance the performance of individual single junction solar cells and then combine them into 4-T configuration to examine the effect of bandgap matching and infrared transmittance. By combining bulk Cl substitution and surface piperazinium diiodide (PDI) treatment for a wide bandgap CsFAPb(IBrCl)3 perovskite layer, we have realized a distinct enhancement in the PCE of PSCs, as well as good stability against light-induced phase segregation. By varying the In and Ga compositions in the CIGS absorber layer, we have also fabricated a few highly efficient CIGS cells with various bandgaps but comparable PCEs. Even for 4-T tandem configuration, it is demonstrated that the bandgap matching by various CIGS sub-cells to the same semi-transparent PSC top cell can provide an enhancement of up to ∼0.9% absolute efficiency. By replacing indium tin oxide (ITO) with indium zinc oxide (IZO) as the TCO electrode for a semi-transparent PSC sub-cell, we have made better use of infrared light and brought an additional enhancement of 0.6% absolute efficiency. With the above optimized semi-transparent top cell on a CIGS bottom cell with a matched bandgap, we have successfully boosted the calculated tandem efficiency of PSC/CIGS to 28.4%, the highest for its kind up to the present. Moreover, the achieved comparable short circuit current densities between top and bottom sub-cells and the adopted inverted-PSC structure in this work would pave the way for direct monolithic growth of PSCs on CIGS bottom cells with high conversion efficiency in the near future.
Highly efficient PSCs with combined bulk Cl incorporation and surface PDI treatment
To obtain highly-efficient PSC/CIGS tandem solar cells, we first concentrated on the fabrication of wide bandgap PSC solar cells. The PSC adopted here featured a p–i–n structure consisting of ITO/Poly-TPD/Perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag. The thickness of Poly-TPD, C60, BCP and Ag was around 10 nm, 20 nm, 6 nm and 100 nm, respectively. The perovskite films were prepared by spin coating with a one-step precursor solution in a DMF/DMSO mixed solvent. The optimization of perovskite films to enhance the device performance was the focus of this part of study. Inspired by two recent advances in perovskite solar cells, one about effective surface defect passivation by piperazinium iodide (PI, C4H11IN2) or piperazinium diiodide (PDI, C4H12I2N2) for normal bandgap perovskites,13 the other about triple halide perovskite alloys with a small amount of Cl to realize a high PCE with suppressed phase segregation,14 we in this study adopted a bandgap ∼1.67 eV triple halide perovskite material system CsFAPb(IBrCl)3, free from the MA group to reduce thermal degradation.15–17 To demonstrate the specific roles of PDI surface treatment and Cl bulk incorporation (shown in Fig. 1a), we have fabricated four groups of samples. We denoted FA0.78Cs0.22Pb(I0.80Br0.20)3 without Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment as the Control sample, FA0.78Cs0.22Pb(I0.80Br0.20)3 with only PDI treatment as PDI, Cl incorporated perovskite FA0.78Cs0.22Pb(I0.82Br0.15Cl0.03)3 as Cl, and FA0.78Cs0.22Pb(I0.82Br0.15Cl0.03)3 with PDI treatment as Cl + PDI. The reason that we only included the PDI case in the presentation was that the surface defect passivation effect of PI on the Cl incorporated wide bandgap FA0.78Cs0.22Pb(I0.82Br0.15Cl0.03)3 layer was found to be comparable but slightly inferior to that of PDI, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Effects of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (a) Schematic diagram of the Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (b) Typical J–V curves with reverse voltage scan. (c) The J–V curve of the best Cl + PDI sample with both forward and reverse scans. (d–g) Statistical boxplot of PCE (d), Voc (e), Jsc (f) and FF (g) for the four groups of PSC samples. The mean value, maximum and minimum values, and 25–75% region of data were represented by the open circle, top and bottom bars, and rectangle, respectively. About 20 devices are used for the statistics for each group. 
A surprising phenomenon was observed with the above three types of treatments, out of which the best device performance resulted from the synergetic effect of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. In Fig. 1b, the typical photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the above four groups of PSC devices were compared. It was shown that the Cl sample made a tiny improvement from the Control sample despite the change in compositions which led to a slightly smaller bandgap (Fig. S1e and f, ESI†); the PDI sample increased the open circuit voltage (Voc) by ∼30 mV but brought an obvious and strong negative effect on the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), in strong contrast to the previous study13 on a normal bandgap (∼1.50 eV) perovskite system for which the surface PDI treatment enabled an increase of ∼70 mV in open circuit voltage Voc but a practically unchanged short circuit current density Jsc. Interestingly and unexpectedly, compared to the Control sample, the Cl + PDI sample with both Cl incorporation and PDI treatment showed a prominent performance improvement, with an increase of ∼70 mV in Voc and an increase of ∼2% in fill factor (FF). The best device in the Cl + PDI group achieved a PCE of 20.57% with negligible hysteresis as shown in Fig. 1c, which exhibited a Voc of ∼1.19 V, a Jsc of ∼21.56 mA cm−2, and a FF of ∼79.86%.
The above devices showed good repeatability of photovoltaic performance, as revealed by the statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters for a large number of devices in Fig. 1d–g, where the statistics of PCE, Jsc, Voc, and FF of the four groups of PSC devices were displayed respectively. Compared to the Control group, the Cl bulk incorporation alone into the perovskite absorber layer induced a slight increase of Voc by about 15 mV without much sacrifice of other parameters and eventually led to the slightly increased PCE from ∼18.2% to ∼18.4%. Using PDI surface treatment alone increased the Voc by about 30 mV but reduced the Jsc by as much as about 2 mA cm−2 and deteriorated FF by ∼5% in absolute, resulting in a reduced PCE from ∼18.2% to ∼16.0%. The surprising synergistic effect when using combined Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment in the perovskite precursor was evident in the markedly improved device characteristics. The average PCE in this group was increased remarkably from ∼18.2% to ∼20.0%, dominated by the large Voc increase of ∼70 mV. The detailed synergistic mechanism of both Cl and PDI on film quality and device performance compared to PDI alone is discussed in Note 5 (ESI†). Strikingly, this increase of Voc was found not even related to the change of bandgap. As depicted in Fig. S1e and f (ESI†), the EQE spectra of the representative devices and the absorption spectra of the representative perovskite films of these four groups indicated that neither PDI treatment nor Cl incorporation caused a definitive blue shift of the onset of absorption in the infrared region; in fact, a slight red shift in the bandgap by as much as ∼10 meV was observed. Here, the slightly reduced bandgap was contributed from the combined effect of the replacement of 5% Br by 2% I and 3% Cl. Nevertheless, this little change in bandgap did not contribute to a large effect in Voc or Jsc of the devices.
Defect analysis and mechanism of Voc increase
Despite the negative effect on Jsc by PDI surface treatment whose origin is explained in Note 5 (ESI†), the performance improvement by Cl incorporation and PDI surface treatment mainly appeared in the Voc increase. To understand how the PDI treatment, Cl incorporation, and combination of Cl incorporation and PDI treatment resulted in the observed changes in device performance of the wide-bandgap PSCs, several structural and optoelectronic studies were conducted. Fig. S2 (ESI†) compared the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the above four groups of perovskite films. It seemed that neither the PDI treatment nor the Cl incorporation made much difference to the surface morphology, whereas the combination of them seemingly increased the grain size slightly. Therefore, microscopic origins of device performance different from morphology must be sought.
Bulk and interface defects are normally responsible for the carrier recombination and thus the device performance. To directly reveal the defect density and their spatial distribution, capacitance–voltage (C–V) and drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) measurements were conducted on the four groups of perovskite devices. In general, the C–V measurements usually unveil charge density NCV from free carriers, bulk and interfacial defects, while the DLCP measured charge density NDL is only sensitive to free carriers and bulk defects. To avoid complication by ion movement of perovskite itself,18,19 the above measurements were carried out at 10 kHz frequency at which only the electronic charge states of defects at room temperature could be activated. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the alloying of Cl in the perovskite films resulted in a decrease of the bulk defect concentration from (3.1 ± 0.2) × 1015 cm−3 to (1.9 ± 0.4) × 1015 cm−3 and the PDI surface treatment clearly reduced the near surface NCV of PDI and Cl + PDI samples from that of Control and Cl by almost one order of magnitude, directly revealing a good suppression effect by Cl incorporation on bulk defects and by PDI on interface defects.
 Fig. 2  Defect passivation by Cl incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (a and b) Spatial distribution of the density of dopants and charge traps measured respectively by the DLCP and C–V method for the four groups of perovskite films. (c) Photoconductivity transients measured by TRMC for the four groups of perovskite films. (d) TRPL spectra of the four groups of perovskite films. (e) SCLC data measured for the four groups of perovskite films in the glass-ITO/SnO2/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag structure. (f) Voc as a function of illumination intensity for the four groups of perovskite solar cell devices. 
To semi-quantitatively evaluate the effect of bulk and interface defects on carrier recombination, further investigation by time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC), time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), and confocal photoluminescence (PL) mappings were applied. Fig. 2c compared the typical photoconductivity transients measured by TRMC with an excitation intensity of ∼0.2 μJ cm−2 absorbed photon flux for the four groups of films. The microwave data were typically plotted as the yield-mobility product ΦΣμ, which usually could be treated as a measure of the carrier mobility. It was shown that in the case of Cl incorporation alone, the lifetime increased from 492 ± 30 ns to 765 ± 40 ns and the charge-carrier mobility improved from 3.0 ± 0.1 to 7.1 ± 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, revealing a bulk defect suppression by Cl incorporation. Once combined with the PDI surface treatment, the lifetime was measured as 1043 ± 20 ns and the charge-carrier mobility was 7.9 ± 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. The similar lifetime and carrier mobility in the film with Cl incorporation with or without PDI surface treatment was consistent with the fact that the TRMC measurement was only sensitive to the bulk properties of materials. For the case with PDI treatment alone, the lifetime decreased from 492 ± 30 ns to 326 ± 40 ns and the charge-carrier mobility reduced from 3.0 ± 0.1 to 1.8 ± 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, owing to a peculiar effect consistent with the observed reduced Jsc as shown in Fig. 1 which was discussed in Note 5 (ESI†).
The PL decay process was sensitive to both interface defects and bulk defects. It consisted of a carrier recombination process in the bulk region, as characterized by the slow decay lifetime τ2, and a carrier recombination process at the interface, as characterized by the fast lifetime τ1.20 In Fig. 2d, the measured TRPL spectra for perovskite films of the four groups were plotted. A bi-exponential decay formula was used to analyze the data and the two decay time constants and the corresponding signal weights are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The fact that the slow lifetime τ2 of Cl and Cl + PDI samples was obviously longer than that of Control and PDI samples implied that Cl incorporation alone could reduce the bulk defect density in the perovskite film and thus suppress the non-radiative recombination therein,21 consistent with the above TRMC measurements. Interestingly, both PDI treatment and Cl incorporation could prolong the fast lifetime τ1, and their combination would significantly increase this τ1 by ∼2 times against the Control sample, revealing a synergetic effect of strong suppression on the surface non-radiative recombination by the combination of Cl incorporation and PDI treatment.
Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) was also conducted to explore the optoelectronic properties of perovskite films and the results are displayed in the Fig. S3 (ESI†). The FLIM intensity of the Cl and Cl + PDI groups was significantly higher than those of Control and PDI groups, suggesting that the incorporation of Cl could effectively alleviate the nonradiative recombination loss in the bulk of perovskite films. Although the FLIM intensity of PDI treatment alone was comparable to that of the Control samples, the accompanied strong fluctuation in the FLIM indicated a non-uniform surface which could partly explain the deteriorated performance of the corresponding devices. This non-uniformity was also consistent with the large dispersion of Voc and FF statistics of the PDI group devices in Fig. 1. In contrast, the combination of PDI treatment and Cl incorporation eliminated this microscopic non-uniformity and evidently increased the PL intensity, again suggesting better passivation of defects and less nonradiative recombination loss.
At the device level, space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) and light intensity dependent Voc were conducted for the four groups of perovskite devices. As shown in the inset of Fig. 2e, the trap density of the devices calculated by the SCLC results indicated that both Cl incorporation and PDI treatment effectively reduced the defect density. Among these four groups, Cl + PDI showed the lowest defect density, which was about 57% of the Control sample. Fig. 2f further depicted the relationships between Voc and light intensity for the four groups of devices. As was clear, the slopes (related to the ideality factor n) of the curves corresponding to Control, PDI, Cl, Cl + PDI were (2.20 ± 0.12) kT/q, (1.91 ± 0.08) kT/q, (1.77 ± 0.03) kT/q, (1.66 ± 0.03) kT/q, respectively. Since the slope could reflect the defect-assisted recombination rate in the devices, in particular within the space charge region including the interface, a smaller slope in Cl + PDI indicated that the corresponding non-radiative recombination was better suppressed, in agreement with effective surface defect passivation by PDI treatment.
The above elaborated analysis by six different techniques unequivocally demonstrated both reduction of defect density and reduced non-radiative recombination for perovskite with Cl incorporation and PDI surface treatment. The reproducibility of the above measurements for different samples in the same preparation condition group is presented in Fig. S4 (ESI†) for CV, DLCP, and TRMC, and the variation ranges of all measurements were described by the error bars in the corresponding data. In principle, there exist many iodine vacancies in the bulk of parent FAPbI3 absorber in order to accommodate the strain, and such vacancies may take the form of Schottky-type PbI2 as found by DFT calculation.22 The Cl incorporation with a smaller ionic radius than its isoelectronic element I makes it suitable not only to reduce the strain but also to effectively prevent the formation of vacancy defects.22,23 On the surface of the FAPbI3 absorber, in addition to the iodine vacancies, because of the volatile nature of organic components, FA+ could easily leave the surface during the thermal annealing process and create organic cation vacancies.23 After the surface treatment with PDI, its RxNH2+ group can insert into the A-site vacancy and the N in the six-member ring of PDI may form a Pb–N bond with defected perovskite, thus regulating the surface termination and releasing the surface residual stress.13 The reduction of vacancies can suppress the reaction of the perovskite surface with the ambient environment to avoid formation of deep traps and reduce ion migrations to improve the long-term stability of the PSCs.23–25 As observed, the suppressed non-radiative recombination can reduce the reverse saturation current density J0 by about one order of magnitude (Fig. S5, ESI†) and thus enhance the open circuit voltage Voc and the overall device performance. Semi-quantitatively, the change of J0 from 1.88 × 10−7 mA cm−2 for the Control to 1.44 × 10−8 mA cm−2 for Cl + PDI could raise the Voc by  quite consistent with the experimentally observed difference of ∼70 mV.
Therefore, the reduced Jsc and enhanced Voc in PDI devices were attributed to different mechanisms. As elaborated in Note 5 (ESI†), Fig. S15 (ESI†), the electric field caused by PDI treatment formed an energy barrier of ∼210 meV with the conduction band bending upwards for electron transport from the bulk absorber to the PDI treated surface, which suppressed the transportation of electrons and resulted in a reduced Jsc. However, the interface defect density has been effectively reduced by PDI surface treatment which was confirmed by SCLC, CV and DLCP measurements. The reduced defect density and the consequently reduced non-radiative recombination caused an enhanced Voc in the PDI devices. Furthermore, the peculiar band alignment at the PDI/perovskite interface as shown in Fig. S15 (ESI†) would suppress the hole transport at the PDI/perovskite and PDI/C60 interfaces, leading to further reduced non-radiative carrier recombination at these interfaces due to strongly decreased hole density, thereby again enhancing the open-circuit voltage of the device.
Enhanced photostability by a combination of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment
One important issue of wide bandgap perovskite films is their photostability. The traditional method to increase the bandgap of perovskite through I/Br alloying generally resulted in photoinduced phase segregation. Cation and anion substitution such as Cs, Cl, and DMA was demonstrated to reduce photoinduced phase segregation to a good extent.14,26–28 For the present Cs0.22FA0.78Pb(I0.80Br0.20)3 perovskite system, to investigate the susceptibility of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment to light-induced phase segregation, time dependent and excitation light intensity dependent PL measurements were conducted on the four types of perovskite films deposited on quartz substrates under a N2 environment using 488 nm continuous-wave laser illumination. As presented in Fig. 3a–c, during the course of 27 min illumination at 10 sun-equivalent intensity, the Control group and the Cl group exhibited little change in PL peaks while the PDI group and the Cl + PDI group showed an obvious blue shift in their PL spectra. As the illumination intensity further increased to 100 sun-equivalent and even 1000 sun-equivalent, the Control group and the Cl group displayed a noticeably large red shift in their PL spectra, and the PDI group also changed the trend of peak shift from a blue shift to a small red shift. Remarkably, the Cl + PDI group maintained a small blue shift at 100 sun-equicalent illumination and nearly unchanged PL spectra at 1000 sun-equicalent illumination. As empirically concluded in previous reports,14,23,28 a red shift spectrum indicated the formation of light-induced small bandgap I-rich domains and thus a phase segregation; a blue shift spectrum usually stood for phase stability and was beneficial to the high performance of devices. The blue shift of the PL spectrum was from the Moss–Burstein effect, which was a consequence of the push-up of quasi-Fermi level caused by electrons pumped into the conduction band at a high injection level due to intense light excitation, and could only occur for phase-stabilized semiconductors with a low defect concentration.14 Therefore, as seen from the above data, the PDI surface treatment was beneficial to the suppression of light-induced phase segregation and the effect was even more pronounced when combined with the Cl incorporation. That the amount of blue shift did not continue to increase as the illumination intensity increases may imply that the strong light intensity might still induce some extent of phase segregation or defect generation for the Cl + PDI group, indicating that the photostability should be further improved. The phase segregation phenomenon of mixed halide perovskite films under light illumination was previously directly verified by XRD when the bromine composition was relatively large.29 In the present case, the bromine composition was much smaller which resulted in more stable perovskite films. Nevertheless, under strong light illumination this phase segregation still occurs. In comparison, adding a small amount of MAPbCl3 (∼5%) to the Cs0.22FA0.78Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 system, Xu et al. demonstrated an improved photostability with blue shifted PL spectra at 100 sun illumination,14 quite comparable to that observed here. Our choice of using only a FA-based perovskite absorber here with additional PDI surface treatment not only demonstrated improvement of photostability but also avoided the potential poor thermal stability of MAPbI3.15–17
 Fig. 3  Photostability measurement of perovskite films and the corresponding devices. (a) Normalized PL spectra of four groups of perovskite films (Control, Cl, PDI and Cl + PDI) under 10 sun, 100 sun and 1000 sun illumination for various times up to 27 min, respectively. Arrows indicate the direction of the PL peak shift over time. (b) The shift of the PL peak of perovskite films under 100 sun illumination over time. (c) The shift of the PL peak of perovskite films under 1000 sun illumination over time. (d) Operational stability of devices from the four groups under MPP tracking with continuous illumination at 50 °C under an N2 atmosphere. The ST-PSC denoted the semi-transparent PSC based on Cl + PDI. (e) The Arrhenius plots of the characteristic transition frequencies derived from the thermal admittance spectra. 
To directly demonstrate the stability of the devices, the normalized PCEs of the devices from the four groups were measured by continuous maximum-power-point (MPP) operation under 1 sun conditions. The short-term results are shown in Fig. S6b (ESI†). It was not surprising to observe that the normalized PCE of the Control device kept decreasing during the MPP test, most probably owing to phase segregation of the perovskite film even under continuous weak light illumination. In contrast, both the PDI treatment and Cl incorporation demonstrated better photostability. In particular, for the Cl + PDI device, the MPP test showed a high-level photostability without any degradation over the 600 s measurement time. Rather, its PCE even underwent a slight improvement under illumination. Fig. 3d further depicted the long-term continuous illumination MPP tracking of the unencapsulated devices under an N2 atmosphere (T = 50 °C). For the Cl + PDI device, even after 600 h, its PCE still maintained its initial value, exhibiting a superior long-term stability. Expectedly, the devices of Control, PDI, and Cl groups all suffered quite a large PCE decrease. After 420 h, the PCE of the Control group dropped to a level lower than 30% of the initial value; in contrast, the PCEs of the PDI and Cl devices both dropped to around 70% of their initial values, implying a long-term operational stability benefitting from the Cl incorporation or PDI treatment independently. The above results with much better stability for the Cl + PDI device (dropped to around 90% of the initial value after 1100 h) not only were consistent with the PL blue shift of perovskite films under relatively strong light illumination but also demonstrated the synergetic effect using a combination of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. The Fig. S7 (ESI†) further shows the MPPT measurement results of two other samples in each group, revealing the reproducibility and the robustness of the improved stability of Cl + PDI devices. Notably, the semi-transparent PSC (denoted by ST-PSC) based on Cl + PDI (to be discussed latter) exhibited a similar operational stability as the opaque PSC. Its PCE maintained its initial value at 600 h and experienced a drop of only ∼6% at 1100 h.
To understand the mechanism of photostability, the activation energy of ion diffusion which is responsible for the phase separation was measured. It has been experimentally demonstrated that, because of the ion migration in perovskite films under an electric field, the measured capacitance in thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) would bear information of ion redistribution with a low frequency signature (below 103 Hz) within the temperature range of 240–300 K.19 Our TAS data in the form of −ωdC/dω vs. ω are shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†), from which the peak frequency ω0 at various temperatures could be obtained. Displaying ω0 in the Arrhenius plot in Fig. 3e allowed a deduction of the activation energy EA of halide ion movement through:18,30  where υ0 and k are the attempt-to-escape frequency and the Boltzmann constant, respectively. The higher the activation energy EA, corresponding to the barrier of ion migration, the more difficult the ion migration in the perovskite layer. The EA values in the inset of Fig. 3e showed an increasing trend from Control to PDI, to Cl, and to Cl + PDI, indicating that the ion migration can be suppressed by either Cl bulk incorporation or PDI surface treatment, and especially effective by the combination of Cl incorporation or PDI treatment. The much higher EA of 0.312 eV for the Cl + PDI device than that of 0.189 eV for the Control device revealed that the ion migration and thus the phase separation in perovskite film with a combination of Cl incorporation and PDI treatment became much more difficult, explaining the enhanced photostability of the according perovskite solar cells.
Effect of CIGS bandgap on the performance of tandem solar cells
To examine the CIGS bandgap effect on the performance of tandem solar cells, three CIGS solar cells of comparable efficiencies but different bandgaps were fabricated with the conventional structure of Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO to serve as the bottom cell. The semi-transparent PSC-ITO top cell, as also revealed by its cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S9, ESI†), consisted of an n–i–p structure with Glass/ITO/Poly-TPD/Perovskite/C60/SnOx/ITO. Its perovskite layer was straightforwardly inherited from the Cl + PDI group with both Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. The validity of the transferability of this optimization procedure is demonstrated in Fig. S10 (ESI†). The transparent contact electrode was grown by depositing ∼20 nm SnOx via atomic layer deposition followed by about 100 nm ITO via magnetron sputtering. The transmittance spectrum of this semi-transparent PSC is shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†).
Fig. 4a on the right displayed the J–V curves of the champion semi-transparent PSC, which appeared to have almost no hysteresis with a reverse-scan PCE of 18.63% and a forward-scan PCE of 18.24%. In comparison to the opaque counterpart, the PCE of the present semi-transparent PSCs was about 2% lower in absolute value, resulting from reductions in Jsc and Voc. The decreased Jsc by about 1 mA cm−2 was primarily attributable to the shortened optical path of absorption in the absence of a strong reflection by Ag contact, which in principle could be compensated by a thicker perovskite layer. This deficiency was evident from the reduced EQE in the long wavelength range from ∼550 nm to 750 nm (Fig. 5). The decreased Voc by around 30 mV was most likely caused by the defects at the semi-transparent contact in comparison to the opaque device. This performance deterioration compared to the opaque device was relatively smaller than many previous results,8,9,31 although there was room for further improvement.
 Fig. 4  Structure and performance of the semitransparent PSC solar cells. (a and b) Show the J–V curves of reverse and forward voltage scans of the best semi-transparent perovskite solar cells respectively with ITO and IZO as the transparent electrode. 
 Fig. 5  Performance of PSC/CIGS tandem devices. (a and b) Current density–voltage curves (a) and EQE spectra (b) of tandem cells with PSC-ITO on 1.18 eV-CIGS. (c and d) Current density–voltage curves (c) and EQE spectra (d) of tandem cells with PSC-ITO on 1.04 eV-CIGS. (e and f) Current density–voltage curves (e) and EQE spectra (f) of tandem cell with PSC-IZO on 1.04 eV-CIGS. The present Jsc of the CIGS bottom cell was even larger than that of the PSC-IZO top cell, in strong contrast to all previous reports. 
Tandem solar cells require bandgap matching among light absorbers of constituent sub-cells to achieve a high conversion efficiency. Compared to PSC/c-Si tandem solar cells, aside from the coherent merits of using thin-film technology for both CIGS and PSC fabrication in PSC/CIGS tandem solar cells, an important advantage of CIGS over c-Si is that its bandgap could be easily tuned by varying the [Ga]/([Ga] + [In]) ratio in the absorber. Collaborative bandgap matching is particularly important for two-terminal tandem devices to realize current matching and is also critical for four-terminal tandem devices to achieve a high PCE. As seen in Table 1, in order to determine the appropriate bandgap experimentally, we coupled our optimized semi-transparent PSC-ITO top cell with CIGS bottom cells of various bandgaps (Fig. S12, ESI†), i.e., 1.18 eV with a PCE of 18.1%, 1.14 eV with a PCE of 18.0% and 1.04 eV with a PCE of 18.2%. Despite the fact that the three CIGS solar cells had quite similar conversion efficiencies, the resultant tandem solar cell with the same perovskite top cell of 18.6% conversion efficiency in the 4-T configuration demonstrated very different total conversion efficiencies, namely 26.4%, 26.7% and 27.3% respectively. The J–V curves and the EQE spectra of the perovskite top cell and CIGS bottom cell with bandgaps of 1.18 and 1.04 eV are shown in Fig. 5. The corresponding results for CIGS with a bandgap of 1.14 eV together with the tandem stacking structure are displayed in Fig. S13 (ESI†). The EQE of the PSC-ITO showed a very sharp decreasing edge at around 750 nm, corresponding to its bandgap of ∼1.67 eV. The success of creating a highly transparent PSC enabled the CIGS cell to achieve an EQE beyond 80% under the perovskite filter, which provided an absolute efficiency gain of 7.8% from CIGS with a bandgap of 1.18 eV, 8.1% from CIGS with a bandgap of 1.14 eV, and 8.7% from CIGS with a bandgap of 1.04 eV, to the total conversion efficiency of the tandem cells. The 27.3% efficiency of the tandem solar cell with a CIGS bandgap of 1.04 eV was significantly higher than the 26.4% efficiency of the tandem solar cell with a CIGS bandgap of 1.18 eV, revealing the importance of bandgap matching even for 4-T tandem cells. This result could also be compared to a recent study of PSC/CIGS tandem cells in which a top cell of 21.4% PCE and a bottom cell of 17.9% PCE were stacked to reach a total calculated tandem efficiency of 27.1%.32 Despite their very high PCEs of individual sub-cells, the large mismatch of bandgaps only resulted in a relatively low tandem PCE and could not be adapted for 2-T tandem cells.
Table 1 Summary of photovoltaic parameters of our best PSC-ITO and CIGS stand-alone cells with different bandgaps. The calculated tandem efficiency of PSC/CIGS are also listed




Device
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
Tandem efficiency (%)




1.67 eV Perovskite
Opaque Ag
1.190
21.6
78.0
20.6
 


Semi-transparent
1.160
20.3
79.3
18.6
 


1.18 eV CIGS
Stand alone
0.729
32.2
76.9
18.1
 


Filtered
0.703
14.6
76.4
7.8
26.4


1.14 eV CIGS
Stand alone
0.699
33.6
76.4
18.0
 


Filtered
0.674
15.6
77.1
8.1
26.7


1.04 eV CIGS
Stand alone
0.615
38.6
76.8
18.2
 


Filtered
0.598
18.9
77.1
8.7
27.3




Our results above with the same top cell but different bottom CIGS solar cells with various bandgaps demonstrated the importance of bandgap matching in double junction tandem solar cells. While the Jsc of the top perovskite cell was 20.3 mA cm−2, only the bottom CIGS cell with a bandgap of 1.04 eV reached a comparable Jsc of 18.9 mA cm−2. This photo-current density is so far the highest among all previously used CIGS cells in 4-T tandem cells, and even including 2-T tandem cells. Table 2 shows that our achieved Jsc from the 1.04 eV bandgap bottom CIGS cell was significantly higher than the previous highest Jsc of 15.9 mA cm−2 of the bottom cell;9 and even superior than the best 4-T PSC/Si tandem cell for which a Jsc of 17.2 mA cm−2 of the bottom cell was reported.33 The other two bottom CIGS cells in our study offered Jsc of 14.6 mA cm−2 and 15.6 mA cm−2 respectively, far less than the top cell of 20.3 mA cm−2. The Jsc of the CIGS bottom cells could be further increased if the transmittance of the top cell was improved in the infrared region. The close values of Jsc of top and bottom cells would enable current-matching monolithic tandem devices to be built without sacrificing much of the high-energy photons by the top cell. The presently employed inverted-PSC configuration has further paved the way for direct monolithic growth on the CIGS bottom cell and a high conversion efficiency 2-T PSC/CIGS would become possible in the future.
Table 2 Summary of previously reported 4-T PSC/CIGS tandem cells. Our present results are included for comparison




PSC
CIGS
Total Eff (%)
Year ref.


Eg (eV)
Eff (%)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Eg (eV)
Eff (%)
Jsc with filter (mA cm−2)
Eff with filter (%)




1.55
11.5
14.6
1.14
12.4
10.2
4.0
15.5
201536


1.58
12.7
17.5
1.16
17.0
10.9
5.9
18.6
20157


1.55
16.1
19.1
1.15
19.2
15.3
6.0
22.1
201637


1.58
16.0
20.1
1.02
12.3
15.2
4.7
20.7
201738


1.62
18.4
22.2
1.16
16.5
13.0
5.8
23.9
20188


1.68
17.1
19.0
1.12
20.7
15.9
8.8
25.9
20199


1.55
19.5
23.4
1.02
21.1
13.9
6.7
26.2
202239


1.55
21.4
24.5
1.00
17.9
14.3
5.7
27.1
202232


1.62
18.5
20.9
1.13
20.95
16.8
8.8
27.3
202240


1.67
18.6
20.3
1.18
18.1
14.6
7.8
26.4
This work


20.3
1.14
18.0
15.6
8.1
26.7


20.3
1.04
18.2
18.9
8.7
27.3


1.67
19.1
19.5
1.04
18.2
20.3
9.3
28.4




Effect of transparent conductive oxide layer on the performance of tandem solar cells
As shown in Fig. 5b and d, the current loss of the bottom sub-cells resulted not only from the CIGS bandgap but also from the transmittance of the top cell. It was known that ITO exhibited severe parasitic absorption at long wavelengths (>800 nm), as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†), which severely limited the contribution of bottom sub-cell to the overall PCE. In order to enhance the transmittance of the top sub-cell at long wavelengths, we further replaced ITO by IZO as the top transparent electrode of the semi-transparent PSC. This replacement of ITO by IZO in tandem solar cells was demonstrated to benefit the transmittance in the infrared region in the literature.12,34 As shown in Fig. 5f, the EQE spectra of the filtered CIGS by IZO based ST-PSC is apparently higher than that by ITO based PSC, semi-quantitatively consistent with their transmittance spectra of ST-PSC measured in air. The higher EQE values in contrast to those of the transmittance spectra of ST-PSC measured in air are due to the elimination of reflection at the interface between ST-PSC and CIGS subcells by index matching materials. As demonstrated in Fig. S11 (ESI†), the transmittance of the top sub-cell was indeed improved in the spectral range from 800 nm to 1300 nm, allowing better contribution by the bottom sub-cell of 1.04 eV bandgap CIGS with 0.6% (9.3% vs. 8.7%) absolute efficiency increase to the tandem (Table 2). Furthermore, as also shown in Fig. 4b, using IZO helped to achieve a higher Voc by 40 meV and FF by over 2% in absolute value. Despite the reduction of Jsc to a certain extent, the PCE of the PSC-IZO was improved from 18.6% to 19.1%. Combined with the better contribution of the bottom sub-cell, the final calculated tandem efficiency of 4-T PSC/CIGS was boosted to 28.4%, as exhibited in Fig. 5 and Table 2. This obtained PCE for PSC/CIGS tandem with improved transmittance of top sub-cell and better bandgap matched bottom sub-cell was significantly higher than the reported highest conversion efficiency of single-junction CIGS solar cells (23.4%), perovskite solar cells (25.7%), and even c-Si solar cells (26.7%).35 It is also the highest reported conversion efficiency for the PSC/CIGS tandem cells so far.
To further our comprehensive knowledge, we summarize the previous results on 4-T PSC/CIGS tandem solar cells in Table 2. The previously reported works on PSC/CIGS tandem solar cells rarely made use of the advantage to adjust the bandgap of CIGS bottom cells. The better result obtained in our case now should be attributed to the following: (1) a better PSC top cell has been obtained with appropriate bandgap and highly competitive PCE as compared to those used in previous studies. (2) The used CIGS bottom cell has a better matched bandgap and a state-of-the-art PCE of 18.2% without antireflection coating. This particular point was rarely considered in previous studies. (3) The infrared transmittance of the transparent electrode of the top cell has been significantly improved so that the bottom sub-cell can make a higher contribution to the overall PCE of tandem cells.
Conclusions
In summary, using highly efficient sub-cells with bandgap matching and high transmittance transparent conductive oxide, we have demonstrated PSC/CIGS four-terminal tandem solar cells with a calculated tandem efficiency of 28.4%, the best reported so far for CIGS based tandem cells. The PSC device showed no degradation after 600 h of operation at 50 °C and attenuated by only 10% at 1300 h. For the top cell, a combination of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment on (FA0.8Cs0.2)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 has proven to be an effective method to prepare highly efficient wide-band-gap PSCs with sound photostability. The simultaneously enhanced device performance and photostability were attributed mainly to the strongly suppressed defect density both in the bulk and at the surface of the perovskite layer, and the increased activation energy of ion migration. For the CIGS bottom cell, bandgap matching by a 1.04 eV CIGS bottom cell with the 1.67 eV PSC top cell has gained 0.9% absolute efficiency. The use of IZO instead of ITO as the TCO of the top cell has enhanced the light transmittance in the infrared range and further gained about 0.6% absolute efficiency for the tandem cell. With the highest and comparable Jsc obtained for the top perovskite cell and the bottom CIGS cell, our present study using inverted configuration of perovskite solar cells has paved the way for direct monolithic growth on the CIGS bottom cell and a high conversion efficiency 2-T PSC/CIGS would become possible in the future.
Experimental
Materials
Formamidinium iodide (FAI), cesium iodide (CsI), lead iodide (PbI2), lead bromide (PbBr2), lead chloride (PbCl2), piperazinium diiodide (PDI) and piperazinium iodide (PI) were all purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology in China. Poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N-bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD) was purchased from 1-Materials in Canada. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), isopropanol (IPA) and chlorobenzene (CB) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Diethyl ether (DE) was purchased from Jiansu Yonghua in China.
Fabrication of opaque and semi-transparent perovskite solar cells
The TPD layer was formed by spin-coating its solution (2 mg mL−1 in CB) on an ITO substrate at 5000 rpm for 25 s and followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The wide-bandgap perovskite solutions were prepared by dissolving FAI, CsI, PbI2, PbBr2, and PbCl2, according to the molar ratios of stoichiometric (FA0.78Cs0.22)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 or (FA0.78Cs0.22)Pb(I0.8Br0.15Cl0.03)3, in DMF and DMSO mixed solvent system (DMF:DMSO = 3:1 volume ratio). This solution (60 μL) was spin-coated on the TPD film at 4000 rpm for 60 s, during which 500 μL DE was quickly dripped onto the center of the sample at the 30-second mark. The deposited perovskite film was further annealed at 100 °C for 20 min. As a result, a perovskite absorber of ∼420 nm thickness was obtained. This process was also suitable for the semi-transparent perovskite. The surface passivation treatment was achieved by spin-coating PDI solution (0.5 mg mL−1) on the annealed perovskite. The estimated thickness of this PDI film is ∼2 nm. For the opaque devices, C60 (20 nm), BCP (6 nm), and Ag (100 nm) were deposited in sequence onto the perovskite films by thermal evaporation. For the semi-transparent devices, C60 (20 nm) by thermal evaporation, SnOx (20 nm) by atomic layer deposition (ALD), and ITO (In/Sn ratio 90/10, 100 nm) or IZO (In/Zn ratio 95/5, 100 nm) by sputtering were sequentially deposited onto perovskite films. The sheet resistance of ITO thin film deposited on glass under identical deposition conditions showed a value of about 75 Ω sq−1.
CIGS cell fabrication
In a typical procedure of our CIGS solar cell fabrication, we began with the sputtering deposition of a layer of molybdenum (∼1 μm) on soda-lime glass as the back electrode. Then, Cu, In, Ga, and Se were co-evaporated via the three-stage process to form a CIGS light absorber layer (∼2.3 μm). The solar cell devices were completed with a ∼50 nm CdS buffer layer via chemical bath deposition, a ∼50 nm i-ZnO and a ∼300 nm Al-doped ZnO window layer via RF sputtering. To facilitate better electron collection, Ni/Al/Ni metallic grids were deposited by electron-beam evaporation through a mechanically defined shadow mask. All the conversion efficiencies were measured without any anti-reflection coating. The total area of fabricated CIGS solar cells was 0.50 cm2 which has been confirmed by the third party certification from Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology.
To vary the CIGS bandgap, different overall GGI was designed and a modified three-stage co-evaporation method was employed. First, Ga and In with designated time-dependent ratio were simultaneously evaporated onto the Mo coated substrate for about 30 minutes at a substrate temperature of 330 °C. Then, Cu was deposited at a maximum substrate temperature of 520 °C until a slight Cu-rich phase was reached. Lastly, in the third stage, In was deposited first followed by In and Ga co-evaporation until the CGI composition reached ∼0.9. Due to the interdiffusion between In and Ga, even for the narrowest bandgap CIGS, the minimum GGI region still contained a small amount of Ga and caused the minimum bandgap to be slightly higher than that of pure CIS.
Structure and morphology characterization
Structural analysis of the perovskite films was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Rigaku Smartlab-3 kW, Japan). The measurements were conducted using the theta/2theta mode with an anode operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphology and microstructure of the perovskite films and cross-section of the solar cells were characterized using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Zeiss SIGMA, Germany). The transmittance spectra were recorded on a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Agilent Carry 5000, USA).
Capacitance–voltage (C–V) and drive-level-capacitance-profiling (DLCP)
The steady capacitance including C–V and DLCP were measured with an LCR meter (TH2832, Tonghui, China). For C–V measurements, an AC signal with an amplitude of 20 mV and a frequency of 10 kHz was applied, and the DC bias ranged from 0 V to 1.2 V. For DLCP measurements, the AC amplitude ranged from 20 mV to 200 mV and the DC voltage bias varied from 0.6 V to 0.95 V.
Admittance spectroscopy (AS)
AS measurements were performed with a CHI760E electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instruments, China) with a small AC modulation voltage of 20 mV. The frequency ranged from 1 to 100 kHz and the DC bias voltage was kept at 0 V. The samples were set at temperatures ranging from 250 to 320 K in the dark.
Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC)
The perovskite thin film samples were placed within a brass cavity. The nanosecond laser had a pulse width of ∼5 ns. The reflected microwave power was highly dependent on the conductivity of the perovskite thin films, which was closely related to the charge carrier density and mobility σ = qnμ, where q is the elementary charge, n is the carrier density, and μ is the mobility. By probing the change in the reflected microwave power (ΔP), the change in conductivity could be determined by Δσ(t) = −kΔP(t)/P, where k is the correction factor and P is the incident microwave power. Based on the change of the conductance and the incident light intensity (I0), the mobility (Σμ) can be obtained as follows,Δσpeak = βqN(μe + μh) = βqI0FAΣμ,where β is the ratio of the interior dimensions of the waveguide, φ is the yield of free-carrier generation, N is the pair number of photogenerated charge carriers, σμ denotes the sum of mobilities of electron μe and hole μh, I0 is the incident photon flux of the excitation laser pulse, and FA is the fraction of photons (530 nm) absorbed.
Photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL)
The PL spectra of the perovskite films were recorded using a DeltaFlex fluorescence spectrometer (HORIBA, Japan) excited with a semiconductor laser at a center wavelength of 481 nm; TRPL was carried out with a time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) module as the detector.
Photoluminescence (PL) photo-stability test
Photostability measurements were performed using a home-built setup. The perovskite films were sealed in an N2-filled sample holder with an optical window and were excited with a 488 nm continuous-wave diode laser. The illumination intensity could be adjusted by optical neutral density filters to range from 10 to 1000 sun equivalent intensity. PL spectra were measured using an Acton Research SpectraPro 500i spectrograph with a Hamamatsu silicon CCD array detector. The PL spectra were recorded every two minutes to monitor the degree of phase segregation in perovskite materials.
Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM)
The FLIM measurement was performed with the confocal configuration of a PicoQuant MicroTime 200. The excitation pulsed laser at 488 nm was operated at a repetition rate of 5 MHz and was focused onto the sample through an objective lens (Olympus MPLFLN100x, NA 0.9). The fluorescence emission of the sample was passed through a 650 nm-long-pass filter and detected by a single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD). The electrical signal was then processed by time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) electronics (Time harp 260 PicoQuant). The FLIM images were analyzed by PicoQuant SynphoTime 64.
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements
XPS measurements were performed on a Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250Xi instrument with a monochromatic Mg Kα (1.254 keV) X-ray source and the samples were placed in an ultrahigh vacuum. The binding energies were calibrated using the C (1s) carbon peak (284.8 eV). All the high-resolution spectra were obtained under CAE mode with a pass energy of 30eV and step size of 0.05 eV. UPS was carried out with He I (21.2 eV), and a pass energy of 0.5 eV, dwell time of 50 ms, bias voltage of −6 V, and a step size of 20 meV. The systematic energy error of XPS and UPS were 0.30 eV and 50 meV, respectively. The relative accuracy of the work function and valence band maximum position is slightly better than 50 meV. XPS and UPS are very sensitive to the cleanliness of the film surface. In order to avoid contamination errors, we kept the freshly prepared samples in a nitrogen-filled box until the samples entered the XPS or UPS chambers. The sample transfer process took about 5 minutes. Thus, the reliability of the sample test was generally ensured.
Device characterization
J–V curves were measured using an AM 1.5G simulator (Enli-tech AAA solar simulator) under ambient conditions. For 4-T PSC/CIGS solar cells, the semi-transparent PSC solar cell was mechanically-stacked on the top of the CIGS solar cell with the index-matching fluid filling into the space between them. The CIGS solar cell was measured either standalone or below the semitransparent perovskite filter fabricated along with the devices. Prior to J–V characterization, all devices were pre-conditioned by continuous illumination for 5 seconds. The J–V curves of perovskite solar cells were taken with reverse and forward voltage scans with a scan speed of 0.1 V s−1 (voltage steps of 20 mV and a delay time of 30 ms). The perovskite device area was 0.110 cm2 and masked with a metal aperture to define an active area of 0.076 cm2. The intensity of the simulator was calibrated to 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using a reference Si solar cell. The reference Si cell was certified by Enli Tech. Optoelectronic Calibration Lab. The stabilized power output (SPO) was measured by holding the devices at a constant voltage near the maximum-power-point (MPP) of J–V scans to record the continuous current output. The MMP tracking was performed using an in-house-written MPP Tracking-4B STD program. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed on Enli-tech equipment with chopped light at a frequency of 72 Hz.
Third party PCE certification
Notes 1–4 (ESI†) show the third party certified PCE results for the relevant devices by Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Science.
Author contributions
Xudong Xiao and Junbo Gong supervised the project at Wuhan University (China). Xudong Xiao, Junbo Gong, Xinxing Liu, Junjun Zhang, and Liting Tang conceived the original concept and designed the experiments. Xinxing Liu fabricated and characterized the films and solar cells. Liting Tang assisted with the perovskite device fabrication and characterization. Junjun Zhang and Zengyang Ma prepared the CIGS solar cells and performed characterization. Liting Tang is also in charge of maintaining the appropriate operation of evaporation and sputtering equipment. Chang Liu and Zexin Tu fabricated the ALD-SnO2 for ST-PSCs. Zengming Zhang and He Wang performed the continuous PL illumination and characterization. Qianqian Lin and Yanyan Li conducted the TRMC measurement and data analysis. Ruiming Li performed the CV and DLCP measurements. Guojia Fang and Xuzhi Hu performed the TRPL measurements. Sheng Wang and Chen Shen performed the FLIM measurements. Xinxing Liu, Wang Li, and JunJun Zhang fabricated all the devices for performance and certification. Xinxing Liu and Wang Li helped with device certification. Xudong Xiao, Junbo Gong, Jianmin Li, and Xinxing Liu analyzed all the measurement data. Junbo Gong and Xinxing Liu wrote the first draft. Xudong Xiao and Jianmin Li revised the manuscript with all authors commenting on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Note added in proof
After first publication of this article a study by Feeny et al. which reported a perovskite/CIGS 4T tandem device with a PCE of 27.3% was brought to our attention. This has been added to Table 2 as ref. 40.
AcknowledgementsThese authors contributed equally: Xinxing Liu, Junjun Zhang, Liting Tang and Junbo Gong. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61904128), the Special Fund for the “Dual Carbon” Science and Technology Innovation of Jiangsu province (Industrial Prospect and Key Technology Research Program, BE2022021) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2042022kf1060). The authors also acknowledge the support from Wuhan University's Start-up funding and the use of facilities and assistance at Wuhan University Analysis and Testing Center.
ReferencesK. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu and H. Uzu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–8 CrossRef .M. Nakamura, K. Yamaguchi, Y. Kimoto, Y. Yasaki, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9, 1863–1867 Search PubMed .M. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Lu, T. K. Lee, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Liu, I. W. Choi, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo and H.-B. Kim, Science, 2022, 375, 302–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kim and A. Walsh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 243905 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot and R. May, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828–838 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 RSC .H. Shen, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber and X. Xiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394–406 RSC .D. H. Kim, C. P. Muzzillo, J. Tong, A. F. Palmstrom, B. W. Larson, C. Choi, S. P. Harvey, S. Glynn, J. B. Whitaker and F. Zhang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1734–1745 CrossRef CAS .Q. Han, Y.-T. Hsieh, L. Meng, J.-L. Wu, P. Sun, E.-P. Yao, S.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Bae, T. Kato and V. Bermudez, Science, 2018, 361, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Jošt, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, T. Bertram, S. P. Tomšič, A. Magomedov, E. Kasparavicius, T. Kodalle, B. Lipovšek and V. Getautis, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1298–1307 CrossRef .M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, F. Gota, P. Fassl, I. M. Hossain, R. Singh, F. Laufer, F. Schackmar, T. Feeney, A. Farag and I. Allegro, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 2273–2281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Li, X. Deng, F. Qi, Z. Li, D. Liu, D. Shen, M. Qin, S. Wu, F. Lin and S.-H. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20134–20142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey and E. J. Wolf, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Tress, K. Domanski, B. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, E. A. Alharbi, M. Graetzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame and A. Di Carlo, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .Z. Ni, H. Jiao, C. Fei, H. Gu, S. Xu, Z. Yu, G. Yang, Y. Deng, Q. Jiang and Y. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Awni, Z. Song, C. Chen, C. Li, C. Wang, M. A. Razooqi, L. Chen, X. Wang, R. J. Ellingson and J. V. Li, Joule, 2020, 4, 644–657 CrossRef CAS .T. Jiang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, X. Chen, X. Xu, T. Liu, L. Bai, D. Yang, D. Di and W. E. Sha, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1784–1790 CrossRef CAS .X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen and C. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963–1976 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao and O. Voznyy, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng and L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O’regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese and S. Nanayakkara, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte and B. Rech, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .M. Hu, C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Bai and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500301 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Chen, J. Liang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Yin, H. Cui, H. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Li and J. Gong, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106608 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhang, M. Chen, F. Fu, H. Zhu, T. Feurer, W. Tian, C. Zhu, K. Zhou, S. Jin and S. M. Zakeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1536–1544 RSC .B. Chen, S.-W. Baek, Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, B. Scheffel, A. Proppe, Z. Huang, M. Wei and Y.-K. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, G. T. Harrison, Y. Gao, R. R. Pradhan, M. K. Eswaran, M. Mandal, W. Yan and A. Seitkhan, Science, 2022, 377, 302–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2022, 30, 3–12 Search PubMed .Y. Yang, Q. Chen, Y.-T. Hsieh, T.-B. Song, N. D. Marco, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7714–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .A. Guchhait, H. A. Dewi, S. W. Leow, H. Wang, G. Han, F. B. Suhaimi, S. Mhaisalkar, L. H. Wong and N. Mathews, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 807–812 CrossRef CAS .M. Nakamura, C. C. Lin, C. Nishiyama, K. Tada, T. Bessho and H. Segawa, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 8103–8111 CrossRef CAS .T. Feeney, I. M. Hossain, S. Gharibzadeh, F. Gota, R. Singh, P. Fassl, A. Mertens, A. Farag, J. P. Becker, S. Paetel, E. Ahlswede and U. W. Paetzold, Solar RRL, 2022, 6, 2200662 CrossRef CAS .
Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00869j‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Tandem solar cells are drawing intensive attention due to their potential to overcome the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit. All-thin-film perovskite/Cu(InGa)Se2 (PSC/CIGS) tandem solar cells have unique advantages compared to Si based tandem solar cells as they can be manufactured on thin, lightweight, and flexible substrates in a cost-effective manner, and are a good candidate in space and indoor applications. In this work, by combining a 1.67 eV PSC top sub-cell with a bandgap nearly-matched 1.04 eV-CIGS bottom sub-cell, we have successfully realized the highest tandem efficiency of 28.4% for PSC/CIGS tandem cells. The bandgap matching close to the best theoretical values for double junction tandem solar cells was realized. The PSC device showed no degradation after 600 h of operation at 50 °C and dropped by only ∼10% at 1300 h. This inverted configuration used for wide-bandgap PSCs and the nearly perfect photocurrent density matching realized in this study pave the way for the application of thin film tandem solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Effects of Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (a) Schematic diagram of the Cl bulk incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (b) Typical J–V curves with reverse voltage scan. (c) The J–V curve of the best Cl + PDI sample with both forward and reverse scans. (d–g) Statistical boxplot of PCE (d), Voc (e), Jsc (f) and FF (g) for the four groups of PSC samples. The mean value, maximum and minimum values, and 25–75% region of data were represented by the open circle, top and bottom bars, and rectangle, respectively. About 20 devices are used for the statistics for each group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Defect passivation by Cl incorporation and PDI surface treatment. (a and b) Spatial distribution of the density of dopants and charge traps measured respectively by the DLCP and C–V method for the four groups of perovskite films. (c) Photoconductivity transients measured by TRMC for the four groups of perovskite films. (d) TRPL spectra of the four groups of perovskite films. (e) SCLC data measured for the four groups of perovskite films in the glass-ITO/SnO2/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag structure. (f) Voc as a function of illumination intensity for the four groups of perovskite solar cell devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photostability measurement of perovskite films and the corresponding devices. (a) Normalized PL spectra of four groups of perovskite films (Control, Cl, PDI and Cl + PDI) under 10 sun, 100 sun and 1000 sun illumination for various times up to 27 min, respectively. Arrows indicate the direction of the PL peak shift over time. (b) The shift of the PL peak of perovskite films under 100 sun illumination over time. (c) The shift of the PL peak of perovskite films under 1000 sun illumination over time. (d) Operational stability of devices from the four groups under MPP tracking with continuous illumination at 50 °C under an N2 atmosphere. The ST-PSC denoted the semi-transparent PSC based on Cl + PDI. (e) The Arrhenius plots of the characteristic transition frequencies derived from the thermal admittance spectra.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Structure and performance of the semitransparent PSC solar cells. (a and b) Show the J–V curves of reverse and forward voltage scans of the best semi-transparent perovskite solar cells respectively with ITO and IZO as the transparent electrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  Performance of PSC/CIGS tandem devices. (a and b) Current density–voltage curves (a) and EQE spectra (b) of tandem cells with PSC-ITO on 1.18 eV-CIGS. (c and d) Current density–voltage curves (c) and EQE spectra (d) of tandem cells with PSC-ITO on 1.04 eV-CIGS. (e and f) Current density–voltage curves (e) and EQE spectra (f) of tandem cell with PSC-IZO on 1.04 eV-CIGS. The present Jsc of the CIGS bottom cell was even larger than that of the PSC-IZO top cell, in strong contrast to all previous reports.	 

1.67 eV Perovskite	Opaque Ag	1.190	21.6	78.0	20.6	 
Semi-transparent	1.160	20.3	79.3	18.6	 
1.18 eV CIGS	Stand alone	0.729	32.2	76.9	18.1	 
Filtered	0.703	14.6	76.4	7.8	26.4
1.14 eV CIGS	Stand alone	0.699	33.6	76.4	18.0	 
Filtered	0.674	15.6	77.1	8.1	26.7
1.04 eV CIGS	Stand alone	0.615	38.6	76.8	18.2	 
Filtered	0.598	18.9	77.1	8.7	27.3


1.55	11.5	14.6	1.14	12.4	10.2	4.0	15.5	201536
1.58	12.7	17.5	1.16	17.0	10.9	5.9	18.6	20157
1.55	16.1	19.1	1.15	19.2	15.3	6.0	22.1	201637
1.58	16.0	20.1	1.02	12.3	15.2	4.7	20.7	201738
1.62	18.4	22.2	1.16	16.5	13.0	5.8	23.9	20188
1.68	17.1	19.0	1.12	20.7	15.9	8.8	25.9	20199
1.55	19.5	23.4	1.02	21.1	13.9	6.7	26.2	202239
1.55	21.4	24.5	1.00	17.9	14.3	5.7	27.1	202232
1.62	18.5	20.9	1.13	20.95	16.8	8.8	27.3	202240
1.67	18.6	20.3	1.18	18.1	14.6	7.8	26.4	This work
20.3	1.14	18.0	15.6	8.1	26.7
20.3	1.04	18.2	18.9	8.7	27.3
1.67	19.1	19.5	1.04	18.2	20.3	9.3	28.4
Δσpeak = βqN(μe + μh) = βqI0FAΣμ,
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00869j
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
