Noble-metal single-atoms in thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00247C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00247C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2954-3009Noble-metal single-atoms in thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis

        
          
            Feifei 
            Zhang†
, 
      
        
          
            Yinlong 
            Zhu†
*, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Lin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lian 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiwang 
            Zhang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huanting 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: yinlong.zhu@monash.edu; huanting.wang@monash.edu
Received 
      24th January 2021
    , Accepted 30th March 2021First published on 30th March 2021AbstractNoble metals have received widespread applications in the field of catalysis due to their unique intrinsic properties and irreplaceable catalytic activities. However, in consideration of the scarcity and high cost, maximizing the efficiency of noble metals for catalysis is of prime importance in the societal pursuit of sustainable energy. In recent years, noble-metal single-atom catalysts (NMSACs) with well-defined structures have gained great research attention due to their maximum atom utilization efficiency (100%), distinct active sites and high catalytic activity and selectivity. This review comprehensively discusses the recent advancements in NMSACs for catalytic applications. Firstly, various fabrication strategies for NMSACs are introduced with a focus on how to effectively stabilize single noble-metal atoms on appropriate substrates and prevent their migration and aggregation. Subsequently, some advanced characterization techniques are presented to precisely probe the noble-metal active sites at the atomic level, which is critical to investigate the structure of NMSACs. Furthermore, we provide a comprehensive summary of various types of NMSACs for the applications of thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis, with special emphasis on the structure–activity relationships and the underlying catalytic mechanisms. Finally, the remaining challenges and future opportunities are provided for guiding the rational design of advanced NMSACs toward various catalytic processes in the chemical transformation and energy conversion fields.
Yinlong Zhu
Yinlong Zhu received his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, in 2017. Now he works as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of functional materials (especially perovskite oxides) as ORR/OER/HER/NRR electrocatalysis for the application of electrochemical energy technologies, such as solid oxide fuel cells, metal–air batteries and water splitting. He has published over 30 papers as the first author/corresponding author in Nat. Commun., Adv. Mater., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., Energy Environ. Sci., Matter, Nano Lett., Adv. Energy Mater., Adv. Funct. Mater., etc.
Huanting Wang
Huanting Wang is a Professor and ARC Australian Laureate Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, and the director of the Monash Centre for Membrane Innovation at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials and membranes for gas separation, water treatment, chiral separation, ion transport and separation, and electrochemical energy applications. He has co-authored over 300 papers in these areas.

Broader context
Clean energy and environmental technologies are essential for pursuing a sustainable future. To boost the rate and selectivity of key chemical reactions involved in these technologies, high-performance catalysts are necessary. Noble-metal nanoparticles have always been regarded as benchmark catalysts with reasonably high activity, but the scarcity and high cost limit their large-scale practical applications. Reducing the dosage and simultaneously maximizing the catalytic efficiency is highly desirable for making full use of noble metals. Noble-metal single-atom catalysts (NMSACs), with well-defined structures and maximum atom utilization efficiency, are emerging alternatives to noble-metal nanoparticles due to better catalytic performance. In this review, we present a comprehensive overview of recent advances of NMSACs in various catalytic applications including thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. Synthetic strategies, characterization techniques and structure–activity correlation of NMSACs are highlighted. We also conclude existing challenges and provide an outlook for future development of NMSACs. This review is expected to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of NMSACs for catalysis and offer some guidelines for the design of advanced catalysts in the future.

1. Introduction
With the growing global concerns about the energy crisis and environment pollution caused by the depletion of non-renewable fossil fuels, tremendous efforts have been made to explore high-efficiency technologies for chemical transformations and energy conversion, while most of them depend heavily on various catalytic processes (e.g., thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis).1–5 Therefore, designing efficient catalysts with high selectivity and a fast catalytic reaction rate is of paramount significance and has been a longstanding goal in modern society.6,7 Noble-metal-based catalysts are widely regarded as state-of-the-art catalysts due to their unique intrinsic properties and irreplaceable catalytic activities.8,9 For example, noble metals including platinum (Pt), ruthenium (Ru) and gold (Au) supported on carbon substrates display outstanding CO oxidation performance. Pt-Based materials are the benchmark electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and methanol oxidation reaction (MOR). Palladium (Pd)-based materials with high hydrogenation activity are widely used for hydrogenation of acetylene. However, due to the scarcity of noble metals on the earth (less than 3 wt% among all elements) and costliness, how to make the best of these noble resources remains a big issue for large-scale industrial applications.10–13 Therefore, reducing the amounts of noble metals used and meanwhile maximizing the utilization efficiency of noble metals for catalysis are highly desirable in consideration of the sustainable and economic aspects.14–16
Single-atom catalysts (SACs), with isolated single metal atoms dispersed on a specific solid support, have recently emerged as a new research frontier in materials science and catalysis.17,18 The concept of SACs was first proposed by Zhang et al. in 2011.19 In their pioneering study, they prepared an SAC with isolated single Pt atoms supported on iron oxide (Pt1/FeOx), which shows excellent catalytic activity for CO oxidation. Since then, SACs have been widely investigated and developed rapidly in the field of catalysis. As compared with heterogeneous catalysts, SACs possess homogenized active centers for catalytic reactions (similar to homogeneous catalysts), consequently keeping the combined merits of heterogeneous catalysts with stable properties, high tolerance to harsh conditions and excellent recyclability, and homogeneous catalysts with superior activity and selectivity.20,21 SACs have received extensive research attention mainly because of the following characteristics: (i) atomically dispersed metal centers with 100% active atom utilization; (ii) low atomic coordination number of the active center; (iii) quantum size effects with electron confinement; and (iv) metal–support interactions.18,22–24 These interesting properties of SACs can promote the enhancement of both the reaction rate and selectivity for various catalytic processes, including thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis.4,25 Inspired by the above considerations, SACs provide a great opportunity in minimizing the usage of noble metals with 100% atom-utilization efficiency and performing the perfect approach for constructing cost-effective noble metal catalysts. Recently, a variety of noble-metal SACs (NMSACs) featuring high selectivity, catalytic activity and stability, superior to their nanocluster and nanoparticle (NP) counterparts, have been reported in diverse catalytic reactions.21,26,27 To date, several reviews relevant to SACs have been published, but, to the best of our knowledge, very few paid special attention to the catalytic applications of NMSACs. Accordingly, a comprehensive review on such a topic is timely and important.
In this article, we present an overview of the recent advancements in NMSACs for catalytic applications over the past few years (Fig. 1). This review is structured in the following parts. Firstly, various synthetic strategies for the preparation of NMSACs are summarized and the significant role of the formation of strong chemical interactions between atomic metal sites and appropriate supports is discussed. Then, we introduce the characterization techniques for probing and identifying the noble-metal active sites at the atomic level, which is vital for further investigation of SACs. In addition, the promising potential for the application of NMSACs in various catalytic systems is reviewed in detail. The catalytic applications are classified into 3 categories: thermocatalysis (e.g., CO oxidation, water–gas shift reactions, and selective hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions), electrocatalysis (e.g., the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) and N2 reduction reaction (N2RR)), and photocatalysis (e.g., photocatalytic H2 evolution and CO2 reduction). In the discussion, how the unique electronic and structural characteristics of NMSACs boost their catalytic performance is mainly focused on. Finally, we provide the current research challenges and an outlook for the future development of NMSACs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategies, characterization techniques and catalytic applications of NMSACs summarized in this review. 
2. Synthetic strategies of NMSACs
Developing facile and effective strategies is a prerequisite for fabricating stable NMSACs. Due to the high surface energy of isolated atoms, it remains a challenge to successfully disperse metal atoms onto a suitable support surface.28 In order to investigate the catalytic performance of atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts, a variety of strategies have been reported in the past decade, such as the wet chemistry strategy, physical and chemical deposition and high-temperature pyrolysis. Based on recent advances, we will discuss several different approaches for the synthesis of NMSACs.
2.1. Wet chemistry strategy
The wet chemistry strategy is commonly employed to synthesize NMSACs, because it can not only be operated easily without specialized equipment, but also promote large-scale production.29 In the synthetic approach, the main objective is to successfully anchor isolated metal species that are usually contained in the precursor material onto the support and prevent agglomeration during the process. Experimentally, strong metal–support interactions between the single noble metal atoms and the support can be achieved by effectively coordinating the ligands in the metal complexes with the surface groups on the substrate. This widely used strategy usually consists of three sequential processes. First, the metal precursor is introduced and loaded on the support by deposition–precipitation, wet impregnation/ion-exchange, or coprecipitation. Then, the precursor material is dried to remove the solvent followed by heat treatment. Lastly, reduction or activation procedures are required to fabricate NMSACs.30 In practice, due to the agglomeration tendency of single atoms at a high metal loading and limited anchoring sites on the solid substrate, a metal precursor with a low concentration is generally preferred to be used for this method. However, the resulting low metal loadings (usually below 1 wt%) may hinder the catalytic performance. Therefore, enhancing the metal–support interaction in the synthesis is highly desirable for increasing the accessible metal active sites on the support.26,31 In this section, four fundamental approaches related to the wet chemistry strategy including the impregnation method, deposition–precipitation method, co-precipitation method and spatial confinement strategy are summarized in detail.

Impregnation method. 
The impregnation method including incipient wetness impregnation and dry impregnation is an economical and simple strategy to prepare NMSACs. However, it suffers from difficulty in achieving uniformly distributed atomic metal sites on the support. In this technique, several key parameters should be considered to control the metal dispersion, such as the support type and the functional groups on the surface, the concentration and type of the metal precursor complexes, and the pH of the solution.30,32 For instance, Wang and co-workers employed mesoporous sulfur-doped carbon (denoted as meso_S–C) as the support to stabilize a series of noble metal single atoms such as Pt, Pd, Ir and Ru by the incipient wetness impregnation method, followed by thermal reduction at 250 °C in a 5 vol% H2/Ar atmosphere (Fig. 2a). The final metal loading on the support was up to 10 wt%. This study confirms that the enhanced formic acid oxidation reaction (FAOR) and quinoline hydrogenation activity can be attributed to the strong chemical interactions between sulfur and atomic metal sites.33 Recently, Bulushev and co-workers also prepared a series of atomically dispersed Pt-group metals supported on N-doped carbon nanofibers via the impregnation method. Density functional theory (DFT) modeling indicates that the single metal atoms can be effectively stabilized by a pair of pyridinic N atoms, which are situated at the open edge of the carbon sheet. Such strong metal–support interactions (chelate binding) can lead to superior stability and enhanced H2 selectivity from formic acid decomposition.34
 Fig. 2  (a) Synthesis of metal/meso_S–C (metal = Ru, Rh, Pd, Ir, and Pt) via a wet chemistry strategy. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Synthesis of a single-atom Pd1/graphene catalyst via an ALD strategy. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of atomically dispersed Pt deposited on various solid substrates (multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), mesoporous carbon (MC), ZnO nanowires, graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles) via an ice-photochemical strategy. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Synthesis of SA-Rh/CN via high-temperature pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 


Deposition–precipitation method. 
The deposition–precipitation method is one of the effective and facile strategies to synthesize highly active nano-catalysts. In the synthesis, the metal precursors are added into a suspension of the target support (usually metal oxide particles) to form a uniformly mixed suspension. Then, under stirring conditions, metal ion complexes can be deposited on the support surface by controlling the pH of the suspension. This approach is useful for fabricating uniformly distributed noble metal single atoms.30,35 For example, Zhang and co-workers reported isolated Au3+ ions loaded on a zirconia (ZrO2) support fabricated by the deposition–precipitation method, followed by a calcination process. The isolated Au3+ ions on the surface are discovered to be the active sites for 1,3-butadiene hydrogenation.36 However, deposition–precipitation may not be suitable for producing catalysts with a high level of metal loading, because small metal (hydroxide) clusters/NPs could be generated in the solution before the adsorption of metal ion complexes onto the support. Moreover, the nucleation process is more likely to occur in the solution instead of on the support, which could be another concern for fabricating NMSACs.30,37


Co-Precipitation method. 
The co-precipitation method is an approach involving the simultaneous precipitation of two or more metal cations by adding precipitants in the solution. Different active species are uniformly distributed in the obtained solid products. Although a critical issue for this method to prepare SACs is that the single metal atoms could be buried in the support crystallites or at the interface of the support agglomerates, this strategy is still commonly applied to fabricate NMSACs as a result of the simple procedures, short synthetic period and easy to control experimental conditions.19,30,38 Recently, a report by Qiao and co-workers showed that single Pt atoms (0.17 wt% Pt loading) can be stabilized by iron oxide (FeOx) surface defects. During the process, both the pH of the solution and the co-precipitation temperature were finely controlled. It is noteworthy that the charge-transfer mechanism from individual Pt atoms to the FeOx surface has been confirmed to be effective for stabilizing Pt atoms on the support.19 Likewise, ultrastable atomically dispersed Au anchored on FeOx (Au1/FeOx) was also successfully prepared for CO oxidation by the same method.39


Spatial confinement strategy. 
NMSACs can be achieved by spatially trapping single noble metal atoms into cages at a molecular scale through an efficient spatial confinement strategy. This strategy can effectively stabilize the single atoms and avoid migration during the process. Typically, two steps are involved in this approach. The first step is to separate and encapsulate mononuclear metal precursors with the assistance of porous materials, such as covalent-organic frameworks (COFs), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and zeolites, which have uniform pore structures. Then, atomically dispersed metal species stabilized on the support could be obtained by removing the precursors.31,40 The spatial confinement strategy has been employed to fabricate NMSACs in several recent studies. For instance, Kistler et al. reported a single-site platinum catalyst fabricated by spatially confining a [Pt(NH3)4]2+ complex into the pores of zeolite KLTL. During the process, the metal complexes can occupy the location of Na+ and K+via ion exchange and are bonded to oxygen atoms on the zeolite surface. Then, after oxidation at 633 K, single Pt atoms stabilized in the KLTL zeolite can be achieved. This study indicates that a crystalline support with uniform surface sites is beneficial for fabricating single-site catalysts.41 In addition to zeolites, MOFs and COFs have also been developed to prepare NMSACs. For example, atomically dispersed Ru on N-doped carbon were produced by the spatial confinement strategy using the UiO-66-NH2 MOF as the carbon support. Interestingly, the uncoordinated amine groups (–NH2) in the skeleton of UiO-66-NH2 play a key role in stabilizing RuCl3. The strong coordination between Ru ions and –NH2 can effectively prevent Ru3+ migration. After high temperature pyrolysis and HF treatment, single Ru atoms anchored on N-doped porous carbon were obtained. It indicates the great potential of MOFs as a desirable support for the fabrication of NMSACs.42

2.2. Physical and chemical deposition
In addition to the wet chemistry strategy, the synthesis of NMSACs can also be achieved by physical and chemical deposition.

Physical deposition. 
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) is a deposition process involving the vaporization of metal precursors such as metals and metal alloys using a physical method (e.g., bombardment and heating). This technique has been widely applied in electronics, materials, aerospace and other fields due to the advantages of the simple process, environmental friendliness, strong binding force with the substrate and uniform film formation.43,44 Recent studies have employed this method for the preparation of atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts. For example, Sykes's group synthesized Pt–Cu single-atom alloys (SAAs) for the dehydrogenation of formic acid by depositing 0.01 ML of Pt on a Cu(111) crystal surface via PVD. From the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) image, the observable individual Pt sites on the Cu(111) surface confirm that Pt has been successfully alloyed with Cu(111).45 Using the same method, single-site Pt atoms dispersed on a well-defined copper oxide (Cu2O) film were fabricated by Therrien and co-workers in 2018 for CO oxidation.46


Chemical deposition. 
The atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique, a vapor-phase deposition process, is an effective approach for uniformly depositing metal catalytic materials on a selected large surface area substrate in a self-limiting and layer-by-layer manner. In the synthesis, the solid substrate surface is repeatedly exposed to gaseous precursors.47–49 This strategy offers a great opportunity to investigate the structure of catalysts and the relative catalytic processes, because the composition and thickness of the films can be precisely controlled at an atomic level. Generally, soft materials (e.g., graphene) and metal oxides are applied to load metal precursors in the ALD strategy.40,50 For instance, in 2015, Lu's group obtained atomically dispersed Pd on graphene by precisely controlling the oxygen functional groups on the support for anchoring palladium hexafluoroacetylacetate (Pd(hfac)2) (Fig. 2b).50 Both microscope and synchrotron characterization verified the existence of single Pd atoms on graphene, further confirming successful immobilization of isolated Pd atoms on anchoring sites after the precursor–support reaction and ligand removal under the ALD conditions.50 The ALD strategy was also applied for the preparation of isolated Pd atoms on the surface of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) in Huang's study.51 g-C3N4 is a suitable support material owing to the excellent thermal stability and effective six-fold cavities for anchoring single Pd atoms. During the process, single-atom Pd/C3N4 was successfully obtained under one Pd ALD cycle, However, when the ALD cycles were increased to ten, Pd nanoparticles were formed. Although the PVD and ALD technique are effective for the fabrication of NMSACs through vapor transportation, their mass production is still limited by the harsh conditions such as a high vacuum environment and expensive equipment, and difficulty in precisely controlling the anchoring sites on the solid substrate.40,52

2.3. Photochemical strategy
In the past decades, the photochemical strategy has been considered as one of the effective routes for the fabrication of metal nanocrystals. During the process, controlling the nucleation and growth of solids is of vital importance for adjusting the particle size and morphology of nanomaterials.40,53,54 To prepare atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts, such a simple and time-saving method can effectively prevent the agglomeration of noble metals in comparison to the traditional wet chemistry strategy. Moreover, the process is more scalable than the ALD technique. Typically, extra chemical or physical treatment is not required for the generated catalysts after photochemical reduction.55
Recently, Liu and co-workers fabricated single Pd atoms (loading up to 0.5 at%) on an ultrathin titanium oxide (TiO2) support functionalized with ethylene glycolate (EG) under ultraviolet (UV)-light treatment. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) verified the successful formation of single Pd atoms on the TiO2 support without any observation of Pd nanoparticles. In this study, the plentiful Pd–O bonds formed with the assistance of UV-generated EG radicals have been proved to be effective in removing Cl− and stabilizing isolated Pd atoms on the support.56 In addition to the conventional photochemical strategy, Wu's team reported that atomically dispersed Pt was successfully deposited on various solid substrates, including multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), mesoporous carbon (MC), ZnO nanowires, graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles using an ice-photochemical strategy (Fig. 2c). Among these catalysts, Pt SACs stabilized on the MC material exhibit superior HER performance compared to commercial Pt/C. In the synthesis, the formation of an ice layer by rapidly freezing H2PtCl6 aqueous solution with liquid nitrogen is the key step for effectively confining isolated Pt ions and limiting their aggregation. Afterwards, the ice layer is irradiated with UV light at an extremely low temperature under dark conditions. Lastly, different Pt SACs are achieved by mixing the frozen solution with various support dispersions. It is noteworthy that the Pt SAs can be obtained in the solution before mixing with the dispersion of supports. The ice-photochemical strategy offers a promising route for the green fabrication of SACs.53
2.4. High-temperature pyrolysis
High-temperature pyrolysis is recognized as one of the facile and powerful methods for the synthesis of SACs on various supports. As is well known, this strategy involves thermal decomposition of suitable precursors at high temperatures in a controlled inert atmosphere (e.g., NH3, Ar, H2 and N2). Several different sources of supports have been applied in the synthesis, such as MOFs, small molecule precursors and polymers.57,58 Among these materials, MOFs have attracted extensive attention in recent years due to the unique porous structure and diverse compositions. The obtained SACs usually demonstrate superior conductivity and catalytic performance. However, the main obstacle for this strategy is the aggregation tendency of metal atoms at high temperatures. Generally, in this case, the excess metal particles formed in the synthesis can be effectively removed by acid treatment, leaving only the desired isolated metal sites on the support.28,59,60 Moreover, MOFs can be adopted as suitable cages to confine metal precursors. For example, Xiao et al. prepared a catalyst with Ir single atoms on N-doped carbon for a high-performance ORR using a confined pyrolysis method.61 In this study, an Ir-containing derivative of zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) was selected as the precursor. Ir acetylacetonate (Ir(acac)3) with a molecular diameter of 9.8 Å can be in situ encapsulated by ZIF-8 with a cavity diameter of 11.6 Å. After high temperature pyrolysis (950 °C) under an Ar/H2 (10% H2) atmosphere, individual Ir atoms uniformly distributed in N-doped carbon were achieved (Ir mass loading: 0.2 wt%). The successful synthesis of Ir-SAC can be ascribed to the space-confinement effect and generation of nitrogen anchoring sites after Zn evaporation at elevated temperatures.61 Ru-SAC and Rh-SAC have also been successfully prepared by a similar strategy (Fig. 2d).62,63 In another study, Bai and co-workers reported an atomically dispersed Ru catalyst prepared by annealing a mixture precursor of ruthenium chloride (RuCl3) and graphene oxide (GO). The final Ru loading was 0.76 wt%. Both the high surface area of GO and low Ru content ensure a high dispersion of Ru atoms.64
2.5. Galvanic replacement
The galvanic replacement strategy has been applied in recent studies to fabricate a variety of nanomaterials with controllable morphology and composition. Typically, a redox reaction incorporating reduction of the target metal ions in the solution and oxidation of a sacrificial template (generally a metal and metal oxide) is involved in this approach. The electrical reduction potential between the metal ions and the selected template drives the reaction to take place.65–67 When they are in contact with the solution, the metal ions can be effectively reduced and deposited over the substrate surface. Very recently, the galvanic replacement approach has become highly desirable for preparing NMSACs, due to the advantages of the short reaction time and the possibility to obtain high-efficiency and low-cost products with large pore volumes.65,68
In 2016, a report by Wang and co-workers demonstrated that single Rh atoms can be stabilized on a cobalt oxide (CoO) surface via the galvanic replacement strategy. In the synthesis, Na3RhCl6 solution was injected into a CoO nanosheet-containing solution firstly, and then a redox reaction between Rh atoms and CoO nanosheets took place during the mixing process. Co atoms on the substrate surface can be substituted by the Rh atoms in the solution. After the galvanic replacement reaction, single Rh atoms can be clearly observed on the support surface by the STEM technique.69 Similarly, atomically dispersed Pd catalysts stabilized on various metal oxide supports such as ZnO, TiO2 and Cu2O were successfully prepared and investigated by Zheng's group. Among these catalysts, single Pd atoms on Cu2O exhibit the highest catalytic activity and selectivity of alkenes formed from the semihydrogenation of alkynes. During the process, Pd atoms from the Pd(CH3CN)2Cl2 precursor were deposited on the Cu2O support via galvanic displacement in the solution (Pd2+ + Cu1+ → Pd1+ + Cu2+). The as-formed distinct structure (Pd–(O–Cu)2) and oxidation state of Pd (+1) led to the excellent performance, further confirming the critical role of the support effect in the process.70 In addition to single metal atoms anchored directly on supports, galvanic replacement is also an effective strategy for the fabrication of SAAs. For instance, Pt partially replaced Ni atoms on several different Ni-containing supports (e.g., activated carbon (AC) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)) to form SAAs, which were composed of single Pt atoms (160 ppm) supported on Ni particles. The superior activity can be attributed to the unique electronic properties of the Ni-based catalysts modified by single Pt atoms.71 Such a facile and effective strategy opens the possibility for obtaining controlled supported SACs.
2.6. Other strategies
Apart from the above-mentioned strategies for the synthesis of noble metal atomic-scale catalysts, several other effective approaches have also been reported in recent years. For example, a microwave-assisted strategy was applied to stabilize noble metals including Pt, Ir, Ag, and Pd on a mesoporous g-C3N4 support by Vorobyeva and co-workers. Owing to the high yield and short reaction time, microwave heating is a promising approach to prepare uniformly distributed SACs with a high yield.72 Similarly, atomically dispersed Pt on aniline-stacked graphene (AG) was also prepared by the reduction of PtCl62− ions to single Pt atoms on the substrate surface via microwave irradiation (Fig. 3a).73 In addition, a thermal emitting strategy has been developed for the fabrication of SACs recently. For instance, Qu and co-workers synthesized single Pt atoms on defective graphene (DG) via this simple route for catalyzing the oxidation of various organosilanes and the HER (Fig. 3b). In the synthesis, volatile Pt(NH3)x species were formed via the coordination between Pt atoms from the bulk Pt net and ammonia from decomposition of dicyandiamide firstly, and then trapped by the DG support.74 The thermal emitting method offers guidance for the facile fabrication of SACs using bulk metals as precursors. Besides, the electrochemical deposition method is also a promising strategy to obtain NMSACs due to the controllable size and amount of the deposited metal. Taking single Pt atoms supported on MoS2 as an example, a three-electrode system was constructed using MoS2/graphite paper (GP) as the counter electrode (CE) and Pt foil as the working electrode (WE) (Fig. 3c). During the process, Pt atoms from the WE were easily deposited on the MoS2 support through cathodic growth in an electrochemical solution.26,52 According to recently published reports, various strategies such as the surfactant-assisted strategy (Fig. 3d),75 ball-milling method (Fig. 3e)76 and amine-induced-reduction method (Fig. 3f)77 have also been confirmed to be effective for the synthesis of NMSACs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of Pt SAS/AG via microwave irradiation. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis of Pt SA/DG via the thermal emitting strategy. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of single-atom Pt deposited on an MoS2/GP electrode via electrochemical deposition. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis of PtSA–MNS via the surfactant-assisted strategy. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Synthesis of Pd1/ZnO via the ball-milling method.76 Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Synthesis of Au1Nx single-site/C3N4via the amine-induced-reduction method. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
2.7. Summary
In summary, the development of highly active and robust NMSACs can be achieved through various synthetic strategies in consideration of some key factors, such as the time, cost, procedural complexity and yield. To compare these strategies more clearly, their respective advantages and disadvantages have been summarized in Table 1. Generally, the synthetic approaches can be divided into two categories, “bottom-up” (direct-synthesis) and “top-down” (post-synthesis) routes, based on the different starting precursor materials.78,79 For the former, the wet chemistry strategy is considered as one of the most promising and effective “bottom-up” strategies to prepare NMSACs due to the simple procedure and low cost. However, the low metal loadings and the difficulty in controlling the location of the active sites on the support may hamper their catalytic performance and practical industrial applications.79,80 In addition, although PVD is a simple and environmentally friendly approach, and ALD can accurately control the loading amount of NMSACs and provide the opportunity to explore the structure–performance relationships, they suffer from some problems including the cost and harsh conditions (e.g., expensive equipment and a high vacuum environment) and the difficulty in controlling the anchoring sites on the solid substrate.80,81 As for galvanic replacement, this low-cost and energy-efficient method can not only produce low-cost and highly efficient products with large pore volumes, but also effectively control the morphology, composition and internal structure of catalysts. However, its universality may be limited by the requirement for the different equilibrium potentials of two metal/metal ion redox pairs. Moreover, to successfully prepare NMSACs, the selected second metal should exhibit a higher reduction potential than that of the first metal, which leads to limited metal precursor selection.67,80 In addition to the “bottom-up” strategy, the “top-down” method has also demonstrated promise for the practical production of NMSACs. Benefiting from the simple procedure and usage of inexpensive raw materials, high-temperature pyrolysis is one of the most commonly used “top-down” strategies to synthesize atomically dispersed catalysts. However, the agglomeration tendency of metal atoms into nanoclusters or nanoparticles and the generation of complex species at high temperatures are still critical challenges.81,82 To improve the yield, high-energy ball-milling is another simple and effective “top-down” strategy that can control the size of catalysts by tuning the rotation speed of the balls and realize large-scale fabrication, but this approach has some disadvantages, such as contaminant problems, uncontrollable active sites and long reaction time.76,80 As a result, although various “bottom-up” and “top-down” methods have shown great potential for preparing NMSACs, how to simultaneously obtain high metal-loading SACs with controllable properties and reduce the production cost through a simple and universal method remains an issue for their practical applications. There is still a long way to go to develop more advanced technologies to satisfy the industrial production requirements regarding the performance, yield, environmental friendliness, cost and safety.
Table 1 The advantages and disadvantages of various synthetic strategies for NMSACs




Strategies
Advantages
Disadvantages




Wet chemistry strategy
• Simple procedure
• Low metal loadings


• Low cost
• Limited control over the location of the active sites on the support surface






Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
• Simple procedure
• Harsh conditions (e.g., a high vacuum environment and expensive equipment)


• Environmental friendliness
• Difficult to precisely control the anchoring sites on the solid substrate


• Precise control of the composition
• Slow process of ALD






Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
• Useful for the investigation of structure–performance relationships
• Harsh conditions (e.g., a high vacuum environment and expensive equipment)


• Easy to control the loading amount of NMSACs by adjusting the reaction speed and times
• Difficult to precisely control the anchoring sites on the solid substrate


• Precise control of the size and thickness of the deposition by adjusting the number of ALD cycles
• Slow process of ALD






Photochemical strategy
• Simple and time-saving procedure
• Restricted to specific systems


• More scalable than the ALD technique
• Narrow applicability


• No requirement for extra chemical or physical treatment








High-temperature pyrolysis
• Simple procedure
• Generation of complex species


• Usage of inexpensive raw materials
• Long reaction time and high energy consumption




• Uncontrollable active sites on the support surface






Galvanic replacement
• Short reaction time
• Restriction on universality


• The possibility to obtain high-efficiency and low-cost products with large pore volumes
• High reduction potential


• Low-cost and energy-efficient
• Limited material selection


• Easy to control the morphology, composition and internal structure








A microwave-assisted strategy
• High yield and short reaction time
• Difficult to control the thickness and loading of single metal atoms


• Low cost






Ball-milling
• Simple procedure
• Irregular morphologies of catalysts


• High yield
• Contaminant problem


• Easy to control the size of catalysts
• Long reaction time


• Wide scope of applications
• Uncontrollable active sites on the support surface




3. Characterization of NMSACs
In recent studies, NMSACs comprised of atomically dispersed noble metals on the support material usually exhibit excellent performance for heterogeneous catalysis. Interestingly, single atoms as catalytically active sites have unique properties, which are distinguished from their nanoparticle or nanocluster counterparts in catalysts.83,84 To attain a deep understanding of NMSACs, it is essential to verify the existence of isolated noble metal atoms and investigate the relationship between their structures and performance. A series of advanced characterization techniques have been developed to probe and analyze SACs. Among them, aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) are most commonly used and will be described in detail in this section. AC-STEM, an integrated electron microscopy technique, offers the direct observation of active sites at the atomic level, and then a spectroscopic technique XAS is applied to provide more in-depth information (e.g., structural features and the coordination environment) of SACs. Except for these characterization techniques, other effective techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) also play an essential role in investigating the properties of atomic-level catalytically active sites.85–90
3.1. AC-STEM
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a conventional and widely used technique to examine the morphology (shape and size), crystallinity, exposed facets, and surface dispersion of nanomaterials. However, the configuration of single atoms and metal–support interactions are still difficult to be verified by the regular high-resolution TEM (HRTEM).1,91 With the development of aberration correction technology, AC-STEM is capable of identifying the active sites at the atomic scale owing to the added beam current and resolution.92 Particularly, aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) can provide atomic resolution images by collecting the electrons scattered from an annulus around the beam using an annular dark-field detector. As the contrast is related to the atomic number (symbol Z) of detected atoms, this technique allows single metal atoms (especially heavy metal atoms with higher Z) anchored on supports with light elements to be identified directly by observing the atomic-scale bright spots.93,94 For instance, isolated Pt atoms uniformly distributed on different supports including ZrO2, CeO2, Co3O4 and graphene are clearly observed from aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 4a–h) with obvious contrast. No Pt NPs or clusters can be visualized in all these samples at both low and high magnification, further confirming the successful synthesis of Pt SACs.95
 Fig. 4  AC-HAADF-STEM images of (a and b) Pt1/Co3O4, (c and d) Pt1/CeO2, (e and f) Pt1/ZrO2, and (g and h) Pt1/graphene at both low and high magnification. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra and (j) Fourier transform (FT) radial distribution function of the Pt L3-edge k3-weighted EXAFS spectra for Pt1/R-Mn2O3-5D, PtO2 and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (k) Wavelet transform (WT) for HNTM-Pt (Pt), H2PtCl6, PtO2 and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
To further probe the structure and chemical composition of SACs, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) are the two important material analysis techniques to combine with HAADF-STEM imaging. Due to the high detection limit, EDX is usually applied to characterize SACs with high metal loadings. Compared with the EDX technique, EELS can offer elemental identification with an enhanced resolution, signal-to-noise ratio, and sensitivity to lower Z elements.9,85,96 For example, the existence of single Pt atoms on a defective graphene surface can be confirmed by the bright spots in HAADF-STEM image. The relatively high Z value of Pt species in the catalysts can lead to excellent image contrast. Moreover, the corresponding EELS spectrum and mapping verify that the isolated Pt atoms are coordinated with the neighboring defective carbon instead of N species, as N atoms are not detected around Pt active sites.74
3.2. XAS
In addition to microscopy techniques for probing the structure and chemical composition of NMSACs in a specific area, spectroscopic techniques with higher resolution are commonly applied to further investigate the electronic and coordination structures of atomic active sites considering the entire architecture. Generally, XAS has been considered as one of the typical and powerful spectroscopic techniques for characterizing SACs.4,90,97 This synchrotron-radiation-based tool is composed of two important techniques: X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). XANES can provide detailed information on the geometrical structure and valence state of single atoms. The core electrons are excited to free orbitals in the low energy range of 5–150 eV during the characterization process. In contrast, EXAFS is effective for determining the bond lengths, neighboring atomic species and coordination numbers of the central metal atoms. In this analysis, the electron waves are backscattered from adjacent atoms around the central atom in the high kinetic energy region of 150–2000 eV.4,31,98 It is worth mentioning that the Fourier transform (FT) is a basic step to analyze the coordination environment of central atoms in EXAFS data processing.99,100 Recently, Yan and co-workers investigated the coordination environment of isolated Pt atoms anchored on an Mn2O3 (Pt1/R-Mn2O3-5D) support by applying XANES and EXAFS in the characterization. The XANES spectra (Fig. 4i) reveal that the near-edge absorption energy of atomic Pt is situated at that of PtO2, further confirming that the valence state of atomic Pt is +4 in the catalysts. There are a lot of unoccupied Pt 5d states for Pt ions and oxygen around Pt4+. The FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra determine the coordination configuration of Pt species in Pt1/R-Mn2O3-5D. No obvious Pt–Pt coordination peak can be observed in Fig. 4j, revealing that Pt atoms exist in an atomically dispersed state in the catalysts. Additionally, the two main peaks located at around 1.60 Å and 2.81 Å are attributed to Pt–O and Pt–Mn bonds, respectively. The strong interaction between high-valent single Pt atoms and the Mn2O3 support can effectively hinder the aggregation of Pt atoms in the synthesis.101 Taking atomically dispersed Ir and Pt anchored on a hollow nanotube MOF (HNTM-Ir/Pt) as another example, more powerful wavelet-transform EXAFS (WT-EXAFS) was employed to analyze the NMSACs. Firstly, the positively charged Pt atoms in the structure can be confirmed in the Pt K-edge XANES spectra, as the white line peak is located between H2PtCl6 and Pt foil. In addition, the absence of detectable Pt–Pt coordination in WT-EXAFS verifies the sole existence of single Pt atoms in HNTM-Ir/Pt. As seen in Fig. 4k, the WT contour plots of the H2PtCl6 and PtO2 standards display two intensity maxima at 8.2 Å−1 and 6.2 Å−1, which correspond to Pt–Cl and Pt–O contributions, respectively. In contrast, only one intensity maximum at 7.2 Å−1 ascribed to Pt–N/Cl is seen in the plot of HNTM-Ir/Pt, which further confirms the atomically dispersed Pt sites.102
3.3. Other techniques
Besides the above-mentioned main characterization techniques, various other advanced techniques could further provide more key information for understanding the working mechanisms of SACs in the catalytic processes.

STM. 
STM, another efficient surface-science technique, is applied for directly observing the atomic-level surface structure of catalysts based on the tunnel effect at the quantum scale. By manipulating the STM conducting tips mechanically, the atomic sites on the surface can be routinely imaged through the recording of the tunneling current, thereby affording more information on the atomic and electronic structure.14,81,103,104 As shown in Fig. 5a and b, STM images employed by Therrien and co-workers reveal the presence of symmetrical CO–Pt units in the structure, confirming that CO is bound to single Pt atoms after CO addition and a 250 K annealing process. In another series of STM images, the atomic-level surface structure change around Pt atoms can be observed during a low-temperature CO oxidation reaction. When annealed at 160 K, Fig. 5c indicates that CO desorbed from the support is absorbed at Pt sites, which is bound to different positions on the surface. Then, in Fig. 5d, an observable location change of CO–Pt and the formation of new defects in the oxide near the Pt sites could be found on the ‘29’ copper oxide when annealed at 250 K. The enhanced mobility of CO–Pt and increased defects could be attributed to the CO adsorption to atomic Pt sites and lattice oxygen removal at 250 K, respectively. When the annealing temperature increased to 350 K, the unchanged area density reveals that Pt is still highly dispersed on the surface. However, compared to Fig. 5d, the promotion of CO2 formation at higher temperatures could lead to further changes in the Pt occupation sites and the generation of more defects adjacent to Pt atoms as shown in Fig. 5e.46 At present, the development of the STM technique is still hindered by the strict working conditions and specimen requirements.80
 Fig. 5  (a) High-resolution STM image of 0.5% of a monolayer Pt coverage on the ‘29’ copper oxide after CO addition and annealing at 250 K. (b) The simulated STM image of the DFT model with a CO–Pt complex in each unit cell at −0.5 V. High-resolution STM image of CO-exposed Pt atoms anchored on the ‘29’ copper oxide after the annealing process at (c) 160 K, (d) 250 K and (e) 350 K. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) XPS Pt 4f spectra of Pt1@MIL and Ptn@MIL. (g) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt1@MIL, Ptn@MIL and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (h) FTIR spectra of 0.1Pt/C12A7 before and after exposure to D2. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (i) The 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–O2, 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2 and com-Pt/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 


XPS. 
As a powerful quantitative spectroscopic technique, XPS has been frequently applied for evaluating the elemental composition and the valence states on the surface of catalysts. However, this technique suffers from relatively low atomic resolution and surface limitations, especially under low metal loadings. To better analyze the probed atoms at the atomic level, XPS is usually employed in combination with other techniques (e.g., HAADF-STEM and XAS).14,80,85,90 For instance, the valence state and coordination environment of Pt atoms in Pt1/NMC were investigated by XPS and XANES. The positive binding energy shift of Pt 4f in Pt1/NMC, which is similar to the Pt 4f shift from the bulk state to single Pt atoms, indicates the strong interaction between the Pt sites and the NMC substrate. Then, in the XANES spectra, the white-line intensity of isolated Pt atoms on NMC can be observed to increase in comparison to Pt foil and Pt NPs, further demonstrating the oxidation of Pt atoms in the catalyst.105 In another study, XPS (Fig. 5f) and XANES (Fig. 5g) reveal that the oxidation state of Pt species is identified to be +2 in Pt1@MIL, which is higher than the metallic state of Pt in Ptn@MIL.106


FTIR. 
FTIR is a powerful technique for determining the exact structure of supported metal catalysts, which involves the direct monitoring of the adsorption behaviors of probe guest molecules such as CO and NH3 on the support surface. According to the changes in vibrational frequency and intensity of the adsorbed molecules, the characteristics of the active centers and local structure can be inferred through proper calibration. Generally, the time- and temperature-resolved FTIR technique can be employed to evaluate the presence of atomically dispersed metal sites on the support quantitatively and detect the intermediate species in the catalytic process, which produces more evidence that metal NPs did not exist in SACs.30,82,107 For example, atomically dispersed Ptδ+ species stabilized on the surface of a 12CaO·7Al2O3 (C12A7) support can be confirmed by the CO adsorption behavior revealed by the FTIR technique, as only one peak located at 2070 cm−1 is observed for the 0.1Pt/C12A7 and 0.1Pt/C12A7-R600 samples. In addition, FTIR can also become a reliable tool for elucidating the reaction mechanism. The detectable O–D vibration on 0.1Pt/C12A7 exposed to D2 (instead of 0.1Pt/CaO or 0.1Pt/Al2O3) confirms the cleavage of O–H bonds in the rate-controlling step of the hydrogenation reaction on 0.1Pt/C12A7 (Fig. 5h).108 Compared with the AC-STEM and XAS techniques, FTIR is easy to use in most laboratories to characterize NMSACs, and make up for the shortcomings of insufficient local field of vision. In addition, FTIR spectroscopy (CO probing) is atomically sensitive due to the very strong IR signal and the high sensitivity to the geometry, chemical state and degree of coordination unsaturation of the adsorption site. Thus, although this technique is easily affected by limitations including indirectly acquired information and high sensitivity to organic impurities, FTIR with high sensitivity has a greater advantage in detecting low precious metal loadings in NMSACs.85,109


NMR. 
Another technique for detecting isolated metal atoms and analyzing their coordination environment is NMR spectroscopy, which is usually performed under in situ conditions.30,82 For example, NMR was employed to investigate the binding ligands of isolated Pt atoms in samples of 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2 and 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–O2. By applying 27Al magic-angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MAS NMR), three main peaks situated at 7, 38, and 70 ppm can be clearly observed in the spectra (Fig. 5i), demonstrating the existence of AlO4, AlO5 and AlO6 coordination in the structure.110 In characterization, the operation of NMR spectroscopy may suffer from problems including high sensitivity to impurities and susceptibility to magnetism.85,109 Despite these disadvantages, this technique is still effective for investigating the formation mechanism of NMSACs with low metal loadings. The NMR sensitivity can be improved by new hyperpolarization techniques and parahydrogen (p-H2) involved in the catalytic processes. Therefore, high-sensitivity NMR can provide an in-depth understanding of the nature of the atomic active centers under operating conditions.78,79,82,109

4. Catalytic applications of NMSACs
The catalytic applications of NMSACs are versatile. Different from their metal NP/cluster counterparts, noble metal single atoms possess unusual catalytic behaviors including a high density of exposed active sites, robust catalytic activity and selectivity, and excellent stability towards a range of catalytic reactions. Based on the mode of energy supply, they can be classified into thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis.4,26,107 In terms of thermocatalysis, NMSACs are able to catalyze a series of key reactions such as CO oxidation, water–gas shift reactions and selective hydrogenation reactions, which are beneficial to facilitate the production of important industrial chemicals and address some environmental issues.4 As for electrocatalysis, a variety of elementary reactions involved in electrochemical energy conversion and storage (such as the ORR, OER, HER and CO2RR) can also be effectively promoted by NMSACs, enabling clean energy conversion processes.57,80 To achieve efficient solar-to-chemical energy conversion, single-atom noble metal photocatalysts are developed and applied in many photocatalytic reactions, including photocatalytic H2 evolution, CO2 reduction and N2 fixation.103 In the following section, recent advances in catalytic applications of NMSACs are summarized and introduced. Specifically, the structure–activity relationships and the catalytic mechanisms were also discussed based on both experimental and computational results, which shed light on designing highly efficient catalysts for future study.
4.1. Thermocatalysis
Thermocatalysis, one of the most well-known catalytic categories, is commonly applied in conventional industrial processes (e.g. the water–gas shift reaction and ammonia synthesis) owing to the high efficiency and applicability for large-scale production.111 Generally, many common heterogeneous catalysts such as zeolites, metals and metal oxides participate in thermally driven catalysis, but the poor stability of catalysts and complex product distribution may hinder their practical applications.4 In recent years, NMSACs have been developed for thermocatalysis from economic and environmental perspectives. Benefiting from advantages including the uniform atomic active sites and unique chemical properties of single atoms, as well as high activity and thermal stability of noble metals, atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts are conducive to accelerating conversion reactions and improving the selectivity to specific products.82,85 In this case, recent studies on a series of thermocatalytic applications of NMSACs are discussed and also summarized in Table 2 to demonstrate their great potential for use as thermocatalysts.
Table 2 Summary of NMSACs for thermocatalysis




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Performance




CO oxidation


Pt(NH3)42+/KLTL zeolite41
Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)
1.0 wt%
Initial TOF: 0.0038 s−1


PtOx/KLTL zeolite41
Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)
1.0 wt%
Initial TOF: 0.012 s−1


PtRuSA–CN117
An icing-assisted photocatalytic reduction method
0.51 wt% (Pt), 0.45 wt% (Ru)
CO conversion: 100% at 150 °C


Pt/La–Al2O3141
Thermal emitting strategy
1.0 wt%
TOF: 0.12 ± 0.04 s−1 at 225 °C


Pt/FeOx19
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.17 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 0.435 molCO h−1 gPt−1 at 27 °C


Pt/θ-Al2O3142
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.18 wt%
TOF: 0.187 s−1 at 20% CO conversion


Pt/CeO2_S143
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1.0 wt%
CO conversion: 95% at 145 °C for 310 h


Pt–O–Pt/CeO2-a144
Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)
∼0.24 wt%
Reaction rate: 2.6 × 10−6 molCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 80 °C, 2.5 × 10−5 molCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 150 °C


Pt/HZSM-5119
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 wt%
N.A.


Pt/Cu2O film46
Physical vapor deposition
N.A.
N.A.


Pt/m-Al2O3110
Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)
0.2 wt%
TOF: 0.023 s−1 at 200 °C, 0.175 s−1 at 250 °C


Pt1/ZnO-nw145
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.0125 wt%
TOF: 0.37 s−1; reaction rate: 6.9 mol h−1 gPt−1 at 250 °C


Pt1/CeO215
Atomic layer deposition
Up to 4 wt%
CO conversion: 50% at ∼192 °C for dry CO oxidation, at 90 °C for water-mediated CO oxidation


Pt1–Ox–K/Al2O3146
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
2.0 wt%
∼99.8% conversion, 70% selectivity at 110 °C


Pt1/CeO2–Al2O3147
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1.0 wt%
TOF: 14.5 × 10−2 s−1 at 26 °C; CO conversion: 100% at 45 °C


0.1Pt1/ZrO2148
Flame spray pyrolysis
0.1 wt%
CO conversion: 100% at 230 °C


Pt1/FeOx149
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.17 wt%
CO conversion: ∼100% at 80 °C; specific reaction rate: 0.992 molCO h−1 gIr−1; TOF: 0.311 s−1


Pd/La–alumina150
Dry impregnation
∼0.5 wt%
TOF: 7.5 × 10−3 s−1 (first light-off run), 5.6 × 10−3 s−1 (second run) at 125 °C


Pd/CeO2151
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
N.A.


Pd1/ZnO76
Ball-milling method
0.25 wt%
CO conversion: 100% at 160 °C


Pd/CoxOy-I152
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
TOF: 0.22 s−1; CO conversion: 100% at 90 °C


Rh1/ZnO-nw145
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.007 wt%
TOF: 0.63 s−1; Reaction rate: 22.0 mol h−1 gRh−1 at 180 °C


Rh1/CeO2153
Wet chemistry strategy (adsorption precipitation method)
0.04 wt%
TOF: 0.41 s−1; specific reaction rate: 14.3 molCO h−1 gRh−1 at 100 °C


Rh1/NPTA154
Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)
0.2 wt%
N.A.


Au1/FeOx39
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.03 wt%
CO conversion: 100% at 160 °C; specific reaction rate: 8.3 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 0.45 s−1


Au1/Co3O4155
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.05 wt%
Specific reaction rate: ∼25 molCO h−1 gAu−1


Au–SA/Def-TiO2156
Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method)
0.25 wt%
CO conversion: 100% at 120 °C


Au1/CeO2116
Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)
0.03 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 3.6 molCO h−1 gAu−1; a TOF of 0.2 s−1


Au1/CeO2157
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.05 and 0.3 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 45.9 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 2.5 s−1 (0.05 wt% Au); specific reaction rate: 38.2 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 2.1 s−1 (0.3 wt% Au)


Au1/ZnO-nw145
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.0125 wt%
N.A.


Isolated gold atom catalytic sites in zeolite NaY158
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
1 wt%
Initial specific reaction rate: 2.6 ± 0.3 × 10−2 molCO2 (molAu × s)−1; reaction rate: (2.9 ± 0.2) × 10−3 molCO2 (molAu s)−1 after 15 min


Ir1/FeOx149
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.22 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 0.418 molCO h−1 gIr−1; TOF: 0.0256 s−1


Ir/MgAl2O4159
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.0025 wt%
N.A.


Ag/HMO160
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
N.A.






Water–gas shift (WGS) reaction


Pt–Ox(OH)yNa123
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.5 wt%
N.A.


Pt–Nax–Oy–(OH)z125
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
N.A.


Pt/HZSM-5119
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 wt%
N.A.


Pd/FeOx121
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.044 wt%, 0.22 wt%, 1.1 wt%, and 2.2 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 26.2 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (0.044 wt% Pd), 7.4 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (0.22 wt% Pd), 4.0 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (1.1 wt% Pd); TOF: 0.78 s−1 (0.044 wt% Pd), 0.41 s−1 (1.1 wt% Pd) at 300 °C


Rh1@TiO2122
Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)
0.05 wt%
TOF: ∼0.01 s−1 at 500 K


Au/TiO2161
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
N.A.


Au/CeO2162
Wet chemistry strategy (the urea gelation/coprecipitation method)
0.2–0.9 at%
N.A.


Au–O(OH)x–(Na or K)124
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.25 wt%
Specific reaction rate: 8.2 × 10−7 molH2 gcat−1 s−1 for 0.25 Au–K/KLTL, 7.9 × 10−7 molH2 gcat−1 s−1 for 0.25 Au–Na/[Si]MCM41 at 150 °C


Au/TiO2163
Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method with UV irradiation)
∼1 wt%
N.A.


Ir1/FeOx120
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.01 wt%
TOF: 2.31 s−1; specific reaction rate: 43.4 molCO h−1 gIr−1 at 300 °C






Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Application
Performance




Selective hydrogenation


Pt@MCM-22164
Wet chemistry strategy
0.11 wt%
Hydrogenation of alkenes
N.A.


Pt/g-C3N4165
Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential wet deposition–reduction approach)
Up to 1.4 wt%
Semihydrogenation of 1-hexyne
N.A.


Pt–PMA/AC166
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
∼1 wt%
The hydrogenation of nitrobenzene and cyclohexanone
TOF: 774 h−1 (nitrobenzene); 23.7 h−1 (cyclohexanone); 1002 h−1 (styrene); 492 h−1 (phenylacetylene)


Pt/FeOx129
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.08 wt%
Chemoselective hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene
TOF: ∼1500 h−1; selectivity to 3-aminostyrene: ∼99%


Na–Pt/FeOx130
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
2.16 wt%
Chemoselective hydrogenation of functionalized nitroarenes
TOF: 1083 h−1; selectivity to 3-aminostyrene: 97.5%


Pt/N–C167
Wet chemistry strategy (a precursor-dilution strategy)
0.06 wt%, 0.21 wt%, 0.43 wt% and 0.73 wt%
Hydrogenation of 1-nitro-4-ethynylbenzene and 1-ethynyl-4-vinylbenzene
Selectivity to 1-nitro-4-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 98% (∼100% conversion); selectivity to 1,4-divinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 97% (∼100% conversion)


Pt/N–C167
Wet chemistry strategy (a precursor-dilution strategy)
0.06 wt%, 0.21 wt%, 0.43 wt% and 0.73 wt%
Hydrogenation of 1-ethynyl-4-(phenylethynyl)benzene and 1-(dec-1-yn-1-yl)-3-ethynylbenzene
Selectivity to 1-(phenylethynyl)-4-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 98% (∼100% conversion); selectivity to 1-(dec-1-yn-1-yl)-3-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 97% (∼100% conversion)


Pt/MoS2168
Wet chemistry strategy
Up to 7.5 wt%
CO2 hydrogenation
TOF: 162.5 h−1; yield: 0.2 mmol (formic acid), 0.8 mmol (methanol) at 150 °C after 3 h; yield: 2.3 mmol (formic acid), 7.3 mmol (methanol) at 210 °C


PtZn/HNCNT169
Wet chemistry strategy (a sacrificial template method)
0.82 wt%
Hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenylacetylene to 4-aminophenylacetylene
Conversion: >99%; selectivity: 99%


Pt/m-Al2O3110
Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)
0.2 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
Selectivity from acetophenone to 1-phenylethanol: 98.7%; selectivity from 1,3-butadiene to butenes: >99% at 50 °C


Pt/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 10 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
N.A.


Pt/Cu SAA NP170
Galvanic replacement
N.A.
Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
Conversion: 100% at 160 °C, >95% at 145 °C


Pt/C12A7108
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
∼0.18 wt%
Chemoselective hydrogenation of nitroarenes
TOF: ∼25772 h−1; CO conversion: 100% at ∼225 °C


0.2Pt1/HAP171
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.2 wt%
Propylene hydrogenation
TOF: 35 h−1 (BmimBF4-0.2Pt1/HAP), 67 h−1 (BmimTf2N-0.2Pt1/HAP), 81 h−1 (BmimCF3SO3-0.2Pt1/HAP)


Pt/PO4–CeO2172
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
Hydrogenation of styrene, cyclohexene, phenylacetylene, and nitrobenzene
TOF: 316 (styrene), 169 (phenylacetylene), 75 (cyclohexene) and 273 (nitrobenzene) h−1; selectivity: ∼85% (styrene), 15% (phenylethane) in the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene; 100% (aniline) in the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene


Pt1/MoC173
High-temperature arc-discharge strategy
2 wt%
Selective quinoline hydrogenation
Initial TOF: 3710 h−1 at 100 °C; selectivity to 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline: >99%


Pt/In2O3174
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.58 wt%
CO2 hydrogenation
Methanol selectivity: 91.1% at 220 °C


Pt1/α-MoC175
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.25 wt%
Chemoselective hydrogenation of nitrobenzene derivatives
Chemoselectivity: >99% under 100% conversion; hydrogenation TOF rate per Pt site: 3460 h−1 at room temperature


Pt0.008Cu–SAA176
Galvanic replacement
N.A.
Selective hydrogenation of acetylene
N.A.


Pt/FeOxHy SACs177
Wet chemistry strategy
N.A.
Selective hydrogenation of propyne to propylene
Selectivity to propylene: from 65.4% to 94.1% with Pt–O coordination number from ∼3.4 to ∼5


Pt1@MIL106
Wet chemistry strategy
0.2 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of CO2 into methanol
TOF: 117 h−1 in DMF at 150 °C; selectivity for methanol: 90.3%


Pt1/Ni nanocrystals178
Galvanic replacement
1.0 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene
TOF: ∼1800 h−1 at 40 °C; selectivity for 3-vinylaniline: >99%


Ni95Pt5/Al2O3179
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1.0 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of CO2 toward CH4
CH4 formation rate: 715 μmol molmetal−1 s−1


[Pd]mpg-C3N4180
Wet chemistry strategy
0.5 wt%
Three-phase hydrogenation of alkynes and nitroarenes
1-Hexene selectivity: ∼100%; olefin selectivity: 90%; alkene selectivity: 90%


Pd–SAs133
High-temperature pyrolysis
N.A.
Semi-hydrogenation of acetylene
Conversion: 96.0%; selectivity to ethylene: 93.4% at 120 °C


Au@AgML@Pd core–shell NWs181
Wet chemistry strategy
1/16, 1/8, 1/4, 1/2 and 1.0 ML
Hydrogenation of 4-nitro-phenol (4-NP)
Rate constant: from 28.0 × 10−3 s−1 (1/16 ML) to 57.0 × 10−3 s−1 (1.0 ML)


PdIn IMNCs182
Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)
2 wt%
Semihydrogenation of acetylene
Ethylene selectivity: 92% at 90 °C


Pd1/TiO256
A room-temperature photochemical strategy
Up to 1.5 wt%
Hydrogenation of CC bonds
TOF: 8973 h−1


Pd/g-C3N4 SAHCs72
Microwave-irradiation-assisted deposition
0.5 wt%
Semi-hydrogenation of 2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol
Selectivity to the alkenol product: >95%


Pd1/C3N451
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 wt%
Hydrogenation of acetylene
Acetylene conversion: 13% at 80 °C, 100% at 115 °C


Pd1/graphene50
Atomic layer deposition
0.25 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
Butene selectivity: 100% at 95% conversion at ∼50 °C; TOF: 0.35 s−1 at 47 °C


Pd1/ZnO183
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.01 wt%
High chemoselectivity in acetylene semi-hydrogenation
Selectivity to ethylene: >80% at ∼100% conversion at 80 °C


Pd/Cu SAA184
N.A.
N.A.
Selective hydrogenation of styrene and acetylene
Selectivity to ethylbenzene: >95% with 13% conversion at 260 K


Pd0.18Cu15/Al2O3185
Galvanic replacement
0.18 at%
Hydrogenation of phenylacetylene
Selectivity to styrene: ∼94% at 90% conversion


Pd1/α-MoC186
High-temperature pyrolysis
Up to 5 wt%
Hydrogenation of substituted nitroarenes and gas-phase hydrogenation of CO2
Selectivity: >99% (liquid-phase hydrogenation of substituted nitroaromatics), >98% (gas-phase hydrogenation of CO2 to CO)


Au–Pd/SiO2187
Wet chemistry strategy
225 ppm, 660 ppm
Selective hydrogenation of acetylene
Conversion: ≤20% at 240 °C; selectivity to ethylene: ∼100%


Pd–Cu single atom alloy188
Wet chemistry strategy
0.03 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of acetylene
Conversion: >99%; ethylene selectivity: >73% at 150 °C


Pd1/Cu(100)189
Galvanic replacement
0.2 wt%
Semihydrogenation of alkynes
Selectivity to styrene: ∼96% at a conversion of 100%


Pd–Ag alloy nanoparticle190
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.01 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of acrolein
N.A.


ISA-Pd/MPNC191
Wet chemistry strategy (a hard-template Lewis acid doping strategy)
0.0433 wt%
Semihydrogenation of acetylene
Activity: 83%; ethylene selectivity: 82%


PdZn alloy192
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
Chemoselective semi-hydrogenation of acetylene
Selectivity to ethylene: ∼90% at ∼100% acetylene conversion at 60 °C


Cu-Alloyed Pd SAC132
Wet chemistry strategy (wet co-impregnation method)
494 ppm
Semihydrogenation of acetylene
Selectivity to ethylene: ∼85%; 100% acetylene elimination


Pd/CNF193
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
From 0.04 to 0.5 wt%
Hydrogenation of acetylene
N.A.


Pd/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 10 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
N.A.


PdNi/SiO2194
Atomic layer deposition
0.98 wt%, 2.0 wt%, and 3.5 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of BN
Yield of dibenzylamine: from ∼5 to 97% at 80 °C


Pd1/ZnO76
Ball-milling method
0.25 wt%
Selectivity hydrogenation of phenylacetylene
TOF: 8829 h−1 at ∼35% conversion (40 °C, 5 min); selectivity to styrene: >93% (40 °C, 20 min)


Pd1/N-graphene12
A freeze-drying-assisted method
2.3 wt%
Selective photothermal hydrogenation of acetylene to ethylene
Conversion: 99%; selectivity to ethylene: 93.5% at 125 °C


Pd1/Cu2O70
Galvanic replacement
0.2 wt%
Semihydrogenation of terminal alkynes
Selectivity: 96.5% (styrene), 96.2% (1-octyne), 94.7% (2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol), 96.0% (trimethylsilylacetylene), 90.5% (4-ethynylanisole), 95.3% (4-(tert-butyl)phenylacetylene), 96.1% (4-chlorophenylacetylene)


Pd/Ru nanoribbons195
Wet chemistry strategy
Up to 5.9 wt%
Chemoselective hydrogenation of allyl benzyl ether
N.A.


Pd0.004Au–SAA196
Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential reduction method)
Total metal loading of 3.8 wt% (Pd/Au = 1/250)
Selective hydrogenation of 1-hexyne to 1-hexene
Selectivity to 1-hexene: 85% at full conversion


Pd1/ND@G131
Wet chemistry strategy
0.11 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of acetylene
Conversion: 100%; ethylene selectivity: 90%; TOF: 0.064 s−1


0.2Pd–TiO2128
Wet chemistry strategy (a self-assembly method)
0.2 wt%
Hydrogenation of phenylacetylene to styrene
TOF: >8000 h−1; selectivity to styrene: 91% at room temperature


Ru@ZIF-8197
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.032 wt%
Semi-hydrogenation of alkyne
TOF: 360 h−1; chemoselectivity for styrene: 97%


Ru1/mpg-C3N4198
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
∼0.1 wt%
Selectivity of hydrogenation in the conversion of biomass molecules
95% conversion, ∼100% selectivity from vanillin to vanillyl alcohol at 60 °C; ∼100% conversion, ∼100% selectivity to 2-methoxy-p-cresol at 140 °C


Ru SA/N–C42
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.3 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
Selectivity to py-THQ: >99%; conversion: >99%


Ru/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 3 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
N.A.


Ru/pBN199
Wet chemistry strategy
0.58 wt%
CO2 hydrogenation
CH4 selectivity: up to 93.5%; reaction rate: 1.86 mmolCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 350 °C


Rh/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 5 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
N.A.


Rh@S-1-H17
Wet impregnation method (a one-pot hydrothermal synthesis method)
0.28 wt%
Hydrogenation of nitroarenes
Nitrobenzene conversion: 100%; aniline selectivity: >99%; TOF: 60.6 molnitrobenzene molRh−1 min−1


Rh1/MoS2126
Wet chemistry strategy (a modified strong metal adsorption method)
0.27 wt%
The selective hydrogenation of crotonaldehyde toward crotyl alcohol
Selectivity toward crotyl alcohol: 100% from 18% to 91% conversion; TOF: 26.6 h−1 (80 °C for 2.5 hours)


Au/MWCNTs200
Wet chemistry strategy
0.1 wt%
Hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
N.A.


Au/ZrO236
Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method)
0.01 wt%, 0.05 wt%, 0.08 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
Reaction rate: 2.08 (0.01 wt%), 2.01 (0.05 wt%) and 2.15 (0.08 wt%) mmol s−1 g(Au)−1; TOF: 0.41 (0.01 wt%), 0.40 (0.05 wt%) and 0.42 (0.08 wt%) s−1


PSAC Au/MOF27
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation and conversion strategy)
Up to 1.0 wt%
Hydrogenation of p-nitrophenol
TOF: 581 min−1 at 298 K


[Ir(C2H4)2]/zeolite Y201
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
Hydrogenation of cyclohexene
N.A.


Ir(CO)2/rGA202
Wet chemistry strategy
14.8 wt%
Hydrogenation of ethylene
N.A.


Ir/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 10 wt%
Hydrogenation of quinoline
TOF: 1292 (5 wt%), 1149 (10 wt%) h−1


Ir1–In2O3203
Wet chemistry strategy
N.A.
Selective hydrogenation of CO2 to ethanol
TOF: 481 h−1; ethanol selectivity: 99.7%


AgTCM-mpg-CN204
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%, 2 wt%, 3.5 wt%, 5 wt% and 10 wt%
Selective hydrogenation of alkynes
Reaction rate: >103 molalkyne h−1 molAg−1






Dehydrogenation and reforming reactions


Pt/Cu SAA136
Wet chemistry strategy (wet co-impregnation method)
0.1 wt%
Propane dehydrogenation
Propylene selectivity: ∼90% with 10.6 mol gPt−1 h−1 formation rate at 520 °C


Pt1/graphene, Pt2/graphene48
Atomic layer deposition
N.A.
Hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane
Specific rate: 2800 molH2 molPt−1 min−1 at room temperature


Pt/ZnO37
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.0125 wt%
Methanol steam reforming
Conversion: ∼43% at the steady state; selectivity toward CO2: 88%


Pt–Cu SAA NPs45
Physical vapor deposition
N.A.
Selective formic acid dehydrogenation
Conversion: 4.7% at 100 °C and 19.8% at 120 °C


Pt/Ni SAA71
Galvanic replacement
N.A.
Hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane
TOF: 12000 molH2 molPt−1 min−1


Pt–Cu SAA205
N.A.
N.A.
Dehydrogenation of ethanol to acetaldehyde and hydrogen
Selectivity to the desired acetaldehyde and H2 products: 100%


Pt1/Co3O495
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 wt%
Dehydrogenation of ammonia borane
Mass specific rate: 1220 molH2 molPt−1 min−1


Pt/LDH (Zr,Sn)206
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
∼0.3 wt%

n-Hexane reforming and cyclohexane dehydrogenation reactions
Selectivity to branched paraffins and cycloalkanes: >95%


Pt/m-Al2O3110
Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)
0.2 wt%

n-Hexane reforming
The selectivity of 50% toward desired isomeric products


Pt/Te207
Wet chemistry strategy
1.1 wt%
Dehydrogenation of formic acid
Selectivity for hydrogen: 100%; TOF: 3070 h−1 at 25 °C


PtGa–Pb/SiO2135
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
3 wt%
Propane dehydrogenation
Conversion: 30%; propylene selectivity: 99.6% at 600 °C for 96 h


Pt/α-MoC138
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.29 wt%
Methanol-reforming reaction
TOF: 18046 molH2 molPt−1 h−1; H2 production rate: 76.2 μmolH2 g−1 s−1 at 190 °C


Au1/ZnO37
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.0125 wt%
Methanol steam reforming
Conversion: ∼28%; CO2 selectivity: ∼100%






Hydroformylation reactions


Rh/CoO69
Galvanic replacement
0.2 wt%
Hydroformylation of propene
Selectivity for butyraldehyde: 94.4%; TOF: 2065 h−1


Rh/ZnO-nw208
Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)
0.006 wt%, 0.03 wt%, 0.3 wt%
Hydroformylation of olefins
Selectivity: 99% (0.006%, 0.03%, 0.3%); TON: 40000 (0.006%), 38000 (0.03%) and 7000 (0.3%)






Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Performance




NO oxidation


Pt/θ-Al2O3139
Wet chemistry strategy
0.18 wt%
Conversion: ∼4% at 265 °C, ∼6% at 315 °C, ∼15% at 415 °C






Oxidation of alcohols


Pd/meso-Al2O3140
Surfactant-assisted strategy
0.03 wt%
Yield: 3.1 mmol h−1 gcat.−1; TOF: 4400 h−1; aldehyde selectivity: >91%





4.1.1. CO oxidation. 
With a significant role in catalysis research and environmental protection, CO oxidation has attracted intensive attention in industrial processes. Owing to the cheap price and easy operation, low-temperature CO oxidation is the most simple and effective approach to eliminate and utilize CO gas.112,113 At present, the investigations of CO oxidation mainly focus on the optimization of the preparation methods and catalytic performance of catalysts, which are advantageous in terms of designing industrially applicable catalysts. It has been well established that SACs are an active research frontier with the maximum atom utilization efficiency and novel catalytic performance. Among them, NMSACs have made great progress in catalyzing CO oxidation in recent years.17,95 For instance, single Pt atoms anchored on the defects of an iron oxide (FeOx) surface (denoted as Pt1/FeOx) were fabricated by Qiao and co-workers using a simple co-precipitation strategy in 2011. Compared with the standard Au/Fe2O3 as a reference, Pt1/FeOx exhibits a higher specific reaction rate of 0.435 molCO h−1 gPt−1 at 27 °C for CO oxidation. The turnover frequency (TOF), defined as the number of molecules reacting on the catalytically active sites per unit time, is an important parameter for comparing the efficiency of active sites between catalytic materials.114,115 The TOF value of Pt1/FeOx (0.136 s−1) is also higher than that of the standard Au/Fe2O3. The superior activity is attributed to the effective electron transfer from isolated Pt atoms to the FeOx support based on Bader charge analysis. The high oxidation state of single Pt atoms coordinated with three O atoms on the surface can lead to lower adsorption energy (1.96 eV) for CO in comparison to Pt10 clusters (3.05 eV), indicating that the individual Pt sites are highly effective for enhancing the CO oxidation activity.19 In addition, noble metal single atoms supported on other metal oxide supports have also been investigated for CO oxidation. In 2017, Zhang et al. adopted a facile modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly strategy to prepare mesoporous Al2O3 supported Pt SACs with excellent catalytic activity and stability. The sole existence of single Pt atoms is confirmed by the TEM image and corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping as no Pt NPs can be observed (Fig. 6a–c). The only predominant shell of Pt–O situated at approximately 1.7 Å in the EXAFS spectrum also proves the single-atom form of Pt (Fig. 6d). In the synthesis, the P123 template plays a significant role in generating the mesoporous structure with rich unsaturated pentahedral Al3+ centres. The strong interaction between Pt and the support precursors ensures that the low valent Pt atoms in coordination with four oxygen atoms are stabilized in the inner surface of mesoporous Al2O3 (Fig. 6e), resulting in long durations and superior activity of the catalysts. During the CO oxidation process, the TOF value steadily increases from 0.023 s−1 at 200 °C to 0.175 s−1 at 250 °C. Besides, when the temperature is fixed at 400 °C, the conversion of CO can be maintained at 100% for 220 h.110 More recently, Zhao and co-workers prepared single Au atoms supported on CeO2 (Au loading: 0.03 wt%) by an electrostatic adsorption strategy. For comparison, the reference Au/CeO2-RR2Ce with an Au loading of 0.98 wt% was also investigated in this study. From AC-HAADF-STEM, only individual Au atoms can be detected in the catalyst with no observable Au NPs or clusters. Interestingly, the addition of H2O demonstrates a better promotion effect for CO oxidation on Au1/CeO2 SACs in comparison to CeO2 supported Au NPs. After adding ∼2 vol% water, the specific reaction rate (3.6 molCO h−1 gAu−1) and TOF (0.2 s−1) of Au1/CeO2 SACs increase, much higher than those of Au/CeO2-RR2Ce (a specific rate of 0.13 molCO h−1 gAu−1 and TOF of 0.036 s−1) at ambient temperature. Moreover, the bare CeO2 support has little effect on CO oxidation even with the addition of H2O, confirming the unique promotion effect of H2O on single Au atoms. According to DFT calculations, the single Au atoms with positive charge and more variable oxidation states can provide an efficient channel for the (CO + OH) reaction route by adding H2O and –OH groups.116
 Fig. 6  (a) The TEM image, (b) TEM-EDS elemental mapping images and (c) HAADF-STEM image of 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2. (d) The FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra derived from EXAFS, Δ = 3.0–12.0 Å−1. (e) Schematic illustration of a single Pt atom anchored on the m–Al2O3 support surface for 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Ru K-edge and (g) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of RuSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN and Ru foil. XPS spectra of (h) Ru 3p, (i) Pt 4f and (j) N 1s for RuSA-CN620, PtSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN620 and PtRuSA-CN. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to metal oxides, other materials such as zeolites and g-C3N4 can also be selected as the support for stabilizing noble metal single atoms. For example, [Pt(NH3)4]2+ and PtOx complexes with isolated Pt sites supported in zeolite KLTL exhibited great potential for catalyzing CO oxidation in Kistler's study. The initial TOF value of Pt(NH3)42+/KLTL zeolite and PtOx/KLTL zeolite was 0.0038 and 0.012 s−1, respectively, at 423 K. Based on the EXAFS data, the formation of platinum oxo species in PtOx/KLTL zeolite can lead to the increase of the average Pt–O coordination number from 2 to 3 at 2.0 Å, revealing that the oxygen atoms are coordinated with Pt atoms after the oxidation process.41 Moreover, Zhou et al. synthesized neighboring Ru and Pt monomers anchored on g-C3N4 with rich N vacancies for CO oxidation. The Ru and Pt loading in the catalysts is 0.45 wt% and 0.51 wt%, respectively. Both the XANES (Fig. 6f and g) and XPS results (Fig. 6h–j) indicate that the electron density of the adjacent Pt monomer can be increased by the synergistic effect of the Ru monomers and N vacancies. DFT simulations further recommend that the formation of Ru–N and Pt–C bonds can effectively stabilize the Pt–Ru monomers in the triangular sub-nanometer cavity created by the N vacancies in the structure. Compared with other structures such as C–Ru–Pt–N, C–Ru–Ru–N and N–Pt–Ru–N, the C–Pt–Ru–N structure shows the lowest standard deviations of the reaction step energies (0.66 eV), demonstrating the good ability for catalyzing CO oxidation.117 These results suggest that the CO oxidation performance of NMSACs can be significantly affected by the support materials, owing to the strong interaction of the isolated metal atoms with the support surface.


4.1.2. Water–gas shift (WGS) reaction. 
The water–gas shift (WGS) reaction (CO + H2O → H2 + CO2) plays a vital role in industrial hydrogen production for various chemical processes (e.g., fuel cells and ammonia synthesis).113,118 In the past decades, supported precious metal-based catalysts (especially Pt and Au) have been deeply investigated for the WGS reaction due to the outstanding catalytic performance and stability at low temperatures. However, their wide applications could be limited by the scarcity, expensive price, and unsatisfactory utilization efficiency of noble metals. To reduce the usage of noble metals and maintain the high catalytic activity, NMSACs have drawn intensive attention as a new type of WGS catalysts.119,120 For instance, Lin and co-workers constructed a catalyst of isolated Ir atoms anchored on reducible FeOx (denoted as Ir1/FeOx SAC) and investigated its catalytic performance for the WGS reaction. Despite the low Ir loading (0.01 wt%) in the catalyst, the Ir1/FeOx SAC possesses a high reaction rate of 43.4 molCO gIr−1 h−1 at 300 °C as well as a high TOF value of 2.31 s−1, superior to its nanoclusters and nanoparticles, and many reported Au and Pt-based catalysts. The steady-state CO conversions on a series of Ir/FeOx catalysts also reveal that Ir1/FeOx SAC is more active in the WGS reaction (Fig. 7a). The stability of the catalyst can be further investigated by the long-term stability test at 300 °C and AC-STEM characterization. Both the nearly unchanged CO conversion and the uniformly distributed single Ir atoms under 20 h continuous operation confirm the good stability of the Ir1/FeOx SAC. By XANES and H2 temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) analysis, the positively charged Ir single atoms can significantly promote the reduction of the FeOx support, thereby generating more oxygen vacancies as active sites for water dissociation in the WGS process. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between isolated Ir atoms and the reducible FeOx support rich in oxygen vacancies, the Ir1/FeOx SAC exhibits great potential for catalyzing the WGS reaction.120 Besides, an FeOx-supported single Pd atom catalyst (Pd/FeOx) and TiO2-supported single Rh atom catalyst (Rh/TiO2) also confirm the key role of noble metal single atoms in facilitating the generation of oxygen vacancies on reducible supports.121,122
 Fig. 7  (a) CO conversions on a series of Ir/FeOx catalysts at 300 °C. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt/1000-2h-CN and Pt1Na6/1000-2h-CN under WGS conditions. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. AC-HAADF-STEM images of Na-promoted single Pt atoms anchored on (c) mesoporous silica MCM-41 ([Si]MCM41), (d) a microporous K-type L-zeolite (KLTL) and (e) high-surface-area anatase TiO2. (f) TOF plot of various Na-containing Pt catalysts on different supports (TiO2, KLTL, [Si]MCM41, SiO2 and CNTs) for the WGS reaction. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In many previous studies, atomic noble metal species could be stabilized on supports such as titania, iron oxide and ceria through –O ligands. However, it still remained a challenge to eliminate the interference of noble metal NPs in the catalysts at temperatures above ambient, especially on ‘inert’ supports (e.g., silica and zeolites).123 To prepare NMSACs anchored on nonreducible oxides or other oxygen-free supports for the WGS reaction, alkali ion addition is an effective way to stabilize single metal sites along with oxo and hydroxyl groups. For example, single Au atoms (0.25 wt%) on potassium (K) or sodium (Na)-promoted mesoporous MCM-41 silica and KLTL-zeolite were prepared for the WGS reaction at low temperatures (<200 °C) by Yang and co-workers. Based on microscopy studies, the dispersion of Au can be effectively improved by the introduction of alkali metal ions. In situ EXAFS analysis indicates that the atomically dispersed Au species coordinated with alkali ions can result in a significant reduction of the Au–Au coordination number before and after the reaction (from 11 or 12 to 3 or 4), further demonstrating the 100% Au dispersion in the catalysts. By connecting Au–O(OH)x-species with alkali ions through oxygen bonding, the as-formed single-site Au–O(OH)x–(Na or K) ensembles are highly active sites for the WGS reaction.124 The effect of alkali ion addition on the formation of NMSACs has also been confirmed in other studies for the WGS reaction. In the work conducted by Zugic et al., atomically dispersed Pt species can be stabilized on oxygen-free multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) by the introduction of sodium. As shown in the AC-HAADF-STEM image and particle size distribution, more atomically dispersed Pt species remain on the Na-promoted MWNT support in comparison to the Na-free Pt-based catalyst after the WGS reaction. Further in situ atmospheric-pressure (AP) XPS reveals that the Pt 4f peak positions of the Na-promoted Pt catalyst can be kept constant, while an obvious change in the binding energies can be observed in the peak positions of the Na-free Pt catalyst with reduced temperature (Fig. 7b). This result demonstrates the role of Na in stabilizing active oxidized Pt. The formation of the Pt–Ox–Nay–OHz complex in the presence of Na can contribute to preventing metal agglomeration and promoting the WGS reaction.125
To further investigate the ‘support effect’ for the WGS process, Yang et al. reported single Pt atoms anchored on various sodium (Na)-promoted supports including mesoporous silica, zeolites and TiO2. The single Pt sites in the Na-containing Pt catalysts can be confirmed by the observable atomically dispersed Pt in AC-HAADF-STEM micrographs (Fig. 7c–e). Then, the subsequent XPS measurement indicates that the Pt atoms are coordinated with Na–Ox– on the supports. With the addition of Na, more –OH groups can be generated and bonded to Pt atoms to form active Pt(II)–O(OH)x– species, thereby enhancing the WGS activity in a low temperature range (<150–300 °C). Based on the calculated TOF value of Pt atoms on different supports (Fig. 7f), similar results reveal the indirect ‘support effect’ in the WGS process.123 Therefore, the catalytic behaviors of NMSACs rely heavily on the interaction between the atomically dispersed noble metal sites and support surface, which can be greatly modified by the presence of –OH groups. Notably, alkali ion addition plays a vital role in promoting the generation of –OH groups and the stabilization of atomic metal species.


4.1.3. Selective hydrogenation. 
Selective catalytic hydrogenation is a fundamental reaction in the production of various chemicals such as polymers, agrochemicals, fragrances and pharmaceutical compounds for academia and industry.107,126 From the perspectives of the economy and environment, the key to the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds is to improve the selectivity by fabricating highly efficient catalysts. Generally, compared with homogeneous catalysts, heterogeneous catalysts are more commonly utilized for the reaction due to the easy separation and recovery of the catalysts from the products.28,127 In recent years, NMSACs (e.g., Pt, Pd and Au) with uniform atomically dispersed active sites and unique chemical properties have been investigated as a new generation of catalysts. Based on previous research, NMSACs can provide a lower H2 adsorption energy and facilitate H2 activation in comparison to their nanoclusters or nanoparticles, thereby exhibiting superior catalytic activity and selectivity in selective hydrogenation reactions.107,128
Hydrogenation of nitroarenes. 
Hydrogenation of nitroarenes is one of the important subclasses of selective hydrogenation reactions, which involves the production of aromatic amines (e.g., anilines and chloroaniline) or azobenzene in the presence of molecular hydrogen.14 In the work conducted by Wei et al., isolated Pt atoms anchored on FeOx exhibit high selectivity up to 99% for the hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene, superior to the previously reported Pt-based catalysts. In addition, the Pt/FeOx SAC produces a TOF of approximately 1500 h−1, which is about 20 times higher than the reported best results. The remarkable catalytic performance can be ascribed to the following aspects. The positively charged Pt sites and absence of Pt–Pt bonds determined by XAFS techniques are conducive to the favorable adsorption of nitro groups. Moreover, the electron transfer from isolated Pt atoms to the FeOx support attributed to the metal–support interaction also plays an essential role in the chemoselective reduction of nitroarenes.129 Despite the superior catalytic activity per Pt atom, the ultra-low metal loading (0.08 wt%) may hinder the practical application of the Pt/FeOx SAC. Therefore, based on previous research, Wei and co-workers further developed a Pt/FeOx SAC promoted by alkali metals (e.g., Na+, K+ and Li+) with a high Pt loading of 2.16 wt%. After the addition of Na, the formation of Pt–O–Na–O–Fe– species on the surface is helpful to prevent Pt atom agglomeration and produce more positively charged isolated Pt centers for –NO2 group adsorption. The significant positive effect of alkali ions on the catalyst opens up a new route for preparing high-loading NMSACs in selective hydrogenation reactions.130 In another study, Ye et al. reported that single Pt atoms on 12CaO·7Al2O3 (C12A7) crystals yield a high TOF value of 25772 h−1, which is the highest among all the reported Pt group materials (Fig. 8a). Nanoporous C12A7 is an ideal substrate for stabilizing single atoms owing to its unique cavity nanostructure and positive charge. Compared with CaO and Al2O3 as support materials, the desorption of the aniline product is much faster from C12A7. Moreover, the up-shift of the d-band states of Pt atoms on C12A7 can lead to a strong adsorption capability for reactants (e.g., nitroarenes and H2). Therefore, the synergistic effect between the atomically dispersed Pt and the support surface plays a key role in fabricating stable NMSACs and enhancing the catalytic performance for selective hydrogenation and other catalytic reactions.108
 Fig. 8  (a) TOF plot of 0.1Pt anchored on different supports (C12A7, CaO and Al2O3) at elevated reduction temperatures for 4-chloronitrobenzene hydrogenation. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Acetylene conversion and (c) ethylene selectivity of Pd–SA-900, Pd/CN-T (T = 600, 700, 800 °C) and Pd-NP/CN for semi-hydrogenation of acetylene. Energy profile and corresponding structures of the hydrogenation mechanism of acetylene to ethane on the (d) Pd–SAs and (e) Pd(111) surface. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) DFT calculations of the electronic states of atomic Pd alloyed with the Au(111), Ag(111) and Cu(111) surfaces. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) Butene selectivity of Pd1/graphene, Pd-NP/graphene, Pd-NP/graphene-500C and Pd/carbon as a function of the 1,3-butadiene conversion by changing the reaction temperatures. (h) Schematic illustration of the butene selectivity improvement on Pd1/graphene. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Semihydrogenation of acetylene to ethylene. 
In addition to the hydrogenation of nitroarenes, NMSACs also demonstrate highly selective catalysis of semihydrogenation of acetylene to ethylene (C2H2 + H2 → C2H4). For industrial polyethylene production, removing trace amounts of acetylene impurities from ethylene feedstock is a vital step to avoid poisoning of the catalysts. Pd-Based catalysts have been found to be efficient for acetylene hydrogenation; however, achieving high ethylene selectivity and preventing the undesired reaction of ethylene to ethane still remain a challenge due to the strong adsorption of ethylene on the active Pd sites.12,131,132 To address the above problems, many previous studies have achieved high selectivity toward ethylene by employing catalysts containing Pd single atoms or SAAs. For example, Li's group prepared single Pd atoms stabilized on N-doped carbon (Pd–SAs) by the carbonization of a Pd NP@ZIF-8 composite. Compared with the Pd NP sample, the Pd–SAs exhibit a superior acetylene conversion of 96.0% with a higher ethylene selectivity of 93.4% at 120 °C (Fig. 8b and c). Further DFT calculations indicate that the molecular collision possibility between hydrogen and C2H2 can be increased on the Pd–N4 structure in the Pd–SAs as the hydrogen prefers to occupy the N sites while C2H2 prefers the isolated Pd sites (Fig. 8d and e). Therefore, Pd SACs have been confirmed to be highly efficient in selective hydrogenation reactions.133 Apart from Pd single atoms, Cu-alloyed single-atom Pd anchored on silica gel was reported to achieve 100% acetylene conversion, as well as approximately 85% selectivity to ethylene. As revealed in EXAFS spectra, the shorter distance in the first shell compared to Pd foil and the sole presence of Pd–Cu bonds in CuPd0.006/SiO2 suggest CuPd alloy formation and the isolation of Pd atoms by Cu when the atomic ratio of Pd to Cu is 0.006. Then, a microcalorimetric measurement and DFT calculations were conducted to further investigate the origin of the catalytic performance (Fig. 8f). The weak adsorption of ethylene and promotion of H2 dissociation over the Cu-alloyed Pd SAC can be ascribed to the complete isolation of Pd atoms and efficient electron transfer from Cu to Pd, thereby exhibiting excellent catalytic activity and selectivity for the semihydrogenation reaction of acetylene to ethylene.132
Other selective hydrogenation reactions. 
Besides, NMSACs can also be efficient for hydrogenation of various chemicals such as quinoline, 1,3-butadiene and phenylacetylene. For instance, Wang and co-workers employed a coordination-assisted strategy using UiO-66-NH2 hosted-RuCl3 as the precursor to prepare atomically dispersed Ru supported on N-doped porous carbon (denoted as Ru SA/N–C). In the chemoselective hydrogenation of quinoline, Ru SA/N–C demonstrates a high py-THQ selectivity of over 99%, superior to N-doped carbon-supported Ru NPs (79%) and commercial Ru/C (9.0%). With the assistance of the free amine groups, Ru ions can be stabilized as isolated sites by forming strong coordination on the support, resulting in excellent selectivity toward py-THQ.42 In addition, as reported by Lu's group, single Pd atoms on a graphene support fabricated by the ALD strategy give 100% selectivity to butenes at about 50 °C with a TOF value of 0.35 s−1 at 47 °C in the hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene (Fig. 8g). No visible aggregation of metal atoms or activity/selectivity decline after 100 h operation on stream is seen, further confirming the excellent durability of the Pd SAC. The outstanding catalytic performance can be attributed to the changes of the adsorption mode for 1,3-butadiene and enhancement of steric effects on the isolated Pd sites (Fig. 8h).50 In recent years, the selective hydrogenation of phenylacetylene has also been well-investigated as one of the important hydrogenation reactions in industry. For instance, a single-atom Pd catalyst on nanoscale TiO2 synthesized by a self-assembly strategy can achieve a high styrene selectivity of 91% at almost 100% phenylacetylene conversion, as well as a TOF of more than 8000 h−1. Owing to the atomically dispersed active Pd sites, and nanoscale TiO2 with high surface area and unique electronic structure, the as-prepared Pd SAC exhibits better catalytic performance in comparison to the TiO2-supported Pd SAC prepared by the impregnation method and commercial 10% Pd/C.128 These investigations suggest that the selection of the appropriate noble metal element and conductive substrate in the design of NMSACs is of vital importance for a specific selective hydrogenation reaction.


4.1.4. Dehydrogenation and reforming reactions. 
Dehydrogenation and reforming reactions are widely used in industry, involving the critical steps of X–H bond cleavage and hydrogen molecule recombination.134
Dehydrogenation reactions. 
In terms of dehydrogenation reactions, the production of many industrial chemicals has already been realized, such as dehydrogenation of propane to propylene, formaldehyde production via methanol dehydrogenation, and dehydrogenation of ethanol to hydrogen and acetaldehyde. Due to the reversible endothermicity of the dehydrogenation process, the deactivation of the catalyst under harsh conditions may become a problem. Therefore, it is highly desirable to prepare a catalyst with high stability and selectivity at high temperatures and optimize the reaction conditions through various effective methods. Recently, Pt-based materials have been reported to be promising for heterogeneous catalysis. In particular, Pt SACs and SAAs have drawn great attention owing to their exceptional catalytic properties.135,136 For example, Sun et al. prepared γ-alumina-supported Pt/Cu SAA catalysts by an atom dilution method for propane dehydrogenation at high temperatures. When the Pt loading is 0.1 wt%, Pt/Cu displays approximately 90% selectivity toward propylene as well as a high formation rate of 10.6 mol gPt−1 h−1 under atmospheric pressure at 520 °C. As suggested by DFT calculations, the exceptional catalytic performance of atomically dispersed Pt on Cu NPs can be attributed to the appropriate propane dehydrogenation activation barrier and weak binding strength of propylene bonded to the surface. Compared with isolated Pt atoms supported on Ag NPs, the more exposed Pt atoms on the Cu surface can lead to high Pt atom utilization efficiency, thereby enhancing the catalytic activity. Moreover, the prepared Pt/Cu SAA catalyst can maintain excellent stability on stream at high temperatures for more than 120 h, demonstrating its practical application potential in industry.136 Apart from propane dehydrogenation, Pt SAAs were also reported to be efficient for hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane (AB) (NH3BH3 + 2H2O → NH4+ + BO2− + 3H2). In 2017, Li and co-workers successfully synthesized Pt/Ni SAAs composed of atomically dispersed Pt on Ni particles, which could exhibit superb catalytic performance in hydrolytic dehydrogenation of AB to hydrogen. As confirmed by XAFS and electron microscopy (Fig. 9a and b), the atomic Pt sites are uniformly dispersed and surrounded by Ni atoms in the alloys. Further experimental and simulation results reveal that the synergistic effect between the isolated negatively charged Pt atoms and adjacent positively charged Ni atoms can significantly reduce the kinetic barrier in the reaction. Combined with the effect of the active Ni-surrounded Pt center, the Pt/Ni SAAs achieve a high TOF value of 12000 molH2 molPt−1 min−1, which is approximately 21 times as high as the best Pt-based catalysts reported so far.71 Besides, other dehydrogenation reactions such as selective formic acid dehydrogenation and non-oxidative ethanol dehydrogenation have also been investigated in the past few years. For instance, Pt–Cu SAAs prepared by physical vapor deposition can reach a high yield of formic acid dehydrogenation toward CO2 and H2. Compared with Cu(111), the superior catalytic performance can be attributed to the lower O–H bond breaking barrier provided by SAAs. In addition, the Pt–Cu SAA catalyst was also reported to be highly efficient for selective dehydrogenation of ethanol to acetaldehyde and H2 by Sykes's group, implying the great potential of Pt SAAs for dehydrogenation and other heterogeneous catalysis.45
 Fig. 9  (a) Normalized Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of 5% Ni/CNT samples with different Pt amounts. (b) The FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra derived from EXAFS, Δk = 3–10 Å−1. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Methanol conversion and CO2 selectivity of Au1/ZnO, Pt1/ZnO and ZnO-nws as a function of reaction time at 390 °C (left). The corresponding Arrhenius plots of Ln(TOF) (s−1) versus 1/T for the MSR reaction (right). Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Energy profiles for (d) CH3OH dissociation into CO and H atoms, and (e) CO2 formation via the WGS reaction on the α-MoC(111), Pt(111) and Pt1/α-MoC(111) surfaces. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Reforming reactions. 
It has been reported that Pt SACs and SAAs can also efficiently catalyze some reforming reactions, which are the easiest approach to generate hydrogen and syngas from light hydrocarbons (e.g., methanol and ethanol).137 In 2014, isolated Pt and Au atoms anchored on a ZnO nanowire surface (denoted as Pt1/Au1/ZnO) were fabricated by Gu et al. for methanol steam reforming (MSR). Owing to the strong synergistic effect between single Pt/Au atoms and the coordinated oxygen atoms on ZnO, the enhanced binding toward intermediates at stable single active sites can efficiently lower the reaction barriers and even change the reaction routes, further resulting in the outstanding catalytic activity of the Pt1/Au1/ZnO catalyst for the MSR reaction. Specifically, the TOF measured at the isolated Pt sites is over 1000 times as high as the value of pristine ZnO (Fig. 9c).37 In addition to traditional steam methanol reforming at high temperatures (200–350 °C), the aqueous-phase reforming of methanol (APRM) has also been developed to reduce the required energy and achieve a more facile and simpler design for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) applications. Recently, Lin and co-workers reported that atomically dispersed Pt was stabilized on α-molybdenum carbide (α-MoC) taking advantage of the strong interaction between Pt and α-MoC. Notably, when the Pt loading decreases to 0.2%, the 0.2% Pt/α-MoC catalyst with dominant single Pt atoms possesses an exceptional H2 production rate and stability, as well as an excellent TOF value of 18046 h−1 in the APRM process at low temperatures. Such remarkable catalytic performance can be ascribed to the high density of electron-deficient active Pt sites for methanol adsorption and activation, and high water-dissociation activity on the α-MoC substrate (Fig. 9d and e).138 In short, the development of Pt-based SACs and SAAs paves the way to design cost-effective and efficient catalysts for industrial dehydrogenation and reforming reactions.


4.1.5. Other reactions. 
With the rapid development of SACs in recent years, NMSACs have been investigated and applied for other thermal catalytic reactions such as NO oxidation, hydroformylation reactions and oxidation of alcohols. For example, DeBusk's group found that atomically dispersed Pt supported on a θ-Al2O3 substrate was highly efficient for NO oxidation. Previous studies reported that the NO oxidation activity decreases with reduced particle size on the basis of a size-dependent effect. However, the comparable TOF value between supported single-atom Pt and fully formed large-size Pt particles reveals the great potential of small-size single Pt atoms on inert θ-Al2O3 for facilitating NO oxidation. Unlike Pt NPs, the pathway for the oxidation reaction on isolated Pt sites is the modified Langmuir–Hinshelwood (L–H) scheme (Fig. 10a), which does not require the dissociative oxygen adsorption step.139 Besides, Wang and co-workers reported that a single-atom Rh catalyst on a CoO nanosheet support exhibits a remarkable butyraldehyde selectivity of 94.4% and superior TOF of 2065 h−1 in comparison to other reported Rh SACs for the hydroformylation reaction (Fig. 10b). Based on DFT calculations (Fig. 10c–e), the reconstruction of active single Rh sites in Rh/CoO can lead to propene adsorption enhancement and strong interactions between CO and Rh atoms. Owing to the enhanced adsorption and activation of reactants in the co-adsorbed configurations, the Rh/CoO SAC shows excellent catalytic performance under the operation conditions of the hydroformylation reaction.69 In previous literature on the selective aerobic oxidation of allylic alcohols, a mesoporous Al2O3-supported single-atom Pd catalyst (denoted as Pd/meso-Al2O3) was reported to be the most active catalyst with an excellent TOF value of 4400 h−1 and outstanding aldehyde selectivity of over 91%. Compared with conventional γ-Al2O3, the mesoporous Al2O3 support with high surface area shows a better ability to stabilize the isolated Pd sites and promote the Pd atom dispersion, confirming the significant role of substrate optimization in enhancing the catalytic performance. Combined with the simple synthesis and excellent longevity, the Pd/meso-Al2O3 catalyst that contains highly dispersed single Pd centers is responsible for the exceptional catalytic activity and selectivity in the oxidation of alcohols.140 In summary, based on both experimental research and practical applications, the current achievement of NMSACs opens up a door for the rational design of highly efficient catalysts for thermocatalytic applications.
 Fig. 10  (a) NO oxidation pathways on single-atom Pt anchored on the (010) surface of θ-Al2O3. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Product yield and TOF of 0.2% Rh/CoO, 1.0% Rh/CoO and 4.8% Rh/CoO for hydroformylation of propene after 2 h at 100 °C. (c) The model of Rh1/CoO including the top view of the adsorption configurations of H2, CO, and propene on Rh1/CoO, and the top view of the co-adsorbed configuration of both H2 and CO, as well as four co-adsorbed configurations of the reactants and their corresponding adsorption energies. (d and e) Reaction pathways derived from configurations I and II, respectively, in (c). Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 

4.2. Electrocatalysis
As is well known, electrocatalysis plays a crucial role in many energy-conversion processes and industrial applications. Among a range of rationally designed catalysts, supported NMSACs have received great interest in recent years as a result of the robust intrinsic catalytic activity, high density of exposed active sites and excellent stability during electrocatalytic reactions.4,26,40 Thus, the electrochemical applications of atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts in various critical energy-conversion reactions (e.g., the ORR, OER, HER, CO2RR and NRR) are summarized in the following section (Table 3). Moreover, the relationship between the unique structure of single atoms and their performance is also discussed to demonstrate great promise of NMSACs for electrocatalysis.
Table 3 Summary of NMSACs for electrocatalysis




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Performance




ORR via the 2e− pathway


3Pt/CNT_IL_SiO2260
Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)
3 wt%
An H2O2 yield of 63.7% at −0.5 mA cm−2


h-Pt1–CuSx215
Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)
24.8 at%
An H2O2 yield of 92–96% in a wide potential range of 0.05–0.7 V vs. RHE, and H2O2 productivity of 546 ± 30 mol kgcat−1 h−1


Pt/TiN213
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.05 wt%, 0.1 wt%, 0.35 wt%
An H2O2 yield of 90% (0.1 wt% and 0.05 wt%), and mass activity of 78 A gPt−1 at an overpotential of 0.05 V (0.35 wt%)


Pt/TiC214
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.2 wt%
An H2O2 selectivity of 68.0% and ORR activity of −0.96 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V (vs. RHE)


C@C3N4–Pd1212
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.5 wt%
An H2O2 yield of up to 94% and mass activity of 8.5 A mgPd−1 at 0.2 V


Pd–CNT261
Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)
∼0.1 at%
N.A.


PdClx/C262
Wet chemistry strategy
1.3 wt%
An H2O2 selectivity of >90% with a mass-normalized activity of 72.8 A gPd−1


Au Pd nanoalloys216
Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential reduction method)
8.9 (AuPd)/C wt%
An H2O2 yield of up to nearly 95%


3Os/CNT_IL_SiO2260
Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)
3 wt%
An H2O2 yield of 18.8% at −0.5 mA cm−2






Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content

E
1/2

Electrolyte




ORR via the 4e− pathway


Pt1–N/BP218
Wet chemistry strategy
0.4 wt%
760/870 mV
0.1 M HClO4/0.1 M KOH


Pt1/NPC55
A photochemical solid-phase reduction method
Up to 3.8 wt%
887 mV
0.1 M KOH


Pt1@Fe–N–C263
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
2.1 wt%
800 mV
0.1 M KOH


Pt/MoN264
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
∼0.2 wt%
N.A.
0.1 M KOH


CoSe2−x–Pt265
Plasma-photochemical strategy
2.25 wt%
830 mV
0.1 M KOH


A–CoPt–NC219
Electrochemical activation
∼0.16 wt%
960 mV
0.1 M KOH


Pt SA–ZIF–NC24
Atomic layer deposition
0.8 wt%
875 mV
0.1 M HClO4


A FePt nanosheet (NS) catalyst with neighboring Pt266
A CO-assisted method
6.7 wt%
N.A.
0.1 M KOH


Pd/Au–Pt nanowires267
Wet chemistry strategy
2.74 at%
939 mV
0.1 M KOH


Pd/MnO2–CNT268
Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)
0.43 wt%
∼77 mV more negative than Pt/C
0.1 M KOH


Ru–N/G269
Wet chemistry strategy
1.7 wt%
750 mV
0.1 M HClO4


0.4-Ru@NG-75064
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.76 wt%
723 mV
0.1 M HClO4


Ru-SSC270
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.42 wt%
824 mV
0.1 M HClO4


Au1Nx–CN77
Amine-induced-reduction method
Up to ∼0.7 wt%
∼760 mV
0.1 M KOH


Ir–SAC61
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.2 wt%
864 mV
0.1 M HClO4






Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Overpotential (at 10 mA cm−2)
Tafel slope
Electrolyte




OER


Pt/NiO225
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.5 wt%
358 mV
33 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Pt@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2.28 wt%
430 mV
136 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Pt1@Fe–N–C263
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
2.1 wt%
310 mV
62 mV dec−1
0.1 M KOH


CoSe2−x–Pt265
Plasma-photochemical strategy
2.25 wt%
255 mV
31 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Pd@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
1.9 wt%
470 mV
122 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Pd/MnO2–CNT268
Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)
0.43 wt%
N.A.
N.A.
0.1 M KOH


Ru@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2 wt%
470 mV
140 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


0.4-Ru@NG-75064
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.76 wt%
372 mV
68 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ru–N–C226
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1 wt%
267 mV
52.6 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Ru1–Pt3Cu271
Galvanic replacement
N.A.
220 mV
N.A.
0.1 M HClO4


Ru/CoFe–LDHs272
Wet chemistry strategy
0.45 wt%
198 mV
39 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


RuSACoFe2/G273
Wet chemistry strategy (the micelle incorporated sol–gel method and carbothermal reduction)
2.01 wt%
180 mV
51 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ru SA/(AC-FeCoNi)274
Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)
0.67 wt%
205 mV
40 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF229
Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)
Up to 6.8 wt%
197 mV
71.7 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Au1Nx–CN77
Amine-induced-reduction method
Up to ∼0.7 wt%
450 mV
112 mV dec−1
0.1 M KOH


Au/NiFe LDH224
Electrodeposition method
0.4 wt%
237 mV
N.A.
1.0 M KOH


Au@Ni2P275
High-temperature pyrolysis
N.A.
240 mV
58 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Au1–CoSe2276
Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)
0.1 wt%
303 mV
42 mV dec−1
0.1 M KOH


Atomic Ir@Co nanosheets277
Wet chemistry strategy (atomically confined alloying strategy)
1.7 wt%
273 mV
99 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ir@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2.2 wt%
260 mV
163 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ir–NiO87
Wet chemistry strategy
Up to ∼18 wt%
215 mV
38 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


A-Ir1/Co0.8Fe0.2Se2@Ni278
Electrochemical deposition
Upper limit between 3.5% and 4.7%
140 mV
N.A.
1.0 M KOH


np-Ir/NiFeO279
Electrochemical deposition
0.1 wt%
197 mV
29.6 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ir–NiCo2O4 NSs280
Co-electrodeposition method
0.41%
240 mV
60 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


CoIr-0.2281
Wet chemistry strategy
9.7 wt%
235/373 mV
70.2/117.5 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS






HER


Pt@PCM282
Wet chemistry strategy (a dynamic reaction approach)
0.53 wt%
105/139 mV
63.7/73.6 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH


SWNT/Pt283
Electrochemical deposition
0.19–0.75 at%
27 mV
38 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2.1 wt%
310 mV
62 mV dec−1
0.1 M KOH


Pt1/OLC236
Atomic layer deposition
0.27 wt%
38 mV
36 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


PtSA-NT-NF284
Electrochemical deposition
1.76 wt%
24 mV
30 mV dec−1
1.0 M PBS


Pt1/NPC55
A photochemical solid-phase reduction method
Up to 3.8 wt%
25 mV
28 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


ALD50Pt/NGN84
Atomic layer deposition
2.1 wt%
N.A.
29 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt/np-Co0.85Se285
Electrochemical vacancy manufacturing and atom embedding strategy
∼1.03 wt%
55 mV
35 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA238
Electrochemical exfoliation
1.2 wt%
30 mV
30 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt1@Fe–N–C263
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
2.1 wt%
60 mV
42 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt1/hNCNC237
Wet chemistry strategy (impregnation–adsorption method)
2.92 wt%
15 mV
24 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt SA/DG74
Thermal emitting strategy
2.1 wt%
23 mV
25 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt–MoS2286
Wet chemistry strategy (a direct chemical synthesis method)
1.7 wt%
145 mV
96 mV dec−1
0.1 M H2SO4


Pt1/MC53
Photochemical reduction method
2.6 wt%
65 mV at 100 mA cm−2
∼30 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Isolated single Pt atoms on a bismuth ultramicroelectrode287
Electrodeposition method
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
40 mM HClO4 and 0.5 M NaClO4


Pt-GDY288
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
4.65 μg cm−2
N.A.
46.6 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt SAS/AG73
Microwave reduction method
0.44 wt%
12 mV
29.33 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt SA/WO3−x289
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.42 wt%
47 mV
45 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt-Containing nanowire/C290
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
N.A.
N.A.
0.1 M HClO4


Pt/RuCeOx-PA291
Photoactivation strategy
0.49 wt%
41 mV
31 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


PtSA–Co(OH)2@Ag NW292
Electrochemical phase transformation strategy
∼2.8 wt%
29 mV
35.72 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Pt–SA/MoS2293
Electrodeposition method
5.1 wt%
59 mV
31 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt–Ru dimers294
Atomic layer deposition
Pt 0.9 wt% Ru 0.31 wt%
N.A.
28.9 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt–Fe/N/C295
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
1.5 wt%
51 mV
48 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


SA Pt-decorated VS2/CP296
Photothermal reduction method
0.13 wt%
122 mV
54.3 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pd/Au–Pt nanowires267
Wet chemistry strategy
2.74 at%
20.6 mV
27 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt-1T′ MoS2235
Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)
1.04 wt%
80 mV
88.4 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt–PVP/TNR@GC297
Photochemical reduction method
1.75 wt%
21 mV
27 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


PtSA@BP298
Wet chemistry strategy (a cascade surface immobilization strategy)
2.5 wt%
26 mV
37 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


K2PtCl4@NC-M231
Ball-milling method
1.92 wt%
11 mV
21 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt/NiS@Al2O3299
High-temperature pyrolysis
2.8 wt%
34 mV
35 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt1/NMC105
Ultralow-temperature photochemical strategy
2.54 wt%
55 mV at 100 mA cm−2
26 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt@MoS2/NiS2234
High-temperature pyrolysis
1.8 at%
34 mV
40 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pd–MoS2300
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
78 mV
80 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pd/graphdiyne239
Electrodeposition method
0.2%
55 mV
47 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pt-1T-MoS252
Electrodeposition method
1.1 at%
210 mV
34 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


RuSAs@PN301
Wet chemistry strategy (a PN-assisted strategy)
0.33 wt%
24 mV
38 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Ru@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2 wt%
103 mV
210 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ru–C3N4 SACs302
Wet chemistry strategy
0.153 mg cm−2
140 mV
57 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Ru@C3N4/rGO303
Wet chemistry strategy
1.93 at%
80 mV
55 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


0.4-Ru@NG-75064
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.76 wt%
90/35 mV
N.A./35.9 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH


RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx304
Wet chemistry strategy
1.2 wt%
76 mV
90 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


SA-Ru–MoS2305
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.2–7.5 wt%
76 mV
21 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ni5P4–Ru/CC88
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
More than 3.83 wt%
54 mV
52 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


Ru SA–Ni2P NP306
Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)
2.2 wt%
125/57/260 mV
71/75/N.A. mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS


Ru–MoS2/CC307
Electrodeposition method
0.37 wt%
61/41/114 mV
N.A./114 mV/N.A. dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS


ECM@Ru233
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.68 wt%
63/83 mV
47/59 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH


Rh–MoS2240
Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot solvent-thermal process)
4.8%
67 mV
54 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF229
Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)
Up to 6.8 wt%
44 mV
N.A.
1.0 M KOH


FR-NCS308
Wet chemistry strategy
1.1 at%
36 mV
26 mV dec−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Ir@Co/NC228
Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)
2.2 wt%
55 mV
119 mV dec−1
1.0 M KOH


C–Ir1/Co0.8Fe0.2Se2@ Ni278
Electrodeposition method
Upper limit between 3.5% and 4.7%
8 mV
N.A.
1.0 M KOH






Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Performance




CO2RR


Pt-2H-MoS252
Electrodeposition method
1.1 at%
An FECO of 4.56% at −1.6 VRHE


Pd@Au241
Wet chemistry strategy
N.A.
An FECO of ∼80% and a JCO of 1.6 mA cm−2 at −0.5 V


Pd–NC246
High-temperature pyrolysis
∼2.95 wt%
An FECO of 55% at −0.5 VRHE; a JCO of 0.244 mA cm−2 at −0.4 VRHE and 2.20 mA cm−2 at −0.8 VRHE


Ag2-G309
Wet chemistry strategy
0.1 wt%
An FECO of 93.4% and a JCO of 11.87 mA cm−2 at −0.7 V






NRR


Pd-GDY310
Wet chemistry strategy (a self-reduction strategy)
1.02 ± 0.04 wt%
An FENH3 of 31.62 ± 1.06% and a yield rate of 4.45 ± 0.30 mgNH3 h−1 mgPd−1 at −0.16 V vs. RHE


PdCu/NC311
Wet chemistry strategy (a dissolution-and-carbonization method)
2.23 wt%
An FENH3 of 24.8 ± 0.8% and an NH3 yield rate of 69.2 ± 2.5 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.45 V vs. RHE


Ru SA/N–C62
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.18 wt%
An FENH3 of 29.6% with a JNH3 of −0.13 mA cm−2; a yield rate of 120.9 μgNH3 mgcat−1 h−1 at −0.2 V vs. RHE


Ru@ZrO2/NC247
Wet chemistry strategy (a hydrothermal method)
0.1 wt%
An FENH3 of ∼21% at −0.11 V with an overpotential of 0.17 V; a yield rate of 3.665 mgNH3 h−1 mgRu−1 at −0.21 V vs. RHE


SA Ru–Mo2CTX251
Wet chemistry strategy
∼1.41 wt%
An FENH3 of 25.77% and an NH3 yield rate of 40.57 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.3 V vs. RHE


Ru/H-ZSM-5312
The integration of microwave single-mode technology with incipient wetness impregnation
0.2 wt%
A synthesis rate of 1.26 molNH3 h−1 gRu−1 at 300 °C and 1 MPa


CF-Ru SA/g-C3N4313
Wet chemistry strategy
0.6 wt%
An FENH3 of 8.3% and an NH3 yield rate of 23.0 μg h−1 mgcat−1 at a low overpotential of 0.05 V vs. RHE


Rh SA/GDY314
Wet chemistry strategy
13.22 wt%
An FENH3 of 20.36%, an NH3 formation rate of 74.15 μg h−1 cm−2 and an NH3 partial current of 0.35 mA cm−2 at −0.20 V vs. RHE under pressurized conditions of 55 atm of N2


Au1/C3N4315
Wet chemistry strategy
0.15 wt%
An FENH4+ of 11.1% at −0.1 V vs. RHE; an NH4+ yield rate of 1305 μg h−1 mgAu−1


AuSA–NDPC252
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
0.205 wt%
An FENH3 of 12.3% and a yield rate of 2.32 μgNH3 h−1 cm−2 at −0.2 V vs. RHE


SA-Ag/NC253
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.39 wt%
An FENH3 of 21.9% at −0.60 V vs. RHE, and an NH3 yield rate of 270.9 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 or 69.4 mg h−1 mgAg−1 at −0.65 V vs. RHE






MOR


50ALDPt/GNS254
Atomic layer deposition
1.52 wt%
A methanol oxidation peak current density of 22.9 mA cm−2






FAOR


Pt4Au96257
Wet chemistry strategy (a colloidal synthetic method)
5.5 wt%
An FAOR mass activity of 3.77 A mgPt−1


Pt1/ATO258
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 8 wt%
An FAOR mass activity of 9.16 A mgPt−1 (1 wt% Pt1/ATO) and 0.89 A mgPt−1 (8 wt% Pt1/ATO) at around 0.6 V


Pt/meso_S–C33
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
Up to 10 wt%
An FAOR mass activity of 2.38 A mgPt−1 at ∼0.6 V


SA-Rh/CN63
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.92 wt%
An FAOR mass activity of 16.1 A mg−1 at the peak potential


Ir1/CN259
High-temperature pyrolysis
1.2 wt%
An FAOR mass activity of 12.9 A mgIr−1 at 0.7 V





4.2.1. Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and metal–air batteries have emerged as promising electrochemical energy-conversion technologies owing to the high efficiency and zero emissions. In the operating process, the electrocatalytic ORR occurs at the cathode to convert chemical energy into electrical energy.81,209,210 Generally, the reduction of oxygen may follow either a two-electron (O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2) or a four-electron pathway (O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O) depending on the preservation of the O–O bond during the ORR process. The former two-electron route is a facile and energy-saving synthetic pathway for producing the important industrial fine chemical hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), while the latter involving direct water generation is preferred for energy conversion and storage devices due to the high energy-conversion efficiency.29,80,112 Usually, Pt-based materials are employed as efficient electrocatalysts to overcome the sluggish kinetics of the ORR. However, the supply scarcity and high cost could severely limit their large-scale commercialization. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop low-cost and high-performance catalysts as alternatives to the traditional Pt-based catalysts. Recently, many single noble metal atoms (e.g., Pt, Pd and Ru) supported on conductive carbon substrates have been reported to be effective catalysts for the ORR owing to their maximum atom utilization efficiency of noble metals and excellent stability.85,211
ORR via the 2e− pathway. 
For the two-electron reduction pathway, the reaction occurring at the atomic sites can effectively preserve the O–O bond, further resulting in high selectivity to H2O2.212 In 2016, the Lee group employed the incipient wetness impregnation method to prepare isolated Pt atoms on TiN NPs with the assistance of chlorine ligands. The formed Pt SACs predominantly undergo a two-electron pathway for electrochemical H2O2 production in acidic conditions with a high yield of 90%. Both HAADF-STEM (Fig. 11a) and EXAFS characterization confirm the presence of single Pt atoms in the 0.35 wt% Pt/TiN catalyst, which can be stabilized at the N-vacancy sites on the support according to previous DFT calculations. Compared with TiN-supported Pt NPs, single-atom Pt possesses the more reduced state of Pt and stronger interaction between isolated Pt sites and the TiN support based on XANES and EXAFS analysis. Specifically, the 0.35 wt% Pt/TiN catalyst achieves an outstanding mass activity of 78 A gPt−1 at an overpotential of 0.05 V. Such excellent catalytic activity for H2O2 production can be attributed to the insufficient OO bond breaking on the discontinuous isolated Pt sites. Therefore, this work demonstrates that the atomically dispersed Pt sites prefer to follow a two-electron pathway different from the Pt NPs.213 Furthermore, the role of the support in single-atom Pt catalysts for H2O2 production was also investigated by Lee and co-workers. Compared with Pt/TiN, isolated Pt atoms supported on TiC exhibit higher catalytic activity and selectivity, and better stability owing to the weaker interaction with oxygen species and better preservation of the O–O bond on the TiC surface. Thus, the selection of an appropriate support for anchoring single atoms is significant for designing high-performance catalysts considering the support effect.214 Recently, high-concentration atomically dispersed Pt supported on amorphous CuSx (denoted as h-Pt1–CuSx) was reported to be a promising catalyst for H2O2 synthesis. By adopting the ion-exchange method, the Pt precursor (Pt2+) can be reduced to Pt0 and stabilized on the support surface (Cu1.94S nanoparticles) by forming strong coordination with sulfur. Then, after the oxidation and removement of the interior of Cu1.94S support, abundant isolated Pt sites can be achieved in the hollow structure. Owing to the rich atomic active sites, h-Pt1–CuSx yields an excellent selectivity of 92–96% toward H2O2 in a potential range of 0.05–0.7 V vs reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in acidic conditions (Fig. 11b and c), as well as an ultrahigh H2O2 productivity of 546 ± 30 mol kgcat−1 h−1.215 In addition to Pt SACs, other noble metals have also been developed as efficient ORR catalysts for H2O2 production. For instance, Kim et al. prepared a single-atom Pd catalyst stabilized on a C@C3N4 support with the aid of rich N sites by the wet impregnation method. When the Pd loading is 0.5 wt%, the catalyst exhibits an outstanding activity of 8.5 A mgPd−1 at 0.2 V and selectivity up to 94% for H2O2 production. However, a further increase in the Pd loading can lead to a decrease in selectivity as a result of the formation of Pd ensembles. Based on DFT calculations, the superior H2O2 selectivity of C@C3N4–Pd1 compared to C@C3N4 supported single-atom Pt should be attributed to the weaker binding energy of O2 at single Pd sites (−0.99 eV). Thus, Pd SACs can be efficient electrocatalysts for selective production of H2O2.212 In another study, single atom Au–Pd nanoalloys composed of isolated Pd atoms (8% Pd molar content) embedded in Au NPs also result in the two-electron pathway, with a high H2O2 selectivity of up to 95%. Obviously, compared with pure gold and Au–Pd alloys with contiguous Pd ensembles on the surface, the Au as a ‘host’ modified by the individual Pd ‘guest’ atoms exhibits significantly enhanced oxygen reduction toward H2O2, demonstrating the great potential of Au alloyed with isolated transition metal atoms for electrocatalytic H2O2 production.216
 Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image of 0.35 wt% Pt/TiN. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) RRDE results for h-Pt1–CuSx, Pt NPs on Cu1.94S, Cu1.94S, PtS2 and Pt/C in 0.1 M O2-saturated HClO4 electrolyte. (c) The H2O2 selectivity of these catalysts. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. RRDE polarization curves of Pt1–N/BP, Pt1/BP, N/BP, BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated (d) 0.1 M HClO4 and (e) 0.1 M KOH solution, respectively. Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Top view of the charge densities of (f) a(Co–Pt)@N8V4 and (g) a(Pt–Pt)@N8V4. (h) Schematic illustration of the ORR reaction pathway on the a(Co–Pt)@N8V4 catalyst. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
ORR via the 4e− pathway. 
An efficient 4e− ORR can be achieved by the effective adsorption of O2 molecules on two neighboring active sites for O–O bond breaking. In the past years, many studies reported that Pt NPs with high Pt content could be practical for the ORR toward H2O/OH− in fuel cells and metal–air batteries, while the high cost is still the major bottleneck for their large-scale applications. To reduce the price and improve the performance, reducing the Pt particle size to the atomic level is one of the most effective strategies for improving the Pt atom utilization efficiency. Recent studies demonstrated that N-coordinated and C-coordinated atomic Pt sites prefer to catalyze the ORR via a four-electron pathway.29,217 For example, Liu et al. developed a cheap N-doped carbon black-supported atomically dispersed Pt catalyst with a Pt loading of 0.4 wt% for an efficient four-electron ORR. The formed Pt SAC with N co-doping (denoted as Pt1–N/BP) offers a higher half-wave potential of 0.76 VRHE and 0.87 VRHE than pure BP, N-doped BP and a BP-supported Pt SAC in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M KOH solutions, respectively, revealing the significant role of the synergistic effect between single-atom Pt and doped-N for enhancing the ORR performance (Fig. 11d and e). Besides, when employing the Pt1–N/BP catalyst at the cathode for acidic H2/O2 fuel cell measurements, a high Pt utilization of 0.13 gPt kW−1 and excellent fuel cell durability could be achieved. Further DFT calculations demonstrate that the main active sites for the 4e− ORR are atomic Pt centers anchored by single pyridinic-N, different from many reported Pt SACs and traditional Pt/C. Therefore, the doping of N on carbon-supported single-atom Pt catalysts sheds light on the design of cost-effective and powerful electrocatalysts for the ORR in the future.218 In addition, the formation of metal atom pairs at the atomic scale on defective carbon was also reported to be a feasible strategy for achieving high selectivity to H2O/OH− in the ORR. In 2018, Zhang and co-workers demonstrated that atomic Pt–Co trapped in the defects of N-doped carbon (A-CoPt–NC) shows outstanding catalytic activity and stability for the 4e− ORR in alkaline conditions, as well as superior specific and mass activities to commercial Pt/C. Compared with the A-CoPt–C catalyst without N doping, the absence of Pt–Pt coordination and no observable Pt NPs in the characterization reveal the important role of N in trapping and stabilizing atomic Pt. According to the DFT calculations (Fig. 11f–h), the synergistic effect between atomic Pt and Co sites can lead to the shift of the d orbitals and proper charge redistribution, thereby greatly enhancing the ORR performance with the four-electron pathway.219 Apart from Pt SACs, other NMSACs such as Au, Ru and Ir also display remarkable catalytic performance for the ORR. An efficient “amine-induced reduction” method was applied by Liu and co-workers to prepare Au1Nx single sites on a graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) support. Owing to the opposite charge, the adsorbed auric chloride group containing Au3+ ions can first combine with the electron donor N species of amine, then reduce to the lower valence state of Au1+ and anchor on the g-C3N4 surface by the formation of an Au–N bond. Characterization by HAADF-STEM shows that the atomic metal sites are uniformly dispersed on the support with the absence of observable metal NPs. Further XPS and EXAFS validate the strong interaction of Au–N bonding for atomic Au1Nx single sites. Compared with the commercial Pt/C, the g-C3N4-supported Au1Nx single-site catalyst shows comparable ORR activity with a half-wave potential of approximately 0.76 V, and superior kinetics with a Tafel slope of 74 mV dec−1 in alkaline conditions.77 Additionally, an Ir-SAC with an Ir–N–C configuration was successfully prepared by Xiao and co-workers using ZIF-8 as a suitable host to encapsulate the guest Ir acetylacetonate. After the high-temperature annealing process, the formed single Ir atoms anchored on the porous nitrogenous carbon deliver a half-wave potential of 0.864 V in acidic electrolyte, outperforming N-doped carbon-supported Ir NPs and many recently reported catalysts for the ORR. Moreover, an exceptional mass activity of 12.2 A mgIr−1 and ultrahigh TOF value of 24.3 e− site−1 s−1 at 0.85 V (vs. RHE) can also be achieved by the Ir-SAC as a result of the optimal adsorption energy of ORR intermediates on the isolated Ir–N4 sites.61 In summary, the surrounding atomic configuration of SACs can significantly influence the catalytic activity and selectivity for the ORR. Based on theoretical calculations, rational design of NMSACs opens up new opportunities for developing highly efficient and durable catalysts with ideal nanostructures and enhanced ORR performance.


4.2.2. Oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 
The OER is a critical half reaction at the anode in many sustainable energy conversion and storage devices such as water electrolyzers and rechargeable metal–air batteries. Owing to the sluggish kinetics of the four-electron transfer process and the requirement for applying large overpotentials in comparison to the cathodic reaction, tremendous efforts have been made to develop highly efficient and stable electrocatalysts for enhancing the energy conversion efficiency.40,220–222 Generally, noble metal-based catalysts such as IrO2 and RuO2 are regarded as the most efficient OER electrocatalysts in terms of the high performance, while the low abundance, high cost and poor long-term stability are the major hindrances to their large-scale application. As such, NMSACs have garnered great attention for the OER because of the unique physiochemical properties and exceptional atom utilization efficiency.223–225
Inspired by the unique and stable properties of M–N–C moieties, Cao and co-workers synthesized a highly efficient and durable nitrogen-carbon-supported single-atom Ru catalyst through the wet impregnation strategy, followed by controlled pyrolysis. Based on EXAFS analysis (Fig. 12a), atomic Ru is successfully coordinated with four neighboring pyridinic-N atoms to form an Ru1–N4 configuration. XPS and NMR characterizations reveal that the partial replacement of C atoms by P atoms can effectively enhance the electrical conductivity without a framework change. In 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte, the overpotentials of the Ru–N–C catalyst are 267 and 340 mV at 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, which are much lower than those of RuO2/C. Moreover, the outstanding catalytic performance can be maintained for more than 30 h during continuous operation. It is worth noting that both XAFS (Fig. 12b and c) and synchrotron radiation-based FTIR (SR-FTIR) (Fig. 12d and e) demonstrate that the O–Ru1–N4 structure can be formed by pre-adsorbing single oxygen atoms on Ru1–N4 sites under the working potential, resulting in a reaction barrier reduction, thereby enhancing the OER activity in acidic conditions.226 In another study, atomically dispersed Ru on N-doped graphene (denoted as 0.4-Ru@NG-750) prepared by the high-temperature annealing strategy demonstrates that the stable RuN4(O)Cx structure shows great potential for catalyzing the OER in alkaline conditions. By effectively optimizing the *OH/*O adsorption on the active sites, the 0.4-Ru@NG-750 catalyst possesses superior catalytic performance for the OER in comparison to 0.4-Ru@G-750 and NG.64
 Fig. 12  (a) The R-space curve-fitting of ex situ Ru–N–C. The inset is the structure of the Ru site in Ru–N–C. (b) Operando EXAFS spectra and first-shell fitting curves for Ru–N–C under open circuit conditions and working conditions during the OER process. (c) Operando XANES spectra at the Ru K-edge for Ru–N–C during the OER process. The inset is the magnified pre-edge XANES region. (d) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for Ru–N–C during the OER process in acidic media. (e) The enlarged infrared signal appearing at ∼764 cm−1 in the FTIR spectra. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the SAu/NiFe LDH, NiFe LDH and bare Ti mesh in 1.0 M KOH solution. (g) Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope for the SAu/NiFe LDH and NiFe LDH. (h) Differential charge densities of the NiFe LDH with and without an Au atom when one oxygen atom is adsorbed on the active Fe site. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) High-magnification HAADF-STEM image of Ir1@Co/NC. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) The free energy diagram of the OER on M SAC–CuO (M = Rh, Ir, Au, Ru). (k) Computed free energy diagram of the HER in alkaline conditions. Reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, the decoration of other noble metal single atoms such as Au and Ir has also been reported to be efficient for tuning the local electronic structure and boosting the electrocatalytic OER activity of the support materials.227 For instance, Zhang's group developed an NiFe layered double hydroxide (LDH)-supported single-atom Au catalyst with an Au loading of 0.4 wt% through an electrodeposition method. Compared with the NiFe LDH, the Au/NiFe LDH catalyst requires a lower overpotential of 237 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline conditions (Fig. 12f and g). The theoretical results demonstrate that the active sites for the OER are the Fe atoms in the in situ formed NiFe oxyhydroxide. With the decoration of isolated Au atoms, the charge redistribution of the active Fe center and the adjacent atoms can lead to the promotion of the OH− adsorption process and a reduction in the adsorption energies of the OOH* and O* intermediates, thus improving the OER activity (Fig. 12h).224 In Lai's study, a series of noble metal single atoms (e.g. Ir1, Ru1, Pt1, and Pd1) were successfully anchored on an N-doped porous carbon support with dispersed Co NPs (denoted as M1@Co/NC) using a facile π-electron-assisted strategy. Interestingly, as revealed in high-magnification HAADF images (Fig. 12i), the isolated metal atoms can be stabilized on the N-doped carbon layers and Co NPs to form M1@NC and M1@Co SAAs, respectively. Among the M1@Co/NC catalysts, Ir1@Co/NC possesses the highest catalytic performance for both the OER and HER in 1.0 M KOH solution. In particular, the achieved overpotential of 260 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER is significantly smaller than that of the commercial IrO2 (385 mV). Based on DFT investigations, unlike the Ir1@NC3 structure beneficial for catalyzing the HER, the active Ir1@CoO (Ir) site plays an important role in the enhancement of the OER activity. Benefiting from the unique geometric and electronic structures, the energy barrier can be effectively lowered at the Ir1@Co site, thereby achieving outstanding OER performance.228 In addition, although Rh SAs were rarely reported for the OER, Xu et al. prepared atomically dispersed Rh supported on CuO nanowire arrays on copper foam (denoted as Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF) as a highly efficient OER electrocatalyst in alkaline conditions. After atomic Rh doping by the cation exchange strategy, the Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF catalyst delivers a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an extremely low overpotential of 197 mV, exceeding Ir/C/CF and other previously reported alkaline OER electrocatalysts. Moreover, it also shows a lower Tafel slope of 71.7 mV dec−1 compared to Ir/C/CF, Rh NP/CuO NA/CF and CuO NA/CF, demonstrating the significant role of Rh SAs in accelerating the OER kinetics. According to DFT calculations, four-coordination is the most efficient structure of Rh SAC–CuO for catalyzing the OER owing to the weaker binding ability of the O*, OH* and OOH* intermediates. Besides, to further investigate the effect of Rh SAs on the catalytic performance, different NMSAC–CuO NA/CF including Ir, Ru, Au and Os have been developed by the same method. Remarkably, Rh SAC–CuO not only has the lowest overpotential of 0.37 V, but also possesses the lowest electron transfer number of 0.97 e− between the center metal sites and the support compared to other M SAC–CuO NA/CF (M = Ir, Ru, Au, Os), revealing that Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF is highly efficient for catalyzing the OER (Fig. 12j and k). Therefore, the partial substitution of Cu atoms with single-atom Rh through a facile cation exchange reaction can greatly enhance the OER activity in alkaline conditions.229 To sum up, these studies highlight the significance of the electronic and coordination structures of atomic metal sites for optimizing the energy barrier toward the OER process, which is conducive to achieving excellent electrocatalytic OER performance.


4.2.3. Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
The development of a sustainable and clean approach to generate high-purity hydrogen is highly desirable for future energy demands. Among various technologies, the electrocatalytic HER as a critical cathodic reaction in water electrolysis (2H+ + 2e− → H2) has attracted significant attention for hydrogen-related production (e.g., electrodeposition and hydrogen fuel cells) owing to the high energy conversion efficiency and environmental friendliness.28,40,230 Currently, noble-metal Pt-based catalysts are regarded as the most active electrocatalysts for the HER by virtue of the fast reaction kinetics and small overpotentials. However, their practical application in industry could be severely hampered by the low abundance and high cost.231–233 To overcome this issue, downsizing noble metal NPs or clusters to the atomic level on the support has emerged as one of the most promising strategies to maximize the atom utilization and optimize the electrocatalytic performance.234,235 In recent studies, many supported SACs based on noble metals such as Pt, Pd, Ru and Rh have been successfully prepared and employed for catalyzing the HER. For instance, Song's research group synthesized single Pt atoms anchored on onion-like carbon nanospheres (denoted as Pt1/OLC) via the ALD strategy. The OLC substrate was obtained by annealing surface-oxidized detonation nanodiamonds (DNDs) at high temperatures (1500 °C). In the HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 13a), atomically dispersed Pt can be clearly observed on the support in Pt1/OLC with the absence of Pt NPs or clusters. On the contrary, the observable aggregation of Pt atoms on the reoxidized support after heat treatment or on the support prepared at low temperatures reveals that the surface oxygen functionalities (mainly phenolic oxygen) play a role in the formation of isolated Pt atoms. According to FT-EXAFS analysis and DFT calculations, the Pt SAs are stabilized on the OLC surface by forming the stable coordination configuration of Pt–O2C1 with a high diffusion energy barrier (3.2 eV). Furthermore, the computational hydrogen evolution model suggests that the proton mass transfer to the Pt sites can be improved by the strong local electric field effect. Therefore, the optimized Pt1/OLC electrocatalyst exhibits superior HER performance (η10 = −38 mV and TOF = 40.78 H2 s−1 at 100 mV) comparable to commercial Pt/C, and exceptional stability in acidic media.236 In another study, a nitrogen dopant was introduced into the carbon support to anchor noble metal single atoms. Owing to the strong metal–support interaction, singly dispersed Pt atoms can be stabilized on hierarchical nitrogen-doped carbon nanocages (Pt1/hNCNC) with high Pt loading (2.92 wt%). In HER tests, Pt1/hNCNC-2.92 demonstrates a η10 of 15 mV and a Tafel slope of 24 mV dec−1 in acidic conditions, outperforming Pt/hCNC without N-doping. Specifically, this catalyst also gives a mass activity 18.5 times higher (7.60 A mgPt−1) than that of commercial Pt/C, as well as extraordinary stability (for 10000 cycles) (Fig. 13b). From the XPS spectra (Fig. 13c), Pt1/hNCNC shows a lower binding energy in comparison to Pt1/hCNC, revealing the higher electron density of isolated Pt atoms in the Pt1/hNCNC catalyst as a result of the N dopant anchoring effects. DFT studies further indicate that the N participation can effectively improve the ability to capture [PtCl6]2− anions and stabilize the derived single Pt atoms by electrostatic interactions combined with micropore trapping, which offers a facile and convenient route for constructing various NMSACs (Fig. 13d).237 Besides the carbon support, other substrates such as metal oxides and metal sulfides have also been applied for the synthesis of highly efficient NMSACs. Zhang and co-workers prepared double transition metal MXene nanosheets to immobilize single Pt atoms by an electrochemical exfoliation strategy (denoted as Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA). Compared with pristine Mo2TiC2Tx, electrochemically exfoliated Mo2TiC2Tx-VMo and commercial Pt/C, the as-prepared Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA shows a superior HER performance with an overpotential of 30, 77 and 104 mV at a current density of 10, 100 and 200 mA cm−2, respectively, as well as a small Tafel slope of 30 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (Fig. 13e and f). Moreover, the Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA catalyst can also possess comparable catalytic activity to commercial Pt/C in neutral media. Results from FT-EXAFS analysis demonstrate that the atomic Pt sites in the rich Mo vacancies are coordinated with three C atoms and two O-terminal atoms to form Pt–C and Pt–O bonds. Further XANES measurements confirm the positively charged single Pt atoms in the catalyst, which can be attributed to the electron transfer from Pt atoms to the support. Based on DFT calculations, the incorporation of isolated Pt atoms into the MXene surface can not only lead to higher electronic energy levels, but also promote electron transfer. Benefiting from the strong covalent bonding between the positively charged individual Pt atoms and MXene support, the developed Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA demonstrates enhanced catalytic performance and excellent stability for the HER.238
 Fig. 13  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt1/OLC. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (b) HER durability test of Pt1/hNCNC, Pt/hCNC and commercial Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) XPS Pt 4f spectra of Pt1/hNCNC and Pt/hCNC. (d) Six typical configurations of [PtCl6]2− on various supports and their corresponding calculated free energies. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) HER polarization curves of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA, Mo2TiC2Tx–VMo, Mo2TiC2Tx, CP and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (f) Corresponding Tafel slopes derived from (e). Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) The Ru K-edge k2-weighted EXAFS spectra of Ni5P4–Ru, RuO2 and Ru foil. (h) The optimized structure for H2O adsorption on different sites. (i) The energy barriers for water dissociation on Ni5P4 and Ni5P4–Rusurf. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, the development of Ru-based SACs has become the major focus for the HER due to the relatively cheap price and similar metal–hydrogen bond strength in comparison to Pt. For instance, He and co-workers reported individual Ru atoms supported on the surface of Ni5P4 (Ni5P4–Ru) through an impregnation–phosphorization strategy. Based on inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) analysis, the mass ratio of Ru/Ni in Ni(OH)2–Ru with rich nickel vacancies (V-Ni(OH)2–Ru) is higher than that of Ni(OH)2–Ru with fewer nickel vacancies (P-Ni(OH)2–Ru), demonstrating the essential role of the interaction between Ru3+ and nickel-vacancy defects in achieving high-density single-site Ru incorporation, which can be also confirmed in electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) results. After phosphorization, the peaks corresponding to Ru–Ni and Ru–P bonds with the absence of Ru–Ru bonds in the EXAFS spectra (Fig. 13g) reveal the existence of single Ru atoms in Ni5P4. As expected, the developed Ni5P4–Ru loaded on carbon cloth (Ni5P4–Ru/CC) possesses comparable catalytic activity to the commercial Pt/C catalyst toward the HER in alkaline conditions, with an overpotential of 54 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1. To investigate the role of atomic Ru in the catalyst, DFT calculations were conducted to evaluate the structure and catalytic properties of Ni5P4–Ru and pristine Ni5P4 (Fig. 13h and i). Owing to the localized structural polarization, the electron density increase of single-atom Ru in Ni5P4–Ru can effectively reduce the energy barrier for water dissociation at Ru sites (1.28 eV). In addition, the lower hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) of −0.30 eV in comparison to pristine Ni5P4 (−0.42 eV at the P site) also verifies the positive effect of the incorporated Ru sites in enhancing the HER activity.88 Besides, other noble metal-based SACs such as Pd, Rh and Ir also exhibit their application potential for catalyzing the HER. In Yu's study, atomically dispersed Pd was successfully anchored on ultrathin graphdiyne nanosheets (GDY) with a Pd loading of 0.2 wt%. Compared with the commercial Pt/C, Pd0/GDY demonstrates a superior mass activity of 61.5 A mgmetal−1 and TOF of 16.7 s−1 in acidic conditions, which can be ascribed to the well-defined structures and active zero-valent Pd atoms. Moreover, benefiting from the strong interaction between the isolated Pd atoms and GDY support as well as the inert nature of GDY, Pd0/GDY also possesses excellent stability during long-term operation.239 In addition, Meng and co-workers developed a single-atom Rh catalyst confined in MoS2, achieving a low overpotential of 67 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Evidenced from DFT calculations, a distance synergy between the isolated Rh atoms confined in the MoS2 lattice can not only play an essential role in adjusting the electronic structure of the adjacent S atoms, but also in optimizing the hydrogen adsorption energy on the S sites, thereby boosting the HER performance.240 The above examples provide new insights into rational design of various high-performance NMSACs for electrochemical hydrogen production.


4.2.4. CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). 
The excessive consumption of fossil fuels has induced increasing greenhouse CO2 emission and consequent environmental concerns. In this regard, room-temperature electrochemical reduction conversion of CO2 into valuable products driven by renewable electricity is considered one of the most promising approaches to reduce CO2 emission and remit the energy crisis.241–243 Nevertheless, the CO2RR process is usually hindered by its high overpotential, undesirable conversion efficiency and poor selectivity, which can be ascribed to the chemically inert properties of CO2 and the presence of the competitive HER process in the electrolyte. Therefore, tremendous efforts have been devoted to preparing highly active electrocatalysts for promoting the sluggish kinetics of the CO2RR and achieving high selectivity toward specific products such as CO, CH3OH, CH4 and HCOOH.106,242,244,245 To date, many SACs featuring maximum atom utilization efficiency and low coordination environments have been synthesized and applied for catalyzing the CO2RR.40 Among them, precious metal-based SACs including Pd, Au and Ag have been shown to be favorable to produce CO from electrocatalytic CO2 reduction.246
Combining the advantages of the weakly binding Au sites and strongly binding Pd sites, Wang et al. prepared a series of Pd ensembles on Au surfaces with different Pd dispersions (denoted as Pd@Au) to investigate the ensemble effects of Pd sites for electroreduction of CO2-to-CO. From the HAADF-STEM and EELS results (Fig. 14a–e), dispersed discrete points associated with the single Pd sites on the Au surface can be clearly observed when the atomic ratio of Pd is 2% and 5% (Pd2@Au98 and Pd5@Au95). As the atomic Pd ratio increases to 10% and 20%, a semicontinuous Pd layer and Pd shell are formed in Pd10@Au90 and Pd20@Au80, respectively, due to the growth of Pd ensembles on the surface. In addition, results from EXAFS (Fig. 14f–i) reveal that the total coordination number (CN) of Au is estimated to be around 8 including a CNAu–Pd of ∼1 and CNAu–Au of ∼7 for all the Pd@Au, further demonstrating that most Pd atoms are anchored on the Au surface. At a 0.5 V potential, Pd5@Au95 achieves a partial current density (JCO) of 1.6 mA cmgeo−2 and faradaic efficiency (FECO) of ∼80%, outperforming other Pd@Au catalysts. Specifically, the corresponding mass activity of 178 A gmetal−1 is higher than that of pure Au NPs and most of the electrocatalysts for the CO2RR. Moreover, Pd5@Au95 also exhibits excellent stability during continuous 24 h operation with only a small degradation, superior to pure Pd. As confirmed by DFT calculations, the enhanced electrocatalytic CO2RR activity and stability of Pd5@Au95 can be ascribed to the lower energy barrier for CO2 activation in comparison to pure Au, and the reduced sensitivity to CO poisoning by forming a stronger combination with *CO intermediates compared to pure Pd at the atomically dispersed Pd ensembles. Owing to the effect of the Pd ensemble size on the adsorption energies of the *CO and *COOH intermediates, the CO2RR activity of Pd@Au toward CO production shows a nonlinear behavior dependent on the surface Pd composition.241 More recently, He and co-workers reported a single-atom Pd catalyst supported on N-doped carbon (Pd–NC), which can reach a higher FECO of 55% at −0.5 V vs. RHE and JCO of 0.244 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. RHE than those of Pd/C for electrocatalytic CO2-to-CO (Fig. 14j and k). Both XAFS and HAADF-STEM studies suggest that the Pd–N4 structure can be formed in Pd–NC by the coordination of the isolated Pd atom with four N atoms. Further in situ XAFS analysis was conducted to investigate the local structure variation of the Pd sites in the Pd–NC and Pd/C catalysts. Compared with Pd/C, the absence of peak position shifts for Pd–NC in both XANES and EXAFS reveals the stable Pd–N4 configuration without palladium hydride (PdH) formation in the electroreduction of CO2 to CO. Moreover, based on DFT calculations (Fig. 14l and m), the significant difference between the binding energies of *H and *HOCO (2.2 eV) and weak binding energy for *CO desorption (−0.02 eV) at Pd–N4 sites confirm the important role of the Pd–N4 moiety in enhancing the CO2RR performance toward CO in Pd–NC. Therefore, this work offers a facile and promising strategy to prepare cost-effective and highly efficient CO2RR electrocatalysts.246 On the basis of the above studies, more attention should be focused on optimizing the coordination structures of NMSACs for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. In addition, more experimental research and theoretical calculations are also required due to the complex reaction mechanism and diverse reaction products.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for Pd@Au NPs with precise control over the dose of Pd. HAADF-STEM images and EELS results for (b) Pd2@Au98, (c) Pd5@Au95, (d) Pd10@Au90 and (e) Pd2@Au80. k2-Weighted FT spectra at the (f) Au L-edge and (g) Pd K-edge. The coordination numbers from the EXAFS analysis for (h) Au atoms and (i) Pd atoms. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) Faradaic efficiencies (FE) for CO evolution at different applied potentials. (k) Partial current densities of CO evolution at different applied potentials. (l) The optimized structures of *H, *CO and *HOCO adsorbed on Pd–N4 embedded on a 4 × 4 graphene supercell based on DFT calculations. (m) The binding energy difference between H and HOCO on Pd–N4, PdH(111) and Pd(111). Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 


4.2.5. Nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). 
As an important nitrogen source for agricultural fertilizer and a desirable clean energy carrier, ammonia (NH3) is commonly synthesized through the energy-consuming and unsustainable Haber–Bosch process (HBP) (N2 + 3H2 ⇌ 2NH3) at high pressures and temperatures in industrial production.247,248 To achieve efficient and green nitrogen fixation, electrocatalytic reduction of earth abundant N2 to NH3 (N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3) has become an expanding field and is regarded as an alternative to the traditional HBP owing to the mild operational conditions and utilization of renewable energy. However, the high energy requirement for the breakage of NN triple bonds (941 kJ mol−1) and the competition with the HER in aqueous solution can lead to several issues such as high overpotentials, low faradaic efficiency (FENH3) and poor NH3 yield. Hence, numerous efforts have been dedicated to exploring highly active electrocatalysts to lower the energy barriers and improve the efficiency toward the NRR.1,26,249
So far, many NMSACs such as Ru, Au and Pt have been developed and exhibited great potential for reducing N2 into NH3 in electrocatalytic reactions.250 In the work reported by Zeng's group, monodisperse Ru atoms stabilized on N-doped carbon (named Ru SA/N–C) were developed by pyrolysis of Ru-containing ZIF-8 precursors. As confirmed by the EXAFS measurement, a major peak located at around 2.04 Å denotes the formation of Ru–N bonds. The absence of peaks for metallic Ru or its oxidized clusters further reveals the presence of atomic Ru throughout the whole structure, which is consistent with the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 15a) and HAADF-STEM results. In 0.05 M H2SO4 solution, the prepared Ru SA/N–C demonstrates a superior FENH3 of 29.6% at −0.2 V vs. RHE, which is twice as high as that of Ru NP/N–C. Specifically, an extremely high NH3 yield rate of 120.9 μgNH3 mgcat.−1 h−1 can be achieved at −0.2 V (vs. RHE), outperforming the reported value for the NRR. Moreover, according to both the experimental measurements conducted by N2 temperature-programmed desorption (N2-TPD) and theoretical calculations (Fig. 15b and c), the exceptional NRR performance of Ru SA/N–C toward NH3 production can be ascribed to the strong binding energy of N2 and reduced Gibbs free-energy variation (ΔG) for the N2 dissociation step on single-site Ru, thereby resulting in superior activity in comparison to Ru NP/N–C.62 In another case, Tao and co-workers synthesized a ZrO2/NC-supported Ru SAC (0.1 wt% Ru loading) via a simple coordination-assisted strategy, which achieves an excellent NH3 yield rate of 3.665 mgNH3 h−1 mgRu−1 at −0.21 V vs. RHE and a high FENH3 of ∼21% at a low overpotential of 0.17 V. Based on XPS measurements, the lower value of the Zr 3d5/2 peak (182.1 eV) in comparison to that of ZrO2 (182.8 eV) reveals that O vacancies can be formed on the exposed ZrO2 surface after pyrolysis under an N2 atmosphere. Further DFT calculations demonstrate that atomic Ru can be effectively anchored on the O-vacancy sites in ZrO2 as the main active centers to improve *NNH stabilization, *H destabilization and N2 adsorption, thereby achieving high selectivity toward the NRR/HER. Moreover, combined with the XPS results, N doping plays a role in preventing the aggregation of single Ru atoms and improving their stabilization on the surface. Thus, the enhanced electroreduction of N2 to NH3 can be mainly attributed to the suppression effect of Ru@ZrO2 on the HER and promotion effect of Ru@NC on the NRR.247 Except for MOF-derived carbon supports with porous structure and high surface area, other materials such as MXene nanosheets with metal atoms (e.g., Mo) have also been employed to anchor isolated atoms for promoting the electrocatalytic NRR activity under ambient conditions. In Peng's study, the as-prepared single-atom Ru catalyst supported on Mo2CTx nanosheets (SA Ru–Mo2CTx) with an Ru loading of 1.41 wt% delivers a remarkable NH3 yield rate of 40.57 μg h−1 mg−1 as well as a high FE of 25.77% at −0.3 V vs. RHE for NH3 generation, superior to the commercial Ru/C, bare Mo2CTx and most reported NRR catalysts in 0.5 M K2SO4 electrolyte. As revealed in DFT calculations (Fig. 15d), the successful stabilization of atomic Ru sites on the Mo2CTx nanosheets as electron back-donation centers exhibits a positive effect on achieving enhanced N2 adsorption and activation, lowering the energy barrier for hydrogenation of *N2 to *NNH. Therefore, the development of 2D MXene-based catalysts combined with the atomic-doping engineering strategy offers a promising direction for promoting electrocatalytic N2 fixation.251
 Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of Ru SA/N–C and Ru NP/N–C. (b) The N2-TPD profiles of Ru SA/N–C and Ru NP/N–C. (c) Free energy diagram of the NRR with a distal pathway on Ru1–N3, Ru1–N4, and Ru(101). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The charge density difference calculations of N2 bonded to Ru and Mo atoms in SA Ru–Mo2CTx. Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) FE and yield rate of NH3 at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) End-on configurations of *N2 atoms and *NNH admolecules on SA-Ag/NC. (g) Ag K-edge XANES spectra and (h) FT-EXAFS curves of SA-Ag/NC, Ag2O and Ag foil. (i) Chronoamperometry result of the reduction current density for SA-Ag/NC at −0.60 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to Ru-based SACs, Au- and Ag-based SACs have also been investigated as highly active and stable NRR electrocatalysts. For example, atomically dispersed Au anchored on N-doped porous carbon (denoted as AuSA–NDPC) was prepared by Qin and co-workers using a facile impregnation method. Owing to the abundant N species on the support surface, isolated Au atoms (Lewis acid ions) can be trapped and coordinated with electron-rich N atoms (Lewis basic sites) to form a stable structure (a frustrated Lewis pair), which acts as active sites for promoting N2 dissociation. Moreover, the highly polarizable porous structure formed by the condensation of hexaazatriphenylene–hexacarbonitrile (HAT) and subsequent silica removal is beneficial for exposing more active sites and facilitating mass transfer. Benefiting from these outstanding characteristics, the as-prepared AuSA–NDPC shows a high yield rate of 2.32 μgNH3 h−1 cm−2 with a desirable FE of 12.3% for NH3 production at −0.2 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 15e).252 In addition, an N-doped carbon black-supported single-site Ag catalyst (SA-Ag/NC) was reported to be highly efficient for catalyzing electroreduction of N2 into NH3. According to DFT calculations (Fig. 15f), both the vertical end-on configuration of N2 adsorption and oblique end-on configuration of *NNH admolecule formation on atomic metal sites are favorable for achieving high electrocatalytic NRR performance. Inspired by this, Ag–N4 coordination is selected as a suitable candidate to target the two admolecule configurations. Due to the successful formation of Ag–N4 confirmed by XANES and EXAFS measurements (Fig. 15g and h), SA-Ag/NC displays excellent NRR activity with an NH3 faradaic efficiency of 21.9% at −0.60 V vs. RHE and a stable yield of 270.9 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.65 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M HCl electrolyte. Furthermore, both the yield rate and FE value can be maintained almost unchanged in 20 consecutive reaction cycles as well as a constant reduction current density for 60 h, confirming the long-term durability of this catalyst (Fig. 15i).253 All these recent developments in the NRR provide the possibility of NMSACs as promising candidates to achieve sustainable and efficient NH3 synthesis.


4.2.6. Electrooxidation of methanol/formic acid. 
With the growing energy demands, serious environmental pollution issues and rising traditional fossil fuel consumption, the development of cost-effective and highly efficient energy storage and conversion technologies is highly desirable for solving the existing problems. Nowadays, fuel cells have been emerging as one of the promising alternatives for achieving a sustainable energy economy owing to their high energy conversion efficiency and environmentally friendly merits.26,80,254 Among them, liquid fuels such as methanol and formic acid derived from biomass have aroused great interest for fuel cell applications as important chemical feedstocks. In particular, the feedstock transportation for direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) and direct formic acid fuel cells (DFAFCs) is much easier and safer in comparison to the PEMFC system fed by H2. Currently, high-performance precious metal Pt-based electrocatalysts have been commonly applied to accelerate the sluggish kinetics of key steps: the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR, CH3OH + H2O → 6H+ + 6e− + CO2) in DMFCs and the formic acid oxidation reaction (FAOR, HCOOH → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−) in DFAFCs. However, their widespread commercialization is still severely inhibited by the economic barriers and low tolerance to the reaction intermediates (e.g., CO). Hence, it is expected to explore facile and effective strategies to maximize the Pt atom utilization efficiency and enhance the catalytic activity and stability in selective methanol/formic acid electrooxidation.1,26,80
Methanol oxidation reaction. 
The MOR process occurring at the anode in DMFCs consists of ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ pathways to produce the CO2 product. In the direct pathway, the soluble intermediates (e.g., formic acid and formaldehyde) can be formed firstly and then oxidized to CO2, which requires 1 to 2 Pt atoms. In contrast, the indirect pathway involves CO formation and requires more Pt atoms (3–4) in the process. Since the latter route is the predominant one for the MOR, Pt ensembles are more conducive to facilitating CO intermediate adsorption. However, some previous studies reported that reducing the Pt particle size to clusters or single atoms is cost-effective and efficient for improving the catalytic activity and CO tolerance.80,255 For instance, Sun and co-workers found that isolated Pt atoms deposited on graphene nanosheets via the ALD strategy (50 ALD cycles, denoted as 50ALDPt/GNS) could act as an outstanding electrocatalyst for the MOR. To investigate the Pt particle size effect on the performance, several Pt/graphene samples with different particle sizes from single atoms to nanoparticles were synthesized by controlling the number of ALD cycles. Obviously, both the TEM images and inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) test reveal that the average size of Pt particles and Pt loading increase with increasing ALD cycles. As seen in the further HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 16a–c), the Pt particles mainly exist as the single atom form when the ALD cycle number is 50, while subnanometer Pt clusters and small Pt nanoparticles can also be observed in 50ALDPt/GNS. After the number of ALD cycles is increased to 100 or even 150, relatively larger Pt clusters and particles are formed owing to the agglomeration and growth of single atoms in the catalysts. For electrooxidation of methanol, 50ALDPt/GNS shows the lowest overpotential of 0.79 V (vs. RHE) and the highest current density of 22.9 mA cm−2, outperforming those of 100ALDPt/GNS (0.82 V vs. RHE, 8.48 mA cm−2) and 150ALDPt/GNS (0.85 V vs. RHE, 5.73 mA cm−2) (Fig. 16d). Therefore, enhanced catalytic activity can be achieved at a reduced Pt particle size. Significantly, 50ALDPt/GNS possesses a superior electrocatalytic MOR performance and better CO tolerance in comparison to commercial Pt/C, which can be ascribed to the more unsaturated 5d orbitals of single-atom Pt and stronger interaction between Pt atoms and graphene confirmed in XAFS and DFT calculations.254
 Fig. 16  The magnified HAADF-STEM images of Pt/GNS samples with (a) 50 ALD cycles, (b) 100 ALD cycles and (c) 150 ALD cycles. (d) CVs of methanol oxidation on ALD50Pt/GNS, ALD100Pt/GNS, ALD150Pt/GNS and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Pt mass-normalized anodic sweeps obtained from PtAu NPs in a mixed solution containing 0.1 M concentrations of both HClO4 and HCOOH. (f) Schematic illustration of the CO adsorption modes on model (111) lattices of pure Pt surfaces, few-atom Pt surfaces and single-atom Pt surfaces as well as calculated adsorption energies for the CO adsorption sites. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) The mass activity change at 0.6 V of Pt1/ATO, Pt NP/ATO and Pt/C during the durability test with 1800 repeated CV cycles in the range of 0.05–1.4 V. (h) FAOR forward scans after the durability test in Ar-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with 0.5 M HCOOH solutions. Reproduced with permission.258 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (i) Peak mass activity of SA-Rh/CN, Pd/C, Pt/C and Rh/C. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
Formic acid oxidation reaction. 
Electrooxidation of formic acid is a significant reaction in DFAFCs, which demonstrates less toxicity, higher kinetic activity and an easier process compared to the MOR in DMFCs.1,256 Similarly, the FAOR can also proceed via two different routes, involving the direct pathway (HCOOH → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−) and indirect pathway (HCOOH → H2O + COads). However, unlike the MOR, the direct pathway plays a dominant role in the FAOR process. In this case, the design and fabrication of Pt SACs are highly desirable for providing efficient reactive sites and achieving high utilization efficiency of Pt atoms.30 In 2018, Duchesne et al. developed a series of bimetallic PtAu NPs with Pt loadings ranging from 4% to 96% by adopting a facile colloidal synthetic method. Based on cyclic voltammetry analysis (Fig. 16e), the Pt4Au96 catalyst demonstrates a superior activity at the first Pt-mass-normalized current peaks (∼0.6 VRHE), which is 126 and 90 times as high as that of the least-active Pt78Au22 and commercial Pt/C, respectively. In addition, the absence of the second peak attributed to the electrooxidation of adsorbed CO molecules at approximately 0.85 VRHE implies the important role of resistance to CO poisoning in improving the electrocatalytic FAOR activity. As confirmed in further DFT calculations (Fig. 16f), the generated atomically dispersed Pt sites on the surface and electronic effects originating from Pt–Au bonding interactions can lead to weakened CO adsorption at both few-atom and single-atom Pt surfaces, revealing that the single Pt adsorption sites are responsible for the dehydrogenation of formic acid, thereby achieving exceptional FAOR activity.257 In addition, a single-atom Pt catalyst anchored on antimony-doped tin oxide (denoted as Pt1/ATO) with a Pt loading up to 8 wt% was prepared by Kim and co-workers using an incipient wetness impregnation method. The XRD results accompanied by DFT calculations indicate that the introduced Pt atoms can replace Sb sites in the bulk phase or at the ATO or SbSn surface to form an energetically stable structure. In the electrocatalytic FAOR performance test, Pt1/ATO possesses a higher mass activity than that of Pt NP/ATO and Pt/C at 0.6 V, demonstrating the exceptional FAOR activity. Moreover, the maintained high activity and relatively small loss of the Pt amount after the durability test with 1800 repeating cycles further confirm the excellent stability of Pt1/ATO under harsh conditions (Fig. 16g and h). Specifically, the effects of different Pt content in Pt1/ATO were also investigated. At around 0.6 V, 1 wt% Pt1/ATO shows a superior mass activity of 9.16 A mgPt−1 in comparison to that of 8 wt% Pt1/ATO (0.89 A mg−1), which can be explained by the fact that most of the single Pt atoms are located inside the ATO support in 8 wt% Pt1/ATO, instead of on the surface.258 Besides, other NMSACs such as Rh and Ir have also been reported as economical and efficient alternatives to commercial Pt/C. Recently, Xiong and co-workers demonstrated that single Rh atoms supported on ZIF-8-derived N-doped carbon (denoted as SA-Rh/CN) could show outstanding catalytic activity with a remarkable mass activity of 16.1 A mg−1 at the peak potential and a high TOF value of 8.55 s−1, exceeding those of the state-of-the-art Pt/C and Pd/C (Fig. 16i). Due to the relatively high activation barrier to generate CO at isolated Rh sites as well as unfavorable combination with CO, the tolerance to CO poisoning in SA-Rh/CN can be improved, thereby realizing superior catalytic stability.63 Similarly, various NMSACs (e.g., Pt, Ir, Pd and Ru) supported on N-doped carbon were also synthesized by the host–guest strategy in Li's study. Among them, Ir/CN demonstrates the highest catalytic activity, which can achieve the highest current density of 12.9 A mgIr−1 at 0.7 V and excellent CO resistance. Therefore, this work encourages the development of new single-atom electrocatalysts for an efficient FAOR.259
All the fabrication approaches for SACs aim to prevent the aggregation of isolated metal atoms into NPs/nanoclusters and strengthen the metal–support interactions. Based on the above-mentioned examples, the development of novel and efficient synthetic strategies is beneficial for preparing ideal NMSACs, which hold great promise for enhancing the catalytic activity and selectivity in selective methanol/formic acid electrooxidation reactions.

4.3. Photocatalysis
Nowadays, photocatalysis has been recognized as a sustainable and promising approach for chemical and energy production, which is designed to facilitate solar-to-chemical transformation with the participation of catalysts.4,316,317 Many efforts have been devoted to fabricating efficient photocatalysts for various photocatalytic reactions such as photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction reactions, while the low visible light utilization rate and quantum yield, and poor stability are still the main hindrances for their practical applications. Inspired by the 100% utilization efficiency of metals, robust intrinsic activity and excellent stability during catalytic processes, NMSACs have become an active research field in recent studies.25,30,318 In the following section, the development of NMSACs as high-performance photocatalysts is introduced in several photocatalytic reactions, especially photocatalytic H2 evolution. The performances of these catalysts are also summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of NMSACs for photocatalysis




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Content
Performance




Photocatalytic H2 evolution


HNTM-Ir/Pt102
Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)
2.54 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of up to 201.9 μmol g−1 h−1


Pt–SAC/MBT338
Wet chemistry strategy
0.98 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 68.33 mmol g−1 h−1


Al–TCPP–Pt327
Wet chemistry strategy
0.07 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 129 μmol g−1 h−1


Pt–CN324
Wet chemistry strategy
0.16 wt%
An average H2 generation rate of 318 μmol h−1


Pt/TiO2339
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.2 wt%
An H2 production rate of 169.6 μmol h−1


PtSA–MNS75
Surfactant-assisted strategy
12 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 11320 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm)


g-C3N4–Pt2+325
Wet chemistry strategy
0.04–0.18 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 605 μmol g−1 h−1 under irradiation at λ > 400 nm


CdS@CD/Pt–SAs340
Wet chemistry strategy (an in situ impregnation and conversion method)
1.15 wt%
A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 45.5 mmol h−1 g−1


Pt–CN341
Wet chemistry strategy (a hydrothermal method)
0.74 wt%
An H2 production rate of 34.2 μmol h−1


Pt–SA/CN321
Photodeposition method
0.11 wt%
An average H2 generation rate of up to 42.1 μmol h−1


Pt1/def-TiO2323
Wet chemistry strategy
0.02 wt%
A photocatalytic H2 production rate of up to 52720 μmol g−1 h−1


PtSA/CdS342
Wet chemistry strategy
Up to 0.98 wt%
An H2 production rate of 47.41 mmol g−1 h−1


PtSA–CN343

In situ photocatalytic reduction method
1.72 wt%
An H2 production rate of 3.02 mmol g−1 h−1


PdPSA–CN344
PH3-promoted strategy
N.A.
An H2 production rate of 1.98 mmol g−1 h−1


Pd10@Pt1/UiO-66-NH2345
Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)
N.A.
An H2 production rate of 1200.5 μmol g−1 h−1


Pd/g–CN346
Thermo-driven diffusion approach
0.33 wt%
An average H2 production rate of 6688 μmol g−1 h−1; a TOF of 417 h−1


ME-TiO2@Ru347
Wet chemistry strategy
0.93 wt%
An H2 production rate of 7.2 mmol g−1 h−1


CNUHAu348
Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)
0.18 wt%
An H2 production rate of 789.1 nmol h−1 after 5 hour irradiation


SAAg-g-CN349
High-temperature pyrolysis
1 wt%
An H2 production rate of 248 μmol g−1 h−1; a solar-heat-assisted H2 production rate of 498 μmol g−1 h−1 at 55 °C


Ag–N2C2/CN350
Wet chemistry strategy (a supermolecular method)
3.7 wt%
An H2 production rate of 1866 μmol g−1 h−1






Photocatalytic CO2 reduction


Ag–HMO332
Wet chemistry strategy
26.1 wt%
A maintained CH4 yield of 0.61 mol mol−1 catalysts with the wavelength increasing from 380 to 420 nm


Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4333
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.






Photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A


Ag/mpg-C3N4334
Wet chemistry strategy (co-condensation method)
1% to 10%
A removal efficiency of BPA increasing from 88% to 99.4% with the Ag content increasing from 1% to 10%






Photocatalytic N2 fixation


Pt–SAC/CTF335
Wet chemistry strategy
1.02 wt%
An NH4+ production rate of 171.40 μmol g−1 h−1 in the absence of a sacrificial agent


Ru–TiO2 nanosheets351
Wet chemistry strategy
1 wt%
An NH3 formation rate of 56.3 μg h−1 gcat−1






Dye-sensitized solar cells


Pt/FeOx–SAC337
Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)
0.08–2.4 wt%
A PCE of 9.03%





4.3.1. Photocatalytic H2 evolution. 
Photocatalytic H2 evolution, a reaction involving the utilization of solar energy and production of clean hydrogen fuels, has been typically regarded as a viable and promising approach to overcome the challenges related to the growing global energy demands and environmental issues. Despite many efforts being devoted to achieving high photocatalytic H2 generation performance, two main obstacles including fast recombination of electron–hole pairs and insufficient surface-active sites can lead to undesirable solar-to-hydrogen efficiency.319–322 To address these issues, the deposition of metal nanoparticles as cocatalysts on semiconductor photocatalysts is a useful strategy to accelerate charge transfer by trapping photogenerated electrons and provide active sites for efficient proton reduction, thereby significantly enhancing the photocatalytic activity.321,323 Up to now, noble metal Pt-based catalysts have been regarded as the most viable candidates for the HER and employed as ideal cocatalysts because of the suitable Fermi level for capturing electrons and low potential requirement. In order to boost their atom efficiency and reduce the cost, downsizing the particle size to the atomic level is highly desirable for achieving maximum atom utilization efficiency and exceptional catalytic performance.112,323 In many previous studies, Pt SACs have been reported to demonstrate great potential for boosting photocatalytic H2 production. For instance, Xie's group developed atomically dispersed Pt as a new type of cocatalyst supported on g-C3N4 (denoted as Pt–CN), which exhibits enhanced photocatalytic H2 generation activity and excellent stability due to the formation of abundant Pt–N/C bonds. As confirmed in HAADF-STEM (Fig. 17a) and EXAFS spectroscopy (Fig. 17b), single Pt atoms are highly dispersed on the Pt–CN surface with no observable Pt nanoparticles in the catalysts and the absence of Pt–Pt bonds (at 2.61 Å) in comparison to Pt-NP-CN. Combined with the following XPS results which demonstrate the existence of Pt–N coordination bonds, the N/C-coordinating framework derived from the tri-s-triazine units in C3N4 can significantly promote the dispersion of Pt single atoms by providing an effective scaffold for trapping atomic metals, thus achieving high activity. With the decoration of isolated Pt atoms (0.16 wt% Pt), Pt–CN exhibits an H2 generation rate of 318 μmol h−1, which is 50 times higher than that of bare g-C3N4 (Fig. 17c). In addition, when the Pt content increases to 0.38 wt% and even higher, Pt–CN also shows the highest activity compared with that of g-C3N4 decorated with Pt clusters and nanoparticles.324 In another study, Li and co-workers successfully anchored Pt2+ into g-C3N4 pores by polymerization of a mixed dicyandiamide monomer and H2PtCl6·6H2O as a Pt precursor. Unlike Pt–CN, the single Pt2+ in g-C3N4–Pt2+ does not act as a cocatalyst for the H2 evolution process. Owing to the effect of metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) between Pt2+ and the g-C3N4 support, the light absorption of g-C3N4 with the incorporation of a trace amount of Pt2+ can be effectively expanded to cover an additional spectral range (460 nm < λ < 900 nm), thereby realizing photocatalytic H2 evolution in the visible-near-infrared (vis-NIR) region. Besides, the separate work of MLCT and a conventional highest occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (HOMO–LUMO) transition in the local N conjugated aromatic units can be responsible for reducing the charge transport distance and avoiding charge recombination, thereby greatly improving the utilization of charge carriers. Under broad-spectrum excitation, the as-formed single Pt2+ anchored on g-C3N4 demonstrates enhanced photocatalytic H2 generation performance with an H2 evolution rate of 605 μmol g−1 h−1, superior to that of bare g-C3N4 (Fig. 17d).325
 Fig. 17  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt–CN. (b) Pt L3-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Pt–CN, K2PtCl6 and Pt foil. (c) Photocatalytic H2 generation activity of Pt–CN and g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission.324 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Photocatalytic H2 generation rates of C3N4–Pt2+ with different Pt concentrations under irradiation at λ > 400 nm. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e) Photocatalytic H2 generation rates of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, Al–TCPP–PtNP and Al–TCPP. The inset is the TOFs of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt and Al–TCPP–PtNP. (f) Calculated free energy diagram of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, Al–TCPP–PtNP and Al–TCPP for photocatalytic H2 production. Geometric structures of H* of (g) Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, (h) Al–TCPP and (i) Al–TCPP–PtNP (Pt147). Reproduced with permission.327 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (j) AFM height profile of PtSA–MNS. (k) The top and side view of the structure models of H* adsorbed on PtSA–MNS and MNSs. (l) The Gibbs energy on PtSA–MNS and MNSs. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Due to the well-defined porous structure, effective coordination sites and chemical tenability, MOFs have also been considered as ideal templates for the construction of SACs.28,102,326 In recent work, Fang et al. reported that isolated Pt atoms stabilized on an aluminum-based porphyrinic MOF (denoted as Al-TCPP-0.1Pt) can exhibit outstanding performance for photocatalytic H2 evolution, which realizes a high photocatalytic efficiency of 129 μmol g−1 h−1. Specifically, the calculated TOF value of 35 h−1 is approximately 30 times as high as that of Pt NPs anchored on Al–TCPP (1.1 h−1), even superior to previously reported Pt-based MOF composites (Fig. 17e). XAFS analysis was carried out to obtain overall structural information on Pt in Al–TCPP–0.1Pt. Firstly, XANES spectra confirm Pt species with a more oxidized electronic structure in the oxidized state (Ptδ+). Moreover, as revealed in the EXAFS results, the existence of the only predominant peak located at ∼1.5 Å corresponding to Pt–N bonds demonstrates that the single Pt atoms are stabilized by forming a metal–porphyritic N interaction. Based on both ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy and DFT calculations (Fig. 17f–i), the incorporation of single-atom Pt into the Al–TCPP substrate can not only provide an efficient channel to achieve fast electron transfer but also boost the hydrogen binding energy, thus greatly enhancing the catalytic activity for H2 evolution under visible light irradiation.327 Similarly, benefiting from the hollow structure and well-defined anchoring sites, zirconium-porphyrinic MOF hollow nanotubes were employed as a desired support to immobilize single-atom Ir (1.05% mass loading) and Pt (2.54% mass loading) in He's study. Interestingly, the as-formed HNTM-Ir/Pt demonstrates remarkably enhanced photocatalytic H2 production performance, outperforming that of HNTM–Pt, HNTM–Ir and HNTM. The synergistic effect between porphyrin–Ir as a photosensitizer and porphyrin–Pt as a catalyst plays a significant role in boosting the catalytic activity.102 In addition to the above 3D MOF structure, Zuo and co-workers prepared an ultrathin 2D MOF nanosheet-supported Pt SAC (denoted as PtSA–MNS) by an efficient surfactant-stabilized coordination strategy. Compared with MOF nanosheets, MOF nanosheets hybridized with Pt NPs and recently reported MOF-based catalysts, PtSA–MNS shows the best photocatalytic H2 evolution activity with an ultrahigh H2 production rate of 11320 μmol g−1 h−1, which can be attributed to the high concentration of single Pt atoms (12.0 wt% Pt loading) on the surface and unique 2D MOF structure. The ultrathin MOF nanosheets (thickness: 2.4 ± 0.9 nm, Fig. 17j) formed by the interlinkage of PtTCPP (as the linker) and Cu2+ ions (as the metal nodes) are responsible for providing abundant exposed active sites and avoiding the long-distance transport of photon-generated carriers, thereby effectively suppressing electron–hole recombination and improving the photocatalytic performance. DFT calculations (Fig. 17k and l) reveal that single Pt atoms as active sites show a positive effect on the promotion of electron transfer and optimization of H binding, which is similar to many reported MOF-based photocatalysts.75
Recently, taking advantage of the effective surface defect engineering driven by isolated Pt atoms, atomically dispersed Pt supported on a defective TiO2 support (denoted as Pt1/def-TiO2) was also reported to be highly efficient for enhancing photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. In this study, the immobilization of single Pt atoms can not only play a significant role in providing proton reduction sites, but also in promoting the generation of surface oxygen vacancies in adjacent TiO2 units and thereby forming a Pt–O–Ti3+ atomic interface during the low-temperature treatment process. Based on both photo-electrochemical characterizations and DFT calculations, the unique Pt–O–Ti3+ structure favors enhanced photogenerated electron transfer from Ti3+ defective sites to atomic Pt sites, leading to desirable electron–hole separation and effective inhibition of subsequent recombination. Therefore, the Pt1/def-TiO2 catalyst exhibits a photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 52720 μmol g−1 h−1, outperforming those of pure defective TiO2 and Pt NPs anchored on defective-TiO2 (Pt NP/f-TiO2). Moreover, an unexpectedly ultrahigh TOF of 51423 h−1 can be achieved in Pt1/def-TiO2, which is nearly 591-fold higher than that of Pt NP/f-TiO2 (87 h−1). This contribution demonstrates that the construction of atomic interfaces is a promising strategy for developing a new generation of photocatalysts.323 To sum up, benefiting from the unique chemical properties of different support materials (e.g., metal oxides and MOFs), the remarkable synergistic effect between atomic noble metal sites and solid substrates can significantly promote photocatalytic H2 production.


4.3.2. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
Currently, global warming and ocean acidification have become serious global environmental problems due to the rapid industrial development and excessive greenhouse gas (e.g., CO2) emission.21,328 To resolve the aforementioned issue, CO2 capture technology has been applied and considered to be one of the desirable strategies in recent years, while the difficulty in the long-term storage of CO2 still remains a challenge. Consequently, it is highly expected to explore a more efficient method to achieve the sustainable conversion of CO2 into valuable chemical products.103,112 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction is an efficient solar-to-chemical energy conversion process involving solar-driven CO2 reduction and production of higher energy chemicals (e.g., methane, formic acid and methanol), which offers a promising route to alleviate the environmental and energy crisis. Taking advantage of the high atom utilization efficiency and distinctive catalytic performances, many SACs have been developed for catalyzing the CO2 reduction process using solar energy.4,329–331
Recent studies demonstrated that NMSACs can be a potential photocatalyst for CO2 reduction toward hydrocarbon fuels. For example, Ding and co-workers successfully prepared single-atom silver-manganese catalysts (Ag–HMO) based on anti-Ostwald ripening mechanisms. Benefiting from the thermal migration properties, Ag atoms prefer to enter the lattice tunnels of the hollandite manganese dioxides (HMO) after the calcination process, thereby promoting the formation of single-atom Ag chains. For comparison, a single-atom Ag catalyst supported on HMO (Ag/HMO) was also fabricated and tested under the same conditions. Based on the ICP results, the relatively small difference between the chemical composition and surface composition of Ag/HMO (5.9 wt%) in comparison to Ag–HMO (13.9 wt%) demonstrates that most of the Ag atoms are located on the surface instead of in the lattice tunnels of Ag/HMO. From the HRTEM images (Fig. 18a–d), orderly arranged spherical Ag atoms can be clearly observed in the lattice tunnels without visible aggregation, while there are still some nanoparticles on the HMO surface. Moreover, the higher binding energy shift of Mn 2p in Ag–HMO from XPS characterization verifies the stronger interaction between Ag and Mn, which can be ascribed to the formation of Ag–O–Mn links in Ag–HMO. As shown in Fig. 18e, Ag–HMO possesses an outstanding catalytic performance for photocatalytic CO2 reduction with a CH4 production of 0.61 mol mol−1 catalysts, superior to Ag/HMO (0.40 mol mol−1 catalysts), Ag nanoparticles (0.33 mol mol−1 catalysts) and the bare HMO (<0.06 mol mol−1 catalysts). Specifically, the photocatalytic activity of Ag–HMO can remain almost unchanged during consecutive cycle use and in the wavelength range between 380 and 420 nm, revealing the excellent stability of this catalyst. As a result, the formation of single-atom Ag chains can not only facilitate electron transfer from single Ag atoms to the HMO support, but also promote visible light absorption and adsorbed CO2 activation, thereby realizing exceptional catalytic performance.332 In another study, theoretical calculations were adopted by Du's group to investigate the effect of single-atom Pt and Pd catalysts supported on graphitic carbon nitride (Pt/g-C3N4 and Pd/g-C3N4) for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 toward CH4 and HCOOH. Based on the optimized structure models and 3D differential charge densities (Fig. 18f), the charge transfer between single noble metal atoms and neighboring pyridinic-N atoms confirms the strong metal–support interaction in the catalysts. In addition, due to the different properties of atomic metal species as active sites, Pt/g-C3N4 and Pd/g-C3N4 prefer to undergo photocatalytic reactions through different CO2 reduction pathways. As for Pt/g-C3N4, HCOOH is the desirable product as a result of the lower rate-determining barrier (0.66 eV) for HCOOH formation in comparison to CH3OH (1.46 eV), as well as the low HCOOH desorption energy. In contrast, Pt/g-C3N4 tends to reduce CO2 into CH4, because CH4 shows better thermodynamically stability than HCOOH. Interestingly, as revealed in the optical absorption spectra (Fig. 18g), the obvious red shift toward the visible light range for g-C3N4-supported Pt and Pd SACs indicates that the incorporation of Pt and Pd atoms on g-C3N4 can greatly promote the visible-light absorption, thus making them ideal for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Inspired by the aforementioned work, further studies may offer deeper insight into the improvement of solar-driven reduction of CO2 into various hydrocarbon fuels.333
 Fig. 18  (a) HRTEM images and (b) schematic images of Ag–HMO. (c) HRTEM images and (d) schematic images of Ag/HMO. (e) The performances of 30Ag–HMO, 30Ag/HMO, Ag NPs and HMO in photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) The optimized structures of Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. (g) Optical absorption spectra of Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3. Other photocatalytic reactions. 
Apart from the aforementioned photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction, NMSACs also demonstrate activity for other photocatalytic reactions. For instance, Wang et al. developed single-atom Ag supported on mesoporous g-C3N4 (Ag/mpg-C3N4) via a co-condensation method, which is highly efficient for catalyzing the degradation of bisphenol A (BPA) under visible light with the addition of peroxymonosulfate (PMS). Compared with the pure g-C3N4, significantly boosted photocatalytic activity of Ag/mpg-C3N4 can arise from the enhanced visible light absorption and effective suppression of the charge-recombination process due to the synergistic effect between the atomic Ag sites and g-C3N4 substrate. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (Fig. 19a) were further measured with and without PMS (10% Ag/mpg-C3N4/PMS and 10% Ag/mpg-C3N4, respectively) to investigate the effect of PMS on BPA degradation. Obviously, the current of 10% Ag/mpg-C3N4/PMS is higher than that of Ag/mpg-C3N4 under visible light irradiation and dark conditions, indicating that the photogenerated electrons can be effectively transferred from the Ag SAC to PMS, thereby activating PMS as an electron acceptor to generate sulfate radicals as the major reactive oxygen species. As a result, benefiting from the greater visible light capture and improved electron–hole separation efficiency, the immobilization of isolated Ag atoms and the addition of PMS are highly responsible for achieving exceptional photocatalytic performance for BPA degradation.334 In other work, atomically dispersed Pt with a Pt–N3 coordination structure anchored on covalent triazine framework nanosheets (Pt–SAC/CTF) was prepared by Li and co-workers for efficient photocatalytic N2 fixation. The synthesized ultrathin two-dimensional CTF nanosheets exhibit excellent visible light adsorbing capability, and they are rich in well-defined and adjustable –N3 sites for anchoring single metal atoms. The unique chemical properties are beneficial for increasing the metal loadings and regulating the catalytic activity of active sites toward NH3 photosynthesis. Both EXAFS and DFT results show that the atomically dispersed Pt anchored on CTF–PDDA–TPDH nanosheets with a distinct Pt–N3 structure can lead to efficient electron transfer from the support to single Pt atoms, thereby promoting the reduction of adsorbed N2 molecules to generate NH3, and achieving a superior photocatalytic ammonia production rate of 171.40 μmol g−1 h−1 without a sacrificial agent.335 Besides, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), a sustainable photovoltaic technology, have also drawn intensive attention as a promising research topic because of the high power conversion efficiency, cost-effective fabrication and environmentally friendly process.336 In Shi's study, single Pt atoms stabilized on FeOx (denoted as Pt/FeOx–SAC) were utilized as the counter electrode (CE) in DSSCs. To understand the function of Pt single atoms, several Pt/FeOx samples with different Pt loading ranging from 0% to 2.40% were prepared via a co-precipitation method followed by low-temperature reduction. Notably, the HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 19b–e) reveal that only single Pt atoms can be observed in 0.08%Pt/FeOx with an extremely low dispersion density, while both single Pt atoms and sub-nanometer clusters co-exist in 2.40% Pt/FeOx with a higher dispersion density. Taking advantage of the atomically dispersed and fully exposed Pt sites, the 0.08% Pt/FeOx-based CE demonstrates the highest atom utilization efficiency (Fig. 19f) and achieves a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.61%, which is twice as high as that of bare FeOx (3.44%). Specifically, a PCE of 9.03% comparable to that of the conventional Pt CE (9.44%) can be realized when employing 2.40% Pt/FeOx as the CE. In this work, the outstanding catalytic performance for triiodide (I3−) reduction to iodide (I−) can be attributed to the unsaturated coordination environment of atomic Pt in the Pt/FeOx–SACs. In addition, owing to the strong coordination between Pt atoms and O atoms on the FeOx support, the Pt/FeOx–SAC also shows impressive stability in the electrolyte of DSSCs.337
 Fig. 19  (a) The LSV curves of 10% Ag/mpg-C3N4 in the presence and absence of 1.0 mM PMS in the dark and under irradiation with visible light. Reproduced with permission.334 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. HAADF-STEM images of (b) 0.08% Pt/FeOx and (c) 2.40% Pt/FeOx. Schematic diagrams of Pt/FeOx–SAC with relatively (d) low Pt loadings and (e) high Pt loadings. (f) The power conversion efficiency (PCE) enhancement and the ratio of Δη to the Pt content as a function of the Pt weight percentage (wt%). Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
In short, increasing the atomic metal loading and selecting an appropriate substrate are necessary for developing highly efficient and stable catalysts. Previous studies on NMSACs for photocatalytic reactions provide guidance for the preparation of atomically dispersed catalysts with desired structure and ideal functionality in future energy-related applications.

4.4. Summary
In summary, NMSACs have demonstrated promising potential for catalyzing various reactions in thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. Compared with conventional noble metal nanoparticles, the superior catalytic performance can be attributed to the following aspects: (i) More exposed active sites in NMSACs with atomically dispersed metal species that can participate in the catalysis, thereby achieving maximum atom utilization efficiency and reducing the noble metal usage. However, it is difficult for noble metal nanoparticles to achieve high efficiency per metal site as only a small part of the noble metal atoms is accessible to the reaction medium.14,80 (ii) The unsaturated coordination environment and unique electronic structure of single-atom sites can significantly enhance the surface catalytic activity, superior to their nanoparticle counterpart in most cases.29,103 (iii) The similar electronic structure and spatial configuration of the uniformly distributed active sites in NMSACs are conducive to achieving identical strong interactions between the atomic metal sites and solid substrates, which can lead to the boosted product selectivity.18,352 (iv) Compared with noble metal nanoparticles, the strong metal–support interaction in NMSACs can not only facilitate electron transfer and regulate the electronic structure, but also lower the free energy to form highly active and stable atomic active sites. These superior properties are favorable for realizing desired performance and beneficial to their catalytic applications.82,353 (v) By virtue of the well-defined atomically dispersed active metal centers, NMSACs can provide a good platform to investigate the structure–activity relationships at the atomic level and understand the catalytic mechanisms in a variety of reactions, which sheds light on the rational design of efficient NMSACs.18,23 In conclusion, unlike noble metal nanoparticles, NMSACs possess unique characteristics including atomic noble metal sites with maximum atom utilization efficiency, unsaturated coordination environments, quantum size effects with electron confinement and strong metal–support interactions. Therefore, NMSACs offer an opportunity for minimizing the usage of noble metals and exhibit exceptional catalytic activity, selectivity and stability in various catalytic processes, outperforming those of noble metal NP counterparts.
5. Conclusions and outlook
As a conceptual bridge between heterogeneous and homogeneous catalyst systems, SACs have become a promising research frontier and are regarded as efficient and cost-effective alternatives to traditional catalysts in various catalytic applications. Recently, benefiting from the quantum size effect, low-coordination environment, strong metal–support interaction and robust intrinsic catalytic activity of precious metals, noble metal-based SACs can not only achieve 100% atom utilization efficiency but also possess outstanding catalytic activity and selectivity toward many reactions. Therefore, the development of such catalysts is highly desirable for efficient chemical transformations and energy conversion. In this review, we first reviewed various typical synthetic strategies (e.g., the wet chemistry strategy, physical and chemical deposition, the photochemical strategy, high-temperature pyrolysis and galvanic replacement) for anchoring atomic noble metal species on solid substrates and discussed their respective synthetic mechanisms. Based on previous studies, the following key aspects should be considered to successfully prepare NMSACs: (1) selecting appropriate metal precursors in terms of the support features; (2) stabilizing single atoms on suitable supports by strengthening the metal–support interactions; (3) improving the noble metal loadings and balancing the relationship between the catalytic activity and loading amount to effectively prevent the aggregation of isolated metal atoms and achieve desirable catalytic performance; (4) introducing defects, vacancies or heteroatom dopants on the support as anchoring sites for trapping metal precursors; and (5) adopting effective approaches to achieve large-scale production for practical applications. Furthermore, an overview of advanced characterization techniques such as HAADF-STEM, XAS, FTIR and NMR was presented to identify the isolated noble metal atoms at the atomic level and enable the understanding of the unsaturated coordination environment and local electronic structure for SACs. In addition to the characterization methods, DFT calculations are also a powerful tool to investigate the fundamental reaction mechanisms and obtain more reasonable explanations of the experimental results. According to the mode of energy supply, three different categories including thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis were summarized in detail. Within the published literature, highly efficient supported precious metal-based SACs usually demonstrate excellent catalytic activity and stability by virtue of the uniformly dispersed active sites, unsaturated coordination environment and strong binding between isolated metal atoms and adjacent anchoring sites, outperforming those of the noble metal NP counterparts. Generally, single metal atoms are anchored on ideal supports such as metals, metal oxides and carbon-based materials. In contrast to metallic NPs, the lack of atomic ensemble effects and the assistance of electronic effects effectively tune the electronic structure of isolated active sites in SACs, thereby optimizing the catalytic performance. Despite great progress having been made in the development of NMSACs for various catalytic reactions, some key challenges remain to be addressed in this field for future practical applications.
(1) Selectivity limitations
The catalytic selectivity is a significant parameter in industry. Generally, NMSACs possess outstanding catalytic performance with enhanced activity and selectivity compared with those of the NP/cluster counterparts. However, the atomic active centers in SACs are not favorable for some reaction pathways which occur at two adjacent single-atom sites (e.g., the ORR and selective electrocatalytic oxidation of small organic molecules).25,80,212 For instance, 0.05 wt% and 0.1 wt% single-atom Pt supported on TiN show higher H2O2 selectivity compared with that of Pt/TiN samples containing Pt NPs. On the single-atom Pt/TiN surface, the difficulty in the breakage of OO bonds in the adsorbed oxygen molecule hinders the four-electron reduction pathway occurring at the atomic Pt sites.213 Moreover, the selectivity still has much room to be improved by adjusting the electronic structure and optimizing the coordination environment. Therefore, the exploration of effective strategies and further investigation of the selectivity in some specific reactions are highly desirable for the construction of NMSACs.
(2) Insufficient stability
The stability of NMSACs is another critical issue in fulfilling their industrial requirements. Due to the high surface energy especially at high metal loadings and high-temperature conditions, single atoms on the support surface tend to aggregate into nanoclusters or NPs, which leads to undesirable stability during the catalytic reactions.328,354,355 Based on many previous studies, the metal–support interactions have been reported to be highly responsible for achieving uniform dispersion and improving the stability of SACs.20,85 Thus, developing effective strategies to stabilize the isolated metal atoms on the support and further strengthen the interaction between atomic metal sites and suitable substrates is expected to address the stability problem even under harsh environments.
(3) Lack of comprehensive understanding
The lack of comprehensive understanding of the accurate geometric configuration and electronic structure of atomic metal sites is a great challenge in the development of NMSACs. At present, powerful characterization techniques including HAADF-STEM, XAS, FTIR and NMR spectroscopy are commonly applied for the investigation of the local coordination environment of isolated metal atoms, while it is difficult to probe and analyze the precise single-atom structure by an individual technique, especially under complex situations such as SACs with dual and even multi-metal active sites, or multi-shell structures.3,82 Specifically, effective characterization methods are also urgently required to monitor the dynamic changes of the active sites on the catalysts during the catalytic process, which is critical for the rational design of high-performance SACs.355,356 To this end, more efforts should be devoted to developing more advanced in situ and operando characterization strategies to gain deeper insight into the catalytic mechanisms of NMSACs at the atomic level.
(4) Undesirable low metal loadings
Typically, the mass loading of noble metal atoms in SACs is not as high as expected in most studies, which has become one of the main obstacles to achieving desirable catalytic performance for commercial applications. Owing to the agglomeration tendency of single atoms and limited effective anchoring sites, novel and facile synthetic strategies should be explored for designing SACs with high metal loadings. To improve the loading amount and realize a balance between catalytic activity and SAC loading, the construction of a strong coordination environment between atomic metal sites and solid substrates is highly desired to stabilize single atoms on the support through improved metal–support interactions.357–359 Moreover, with the assistance of theoretical modeling and simulations for SAC development, high-loading NMSACs are expected to be achieved, thereby enhancing the catalytic performance and accelerating their industrial processes.
(5) Non-negligible manufacturing cost
In terms of practical large-scale application, a possibly increased manufacturing cost should be also considered besides the catalytic efficiency of NMSACs. Benefiting from the maximum atom utilization efficiency of NMSACs, the increased specific activity per metal site enables the improvement of the catalytic activity and selectivity, and the reduced usage of noble metal resources can lower the manufacturing cost for large-scale production and promote the economic feasibility of the catalytic system.29,80,360 Whereas, the aggregation of single metal atoms with increased surface free energy may lead to an undesirable reduction in both the catalytic performance and stability during the catalytic reactions due to the reduced particle size for achieving 100% atom-utilization efficiency.82,361 Compared with noble metal nanoparticles, some modified and effective synthetic strategies are required to ensure dispersion of catalysts at the atomic level, which may increase the production cost to a certain extent. Besides, during the synthesis of NMSACs, some additional physical/chemical treatments (e.g., acid leaching) with the aim to remove impurities and unstable nanoparticles in the catalysts may be involved, which would result in a possible loss of precious metals and a decreased catalyst yield.14,28,109 Therefore, to address these issues, the optimization of synthetic strategies with avoiding extra physical/chemical treatment (especially acid leaching) should be considered for the preparation of NMSACs. Currently, no reports provide a direct comparison between the catalytic efficiency and the manufacturing cost of catalysts, which may due to the difficulty in calculating accurate manufacturing costs for varied synthetic methods and lab-scale synthesis; more efforts are hence required in the future.
At present, the exploration and application of SACs are still in the basic research stage. To promote the development of NMSACs in the future, the following promising directions are proposed to overcome the current problems:
(1) The development of efficient approaches to improve the intrinsic kinetic activity
Research into the development and optimization of suitable synthetic approaches to improve the intrinsic kinetic activity of NMSACs is essential for expanding their practical applications. Based on previous studies, one feasible strategy to effectively improve the catalytic activity and stability is to dope heteroatoms (e.g., N, S, P, O and B) on the support surface. Generally, the introduced heteroatoms can not only adjust the electronic structure and electrical conductivity, but also coordinate with the central metal atoms to reduce the surface energy and form a stable configuration. Moreover, benefiting from the synergistic effect between dual metal atoms, the catalytic performance can also be improved by introducing another metal atom into the catalysts to form diatomic sites or single-atom alloys. In addition to the above methods, other approaches such as the selection of appropriate substrates (e.g., metal oxides, MOFs, COFs and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)) and the introduction of intrinsic defects also have a significant effect on the final performance due to the synergistic interaction between the isolated metal sites and support surface. Up to now, although a variety of advanced synthetic strategies have been reported to prepare precious metal-based SACs, the development of facile and universal methods to prepare a series of controllable and scalable high-loading SACs with different noble metals remains a challenge, which provides a promising research direction for future industrial applications.
(2) The development of more advanced characterization techniques and theoretical calculations
More progress is expected to develop more in situ/operando characterization techniques as well as advanced theoretical modeling and simulation. To date, multiple advanced characterization techniques such as AC-STEM, FTIR, NMR, and XAFS, combined with theoretical studies such as DFT calculations, are employed to investigate the relationship between the structure and activity, and to understand the reaction mechanisms at the atomic level (e.g., coordination environments and binding energies). To further achieve a direct observation of the dynamic changes of active sites under working conditions, new in situ (or operando) characterization methods such as in situ TEM, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in situ XAS and near-ambient XPS have been developed to provide detailed information during the dynamic process in heterogeneous catalysis. In addition, theoretical modeling is also a powerful tool for investigating the process–structure–property relationships of atomically dispersed catalysts. The traditional DFT calculations usually suffer from problems including high computational cost and a time-consuming process. Due to the rapid development of computer software and hardware, this theoretical technique has been greatly improved in recent years, which is beneficial for the rational design of highly active and robust NMSACs. To deepen the understanding of the structural evolution in the catalytic process, more efforts should be devoted to optimizing the measurement levels and developing more advanced characterization methods and theoretical calculations in the future.
(3) The development of controllable synthetic strategies to scale up production
The development of controllable synthetic strategies to realize large-scale production of NMSACs is promising but challenging for industrial applications. Recently, many strategies have been reported to be efficient for preparing high-performance atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts, such as the wet chemistry strategy, high-temperature pyrolysis and the photochemical strategy. However, it still remains a challenge to achieve high metal loadings and excellent stability through a simple and universal synthetic pathway. In addition, currently, many reported methods usually rely on expensive equipment and complex techniques, or proceed under harsh conditions (e.g., high temperatures or pressures), which may hinder their practical applications. Based on the above considerations, more attention should be paid to the development of controllable techniques to prepare cost-effective and stable NMSACs with high metal loadings, and simultaneously reduce the manufacturing cost for large-scale industrial production.
In summary, atomically dispersed NMSACs featuring maximum atom utilization efficiency and novel catalytic performance have been regarded as a promising research frontier in various catalytic applications. Generally, the synergetic effect between the isolated metal atoms and support plays a significant role in improving the catalytic performance. To effectively tune the metal–support interaction, in situ characterization techniques and theoretical calculations can provide a great opportunity for precisely understanding the reaction mechanisms, and enhancing the in-depth investigation of the structure–activity relationships in noble metal-based catalysts at the atomic level. At present, although there are still some challenges that hinder their practical applications, the rational design and construction of stable NMSACs with a high level of metal loading and optimized local structures are expected to realize remarkable catalytic performance under theoretical guidance, further providing great promise for achieving large-scale industrial production in the future.
Abbreviations

ACActivated carbon
AC-STEMAberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy
AGAniline-stacked graphene
ALDAtomic layer deposition
APAtmospheric-pressure
APRMAqueous-phase reforming of methanol
CECounter electrode
CNCoordination number
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
COFsCovalent-organic frameworks
CO2RRCO2 reduction reaction
CTFCovalent triazine framework
CVCyclic voltammetry
DFAFCsDirect formic acid fuel cells
DFTDensity functional theory
DGDefective graphene
DMFCsDirect methanol fuel cells
DNDsDetonation nanodiamonds
DSSCsDye-sensitized solar cells
EDSEnergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDXEnergy dispersive X-ray
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAORFormic acid oxidation reaction
FEFaradaic efficiency
FTFourier transform
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GDYGraphdiyne nanosheet
GOGraphene oxide
GPGraphite paper
HAADF-STEMAberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy
HOMO–LUMOHighest occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
HBPHaber–Bosch process
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
hNCNCHierarchical nitrogen-doped carbon nanocages
HRTEMHigh-resolution TEM
ICP-AESInductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-OESInductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry
LDHsLayered double hydroxides
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
MAS NMRMagic-angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
MCMesoporous carbon
MLCTMetal-to-ligand charge transfer
MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
MORMethanol oxidation reaction
MSRMethanol steam reforming
MWCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
NCNitrogen-doped carbon
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NMSACsNoble-metal single-atom catalysts
NPsNanoparticles
N2RRN2 reduction reaction
OEROxygen evolution reaction
OLCOnion-like carbon nanospheres
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PEMFCsPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells or proton exchange membrane fuel cells
PVDPhysical vapor deposition
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
SAAsSingle-atom alloys
SACsSingle-atom catalysts
SR-FTIRSynchrotron radiation-based Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
STMScanning tunneling microscopy
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TMDsTransition metal dichalcogenides
TOFTurnover frequency
TPDTemperature-programmed desorption
TPRTemperature-programmed reduction
vis-NIRVisible-near-infrared
WEWorking electrode
WGSWater–gas shift
WTWavelet transform
XANESX-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray powder diffraction
ZIFZeolitic imidazolate frameworks

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council (Discovery Early Career Researcher Award No. DE190100005, Discovery Project No. DP200100500). F. Z. acknowledges Monash University for a PhD scholarship in support of the ARC Research Hub for Energy-efficient Separation (H170100009). Professor Huanting Wang is the recipient of an Australian Research Council Australian Laureate Fellowship (project number FL200100049) funded by the Australian Government.
References
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Rong, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1842–1855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thomas and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1890–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3492–3515 RSC .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11900–11955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rui, G. Zhao, M. Lao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Huang, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8447–8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Su, Y. He, L. Li, S. Zhu, H. Shen, P. Xie, X. Fu, G. Zhou, C. Feng, D. Zhao, F. Xiao, X. Zhu, Y. Zeng, M. Shao, S. Chen, G. Wu, J. Zeng and C. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12217–12314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qu, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800343 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, K. Duanmu, C. Wan, T. Cheng, L. Zhang, S. Dai, W. Chen, Z. Zhao, P. Li, H. Fei, Y. Zhu, R. Yu, J. Luo, K. Zang, Z. Lin, M. Ding, J. Huang, H. Sun, J. Guo, X. Pan, W. Goddard III, P. Sautet, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Y. Huang, L. Zheng and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900509 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, C. Tang, Y. Zheng, B. Xia, X. Zhou, H. Xu and S. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000789 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, T. Fan, N. Xie, G. Nie and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, H. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Liu, L. Cao, J. Gu and J. Lu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1401–1409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fan, J. D. Jimenez, S. N. Shirodkar, J. Wu, S. Chen, L. Song, M. M. Royko, J. Zhang, H. Guo, J. Cui, K. Zuo, W. Wang, C. Zhang, F. Yuan, R. Vajtai, J. Qian, J. Yang, B. I. Yakobson, J. M. Tour, J. Lauterbach, D. Sun and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10077–10086 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, N. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Bai, A. Mayoral, P. Zhang, Q. Zhang, O. Terasaki and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18570–18576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Shang, T. Zhang and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2003018 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Q. He, S. Ding and L. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ying, X. Luo, J. Qiao and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2007423 Search PubMed .
X. Lu, X. Rong, C. Zhang and T. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10695–10708 RSC .
L. Li, X. Chang, X. Lin, Z. Zhao and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8156–8178 RSC .
Z. Song, Y. Zhu, H. Liu, M. N. Banis, L. Zhang, J. Li, K. D. Davis, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. Yang, A. Young, G. A. Botton, L. M. Liu and X. Sun, Small, 2020, 16, 2003096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, R. Ge, Y. Dong, F. Hao and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14025–14042 RSC .
Z. Wang, L. Gu, L. Song, H. Wang and R. Yu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1024–1030 RSC .
A. Han, B. Wang, A. Kumar, Y. Qin, J. Jin, X. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong, Y. Jia, J. Liu and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800471 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 34–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, D. Liu, H. Cao, F. Hou, J. Liang and S. X. Dou, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800501 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, K. D. Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
L. Wang, M. Chen, Q. Yan, S. Xu, S. Chu, P. Chen, Y. Lin and H. Liang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax6322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bulushev, M. Zacharska, A. S. Lisitsyn, O. Y. Podyacheva, F. S. Hage, Q. M. Ramasse, U. Bangert and L. G. Bulusheva, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3442–3451 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sandoval, A. Aguilar, C. Louis, A. Traverse and R. Zanella, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Shi and B. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7294–7297 CrossRef .
X. Gu, B. Qiao, C. Huang, W. Ding, K. Sun, E. Zhan, T. Zhang, J. Liu and W. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3886–3890 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bo, J. Li, Y. Han and J. Dai, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 1415–1418 CrossRef .
B. Qiao, J. Liang, A. Wang, C. Xu, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. J. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2913–2924 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Chou, H. Liu and S. Dou, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800497 CrossRef .
J. D. Kistler, N. Chotigkrai, P. Xu, B. Enderle, P. Praserthdam, C. Chen, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8904–8907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Chen, L. Zhang, T. Yao, W. Liu, Y. Lin, H. Ju, J. Dong, L. Zheng, W. Yan, X. Zheng, Z. Li, X. Wang, J. Yang, D. He, Y. Wang, Z. Deng, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9419–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Helmersson, M. Lattemann, J. Bohlmark, A. P. Ehiasarian and J. T. Gudmundsson, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 513, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Rossnagel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2003, 21, S74 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Marcinkowski, J. Liu, C. J. Murphy, M. L. Liriano, N. A. Wasio, F. R. Lucci, M. F. Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 413–420 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Therrien, A. J. R. Hensley, M. D. Marcinkowski, R. Zhang, F. R. Lucci, B. Coughlin, A. C. Schilling, J. S. McEwen and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 121301 CrossRef .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Hermida, Z. Lu, A. White, K. Low, T. Wu, J. W. Elam, Z. Wu and Y. Lei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15348–15356 RSC .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Y. Xia, Y. Cao, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, C. Ma, H. Wang, J. Li, R. You, S. Wei, W. Huang and J. Lu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1302–1312 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xuan, J. Chen, J. Shi, Y. Yue, P. Zhuang, K. Ba, Y. Sun, J. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Ge and Z. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 429–435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Xue and H. Yang, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 720–722 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8450–8458 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Science, 2016, 352, 797–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, C. Pan, L. Zheng, X. Cai, B. Liu, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 2727–2731 CrossRef .
J. Wang, G. Han, L. Wang, L. Du, G. Chen, Y. Gao, Y. Ma, C. Du, X. Cheng, P. Zuo and G. Yin, Small, 2018, 14, 1704282 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, G. Li, N. Li, S. Li, Z. P. Cano, L. Ma, P. Cui, P. Xu, G. Jiang, H. Jin, S. Wang, T. Wu, J. Lu, A. Yu, D. Su and Z. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 9742–9747 CrossRef .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiong, J. Dong, Z. Huang, P. Xin, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jin, W. Xing, Z. Zhuang, J. Ye, X. Wei, R. Gao, L. Gu, S. Sun, L. Zhuang, X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. Chang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, Z. Duan, X. Wen, R. Si, Q. Zhang and J. Guan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9897–9904 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. M. da Silva, T. S. Rodrigues, S. J. Haigh and P. H. C. Camargo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7135–7148 RSC .
X. Lu, H. Tuan, J. Chen, Z. Li, B. A. Korgel and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1733–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673–689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Luo, X. Wang, R. Zeng, A. Li, H. Li, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Ma, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 14036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, R. Qin, L. Zhou, P. Liu, Q. Zhang, W. Jing, P. Ruan, L. Gu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 207–214 CAS .
Z. Li, T. He, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, A. Wu, L. Liu, G. Wu and P. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6762–6769 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vorobyeva, Z. Chen, S. Mitchell, R. K. Leary, P. Midgley, J. M. Thomas, R. Hauert, E. Fako, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16393–16403 RSC .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. Ouyang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zuo, T. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Ji, X. Gong, Y. Mai and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 10304–10309 CrossRef .
X. He, Y. Deng, Y. Zhang, Q. He, D. Xiao, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, R. Luo, T. Gan, H. Ji and D. Ma, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100004 CrossRef .
L. Liu, H. Su, F. Tang, X. Zhao and Q. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lang, X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, K. Liu, B. Qiao, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11986–12043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. F. Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800443 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 5413–5418 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hou, H. Wang, C. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1658–1693 RSC .
W. Zheng, J. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Hou, Q. Wang, M. Gu, F. He, Y. Xia, Z. Xia, Z. Li, B. Yang, L. Lei, C. Yuan, Q. He, M. Qiu and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907658 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Huang, Z. L. Zhao, M. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Feng, H. Xu and M. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. Tian, H. Jiang, D. Cao, S. Wei, D. Liu, P. Song, Y. Lin and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, X. Cui, L. Gu, S. Yu, X. Fan, M. Luo, S. Xu, N. Li, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Gong, F. Lv, K. Wang, H. Huang, W. Zhang, S. Guo, W. Zheng and P. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700191 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1153–1175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 934–948 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Nellist and S. J. Pennycook, Adv. Imaging Electron Phys., 2000, 113, 147–203 Search PubMed .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Guan, H. Wu, W. Liu, Y. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Ye, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, S. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14515–14519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Müllejans and J. Bruley, J. Phys. IV, 1993, 3, C7-2083 CrossRef .
N. Mårtensson, J. Söderstrom, S. Svensson, O. Travnikova, M. Patanen, C. Miron, L. J. Sæthre, K. J. Børve, T. D. Thomas, J. J. Kas, F. D. Vila and J. J. Rehr, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2013, 430, 012131 CrossRef .
A. Alarawi, V. Ramalingam and J. H. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, N. Parsai and B. D. Shrivastava, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 2011, 49, 25–29 CAS .
Z. Du, X. Chen, W. Hu, C. Chuang, S. Xie, A. Hu, W. Yan, X. Kong, X. Wu, H. Ji and L. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3977–3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, J. Chen and H. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13562–13567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, S. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Gong, Z. Wu, L. Song, L. Gu, W. Hu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 3551–3556 CrossRef .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12175–12216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, J. Bian and C. Sun, Research, 2020, 2020, 1–51 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, H. Wu, K. Huang, B. Ge, J. Ma, J. Lang, D. Zu, M. Lei, Y. Yao, W. Guo and H. Wu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2830–2836 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Li, W. Zhao, W. Zhang, J. Li, W. Li, X. Zheng, W. Yan, W. Zhang, J. Zhu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1885 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, Z. Xiao, J. Li, Y. Gong, H. Abe, Y. Niwa, M. Sasase, M. Kitano and H. Hosono, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rivera-Cárcamo and P. Serp, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5058–5091 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Kho, T. H. Tan, E. Lovell, R. J. Wong, J. Scott and R. Amal, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 204–217 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
Z. Li, S. Ji, Y. Liu, X. Cao, S. Tian, Y. Chen, Z. Niu and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 623–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, C. H. Choi, M. J. M. Primbs, W. Ju, S. Li, N. D. Leonard, A. Thomas, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4841–4852 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Stowell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1203–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, F. Chen, S. Duan, B. Shao, T. Li, H. Tang, Q. Lin, J. Zhang, L. Li, J. Huang, N. Bion, W. Liu, H. Sun, A. Wang, M. Haruta, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3824 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhou, X. Hou, Y. Chao, W. Yang, W. Zhang, Z. Mu, J. Lai, F. Lv, K. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Ma, J. Luo and S. Guo, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 5898–5905 RSC .
Q. Fu, H. Saltsburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2003, 301, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, A. Gulec, A. M. Johnson, N. M. Schweitzer, G. D. Stucky, L. D. Marks and P. C. Stairs, Science, 2015, 350, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, J. Lin, Y. Zhou, L. Li, Y. Su, X. Wang and T. Zhang, AIChE J., 2017, 63, 4022–4031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. Asokan, M. Xu, G. W. Graham, X. Pan, P. Christopher, J. Li and P. Sautet, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4488 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, J. Liu, S. Lee, B. Zugic, J. Huang, L. F. Allard and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3470–3473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, S. Li, Y. Wang, J. A. Herron, Y. Xu, L. F. Allard, S. Lee, J. Huang, M. Mavrikakis and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2014, 346, 1498–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zugic, S. Zhang, D. C. Bell, F. Tao and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3238–3245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lou, Y. Zheng, X. Li, N. Ta, J. Xu, Y. Nie, K. Cho and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19289–19295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Ruhul, M. A. Kalam, H. H. Masjuki, I. M. Rizwanul Fattah, S. S. Reham and M. M. Rashed, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 101023 RSC .
F. Yang, S. Ding, H. Song and N. Yan, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 982–992 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, Y. Ren, A. Wang, X. Liu, X. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Miao, L. Li, J. Liu, J. Wang, G. Wang, D. Su and T. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5126–5131 RSC .
F. Huang, Y. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Cai, M. Peng, Z. Jia, P. Ren, D. Xiao, X. Wen, N. Wang, H. Liu and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13142–13146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pei, X. Liu, X. Yang, L. Zhang, A. Wang, L. Li, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, A. Li, J. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Gong, Q. Zhang, W. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, H. Xiao, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu, X. Han, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 856–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakaya, J. Hirayama, S. Yamazoe, K. Shimizu and S. Furukawa, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sun, Z. Zhao, R. Mu, S. Zha, L. Li, S. Chen, K. Zang, J. Luo, Z. Li, S. C. Purdy, A. J. Kropf, J. T. Miller, L. Zeng and J. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4454 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. Zhai, H. Jin and S. S. C. Chuang, Chemistry of Silica and Zeolite-Based Materials, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 121–142 Search PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y. Li, C. Shi, X. Wen and D. Ma, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Narula, L. F. Allard, G. M. Stocks and M. Moses-DeBusk, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. J. Hackett, R. M. Brydson, M. H. Gass, I. Harvey, A. D. Newman, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 8747–8750 CrossRef .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. P. Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nie, D. Mei, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Kovarik, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Liu, L. F. Allard, S. Lee, J. Liu, H. Li, J. Wang, J. Wang, S. H. Oh, W. Li, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M. Shen, B. R. Goldsmith and M. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3808 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Han, R. Lang, H. Tang, J. Xu, X. Gu, B. Qiao and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 1847–1853 CrossRef .
S. Cao, Y. Zhao, S. Lee, S. Yang, J. Liu, G. Giannakakis, M. Li, M. Ouyang, D. Wang, E. C. H. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba3809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jeong, D. Shin, B. S. Kim, J. Bae, S. Shin, C. Choe, J. W. Han and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 20872–20877 CrossRef .
S. Ding, H. A. Chen, O. Mekasuwandumrong, M. J. Hülsey, X. Fu, Q. He, J. Panpranot, C. M. Yang and N. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, J. Lin, X. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Liu, T. Zhang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21945–21951 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Peterson, A. T. DeLaRiva, S. Lin, R. S. Johnson, H. Guo, J. T. Miller, J. H. Kwak, C. H. F. Peden, B. Kiefer, L. F. Allard, F. H. Ribeiro and A. K. Datye, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Spezzati, Y. Su, J. P. Hofmann, A. D. Benavidez, A. T. DeLaRiva, J. McCabe, A. K. Datye and E. J. M. Hensen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6887–6891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Qin, Q. Meng, Z. Xue, L. Qiu, G. Zhang, X. Guo and Q. Li, Small, 2020, 16, 2002071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, T. Li, J. Zhang, C. Zeng, H. Matsumoto, Y. Su, B. Qiao and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4870–4873 RSC .
M. J. Hülsey, B. Zhang, Z. Ma, H. Asakura, D. A. Do, W. Chen, T. Tanaka, P. Zhang, Z. Wu and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1330 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiao, J. Lin, A. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Zhang and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6249–6254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, C. Aydin, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 5944–5948 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Kovarik, X. Zhang, A. S. Hoffman, A. Gallo, S. R. Bare, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, V. Dagle, H. Xin and A. M. Karim, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. Kasama, Z. Huang, P. Hu, J. Chen, X. Liu and X. Tang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 17397–17402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 783–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, W. Deng, H. Saltburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 57–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, L. F. Allard and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3768–3771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, U. Díaz, R. Arenal, G. Agostini, P. Concepción and A. Corma, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 132–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva, R. K. Leary, R. Hauert, T. Furnival, Q. M. Ramasse, J. M. Thomas, P. A. Midgley, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, S. Pogodin, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605785 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. De and N. Yan, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 8459–8463 CrossRef .
X. He, Q. He, Y. Deng, M. Peng, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Yao, M. Zhang, D. Xiao, D. Ma, B. Ge and H. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3663 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Han, J. Zhang, W. Sun, W. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Han, Q. Feng, L. Zheng, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3787 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Lucci, J. Liu, M. D. Marcinkowski, M. Yang, L. F. Allard, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8550 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ding, Y. Guo, M. J. Hülsey, B. Zhang, H. Asakura, L. Liu, Y. Han, M. Gao, J. Hasegawa, B. Qiao, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Chem, 2019, 5, 3207–3219 CAS .
Y. Ma, B. Chi, W. Liu, L. Cao, Y. Lin, X. Zhang, X. Ye, S. Wei and J. Lu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8404–8412 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bi, X. Yuan, Y. Lu, D. Wang, J. Huang, R. Si, M. Sui and F. Huang, Research, 2020, 2020, 1–10 CrossRef .
Z. Han, C. Tang, J. Wang, L. Li and C. Li, J. Catal., 2021, 394, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, S. Yao, R. Gao, X. Liang, Q. Yu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, M. Peng, Z. Jiang, S. Li, Y. Li, X. Wen, W. Zhou and D. Ma, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 354–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. R. Lucci, M. Yang, S. Lee, M. D. Marcinkowski, A. J. Therrien, C. T. Williams, E. C. H. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6396–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Chu, F. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Cao, J. Gong, J. Luo, H. Lin, Y. Li and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6865–6872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, Z. Geng, S. Zhao, L. Wang, H. Li, X. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, Z. Li, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3785–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kikkawa, K. Teramura, H. Asakura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 23446–23454 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vilé, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, L. Zhang, C. Yu, M. Sun, J. Liu and G. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604571 CrossRef .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, D. He, D. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, L. Gu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, R. Yu, J. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7294–7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, X. Yang, A. Wang, S. Miao, X. Liu, X. Pan, Y. Su, L. Li, Y. Tan and T. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 692–699 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kyriakou, M. B. Boucher, A. D. Jewell, E. A. Lewis, T. J. Lawton, A. E. Bader, H. L. Tierney, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Science, 2012, 335, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Boucher, B. Zugic, G. Cladaras, J. Kammert, M. D. Marcinkowski, T. J. Lawton, E. C. H. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12187–12196 RSC .
Y. Ma, Y. Ren, Y. Zhou, W. Liu, W. Baaziz, O. Ersen, C. Pham-Huu, M. Greiner, W. Chu, A. Wang, T. Zhang and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21613–21619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, A. Wang, L. Li, Y. Huang, T. Zhang, J. W. Lee, B. W. L. Jang and C. Y. Mou, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2043–2051 RSC .
X. Cao, A. Mirjalili, J. Wheeler, W. Xie and B. W. L. Jang, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2015, 9, 442–449 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, K. Liu, S. F. Hung, L. Zhou, R. Qin, Q. Zhang, P. Liu, L. Gu, H. M. Chen, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 848–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Aich, H. Wei, B. Basan, A. J. Kropf, N. M. Schweitzer, C. L. Marshall, J. T. Miller and R. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18140–18148 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Q. Xu, W. Chen, S. Tian, Y. Wang, W. Yan, J. Luo, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901024 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, X. Yang, L. Li, X. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Pan, A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1054–1061 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Kochubey, V. V. Chesnokov and S. E. Malykhin, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2782–2787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, Q. Guan, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, Z. Sun, S. Wei, J. Yang and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, D. He, W. Chen, H. Ju, H. Zhang, T. Chao, X. Wang, R. You, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Li, B. Xiao, W. Huang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13850–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. B. Uhlman, M. M. Montemore, A. Trimpalis, G. Giannakakis, J. Shan, S. Cao, R. T. Hannagan, E. C. H. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8757–8765 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, S. Zhao, W. Chen, L. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Dong, Z. Li, F. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, J. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4271–4275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Gong, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Q. Xu, C. Chen, C. Chen, Q. Peng, L. Gu, H. Zhao, P. Hu, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11161–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fan, J. D. Jimenez, S. N. Shirodkar, J. Wu, S. Chen, L. Song, M. M. Royko, J. Zhang, H. Guo, J. Cui, K. Zuo, W. Wang, C. Zhang, F. Yuan, R. Vajtai, J. Qian, J. Yang, B. I. Yakobson, J. M. Tour, J. Lauterbach, D. Sun and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10077–10086 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, O. G. Salnikov, D. A. Barskiy, K. V. Kovtunov and I. V. Koptyug, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7012–7015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bayram, J. Lu, C. Aydin, A. Uzun, N. D. Browning, B. C. Gates and R. G. Finke, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1947–1957 CrossRef CAS .
M. Babucci, F. E. S. Oztuna, L. M. Debefve, A. Boubnov, S. R. Bare, B. C. Gates, U. Unal and A. Uzun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9905–9913 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, C. Yang, X. Pan, J. Ma, Y. Zhang, Y. Ren, X. Liu, L. Li and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19001–19005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Pronkin, T. P. Fellinger, K. Kailasam, G. Vilé, D. Albani, F. Krumeich, R. Leary, J. Barnard, J. M. Thomas, J. Pérez-Ramírez, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3166–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, R. A. Hoyt, M. El-Soda, R. J. Madix, E. Kaxiras and E. C. H. Sykes, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, Z. An, Y. Zhu, W. Wang and J. He, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1773–1777 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, L. Zhang, H. Wu, H. Zu, P. Cui, J. Guo, R. Guo, J. Ye, J. Zhu, X. Zheng, L. Yang, Y. Zhong, S. Liang and L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900006 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lang, T. Li, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, Y. Ren, Y. Cui, Y. Tan, B. Qiao, L. Li, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16054–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Sa, H. Y. Jeong and S. H. Joo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9567–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, X. Ding, Q. Cao, Y. Qin and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13979–13982 RSC .
S. Ren, Q. Yu, X. Yu, P. Rong, L. Jiang and J. Jiang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 903–920 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Kim, I. H. Lee, J. Cho, S. Shin, H. C. Ham, J. Y. Kim and H. Lee, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4757–4764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 2098–2102 CrossRef .
S. Yang, Y. J. Tak, J. Kim, A. Soon and H. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shen, W. Chen, Q. Peng, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Cao, Y. Wang, W. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 2099–2110 CAS .
J. S. Jirkovský, I. Panas, E. Ahlberg, M. Halasa, S. Romani and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19432–19441 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, L. Liu, X. Ren, J. Gao, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. M. T. A. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Li, X. Liu, H. Yang, C. D. Sewell, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, C. He and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104194 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Z. Fang, H. Li, D. Fernandez, G. Henkelman, S. M. Humphrey and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13225–13234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, Y. Zheng, B. Shi, K. Davey and S. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2719–2730 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, S. Xie, Y. Li, X. Li, Z. Jiang and Z. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6803–6812 RSC .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Liu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lu, Q. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7584–7618 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, L. Zhang, W. Hua, S. Indris, Z. Yan, Z. Hu, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, M. Liu, R. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Hu, H. Liu, S. Chou and S. Dou, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 11994–11999 CrossRef .
H. Xu, T. Liu, S. Bai, L. Li, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5482–5489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Song, Q. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20794–20812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, S. Sultan, M. Ha, J. N. Tiwari, M. G. Kim and K. S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000531 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Lin, L. Zhang, S. Tao, X. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12810–12820 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. Lu, T. Chen and X. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000882 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guan, Y. Feng, J. Wan, X. Yang, L. Fang, X. Gu, R. Liu, Z. Huang, J. Li, J. Luo, C. Li and Y. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800697 CrossRef .
C. Wu, D. Li, S. Ding, Z. Rehman, Q. Liu, S. Chen, B. Zhang and L. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6081–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhou, C. Chen, Z. Han, B. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, L. Du, Y. Bu, P. Wang, X. Wang, H. Yang and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1657 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C. L. Dong, R. S. Liu, C. P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, B. Huang, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, iScience, 2019, 11, 31–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, C. Ma, L. Jiang, R. Si, X. Meng, Y. Tu, L. Yu, X. Bao and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 10588–10593 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Cao, N. J. Libretto, X. Li, C. Li, Y. Wan, C. He, J. Lee, J. Gregg, H. Zong, D. Su, J. T. Miller, T. Mueller and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16635–16642 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, T. Wang, J. Pei, H. Shang, D. Zhou, H. Li, J. Dong, Y. Wang, R. Cao, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2856–2863 RSC .
F. Pan, W. Deng, C. Justiniano and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 463–472 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Li, S. Xi, Y. Du, X. Hai, J. Wang, H. Xu, G. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 15013–15018 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, J. H. Lee, D. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Lin, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, S. Kattel, L. Song and J. G. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 5, 204–214 CAS .
T. He, A. R. P. Santiago and A. Du, J. Catal., 2020, 388, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Z. Zhu, C. Zhu, K. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Tang and J. Chen, Mater. Today, 2020, 38, 99–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Chen, J. Yu and B. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18903–18907 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, M. Luo, X. Xu, K. Jiang, M. Peng, D. Chen, T. S. Chan and Y. Tan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001364 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, T. Heil, M. Antonietti and M. Oschatz, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800202 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, R. Guo, X. Peng, X. Wang, X. Liu, J. Ren, J. He, L. Zhuo, J. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Wu and J. Luo, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6938–6946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu and P. G. Pickup, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 124–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Duchesne, Z. Y. Li, C. P. Deming, V. Fung, X. Zhao, J. Yuan, T. Regier, A. Aldalbahi, Z. Almarhoon, S. Chen, D. Jiang, N. Zheng and P. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1033–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, C. W. Roh, S. K. Sahoo, S. Yang, J. Bae, J. W. Han and H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701476 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Tang, W. Chen, A. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiong, Y. Wu, Y. Gong, T. Yao, W. Liu, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Y. Wang, Z. Zhuang, W. Xing, C. T. He, C. Peng, W. C. Cheong, Q. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Chen, N. Fu, X. Gao, W. Zhu, J. Wan, J. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Wei, P. Hu, J. Luo, J. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, X. Duan, Y. Huang, X. M. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 764–772 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, D. Shin, J. Lee, D. S. Baek, T. J. Shin, Y. T. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. H. Kwak, H. Kim and S. H. Joo, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1990–2001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Back, A. J. Akey, C. Xia, Y. Hu, W. Liang, D. Schaak, E. Stavitski, J. K. Nørskov, S. Siahrostami and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3997 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ledendecker, E. Pizzutilo, G. Malta, G. V. Fortunato, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, G. J. Hutchings and S. J. Freakley, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5928–5938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
S. Li, J. Liu, Z. Yin, P. Ren, L. Lin, Y. Gong, C. Yang, X. Zheng, R. Cao, S. Yao, Y. Deng, X. Liu, L. Gu, W. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Wen, B. Xu and D. Ma, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 907–913 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, X. Wang, R. K. Hocking, H. Liu, J. Chen, L. Ge, L. Zhang, M. Li, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang, S. Shen, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805581 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, W. Gao, P. Tu, T. Robert, Y. Ma, H. Shan, X. Gu, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song, T. Deng, H. Zhu, X. Pan, H. Yang and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5905–5912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chao, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, X. Zheng, Y. Qu, Q. Xu and X. Hong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 4019–4024 CAS .
W. Xiang, Y. Zhao, Z. Jiang, X. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, Z. Ning, F. Du, P. Gao, J. Qian, K. Kato, M. Yamauchi and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23366–23377 RSC .
C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, X. Zou, N. Zhao, H. Yu, Z. Jiang, E. Ringe, B. I. Yakobson, J. Dong, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6930–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Jin, C. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li, J. Ge, Q. He, Z. Wu, Z. Chen and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19800–19806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z. Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C. R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W. X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, M. Wang, X. Duan, L. Zheng, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, Q. Ma, Z. Feng, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1711 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, A. Kumar, T. Yang, X. Liu, A. R. Jadhav, G. H. Park, Y. Hwang, J. Yu, C. T. K. Nguyen, Y. Liu, S. Ajmal, M. G. Kim and H. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5152–5164 RSC .
Y. Hu, G. Luo, L. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, F. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Li, T. Yao, C. Xiong, B. Yang, Z. Yu and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2002816 Search PubMed .
C. Cai, S. Han, Q. Wang and M. Gu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8865–8871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Gao, Y. Yan, X. Li, Y. Xing, H. Li, Z. Peng, J. Yang and J. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20202–20207 RSC .
D. D. Babu, Y. Huang, G. Anandhababu, X. Wang, R. Si, M. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Wang and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8676–8683 RSC .
Z. Zhang, C. Feng, C. Liu, M. Zuo, L. Qin, X. Yan, Y. Xing, H. Li, R. Si, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, M. Peng, Y. Yu, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan, P. Liu, F. M. F. Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, J. Jin, M. Lu, B. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Peng, P. Xi and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18378–18386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707522 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, P. An, W. Zhou, B. Guan, P. Zhang, J. Dong and X. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6657 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tavakkoli, N. Holmberg, R. Kronberg, H. Jiang, J. Sainio, E. I. Kauppinen, T. Kallio and K. Laasonen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3121–3130 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Han, H. Liu, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13694–13698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. Lu, T. Chan, F. M. F. Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
M. Zhou, J. E. Dick and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17677–17682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, H. Wang, S. Tang, X. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, S. Lee, H. E. Kim, A. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Ye, J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 16184–16188 CrossRef .
M. S. Kim, H. Park, S. O. Won, A. Sharma, J. Kong, H. S. Park, Y. M. Sung, T. J. Park, M. W. Moon and K. Hur, Small, 2019, 15, 1903197 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, W. Gao, Q. Wang, M. Dou, Z. Zhang and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20423–20427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhou, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Han, Q. Zhang, X. Ke, J. Liu and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3082–3092 RSC .
Y. Shi, W. Huang, J. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Yin and X. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T. K. Sham, M. Gu, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, G. Wang, F. Zhang, L. Zou, Z. Zou and H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11760–11766 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Cai, X. Yin, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Ma, Y. Ke, Y. Du, S. Xi, A. T. S. Wee, Y. Chai and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5600–5608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Chen, H. Yi, Y. Cao, L. Du, Y. Hu, F. Kong, R. K. Campen, Y. Gao, C. Du, G. Yin, I. Y. Zhang and Y. Tong, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 16036–16041 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Ji, X. Yan, W. Liu, Y. Huang, K. Wang, P. Jin, X. Yao and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5255–5262 RSC .
Y. Feng, Y. Guan, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, J. Li, Z. Jiang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11783–11789 RSC .
Z. Luo, Y. Ouyang, H. Zhang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, D. Tang, X. Cao, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2120 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, B. Chen, X. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, J. Dong, W. Chen, W. Yan, T. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 9639–9644 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, L. Chen, N. Wang, J. E. Lu, Y. Ping and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18261–18269 RSC .
Y. Peng, W. Pan, N. Wang, J. E. Lu and S. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 130–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H. C. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and J. H. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yang, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, K. Sun, S. Liu, W. C. Cheong, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhuang, X. Wei, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105467 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, E. Song, W. Chen, C. U. Segre, J. Zhou, Y. C. Lin, C. Zhu, R. Ma, P. Liu, S. Chu, T. Thomas, M. Yang, Q. Liu, K. Suenage, Z. Liu, J. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Chen, R. Cao, Z. Pan, H. He and K. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, X. Chen, D. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020 DOI:10.1093/nsr/nwaa213 .
L. Han, Z. Ren, P. Ou, H. Cheng, N. Rui, L. Lin, X. Liu, L. Zhuo, J. Song, J. Sun, J. Luo and H. L. Xin, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 349–354 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Li, Z. Fang, Y. Zhang, J. Ni, B. Lin, L. Zheng, C. Au and L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9504–9514 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, H. Li, J. White, S. Donne, J. Yi, S. Xi, Y. Fu, G. Henkelman, H. Yu, Z. Chen and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905665 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, W. Rong, S. Wei, Y. Ji and L. Duan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 29462–29468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Wang, M. Qiao, G. Wu, W. Chen, T. Yuan, Q. Xu, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Ge, X. Hong, Y. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Faungnawakij and M. Chareonpanich, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xia, Y. Zhang, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 39–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Z. Hu, J. Jiang and F. Huang, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 1780–1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, J. Sun, S. Li, C. Huang, W. Yao, W. Chen, T. Zeng, Q. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11863–11874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, D. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, X. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Mou, S. Fang, X. Shen and T. Yao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6082–6088 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, P. Zhang, M. Qiu, J. Dong, Y. Zhang and X. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804883 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, W. Sun, Y. Lei, Q. Wang, A. Li, W. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Han, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1295–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Wang, T. Xia, H. Ju, K. Zhang, R. Long, Q. Xu, C. Wang, L. Song, J. Zhu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6959–6965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, K. Shen, F. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6579–6586 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Q. Shang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao, T. Yao, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705112 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. Lu, Z. Wu and X. Lou, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1288–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 771–805 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, B. Xia, J. Ran, K. Davey and S. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, X. Liu, M. Shi, T. Li, M. Xia, X. Du, R. Shang, H. Gu and Q. Zhong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhao, D. Cao, Y. Wang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Huang, H. Cui, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Z. Li, X. Xu, L. Hou, Y. Tang, B. Deng, F. Yang, Y. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 782–790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, C. Zhao, H. Wei, J. Guo, S. Liang, A. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Liu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8147–8153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Huang, P. Liu, X. Song, D. Mei, Y. Tang, X. Wang and C. Zhong, J. Catal., 2019, 375, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, J. Chen, Y. Li, W. Yuan, Y. Zhou, L. Zheng, H. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Wang and H. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2138–2144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qiu, Y. Shen, G. Wei, S. Yao, W. Xi, M. Shu, R. Si, M. Zhang, J. Zhu and C. An, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, Y. Lei, X. Liu, Y. Li, W. Deng, F. Wang and S. Min, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 14083–14086 RSC .
X. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, M. Qiu, J. Kong, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Xu, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, F. Lv, N. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, Y. Tang, J. Lai, Y. Chao, M. Luo, F. Lin, J. Zhou, D. Su and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Yang, P. Gao and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 14322–14326 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, Y. Qian, X. Zheng, S. Chu, Y. Yang, C. Ding, X. Wang, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa224 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, H. Li, T. Tong, H. C. Chen, A. Yu, J. Yu and H. M. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802169 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, S. Zuo, M. Qiu, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb9823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, C. Dai, B. Liu and C. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24217–24221 RSC .
X. Li, S. Zhao, X. Duan, H. Zhang, S. Yang, P. Zhang, S. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Sun and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119660 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Wu, F. Wu, L. Tian, L. Liu, J. Zou, S. Luo and B. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23112–23116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Wang, M. You, S. Hong, T. S. Wu, Y. L. Soo, Z. Zhao, G. Jiang, J. Qiu, B. Wang and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6813–6820 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis, X. Fu, J. Luo and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001561 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lou, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, C. Pan, Y. Dong and Y. Zhu, Mater. Today Nano, 2020, 12, 100093 CrossRef .
L. Ma, G. Zhu, D. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Lv, Y. Zhang, X. He and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003870 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, C. Ye, H. Yan, L. Li, H. He, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3165–3182 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Q. Xu, J. Qi, D. Zhou, H. Zhu and J. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 14630–14656 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and J. Guan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000768 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qin, K. Liu, Q. Wu and N. Zheng, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11810–11899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, Y. Jiao, B. Shi, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Chen, Q. Zhang and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9171–9176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, D. Xia, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9604–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis, R. Li and X. Sun, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 488–520 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yinlong Zhu
	Yinlong Zhu received his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, in 2017. Now he works as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of functional materials (especially perovskite oxides) as ORR/OER/HER/NRR electrocatalysis for the application of electrochemical energy technologies, such as solid oxide fuel cells, metal–air batteries and water splitting. He has published over 30 papers as the first author/corresponding author in Nat. Commun., Adv. Mater., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., Energy Environ. Sci., Matter, Nano Lett., Adv. Energy Mater., Adv. Funct. Mater., etc.

Huanting Wang
	Huanting Wang is a Professor and ARC Australian Laureate Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, and the director of the Monash Centre for Membrane Innovation at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials and membranes for gas separation, water treatment, chiral separation, ion transport and separation, and electrochemical energy applications. He has co-authored over 300 papers in these areas.

Broader context
Clean energy and environmental technologies are essential for pursuing a sustainable future. To boost the rate and selectivity of key chemical reactions involved in these technologies, high-performance catalysts are necessary. Noble-metal nanoparticles have always been regarded as benchmark catalysts with reasonably high activity, but the scarcity and high cost limit their large-scale practical applications. Reducing the dosage and simultaneously maximizing the catalytic efficiency is highly desirable for making full use of noble metals. Noble-metal single-atom catalysts (NMSACs), with well-defined structures and maximum atom utilization efficiency, are emerging alternatives to noble-metal nanoparticles due to better catalytic performance. In this review, we present a comprehensive overview of recent advances of NMSACs in various catalytic applications including thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. Synthetic strategies, characterization techniques and structure–activity correlation of NMSACs are highlighted. We also conclude existing challenges and provide an outlook for future development of NMSACs. This review is expected to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of NMSACs for catalysis and offer some guidelines for the design of advanced catalysts in the future.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategies, characterization techniques and catalytic applications of NMSACs summarized in this review.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Synthesis of metal/meso_S–C (metal = Ru, Rh, Pd, Ir, and Pt) via a wet chemistry strategy. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Synthesis of a single-atom Pd1/graphene catalyst via an ALD strategy. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of atomically dispersed Pt deposited on various solid substrates (multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), mesoporous carbon (MC), ZnO nanowires, graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles) via an ice-photochemical strategy. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Synthesis of SA-Rh/CN via high-temperature pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of Pt SAS/AG via microwave irradiation. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis of Pt SA/DG via the thermal emitting strategy. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of single-atom Pt deposited on an MoS2/GP electrode via electrochemical deposition. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis of PtSA–MNS via the surfactant-assisted strategy. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Synthesis of Pd1/ZnO via the ball-milling method.76 Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Synthesis of Au1Nx single-site/C3N4via the amine-induced-reduction method. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

Wet chemistry strategy	• Simple procedure	• Low metal loadings
• Low cost	• Limited control over the location of the active sites on the support surface


Physical vapor deposition (PVD)	• Simple procedure	• Harsh conditions (e.g., a high vacuum environment and expensive equipment)
• Environmental friendliness	• Difficult to precisely control the anchoring sites on the solid substrate
• Precise control of the composition	• Slow process of ALD


Atomic layer deposition (ALD)	• Useful for the investigation of structure–performance relationships	• Harsh conditions (e.g., a high vacuum environment and expensive equipment)
• Easy to control the loading amount of NMSACs by adjusting the reaction speed and times	• Difficult to precisely control the anchoring sites on the solid substrate
• Precise control of the size and thickness of the deposition by adjusting the number of ALD cycles	• Slow process of ALD


Photochemical strategy	• Simple and time-saving procedure	• Restricted to specific systems
• More scalable than the ALD technique	• Narrow applicability
• No requirement for extra chemical or physical treatment	



High-temperature pyrolysis	• Simple procedure	• Generation of complex species
• Usage of inexpensive raw materials	• Long reaction time and high energy consumption

	• Uncontrollable active sites on the support surface


Galvanic replacement	• Short reaction time	• Restriction on universality
• The possibility to obtain high-efficiency and low-cost products with large pore volumes	• High reduction potential
• Low-cost and energy-efficient	• Limited material selection
• Easy to control the morphology, composition and internal structure	



A microwave-assisted strategy	• High yield and short reaction time	• Difficult to control the thickness and loading of single metal atoms
• Low cost


Ball-milling	• Simple procedure	• Irregular morphologies of catalysts
• High yield	• Contaminant problem
• Easy to control the size of catalysts	• Long reaction time
• Wide scope of applications	• Uncontrollable active sites on the support surface

 	Fig. 4  AC-HAADF-STEM images of (a and b) Pt1/Co3O4, (c and d) Pt1/CeO2, (e and f) Pt1/ZrO2, and (g and h) Pt1/graphene at both low and high magnification. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra and (j) Fourier transform (FT) radial distribution function of the Pt L3-edge k3-weighted EXAFS spectra for Pt1/R-Mn2O3-5D, PtO2 and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (k) Wavelet transform (WT) for HNTM-Pt (Pt), H2PtCl6, PtO2 and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) High-resolution STM image of 0.5% of a monolayer Pt coverage on the ‘29’ copper oxide after CO addition and annealing at 250 K. (b) The simulated STM image of the DFT model with a CO–Pt complex in each unit cell at −0.5 V. High-resolution STM image of CO-exposed Pt atoms anchored on the ‘29’ copper oxide after the annealing process at (c) 160 K, (d) 250 K and (e) 350 K. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) XPS Pt 4f spectra of Pt1@MIL and Ptn@MIL. (g) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt1@MIL, Ptn@MIL and Pt foil. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (h) FTIR spectra of 0.1Pt/C12A7 before and after exposure to D2. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (i) The 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–O2, 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2 and com-Pt/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

CO oxidation
Pt(NH3)42+/KLTL zeolite41	Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)	1.0 wt%	Initial TOF: 0.0038 s−1
PtOx/KLTL zeolite41	Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)	1.0 wt%	Initial TOF: 0.012 s−1
PtRuSA–CN117	An icing-assisted photocatalytic reduction method	0.51 wt% (Pt), 0.45 wt% (Ru)	CO conversion: 100% at 150 °C
Pt/La–Al2O3141	Thermal emitting strategy	1.0 wt%	TOF: 0.12 ± 0.04 s−1 at 225 °C
Pt/FeOx19	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.17 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 0.435 molCO h−1 gPt−1 at 27 °C
Pt/θ-Al2O3142	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.18 wt%	TOF: 0.187 s−1 at 20% CO conversion
Pt/CeO2_S143	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1.0 wt%	CO conversion: 95% at 145 °C for 310 h
Pt–O–Pt/CeO2-a144	Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)	∼0.24 wt%	Reaction rate: 2.6 × 10−6 molCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 80 °C, 2.5 × 10−5 molCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 150 °C
Pt/HZSM-5119	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 wt%	N.A.
Pt/Cu2O film46	Physical vapor deposition	N.A.	N.A.
Pt/m-Al2O3110	Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)	0.2 wt%	TOF: 0.023 s−1 at 200 °C, 0.175 s−1 at 250 °C
Pt1/ZnO-nw145	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.0125 wt%	TOF: 0.37 s−1; reaction rate: 6.9 mol h−1 gPt−1 at 250 °C
Pt1/CeO215	Atomic layer deposition	Up to 4 wt%	CO conversion: 50% at ∼192 °C for dry CO oxidation, at 90 °C for water-mediated CO oxidation
Pt1–Ox–K/Al2O3146	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	2.0 wt%	∼99.8% conversion, 70% selectivity at 110 °C
Pt1/CeO2–Al2O3147	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1.0 wt%	TOF: 14.5 × 10−2 s−1 at 26 °C; CO conversion: 100% at 45 °C
0.1Pt1/ZrO2148	Flame spray pyrolysis	0.1 wt%	CO conversion: 100% at 230 °C
Pt1/FeOx149	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.17 wt%	CO conversion: ∼100% at 80 °C; specific reaction rate: 0.992 molCO h−1 gIr−1; TOF: 0.311 s−1
Pd/La–alumina150	Dry impregnation	∼0.5 wt%	TOF: 7.5 × 10−3 s−1 (first light-off run), 5.6 × 10−3 s−1 (second run) at 125 °C
Pd/CeO2151	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	N.A.
Pd1/ZnO76	Ball-milling method	0.25 wt%	CO conversion: 100% at 160 °C
Pd/CoxOy-I152	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	TOF: 0.22 s−1; CO conversion: 100% at 90 °C
Rh1/ZnO-nw145	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.007 wt%	TOF: 0.63 s−1; Reaction rate: 22.0 mol h−1 gRh−1 at 180 °C
Rh1/CeO2153	Wet chemistry strategy (adsorption precipitation method)	0.04 wt%	TOF: 0.41 s−1; specific reaction rate: 14.3 molCO h−1 gRh−1 at 100 °C
Rh1/NPTA154	Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)	0.2 wt%	N.A.
Au1/FeOx39	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.03 wt%	CO conversion: 100% at 160 °C; specific reaction rate: 8.3 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 0.45 s−1
Au1/Co3O4155	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.05 wt%	Specific reaction rate: ∼25 molCO h−1 gAu−1
Au–SA/Def-TiO2156	Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method)	0.25 wt%	CO conversion: 100% at 120 °C
Au1/CeO2116	Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)	0.03 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 3.6 molCO h−1 gAu−1; a TOF of 0.2 s−1
Au1/CeO2157	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.05 and 0.3 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 45.9 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 2.5 s−1 (0.05 wt% Au); specific reaction rate: 38.2 molCO h−1 gAu−1; TOF: 2.1 s−1 (0.3 wt% Au)
Au1/ZnO-nw145	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.0125 wt%	N.A.
Isolated gold atom catalytic sites in zeolite NaY158	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	1 wt%	Initial specific reaction rate: 2.6 ± 0.3 × 10−2 molCO2 (molAu × s)−1; reaction rate: (2.9 ± 0.2) × 10−3 molCO2 (molAu s)−1 after 15 min
Ir1/FeOx149	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.22 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 0.418 molCO h−1 gIr−1; TOF: 0.0256 s−1
Ir/MgAl2O4159	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.0025 wt%	N.A.
Ag/HMO160	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	N.A.


Water–gas shift (WGS) reaction
Pt–Ox(OH)yNa123	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.5 wt%	N.A.
Pt–Nax–Oy–(OH)z125	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	N.A.
Pt/HZSM-5119	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 wt%	N.A.
Pd/FeOx121	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.044 wt%, 0.22 wt%, 1.1 wt%, and 2.2 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 26.2 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (0.044 wt% Pd), 7.4 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (0.22 wt% Pd), 4.0 molCO h−1 gPd−1 (1.1 wt% Pd); TOF: 0.78 s−1 (0.044 wt% Pd), 0.41 s−1 (1.1 wt% Pd) at 300 °C
Rh1@TiO2122	Wet chemistry strategy (electrostatic adsorption method)	0.05 wt%	TOF: ∼0.01 s−1 at 500 K
Au/TiO2161	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	N.A.
Au/CeO2162	Wet chemistry strategy (the urea gelation/coprecipitation method)	0.2–0.9 at%	N.A.
Au–O(OH)x–(Na or K)124	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.25 wt%	Specific reaction rate: 8.2 × 10−7 molH2 gcat−1 s−1 for 0.25 Au–K/KLTL, 7.9 × 10−7 molH2 gcat−1 s−1 for 0.25 Au–Na/[Si]MCM41 at 150 °C
Au/TiO2163	Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method with UV irradiation)	∼1 wt%	N.A.
Ir1/FeOx120	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.01 wt%	TOF: 2.31 s−1; specific reaction rate: 43.4 molCO h−1 gIr−1 at 300 °C

Selective hydrogenation
Pt@MCM-22164	Wet chemistry strategy	0.11 wt%	Hydrogenation of alkenes	N.A.
Pt/g-C3N4165	Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential wet deposition–reduction approach)	Up to 1.4 wt%	Semihydrogenation of 1-hexyne	N.A.
Pt–PMA/AC166	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	∼1 wt%	The hydrogenation of nitrobenzene and cyclohexanone	TOF: 774 h−1 (nitrobenzene); 23.7 h−1 (cyclohexanone); 1002 h−1 (styrene); 492 h−1 (phenylacetylene)
Pt/FeOx129	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.08 wt%	Chemoselective hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene	TOF: ∼1500 h−1; selectivity to 3-aminostyrene: ∼99%
Na–Pt/FeOx130	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	2.16 wt%	Chemoselective hydrogenation of functionalized nitroarenes	TOF: 1083 h−1; selectivity to 3-aminostyrene: 97.5%
Pt/N–C167	Wet chemistry strategy (a precursor-dilution strategy)	0.06 wt%, 0.21 wt%, 0.43 wt% and 0.73 wt%	Hydrogenation of 1-nitro-4-ethynylbenzene and 1-ethynyl-4-vinylbenzene	Selectivity to 1-nitro-4-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 98% (∼100% conversion); selectivity to 1,4-divinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 97% (∼100% conversion)
Pt/N–C167	Wet chemistry strategy (a precursor-dilution strategy)	0.06 wt%, 0.21 wt%, 0.43 wt% and 0.73 wt%	Hydrogenation of 1-ethynyl-4-(phenylethynyl)benzene and 1-(dec-1-yn-1-yl)-3-ethynylbenzene	Selectivity to 1-(phenylethynyl)-4-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 98% (∼100% conversion); selectivity to 1-(dec-1-yn-1-yl)-3-vinylbenzene: 99% (∼20% conversion), 97% (∼100% conversion)
Pt/MoS2168	Wet chemistry strategy	Up to 7.5 wt%	CO2 hydrogenation	TOF: 162.5 h−1; yield: 0.2 mmol (formic acid), 0.8 mmol (methanol) at 150 °C after 3 h; yield: 2.3 mmol (formic acid), 7.3 mmol (methanol) at 210 °C
PtZn/HNCNT169	Wet chemistry strategy (a sacrificial template method)	0.82 wt%	Hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenylacetylene to 4-aminophenylacetylene	Conversion: >99%; selectivity: 99%
Pt/m-Al2O3110	Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)	0.2 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	Selectivity from acetophenone to 1-phenylethanol: 98.7%; selectivity from 1,3-butadiene to butenes: >99% at 50 °C
Pt/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 10 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	N.A.
Pt/Cu SAA NP170	Galvanic replacement	N.A.	Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	Conversion: 100% at 160 °C, >95% at 145 °C
Pt/C12A7108	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	∼0.18 wt%	Chemoselective hydrogenation of nitroarenes	TOF: ∼25772 h−1; CO conversion: 100% at ∼225 °C
0.2Pt1/HAP171	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.2 wt%	Propylene hydrogenation	TOF: 35 h−1 (BmimBF4-0.2Pt1/HAP), 67 h−1 (BmimTf2N-0.2Pt1/HAP), 81 h−1 (BmimCF3SO3-0.2Pt1/HAP)
Pt/PO4–CeO2172	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	Hydrogenation of styrene, cyclohexene, phenylacetylene, and nitrobenzene	TOF: 316 (styrene), 169 (phenylacetylene), 75 (cyclohexene) and 273 (nitrobenzene) h−1; selectivity: ∼85% (styrene), 15% (phenylethane) in the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene; 100% (aniline) in the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene
Pt1/MoC173	High-temperature arc-discharge strategy	2 wt%	Selective quinoline hydrogenation	Initial TOF: 3710 h−1 at 100 °C; selectivity to 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline: >99%
Pt/In2O3174	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.58 wt%	CO2 hydrogenation	Methanol selectivity: 91.1% at 220 °C
Pt1/α-MoC175	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.25 wt%	Chemoselective hydrogenation of nitrobenzene derivatives	Chemoselectivity: >99% under 100% conversion; hydrogenation TOF rate per Pt site: 3460 h−1 at room temperature
Pt0.008Cu–SAA176	Galvanic replacement	N.A.	Selective hydrogenation of acetylene	N.A.
Pt/FeOxHy SACs177	Wet chemistry strategy	N.A.	Selective hydrogenation of propyne to propylene	Selectivity to propylene: from 65.4% to 94.1% with Pt–O coordination number from ∼3.4 to ∼5
Pt1@MIL106	Wet chemistry strategy	0.2 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of CO2 into methanol	TOF: 117 h−1 in DMF at 150 °C; selectivity for methanol: 90.3%
Pt1/Ni nanocrystals178	Galvanic replacement	1.0 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene	TOF: ∼1800 h−1 at 40 °C; selectivity for 3-vinylaniline: >99%
Ni95Pt5/Al2O3179	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1.0 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of CO2 toward CH4	CH4 formation rate: 715 μmol molmetal−1 s−1
[Pd]mpg-C3N4180	Wet chemistry strategy	0.5 wt%	Three-phase hydrogenation of alkynes and nitroarenes	1-Hexene selectivity: ∼100%; olefin selectivity: 90%; alkene selectivity: 90%
Pd–SAs133	High-temperature pyrolysis	N.A.	Semi-hydrogenation of acetylene	Conversion: 96.0%; selectivity to ethylene: 93.4% at 120 °C
Au@AgML@Pd core–shell NWs181	Wet chemistry strategy	1/16, 1/8, 1/4, 1/2 and 1.0 ML	Hydrogenation of 4-nitro-phenol (4-NP)	Rate constant: from 28.0 × 10−3 s−1 (1/16 ML) to 57.0 × 10−3 s−1 (1.0 ML)
PdIn IMNCs182	Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)	2 wt%	Semihydrogenation of acetylene	Ethylene selectivity: 92% at 90 °C
Pd1/TiO256	A room-temperature photochemical strategy	Up to 1.5 wt%	Hydrogenation of CC bonds	TOF: 8973 h−1
Pd/g-C3N4 SAHCs72	Microwave-irradiation-assisted deposition	0.5 wt%	Semi-hydrogenation of 2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol	Selectivity to the alkenol product: >95%
Pd1/C3N451	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 wt%	Hydrogenation of acetylene	Acetylene conversion: 13% at 80 °C, 100% at 115 °C
Pd1/graphene50	Atomic layer deposition	0.25 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	Butene selectivity: 100% at 95% conversion at ∼50 °C; TOF: 0.35 s−1 at 47 °C
Pd1/ZnO183	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.01 wt%	High chemoselectivity in acetylene semi-hydrogenation	Selectivity to ethylene: >80% at ∼100% conversion at 80 °C
Pd/Cu SAA184	N.A.	N.A.	Selective hydrogenation of styrene and acetylene	Selectivity to ethylbenzene: >95% with 13% conversion at 260 K
Pd0.18Cu15/Al2O3185	Galvanic replacement	0.18 at%	Hydrogenation of phenylacetylene	Selectivity to styrene: ∼94% at 90% conversion
Pd1/α-MoC186	High-temperature pyrolysis	Up to 5 wt%	Hydrogenation of substituted nitroarenes and gas-phase hydrogenation of CO2	Selectivity: >99% (liquid-phase hydrogenation of substituted nitroaromatics), >98% (gas-phase hydrogenation of CO2 to CO)
Au–Pd/SiO2187	Wet chemistry strategy	225 ppm, 660 ppm	Selective hydrogenation of acetylene	Conversion: ≤20% at 240 °C; selectivity to ethylene: ∼100%
Pd–Cu single atom alloy188	Wet chemistry strategy	0.03 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of acetylene	Conversion: >99%; ethylene selectivity: >73% at 150 °C
Pd1/Cu(100)189	Galvanic replacement	0.2 wt%	Semihydrogenation of alkynes	Selectivity to styrene: ∼96% at a conversion of 100%
Pd–Ag alloy nanoparticle190	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.01 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of acrolein	N.A.
ISA-Pd/MPNC191	Wet chemistry strategy (a hard-template Lewis acid doping strategy)	0.0433 wt%	Semihydrogenation of acetylene	Activity: 83%; ethylene selectivity: 82%
PdZn alloy192	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	Chemoselective semi-hydrogenation of acetylene	Selectivity to ethylene: ∼90% at ∼100% acetylene conversion at 60 °C
Cu-Alloyed Pd SAC132	Wet chemistry strategy (wet co-impregnation method)	494 ppm	Semihydrogenation of acetylene	Selectivity to ethylene: ∼85%; 100% acetylene elimination
Pd/CNF193	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	From 0.04 to 0.5 wt%	Hydrogenation of acetylene	N.A.
Pd/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 10 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	N.A.
PdNi/SiO2194	Atomic layer deposition	0.98 wt%, 2.0 wt%, and 3.5 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of BN	Yield of dibenzylamine: from ∼5 to 97% at 80 °C
Pd1/ZnO76	Ball-milling method	0.25 wt%	Selectivity hydrogenation of phenylacetylene	TOF: 8829 h−1 at ∼35% conversion (40 °C, 5 min); selectivity to styrene: >93% (40 °C, 20 min)
Pd1/N-graphene12	A freeze-drying-assisted method	2.3 wt%	Selective photothermal hydrogenation of acetylene to ethylene	Conversion: 99%; selectivity to ethylene: 93.5% at 125 °C
Pd1/Cu2O70	Galvanic replacement	0.2 wt%	Semihydrogenation of terminal alkynes	Selectivity: 96.5% (styrene), 96.2% (1-octyne), 94.7% (2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol), 96.0% (trimethylsilylacetylene), 90.5% (4-ethynylanisole), 95.3% (4-(tert-butyl)phenylacetylene), 96.1% (4-chlorophenylacetylene)
Pd/Ru nanoribbons195	Wet chemistry strategy	Up to 5.9 wt%	Chemoselective hydrogenation of allyl benzyl ether	N.A.
Pd0.004Au–SAA196	Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential reduction method)	Total metal loading of 3.8 wt% (Pd/Au = 1/250)	Selective hydrogenation of 1-hexyne to 1-hexene	Selectivity to 1-hexene: 85% at full conversion
Pd1/ND@G131	Wet chemistry strategy	0.11 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of acetylene	Conversion: 100%; ethylene selectivity: 90%; TOF: 0.064 s−1
0.2Pd–TiO2128	Wet chemistry strategy (a self-assembly method)	0.2 wt%	Hydrogenation of phenylacetylene to styrene	TOF: >8000 h−1; selectivity to styrene: 91% at room temperature
Ru@ZIF-8197	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.032 wt%	Semi-hydrogenation of alkyne	TOF: 360 h−1; chemoselectivity for styrene: 97%
Ru1/mpg-C3N4198	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	∼0.1 wt%	Selectivity of hydrogenation in the conversion of biomass molecules	95% conversion, ∼100% selectivity from vanillin to vanillyl alcohol at 60 °C; ∼100% conversion, ∼100% selectivity to 2-methoxy-p-cresol at 140 °C
Ru SA/N–C42	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.3 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	Selectivity to py-THQ: >99%; conversion: >99%
Ru/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 3 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	N.A.
Ru/pBN199	Wet chemistry strategy	0.58 wt%	CO2 hydrogenation	CH4 selectivity: up to 93.5%; reaction rate: 1.86 mmolCO2 (gcat s)−1 at 350 °C
Rh/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 5 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	N.A.
Rh@S-1-H17	Wet impregnation method (a one-pot hydrothermal synthesis method)	0.28 wt%	Hydrogenation of nitroarenes	Nitrobenzene conversion: 100%; aniline selectivity: >99%; TOF: 60.6 molnitrobenzene molRh−1 min−1
Rh1/MoS2126	Wet chemistry strategy (a modified strong metal adsorption method)	0.27 wt%	The selective hydrogenation of crotonaldehyde toward crotyl alcohol	Selectivity toward crotyl alcohol: 100% from 18% to 91% conversion; TOF: 26.6 h−1 (80 °C for 2.5 hours)
Au/MWCNTs200	Wet chemistry strategy	0.1 wt%	Hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	N.A.
Au/ZrO236	Wet chemistry strategy (deposition–precipitation method)	0.01 wt%, 0.05 wt%, 0.08 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	Reaction rate: 2.08 (0.01 wt%), 2.01 (0.05 wt%) and 2.15 (0.08 wt%) mmol s−1 g(Au)−1; TOF: 0.41 (0.01 wt%), 0.40 (0.05 wt%) and 0.42 (0.08 wt%) s−1
PSAC Au/MOF27	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation and conversion strategy)	Up to 1.0 wt%	Hydrogenation of p-nitrophenol	TOF: 581 min−1 at 298 K
[Ir(C2H4)2]/zeolite Y201	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	Hydrogenation of cyclohexene	N.A.
Ir(CO)2/rGA202	Wet chemistry strategy	14.8 wt%	Hydrogenation of ethylene	N.A.
Ir/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 10 wt%	Hydrogenation of quinoline	TOF: 1292 (5 wt%), 1149 (10 wt%) h−1
Ir1–In2O3203	Wet chemistry strategy	N.A.	Selective hydrogenation of CO2 to ethanol	TOF: 481 h−1; ethanol selectivity: 99.7%
AgTCM-mpg-CN204	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%, 2 wt%, 3.5 wt%, 5 wt% and 10 wt%	Selective hydrogenation of alkynes	Reaction rate: >103 molalkyne h−1 molAg−1


Dehydrogenation and reforming reactions
Pt/Cu SAA136	Wet chemistry strategy (wet co-impregnation method)	0.1 wt%	Propane dehydrogenation	Propylene selectivity: ∼90% with 10.6 mol gPt−1 h−1 formation rate at 520 °C
Pt1/graphene, Pt2/graphene48	Atomic layer deposition	N.A.	Hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane	Specific rate: 2800 molH2 molPt−1 min−1 at room temperature
Pt/ZnO37	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.0125 wt%	Methanol steam reforming	Conversion: ∼43% at the steady state; selectivity toward CO2: 88%
Pt–Cu SAA NPs45	Physical vapor deposition	N.A.	Selective formic acid dehydrogenation	Conversion: 4.7% at 100 °C and 19.8% at 120 °C
Pt/Ni SAA71	Galvanic replacement	N.A.	Hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane	TOF: 12000 molH2 molPt−1 min−1
Pt–Cu SAA205	N.A.	N.A.	Dehydrogenation of ethanol to acetaldehyde and hydrogen	Selectivity to the desired acetaldehyde and H2 products: 100%
Pt1/Co3O495	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 wt%	Dehydrogenation of ammonia borane	Mass specific rate: 1220 molH2 molPt−1 min−1
Pt/LDH (Zr,Sn)206	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	∼0.3 wt%	
n-Hexane reforming and cyclohexane dehydrogenation reactions	Selectivity to branched paraffins and cycloalkanes: >95%
Pt/m-Al2O3110	Wet chemistry strategy (a modified sol–gel solvent vaporization self-assembly method)	0.2 wt%	
n-Hexane reforming	The selectivity of 50% toward desired isomeric products
Pt/Te207	Wet chemistry strategy	1.1 wt%	Dehydrogenation of formic acid	Selectivity for hydrogen: 100%; TOF: 3070 h−1 at 25 °C
PtGa–Pb/SiO2135	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	3 wt%	Propane dehydrogenation	Conversion: 30%; propylene selectivity: 99.6% at 600 °C for 96 h
Pt/α-MoC138	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.29 wt%	Methanol-reforming reaction	TOF: 18046 molH2 molPt−1 h−1; H2 production rate: 76.2 μmolH2 g−1 s−1 at 190 °C
Au1/ZnO37	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.0125 wt%	Methanol steam reforming	Conversion: ∼28%; CO2 selectivity: ∼100%


Hydroformylation reactions
Rh/CoO69	Galvanic replacement	0.2 wt%	Hydroformylation of propene	Selectivity for butyraldehyde: 94.4%; TOF: 2065 h−1
Rh/ZnO-nw208	Wet chemistry strategy (a facile adsorption method)	0.006 wt%, 0.03 wt%, 0.3 wt%	Hydroformylation of olefins	Selectivity: 99% (0.006%, 0.03%, 0.3%); TON: 40000 (0.006%), 38000 (0.03%) and 7000 (0.3%)

NO oxidation
Pt/θ-Al2O3139	Wet chemistry strategy	0.18 wt%	Conversion: ∼4% at 265 °C, ∼6% at 315 °C, ∼15% at 415 °C


Oxidation of alcohols
Pd/meso-Al2O3140	Surfactant-assisted strategy	0.03 wt%	Yield: 3.1 mmol h−1 gcat.−1; TOF: 4400 h−1; aldehyde selectivity: >91%

 	Fig. 6  (a) The TEM image, (b) TEM-EDS elemental mapping images and (c) HAADF-STEM image of 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2. (d) The FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra derived from EXAFS, Δ = 3.0–12.0 Å−1. (e) Schematic illustration of a single Pt atom anchored on the m–Al2O3 support surface for 0.2Pt/m–Al2O3–H2. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Ru K-edge and (g) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of RuSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN and Ru foil. XPS spectra of (h) Ru 3p, (i) Pt 4f and (j) N 1s for RuSA-CN620, PtSA-CN620, PtRuSA-CN620 and PtRuSA-CN. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) CO conversions on a series of Ir/FeOx catalysts at 300 °C. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Pt 4f XPS spectra of Pt/1000-2h-CN and Pt1Na6/1000-2h-CN under WGS conditions. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. AC-HAADF-STEM images of Na-promoted single Pt atoms anchored on (c) mesoporous silica MCM-41 ([Si]MCM41), (d) a microporous K-type L-zeolite (KLTL) and (e) high-surface-area anatase TiO2. (f) TOF plot of various Na-containing Pt catalysts on different supports (TiO2, KLTL, [Si]MCM41, SiO2 and CNTs) for the WGS reaction. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TOF plot of 0.1Pt anchored on different supports (C12A7, CaO and Al2O3) at elevated reduction temperatures for 4-chloronitrobenzene hydrogenation. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Acetylene conversion and (c) ethylene selectivity of Pd–SA-900, Pd/CN-T (T = 600, 700, 800 °C) and Pd-NP/CN for semi-hydrogenation of acetylene. Energy profile and corresponding structures of the hydrogenation mechanism of acetylene to ethane on the (d) Pd–SAs and (e) Pd(111) surface. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) DFT calculations of the electronic states of atomic Pd alloyed with the Au(111), Ag(111) and Cu(111) surfaces. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) Butene selectivity of Pd1/graphene, Pd-NP/graphene, Pd-NP/graphene-500C and Pd/carbon as a function of the 1,3-butadiene conversion by changing the reaction temperatures. (h) Schematic illustration of the butene selectivity improvement on Pd1/graphene. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Normalized Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of 5% Ni/CNT samples with different Pt amounts. (b) The FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra derived from EXAFS, Δk = 3–10 Å−1. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Methanol conversion and CO2 selectivity of Au1/ZnO, Pt1/ZnO and ZnO-nws as a function of reaction time at 390 °C (left). The corresponding Arrhenius plots of Ln(TOF) (s−1) versus 1/T for the MSR reaction (right). Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Energy profiles for (d) CH3OH dissociation into CO and H atoms, and (e) CO2 formation via the WGS reaction on the α-MoC(111), Pt(111) and Pt1/α-MoC(111) surfaces. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) NO oxidation pathways on single-atom Pt anchored on the (010) surface of θ-Al2O3. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Product yield and TOF of 0.2% Rh/CoO, 1.0% Rh/CoO and 4.8% Rh/CoO for hydroformylation of propene after 2 h at 100 °C. (c) The model of Rh1/CoO including the top view of the adsorption configurations of H2, CO, and propene on Rh1/CoO, and the top view of the co-adsorbed configuration of both H2 and CO, as well as four co-adsorbed configurations of the reactants and their corresponding adsorption energies. (d and e) Reaction pathways derived from configurations I and II, respectively, in (c). Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

ORR via the 2e− pathway
3Pt/CNT_IL_SiO2260	Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)	3 wt%	An H2O2 yield of 63.7% at −0.5 mA cm−2
h-Pt1–CuSx215	Wet chemistry strategy (ion exchange strategy)	24.8 at%	An H2O2 yield of 92–96% in a wide potential range of 0.05–0.7 V vs. RHE, and H2O2 productivity of 546 ± 30 mol kgcat−1 h−1
Pt/TiN213	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.05 wt%, 0.1 wt%, 0.35 wt%	An H2O2 yield of 90% (0.1 wt% and 0.05 wt%), and mass activity of 78 A gPt−1 at an overpotential of 0.05 V (0.35 wt%)
Pt/TiC214	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.2 wt%	An H2O2 selectivity of 68.0% and ORR activity of −0.96 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V (vs. RHE)
C@C3N4–Pd1212	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.5 wt%	An H2O2 yield of up to 94% and mass activity of 8.5 A mgPd−1 at 0.2 V
Pd–CNT261	Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)	∼0.1 at%	N.A.
PdClx/C262	Wet chemistry strategy	1.3 wt%	An H2O2 selectivity of >90% with a mass-normalized activity of 72.8 A gPd−1
Au Pd nanoalloys216	Wet chemistry strategy (a sequential reduction method)	8.9 (AuPd)/C wt%	An H2O2 yield of up to nearly 95%
3Os/CNT_IL_SiO2260	Wet chemistry strategy (a wet impregnation and thermal reduction method)	3 wt%	An H2O2 yield of 18.8% at −0.5 mA cm−2

ORR via the 4e− pathway
Pt1–N/BP218	Wet chemistry strategy	0.4 wt%	760/870 mV	0.1 M HClO4/0.1 M KOH
Pt1/NPC55	A photochemical solid-phase reduction method	Up to 3.8 wt%	887 mV	0.1 M KOH
Pt1@Fe–N–C263	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	2.1 wt%	800 mV	0.1 M KOH
Pt/MoN264	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	∼0.2 wt%	N.A.	0.1 M KOH
CoSe2−x–Pt265	Plasma-photochemical strategy	2.25 wt%	830 mV	0.1 M KOH
A–CoPt–NC219	Electrochemical activation	∼0.16 wt%	960 mV	0.1 M KOH
Pt SA–ZIF–NC24	Atomic layer deposition	0.8 wt%	875 mV	0.1 M HClO4
A FePt nanosheet (NS) catalyst with neighboring Pt266	A CO-assisted method	6.7 wt%	N.A.	0.1 M KOH
Pd/Au–Pt nanowires267	Wet chemistry strategy	2.74 at%	939 mV	0.1 M KOH
Pd/MnO2–CNT268	Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)	0.43 wt%	∼77 mV more negative than Pt/C	0.1 M KOH
Ru–N/G269	Wet chemistry strategy	1.7 wt%	750 mV	0.1 M HClO4
0.4-Ru@NG-75064	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.76 wt%	723 mV	0.1 M HClO4
Ru-SSC270	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.42 wt%	824 mV	0.1 M HClO4
Au1Nx–CN77	Amine-induced-reduction method	Up to ∼0.7 wt%	∼760 mV	0.1 M KOH
Ir–SAC61	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.2 wt%	864 mV	0.1 M HClO4

OER
Pt/NiO225	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.5 wt%	358 mV	33 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Pt@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2.28 wt%	430 mV	136 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Pt1@Fe–N–C263	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	2.1 wt%	310 mV	62 mV dec−1	0.1 M KOH
CoSe2−x–Pt265	Plasma-photochemical strategy	2.25 wt%	255 mV	31 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Pd@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	1.9 wt%	470 mV	122 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Pd/MnO2–CNT268	Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)	0.43 wt%	N.A.	N.A.	0.1 M KOH
Ru@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2 wt%	470 mV	140 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
0.4-Ru@NG-75064	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.76 wt%	372 mV	68 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ru–N–C226	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1 wt%	267 mV	52.6 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Ru1–Pt3Cu271	Galvanic replacement	N.A.	220 mV	N.A.	0.1 M HClO4
Ru/CoFe–LDHs272	Wet chemistry strategy	0.45 wt%	198 mV	39 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
RuSACoFe2/G273	Wet chemistry strategy (the micelle incorporated sol–gel method and carbothermal reduction)	2.01 wt%	180 mV	51 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ru SA/(AC-FeCoNi)274	Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)	0.67 wt%	205 mV	40 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF229	Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)	Up to 6.8 wt%	197 mV	71.7 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Au1Nx–CN77	Amine-induced-reduction method	Up to ∼0.7 wt%	450 mV	112 mV dec−1	0.1 M KOH
Au/NiFe LDH224	Electrodeposition method	0.4 wt%	237 mV	N.A.	1.0 M KOH
Au@Ni2P275	High-temperature pyrolysis	N.A.	240 mV	58 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Au1–CoSe2276	Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)	0.1 wt%	303 mV	42 mV dec−1	0.1 M KOH
Atomic Ir@Co nanosheets277	Wet chemistry strategy (atomically confined alloying strategy)	1.7 wt%	273 mV	99 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ir@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2.2 wt%	260 mV	163 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ir–NiO87	Wet chemistry strategy	Up to ∼18 wt%	215 mV	38 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
A-Ir1/Co0.8Fe0.2Se2@Ni278	Electrochemical deposition	Upper limit between 3.5% and 4.7%	140 mV	N.A.	1.0 M KOH
np-Ir/NiFeO279	Electrochemical deposition	0.1 wt%	197 mV	29.6 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ir–NiCo2O4 NSs280	Co-electrodeposition method	0.41%	240 mV	60 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
CoIr-0.2281	Wet chemistry strategy	9.7 wt%	235/373 mV	70.2/117.5 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS


HER
Pt@PCM282	Wet chemistry strategy (a dynamic reaction approach)	0.53 wt%	105/139 mV	63.7/73.6 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH
SWNT/Pt283	Electrochemical deposition	0.19–0.75 at%	27 mV	38 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2.1 wt%	310 mV	62 mV dec−1	0.1 M KOH
Pt1/OLC236	Atomic layer deposition	0.27 wt%	38 mV	36 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
PtSA-NT-NF284	Electrochemical deposition	1.76 wt%	24 mV	30 mV dec−1	1.0 M PBS
Pt1/NPC55	A photochemical solid-phase reduction method	Up to 3.8 wt%	25 mV	28 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
ALD50Pt/NGN84	Atomic layer deposition	2.1 wt%	N.A.	29 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt/np-Co0.85Se285	Electrochemical vacancy manufacturing and atom embedding strategy	∼1.03 wt%	55 mV	35 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA238	Electrochemical exfoliation	1.2 wt%	30 mV	30 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt1@Fe–N–C263	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	2.1 wt%	60 mV	42 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt1/hNCNC237	Wet chemistry strategy (impregnation–adsorption method)	2.92 wt%	15 mV	24 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt SA/DG74	Thermal emitting strategy	2.1 wt%	23 mV	25 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt–MoS2286	Wet chemistry strategy (a direct chemical synthesis method)	1.7 wt%	145 mV	96 mV dec−1	0.1 M H2SO4
Pt1/MC53	Photochemical reduction method	2.6 wt%	65 mV at 100 mA cm−2	∼30 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Isolated single Pt atoms on a bismuth ultramicroelectrode287	Electrodeposition method	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	40 mM HClO4 and 0.5 M NaClO4
Pt-GDY288	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	4.65 μg cm−2	N.A.	46.6 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt SAS/AG73	Microwave reduction method	0.44 wt%	12 mV	29.33 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt SA/WO3−x289	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.42 wt%	47 mV	45 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt-Containing nanowire/C290	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	N.A.	N.A.	0.1 M HClO4
Pt/RuCeOx-PA291	Photoactivation strategy	0.49 wt%	41 mV	31 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
PtSA–Co(OH)2@Ag NW292	Electrochemical phase transformation strategy	∼2.8 wt%	29 mV	35.72 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Pt–SA/MoS2293	Electrodeposition method	5.1 wt%	59 mV	31 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt–Ru dimers294	Atomic layer deposition	Pt 0.9 wt% Ru 0.31 wt%	N.A.	28.9 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt–Fe/N/C295	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	1.5 wt%	51 mV	48 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
SA Pt-decorated VS2/CP296	Photothermal reduction method	0.13 wt%	122 mV	54.3 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pd/Au–Pt nanowires267	Wet chemistry strategy	2.74 at%	20.6 mV	27 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt-1T′ MoS2235	Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)	1.04 wt%	80 mV	88.4 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt–PVP/TNR@GC297	Photochemical reduction method	1.75 wt%	21 mV	27 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
PtSA@BP298	Wet chemistry strategy (a cascade surface immobilization strategy)	2.5 wt%	26 mV	37 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
K2PtCl4@NC-M231	Ball-milling method	1.92 wt%	11 mV	21 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt/NiS@Al2O3299	High-temperature pyrolysis	2.8 wt%	34 mV	35 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt1/NMC105	Ultralow-temperature photochemical strategy	2.54 wt%	55 mV at 100 mA cm−2	26 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt@MoS2/NiS2234	High-temperature pyrolysis	1.8 at%	34 mV	40 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pd–MoS2300	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	78 mV	80 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pd/graphdiyne239	Electrodeposition method	0.2%	55 mV	47 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pt-1T-MoS252	Electrodeposition method	1.1 at%	210 mV	34 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
RuSAs@PN301	Wet chemistry strategy (a PN-assisted strategy)	0.33 wt%	24 mV	38 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Ru@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2 wt%	103 mV	210 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ru–C3N4 SACs302	Wet chemistry strategy	0.153 mg cm−2	140 mV	57 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Ru@C3N4/rGO303	Wet chemistry strategy	1.93 at%	80 mV	55 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
0.4-Ru@NG-75064	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.76 wt%	90/35 mV	N.A./35.9 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH
RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx304	Wet chemistry strategy	1.2 wt%	76 mV	90 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
SA-Ru–MoS2305	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.2–7.5 wt%	76 mV	21 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ni5P4–Ru/CC88	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	More than 3.83 wt%	54 mV	52 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
Ru SA–Ni2P NP306	Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)	2.2 wt%	125/57/260 mV	71/75/N.A. mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS
Ru–MoS2/CC307	Electrodeposition method	0.37 wt%	61/41/114 mV	N.A./114 mV/N.A. dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS
ECM@Ru233	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.68 wt%	63/83 mV	47/59 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH
Rh–MoS2240	Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot solvent-thermal process)	4.8%	67 mV	54 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Rh SAC–CuO NA/CF229	Wet chemistry strategy (cation exchange strategy)	Up to 6.8 wt%	44 mV	N.A.	1.0 M KOH
FR-NCS308	Wet chemistry strategy	1.1 at%	36 mV	26 mV dec−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Ir@Co/NC228	Wet chemistry strategy (a general π-electron-assisted strategy)	2.2 wt%	55 mV	119 mV dec−1	1.0 M KOH
C–Ir1/Co0.8Fe0.2Se2@ Ni278	Electrodeposition method	Upper limit between 3.5% and 4.7%	8 mV	N.A.	1.0 M KOH

CO2RR
Pt-2H-MoS252	Electrodeposition method	1.1 at%	An FECO of 4.56% at −1.6 VRHE
Pd@Au241	Wet chemistry strategy	N.A.	An FECO of ∼80% and a JCO of 1.6 mA cm−2 at −0.5 V
Pd–NC246	High-temperature pyrolysis	∼2.95 wt%	An FECO of 55% at −0.5 VRHE; a JCO of 0.244 mA cm−2 at −0.4 VRHE and 2.20 mA cm−2 at −0.8 VRHE
Ag2-G309	Wet chemistry strategy	0.1 wt%	An FECO of 93.4% and a JCO of 11.87 mA cm−2 at −0.7 V


NRR
Pd-GDY310	Wet chemistry strategy (a self-reduction strategy)	1.02 ± 0.04 wt%	An FENH3 of 31.62 ± 1.06% and a yield rate of 4.45 ± 0.30 mgNH3 h−1 mgPd−1 at −0.16 V vs. RHE
PdCu/NC311	Wet chemistry strategy (a dissolution-and-carbonization method)	2.23 wt%	An FENH3 of 24.8 ± 0.8% and an NH3 yield rate of 69.2 ± 2.5 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.45 V vs. RHE
Ru SA/N–C62	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.18 wt%	An FENH3 of 29.6% with a JNH3 of −0.13 mA cm−2; a yield rate of 120.9 μgNH3 mgcat−1 h−1 at −0.2 V vs. RHE
Ru@ZrO2/NC247	Wet chemistry strategy (a hydrothermal method)	0.1 wt%	An FENH3 of ∼21% at −0.11 V with an overpotential of 0.17 V; a yield rate of 3.665 mgNH3 h−1 mgRu−1 at −0.21 V vs. RHE
SA Ru–Mo2CTX251	Wet chemistry strategy	∼1.41 wt%	An FENH3 of 25.77% and an NH3 yield rate of 40.57 μg h−1 mg−1 at −0.3 V vs. RHE
Ru/H-ZSM-5312	The integration of microwave single-mode technology with incipient wetness impregnation	0.2 wt%	A synthesis rate of 1.26 molNH3 h−1 gRu−1 at 300 °C and 1 MPa
CF-Ru SA/g-C3N4313	Wet chemistry strategy	0.6 wt%	An FENH3 of 8.3% and an NH3 yield rate of 23.0 μg h−1 mgcat−1 at a low overpotential of 0.05 V vs. RHE
Rh SA/GDY314	Wet chemistry strategy	13.22 wt%	An FENH3 of 20.36%, an NH3 formation rate of 74.15 μg h−1 cm−2 and an NH3 partial current of 0.35 mA cm−2 at −0.20 V vs. RHE under pressurized conditions of 55 atm of N2
Au1/C3N4315	Wet chemistry strategy	0.15 wt%	An FENH4+ of 11.1% at −0.1 V vs. RHE; an NH4+ yield rate of 1305 μg h−1 mgAu−1
AuSA–NDPC252	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	0.205 wt%	An FENH3 of 12.3% and a yield rate of 2.32 μgNH3 h−1 cm−2 at −0.2 V vs. RHE
SA-Ag/NC253	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.39 wt%	An FENH3 of 21.9% at −0.60 V vs. RHE, and an NH3 yield rate of 270.9 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 or 69.4 mg h−1 mgAg−1 at −0.65 V vs. RHE


MOR
50ALDPt/GNS254	Atomic layer deposition	1.52 wt%	A methanol oxidation peak current density of 22.9 mA cm−2


FAOR
Pt4Au96257	Wet chemistry strategy (a colloidal synthetic method)	5.5 wt%	An FAOR mass activity of 3.77 A mgPt−1
Pt1/ATO258	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 8 wt%	An FAOR mass activity of 9.16 A mgPt−1 (1 wt% Pt1/ATO) and 0.89 A mgPt−1 (8 wt% Pt1/ATO) at around 0.6 V
Pt/meso_S–C33	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	Up to 10 wt%	An FAOR mass activity of 2.38 A mgPt−1 at ∼0.6 V
SA-Rh/CN63	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.92 wt%	An FAOR mass activity of 16.1 A mg−1 at the peak potential
Ir1/CN259	High-temperature pyrolysis	1.2 wt%	An FAOR mass activity of 12.9 A mgIr−1 at 0.7 V

 	Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image of 0.35 wt% Pt/TiN. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) RRDE results for h-Pt1–CuSx, Pt NPs on Cu1.94S, Cu1.94S, PtS2 and Pt/C in 0.1 M O2-saturated HClO4 electrolyte. (c) The H2O2 selectivity of these catalysts. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. RRDE polarization curves of Pt1–N/BP, Pt1/BP, N/BP, BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated (d) 0.1 M HClO4 and (e) 0.1 M KOH solution, respectively. Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Top view of the charge densities of (f) a(Co–Pt)@N8V4 and (g) a(Pt–Pt)@N8V4. (h) Schematic illustration of the ORR reaction pathway on the a(Co–Pt)@N8V4 catalyst. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The R-space curve-fitting of ex situ Ru–N–C. The inset is the structure of the Ru site in Ru–N–C. (b) Operando EXAFS spectra and first-shell fitting curves for Ru–N–C under open circuit conditions and working conditions during the OER process. (c) Operando XANES spectra at the Ru K-edge for Ru–N–C during the OER process. The inset is the magnified pre-edge XANES region. (d) Operando SR-FTIR spectroscopy measurements for Ru–N–C during the OER process in acidic media. (e) The enlarged infrared signal appearing at ∼764 cm−1 in the FTIR spectra. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the SAu/NiFe LDH, NiFe LDH and bare Ti mesh in 1.0 M KOH solution. (g) Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope for the SAu/NiFe LDH and NiFe LDH. (h) Differential charge densities of the NiFe LDH with and without an Au atom when one oxygen atom is adsorbed on the active Fe site. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) High-magnification HAADF-STEM image of Ir1@Co/NC. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) The free energy diagram of the OER on M SAC–CuO (M = Rh, Ir, Au, Ru). (k) Computed free energy diagram of the HER in alkaline conditions. Reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt1/OLC. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (b) HER durability test of Pt1/hNCNC, Pt/hCNC and commercial Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) XPS Pt 4f spectra of Pt1/hNCNC and Pt/hCNC. (d) Six typical configurations of [PtCl6]2− on various supports and their corresponding calculated free energies. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) HER polarization curves of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA, Mo2TiC2Tx–VMo, Mo2TiC2Tx, CP and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (f) Corresponding Tafel slopes derived from (e). Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) The Ru K-edge k2-weighted EXAFS spectra of Ni5P4–Ru, RuO2 and Ru foil. (h) The optimized structure for H2O adsorption on different sites. (i) The energy barriers for water dissociation on Ni5P4 and Ni5P4–Rusurf. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for Pd@Au NPs with precise control over the dose of Pd. HAADF-STEM images and EELS results for (b) Pd2@Au98, (c) Pd5@Au95, (d) Pd10@Au90 and (e) Pd2@Au80. k2-Weighted FT spectra at the (f) Au L-edge and (g) Pd K-edge. The coordination numbers from the EXAFS analysis for (h) Au atoms and (i) Pd atoms. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) Faradaic efficiencies (FE) for CO evolution at different applied potentials. (k) Partial current densities of CO evolution at different applied potentials. (l) The optimized structures of *H, *CO and *HOCO adsorbed on Pd–N4 embedded on a 4 × 4 graphene supercell based on DFT calculations. (m) The binding energy difference between H and HOCO on Pd–N4, PdH(111) and Pd(111). Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of Ru SA/N–C and Ru NP/N–C. (b) The N2-TPD profiles of Ru SA/N–C and Ru NP/N–C. (c) Free energy diagram of the NRR with a distal pathway on Ru1–N3, Ru1–N4, and Ru(101). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The charge density difference calculations of N2 bonded to Ru and Mo atoms in SA Ru–Mo2CTx. Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) FE and yield rate of NH3 at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) End-on configurations of *N2 atoms and *NNH admolecules on SA-Ag/NC. (g) Ag K-edge XANES spectra and (h) FT-EXAFS curves of SA-Ag/NC, Ag2O and Ag foil. (i) Chronoamperometry result of the reduction current density for SA-Ag/NC at −0.60 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  The magnified HAADF-STEM images of Pt/GNS samples with (a) 50 ALD cycles, (b) 100 ALD cycles and (c) 150 ALD cycles. (d) CVs of methanol oxidation on ALD50Pt/GNS, ALD100Pt/GNS, ALD150Pt/GNS and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Pt mass-normalized anodic sweeps obtained from PtAu NPs in a mixed solution containing 0.1 M concentrations of both HClO4 and HCOOH. (f) Schematic illustration of the CO adsorption modes on model (111) lattices of pure Pt surfaces, few-atom Pt surfaces and single-atom Pt surfaces as well as calculated adsorption energies for the CO adsorption sites. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) The mass activity change at 0.6 V of Pt1/ATO, Pt NP/ATO and Pt/C during the durability test with 1800 repeated CV cycles in the range of 0.05–1.4 V. (h) FAOR forward scans after the durability test in Ar-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with 0.5 M HCOOH solutions. Reproduced with permission.258 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (i) Peak mass activity of SA-Rh/CN, Pd/C, Pt/C and Rh/C. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Photocatalytic H2 evolution
HNTM-Ir/Pt102	Wet chemistry strategy (a solvothermal strategy)	2.54 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of up to 201.9 μmol g−1 h−1
Pt–SAC/MBT338	Wet chemistry strategy	0.98 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 68.33 mmol g−1 h−1
Al–TCPP–Pt327	Wet chemistry strategy	0.07 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 129 μmol g−1 h−1
Pt–CN324	Wet chemistry strategy	0.16 wt%	An average H2 generation rate of 318 μmol h−1
Pt/TiO2339	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.2 wt%	An H2 production rate of 169.6 μmol h−1
PtSA–MNS75	Surfactant-assisted strategy	12 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 11320 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm)
g-C3N4–Pt2+325	Wet chemistry strategy	0.04–0.18 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 605 μmol g−1 h−1 under irradiation at λ > 400 nm
CdS@CD/Pt–SAs340	Wet chemistry strategy (an in situ impregnation and conversion method)	1.15 wt%	A photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of 45.5 mmol h−1 g−1
Pt–CN341	Wet chemistry strategy (a hydrothermal method)	0.74 wt%	An H2 production rate of 34.2 μmol h−1
Pt–SA/CN321	Photodeposition method	0.11 wt%	An average H2 generation rate of up to 42.1 μmol h−1
Pt1/def-TiO2323	Wet chemistry strategy	0.02 wt%	A photocatalytic H2 production rate of up to 52720 μmol g−1 h−1
PtSA/CdS342	Wet chemistry strategy	Up to 0.98 wt%	An H2 production rate of 47.41 mmol g−1 h−1
PtSA–CN343	
In situ photocatalytic reduction method	1.72 wt%	An H2 production rate of 3.02 mmol g−1 h−1
PdPSA–CN344	PH3-promoted strategy	N.A.	An H2 production rate of 1.98 mmol g−1 h−1
Pd10@Pt1/UiO-66-NH2345	Wet chemistry strategy (wet impregnation method)	N.A.	An H2 production rate of 1200.5 μmol g−1 h−1
Pd/g–CN346	Thermo-driven diffusion approach	0.33 wt%	An average H2 production rate of 6688 μmol g−1 h−1; a TOF of 417 h−1
ME-TiO2@Ru347	Wet chemistry strategy	0.93 wt%	An H2 production rate of 7.2 mmol g−1 h−1
CNUHAu348	Wet chemistry strategy (a one-pot hydrothermal reaction)	0.18 wt%	An H2 production rate of 789.1 nmol h−1 after 5 hour irradiation
SAAg-g-CN349	High-temperature pyrolysis	1 wt%	An H2 production rate of 248 μmol g−1 h−1; a solar-heat-assisted H2 production rate of 498 μmol g−1 h−1 at 55 °C
Ag–N2C2/CN350	Wet chemistry strategy (a supermolecular method)	3.7 wt%	An H2 production rate of 1866 μmol g−1 h−1


Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
Ag–HMO332	Wet chemistry strategy	26.1 wt%	A maintained CH4 yield of 0.61 mol mol−1 catalysts with the wavelength increasing from 380 to 420 nm
Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4333	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.


Photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A
Ag/mpg-C3N4334	Wet chemistry strategy (co-condensation method)	1% to 10%	A removal efficiency of BPA increasing from 88% to 99.4% with the Ag content increasing from 1% to 10%


Photocatalytic N2 fixation
Pt–SAC/CTF335	Wet chemistry strategy	1.02 wt%	An NH4+ production rate of 171.40 μmol g−1 h−1 in the absence of a sacrificial agent
Ru–TiO2 nanosheets351	Wet chemistry strategy	1 wt%	An NH3 formation rate of 56.3 μg h−1 gcat−1


Dye-sensitized solar cells
Pt/FeOx–SAC337	Wet chemistry strategy (co-precipitation method)	0.08–2.4 wt%	A PCE of 9.03%

 	Fig. 17  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt–CN. (b) Pt L3-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Pt–CN, K2PtCl6 and Pt foil. (c) Photocatalytic H2 generation activity of Pt–CN and g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission.324 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Photocatalytic H2 generation rates of C3N4–Pt2+ with different Pt concentrations under irradiation at λ > 400 nm. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e) Photocatalytic H2 generation rates of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, Al–TCPP–PtNP and Al–TCPP. The inset is the TOFs of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt and Al–TCPP–PtNP. (f) Calculated free energy diagram of Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, Al–TCPP–PtNP and Al–TCPP for photocatalytic H2 production. Geometric structures of H* of (g) Al–TCPP–0.1Pt, (h) Al–TCPP and (i) Al–TCPP–PtNP (Pt147). Reproduced with permission.327 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (j) AFM height profile of PtSA–MNS. (k) The top and side view of the structure models of H* adsorbed on PtSA–MNS and MNSs. (l) The Gibbs energy on PtSA–MNS and MNSs. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) HRTEM images and (b) schematic images of Ag–HMO. (c) HRTEM images and (d) schematic images of Ag/HMO. (e) The performances of 30Ag–HMO, 30Ag/HMO, Ag NPs and HMO in photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) The optimized structures of Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. (g) Optical absorption spectra of Pt/g-C3N4, Pd/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The LSV curves of 10% Ag/mpg-C3N4 in the presence and absence of 1.0 mM PMS in the dark and under irradiation with visible light. Reproduced with permission.334 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. HAADF-STEM images of (b) 0.08% Pt/FeOx and (c) 2.40% Pt/FeOx. Schematic diagrams of Pt/FeOx–SAC with relatively (d) low Pt loadings and (e) high Pt loadings. (f) The power conversion efficiency (PCE) enhancement and the ratio of Δη to the Pt content as a function of the Pt weight percentage (wt%). Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 
AC	Activated carbon
AC-STEM	Aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy
AG	Aniline-stacked graphene
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
AP	Atmospheric-pressure
APRM	Aqueous-phase reforming of methanol
CE	Counter electrode
CN	Coordination number
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
COFs	Covalent-organic frameworks
CO2RR	CO2 reduction reaction
CTF	Covalent triazine framework
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DFAFCs	Direct formic acid fuel cells
DFT	Density functional theory
DG	Defective graphene
DMFCs	Direct methanol fuel cells
DNDs	Detonation nanodiamonds
DSSCs	Dye-sensitized solar cells
EDS	Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAOR	Formic acid oxidation reaction
FE	Faradaic efficiency
FT	Fourier transform
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GDY	Graphdiyne nanosheet
GO	Graphene oxide
GP	Graphite paper
HAADF-STEM	Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy
HOMO–LUMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
HBP	Haber–Bosch process
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
hNCNC	Hierarchical nitrogen-doped carbon nanocages
HRTEM	High-resolution TEM
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry
LDHs	Layered double hydroxides
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
MAS NMR	Magic-angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
MC	Mesoporous carbon
MLCT	Metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
MOR	Methanol oxidation reaction
MSR	Methanol steam reforming
MWCNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
NC	Nitrogen-doped carbon
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NMSACs	Noble-metal single-atom catalysts
NPs	Nanoparticles
N2RR	N2 reduction reaction
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
OLC	Onion-like carbon nanospheres
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PEMFCs	Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells or proton exchange membrane fuel cells
PVD	Physical vapor deposition
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
SAAs	Single-atom alloys
SACs	Single-atom catalysts
SR-FTIR	Synchrotron radiation-based Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
STM	Scanning tunneling microscopy
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TMDs	Transition metal dichalcogenides
TOF	Turnover frequency
TPD	Temperature-programmed desorption
TPR	Temperature-programmed reduction
vis-NIR	Visible-near-infrared
WE	Working electrode
WGS	Water–gas shift
WT	Wavelet transform
XANES	X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray powder diffraction
ZIF	Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
