The curious case of ion migration in solid-state and liquid electrolyte-based perovskite devices: unveiling the role of charge accumulation and extrac ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP01214B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP01214B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10936-10945The curious case of ion migration in solid-state and liquid electrolyte-based perovskite devices: unveiling the role of charge accumulation and extraction at the interfaces†

        
          
            Priya 
            Srivastava‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ramesh 
            Kumar‡
a and 

        
          
            Monojit 
            Bag
          
        
      *ab
aAdvanced Research in Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 247667, India. E-mail: mbagfph@iitr.ac.in
bCentre of Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 247667, India
Received 
      18th March 2021
    , Accepted 14th April 2021First published on 14th April 2021AbstractElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been extensively used for the detailed investigation and understanding of the plethora of physical properties of variegated electrochemical and solid-state systems. Over the past few years, EIS has revealed many significant findings in hybrid halide perovskite (HHP)-based optoelectronic devices too. Photoinduced ion-migration, negative capacitance, anomalous mid-frequency capacitance, hysteresis, and instability to heat, light and moisture in HHP-based devices are among the few issues addressed by the IS technique. However, performing EIS in perovskite devices presents new challenges related to multilayer solid-state device geometry and complicated material properties. The ions in the perovskite behave in a specified manner, which is dictated by the energy-levels of the transport layer. Electronic-ionic coupling is one of the major challenges to understand ion transport kinetics in solid-state devices. In this work, we have performed impedance measurements in both solid-state (S-S) and liquid-electrolyte (L-E) device geometry to unfold the effect of charge transport layers on the ac ionic conductivity in perovskite materials. We have modelled the impedance spectra using the electrical equivalent circuit (EEC) and compared the behaviour of ions in different controlling environments. It was concluded that the AC as well as dc ionic conductivity and the accumulation of ions in the perovskite material are highly influenced by the nature of the interface in different device geometry. Charge accumulation in the S-S device gives rise to large polarisation, thereby negative capacitance or any inductive loop can be observed in the Nyquist plot while in the L-E device the presence of an electric double layer at the perovskite/electrolyte interface reduces the surface polarisation effect. Ionic conductivity is hopping limited in the low field regime and diffusion limited in the high field regime in the S-S device. Moreover, the perovskite/electrolyte based devices are promising candidates for electrolyte gated field-effect transistors, perovskite-based supercapacitors and electrochemical cells for water splitting or CO2 reduction.
Introduction
Hybrid halide perovskites (HHPs) have already gained much attention from the scientific community owing to their unique optoelectronic properties such as ambipolar charge transport,1,2 high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs),3–5 tuneable bandgap,6,7 and high absorption coefficient.8 These properties are responsible for the high-power conversion efficiency and high external quantum efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) and light emitting diodes (PeLEDs), respectively.9 In the last few years, the main focus of perovskite research has shifted from device performance to device stability in the ambient environment10–12 by introducing encapsulating materials with desired optical properties.13,14 The most critical factor for device instability is ion migration when subjected to an external electric field, light illumination, heat and environmental moisture.15–17 This process is responsible for many anomalous behaviours such as current–voltage hysteresis,18,19 light-soaking effects,20–22 slow open-circuit voltage decay,23 negative capacitance,24,25 and mid-frequency anomalous capacitance in perovskite devices (PSCs and PeLEDs).25 Moreover, it has also led to changes in the optoelectronic properties of perovskite materials.1,26 Despite these crucial features, ion migration in HHPs has inspired many exciting applications, such as memory devices,27 switchable optoelectronics28 and HHP-based energy storage devices.29 Thus, the complete understanding of ionic movements in HHP materials is critical for perovskite-based photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications.30,31 Small-perturbation frequency domain techniques, especially electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), offers access to the detailed investigation and understanding of the plethora of physical properties of variegated electrochemical devices such as Li-ion batteries, fuel cells, gas sensors, and dye-sensitised solar cells from a very long time. Over the past few years, EIS has revealed many significant findings in HHP-based devices too. Photoinduced ion-migration, negative capacitance, J–V hysteresis, and instability to heat, light and moisture in perovskite solar cells are among the few issues addressed by the impedance spectroscopy technique.32–37
EIS is a non-destructive technique extensively used for the characterisation of photovoltaic devices under working conditions. It is a small-voltage perturbation method in which the stationary condition of the device is established by a DC potential and a small ac signal is superimposed at different frequencies.38 Consequently, complete electrical response in the frequency domain is recorded, decoupling resistive and capacitive components arising from electronic and ionic processes at different frequencies or characteristic time. Analysis of different physical processes in a single measurement makes EIS significantly appealing for characterisation of photo-voltaic devices, optoelectronic devices as well as electrochemical energy storage devices. The EIS feature is mostly presented in a Complex plane plot or Nyquist plot (−Z′′ vs. Z′) and Bode plots (|Z| vs. f and –phase vs. f). In a complex plane plot, the data near the origin are from the high-frequency spectrum and away from the origin are due to low-frequency response. This plot is mostly a small high-frequency semicircle followed by a large low-frequency arc in the case of HHP based photovoltaic devices. The frequency at the maxima or peak of the semi-circle gives the RC time constant or relaxation time scales. The number of relaxation processes in the system will be indicated by the number of semi-circles in the Nyquist plot of the real samples, when the relaxation time scales are distinct. Otherwise, the semi-circles will overlap and it will be necessary to model the data in order to distinguish different relaxation processes. Mostly Nyquist plots are used for equivalent circuit modelling using the RC Randle circuit. This RC circuit is modified using different elements such as constant phase element (CPE) and Warburg element (ZW) to account for the low-frequency anomalous behaviour. The Bode plots are used to represent the frequency dependence of the magnitude of impedance, phase and dielectric parameters.
Analysis of the significant electronic and ionic processes affecting the overall performance of the device using the electrical equivalent circuit (EEC) is one of the most prominent approaches for analysing the HOIP based devices.1,16,39–42 Over the past few years, a lot of modifications in the general EEC to clearly explain both the high-frequency and low-frequency charge kinetics have been seen.19,43,44 Most of the studies use a simple or integrated Randle circuit to model the impedance feature usually with a CPE in place of a capacitor to account for the anomalous diffusion in the low-frequency regime. In 2015, Bag et al. addressed the ion migration in the HHP-based solar cell using the nearly accurate EEC describing that the low-frequency component can also arise from ion diffusion or Warburg diffusion rather than the double-layer capacitance.16 To support their hypothesis, they modelled the low-frequency feature using the Warburg element (ZW) in the EEC. This circuit was later simplified by Chen et al. in their study of the effect of light and voltage in the impedance spectra of PSCs.45 The speculation of using the Gerischer element (ZG) to explain the low frequency ion migration is also reported.46,47 In another study, this equivalent circuit is modified further by introducing an inductor, L, to account for the inductive loop observed in the mid-frequencies in solar cells.48 Moreover, the negative capacitance observed in PeLEDs at very low frequencies is also addressed using the inductor in the EEC.25 However, both types of characteristics result from completely different phenomena occurring in different frequency regimes and the physical significance of the inductor in the circuit has not yet been defined. From all these statistics, it can be concluded that the understanding of the low-frequency feature of impedance spectra is still debatable. Starting from the R–C circuit to using CPE, ZW and ZG to account for low-frequency ion diffusion, every approach is incompatible to explain all the phenomena simultaneously. One of the factors to which this incompatibility of EIS can be attributed to is that most of the studies are performed in solid-state device geometry. In solid-state device geometry, the ion kinetics in the bulk and at the interface of the active perovskite material is influenced by the type of HTM or ETM used. The ions in the perovskite behave in a specified manner which is dictated by the energy levels of the transport layer. Scientists are trying to elucidate more about the ion kinetics in perovskite materials in less controlling environments by performing experiments on single crystals, metal/perovskite/metal lateral geometries and perovskite–electrolyte interfaces. More recently, the study of the perovskite–electrolyte interface has emerged as a new successful approach to understand iodine expulsion on electrochemical hole injection,49,50 ambipolarity,1 film morphology,33 and ionic conductivity in perovskite materials.35 A liquid electrolyte behaves as a kind of reservoir and does not control the nature of the bulk material unlike HTM or ETM in solid-state device geometry. Moreover, in liquid-electrolyte based devices the ion conduction is more focused as it suppresses the electronic contribution to the total conductivity. Hence, the perovskite–electrolyte interface can prove to be much helpful in discerning the ion migration at low frequencies. We have also chosen a bromide-based perovskite to avoid iodine expulsion from the active layer to the liquid electrolyte.
In this work, we have performed impedance measurements in both solid-state (S-S) and liquid-electrolyte (L-E) device geometry, keeping the active material (CH3NH3PbBr3) as well as thin film morphology similar. We have modelled the impedance spectra using the EEC and compared the behaviour of ions in different controlling environments. It was noted that the basic elements of the EEC used for both types of device geometry are the same; however, the different kinetics due to charge extraction/accumulation at the interface in S-S and L-E devices requires different electrical elements especially for the low frequency regime. High surface polarisation in the S-S device results in voltage dependent dc ionic/electronic conductivity, i.e. the conductivity increases with increasing applied bias in the low field regime while the dc conductivity saturates at higher applied voltage. This also results in low frequency negative capacitance in S-S devices in the low field regime and this turns into positive capacitance at high applied bias. The blocking interface in the L-E device shows voltage independent dc ionic conductivity due to the strong space charge effect at the perovskite/electrolyte interface. We found that the low-frequency kinetics of ions is highly sensitive to charge extraction/accumulation at the interface which is completely dependent on the type of device geometry. Therefore, the fundamental understanding of the ion kinetics in S-S and L-E devices needs to be explored in detail.
Results and discussion
For the study of S-S device geometry, we have fabricated an inverted n–i–p structure of FTO/TiO2 (100–120 nm)/MAPbBr3 (200 nm)/P3HT (50–60 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Au (80 nm) as depicted in Fig. 1a. The top-view FESEM image and the XRD pattern of the perovskite thin film, and the photographs of the devices are given in the ESI† (Fig. S1–S3). Impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed under dark in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 100 mHz at different externally applied bias. We have used complex Nyquist (Cole–Cole) plots and Bode plots for representations of the impedance spectra to analyse the ionic–electronic charge carriers in perovskite devices here. Fig. 1b and d depicts the Nyquist plots of the impedance spectra of S-S geometry-based perovskite devices. In the Nyquist spectra, a large high frequency distorted semicircle is observed, related to the bulk recombination mechanisms of perovskites and transport resistance of the selective contacts. However, in the low-frequency regime, Nyquist spectra show different behaviour depending upon the applied bias voltage. At high bias voltages (0.8–1.0 V), we observed a small positive arc, whereas at low applied voltages (0.2–0.6 V), the low-frequency positive arc disappears and gets converted into a small part of the negative arc (Fig. 1b and d). Moreover, at V = 0 V bias, we observed a huge positive arc only. The low-frequency arc is attributed to ion transport and recombination. We have recently explained the low-frequency capacitances (negative and positive) by the transient current in the time domain.25 Moreover, the transition of negative capacitance to positive capacitance around V = 0.6 V is related to the flipping of ions at the interface, which leads to the reversal in the sign of the transient current. The mid-frequency feature is attributed to the electronic–ionic coupling at the interface in perovskite optoelectronic devices. However, in L-E devices, electron–ion coupling could be weak due to poor charge extraction at the perovskite/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture of perovskite solid-state devices. (b) Nyquist plots of the perovskite-based device in S-S geometry. (c) Generalised EEC of S-S based perovskite devices. An inductor (L) is used for fitting the negative capacitance at lower applied bias whereas a capacitor (C4) is used to fit positive capacitance. (d) High frequency response of the perovskite S-S device at different bias voltage. 
Based on the physical process going on in the S-S geometry-based perovskite devices, we have used the modified version of the Randle circuit to fit the impedance spectra. For each physical process, a parallel R–C circuit is used. However, the intermediate-frequency response is fitted using the additional R–C Randle circuit because the mixed electronic-ionic conduction in HHPs makes the kinetics complex in the perovskite optoelectronic devices. At high applied voltages (0.4–1.0 V), the first two R–C Randle circuits (R1–C1 and R2–C2) have the same characteristic frequency and hence the corresponding semi-circles merge. Hence, we have used a single R–C Randle circuit to fit the high- and mid-frequency impedance spectra, as shown in Fig. 1c. An inductor (L) element is used for the low applied voltages (0.2–0.6 V) to fit the small negative arc in the low-frequency region. Jacobs et al. have used a drift-diffusion model to show that the low-frequency positive capacitances, negative capacitances and inductive loops can all be elaborated by the coupling between ion migration and electronic charge carriers.48 Pocket et al. have used a similar electronic-ionic coupling model to explain the impedance feature and the large amplitude transient behaviour of perovskite devices.23 The L-E device geometry used for the analysis here is FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3 (200 nm)/TBAPF6 in DCM/Pt. The liquid electrolyte used is 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate in dichloromethane solvent. The Nyquist plots of IS measurements performed under dark are shown in Fig. 2b and d. The small part of the high frequency semicircle is followed by the huge low-frequency arc. The high-frequency interfacial recombination is very fast to be captured by impedance spectroscopy in the measured frequency ranges. Moreover, a hole transport layer PEDOT:PSS is used in the device which reduces the probability of easy electronic charge transport across the device. It is mostly the ion kinetics which is depicted by the IS data here. These ions could be of the perovskite material or the liquid electrolyte. This leads to high real and imaginary impedance in the L-E based device going up to 250 kΩ and 350 kΩ, respectively. However, this was not the case in S-S devices. In S-S devices, both ZR and ZIm are in the range of 50–150 kΩ (Fig. 1b). The complex Nyquist plots also display a more diffusive nature for the S-S device as compared to the L-E device. The L-E based device is representing a blocking interface. However, the externally applied bias favours diffusion in both types of device geometry.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture of liquid-electrolyte based devices. (b) Nyquist plots of the perovskite-based device in L-E geometry. (c) The generalised EEC of L-E based perovskite devices. (d) High frequency response of the perovskite L-E device at different bias voltage. 
In addition to the ion migration in the perovskite bulk (leading to bulk capacitance Cbulk) and formation of an accumulation region at the interface (leading to double-layer capacitance Cdl), the ion kinetics in the case of L-E device geometry is highly influenced by the physical processes going on in the liquid-electrolyte side.51 In the liquid electrolyte, reduction and oxidation reactions occur at the interface due to the transfer of charge from the perovskite material to the electrolyte. These redox reactions at the interface result in piling up of ions from the liquid electrolyte at the interface. This piled up layer of ions at the interface is termed as the inner Helmholtz layer. The inner Helmholtz layer then polarises the otherwise neutral liquid electrolyte and the formation of a diffused outer Helmholtz layer takes place. Both these inner and outer Helmholtz layers together form the Helmholtz capacitance CH. Due to the formation of these layers at the interface, the charge neutrality in the bulk of the liquid-electrolyte gets disturbed. On application of an external bias this becomes more pronounced, leading to the formation of the Gouy–Chapman region in the liquid electrolyte. This region can also be modelled in the EEC as another capacitance known as Gouy–Chapman capacitance CG.
Considering the physical process going on in the L-E based device described above, there are four different capacitances in a perovskite-electrolyte device. Each physical process is modelled using a R–C Randle circuit. The constant phase element (CPE) is used in the EEC for the modelling of L-E in place of a capacitor to account for the diffused nature of ion accumulation. There is no Warburg diffusion unlike for some S-S devices reported in the literature. The L-E device is shown in Fig. 2c.
From the Bode phase plot, it can be observed that in S-S device geometry ions show capacitive behaviour at a comparatively higher frequency than in L-E device geometry (see Fig. S4, ESI†). In the S-S device, at higher frequency, the electronic contribution is predominating and an imbalance in electron and hole extraction at the respective ETL/perovskite or HTL/perovskite interface creates a local electric field due to space charge. This local electric field causes migration of ions in the perovskite material around kHz frequency. In the L-E device, the charge extraction at the liquid electrolyte–perovskite interface is comparatively poor due to the blocking nature of the perovskite/electrolyte interface. However, with increasing bias, as shown by EIS data, more absorbing behaviour is observed due to charge transfer at the interface. The formation of an electric double layer at the interface causes reduction in ion migration at a higher frequency. Hence, the ions are active only in the lower frequency range. One peak in the phase plot is seen at lower applied bias which separates out with an increase in applied bias. There is a possibility that the increased bias is facilitating the migration of ions (vacancies) in the perovskite materials at a comparatively higher frequency. The ions in the liquid electrolytes are mobile at very low frequency though. To understand the physical processes of charge and ion kinetics in the perovskite materials a schematic band diagram has been proposed for the S-S device as well as the L-E device as shown in Fig. 3. Here there can be two types of mobile ions: cation vacancies such as VMA−, VPb− or halide interstitial (IBr−) and anion vacancies such as VBr+.52 In the S-S device the presence of HTL and ETL gives rise to built-in voltage (Vbi ∼ 0.7 V) which causes the migration of ions (vacancies) till an equilibrium is reached. Therefore the perovskite/HTL(ETL) interface gets polarised. With increasing applied bias (Vapp) the flat-band potential is reduced by Vbi–Vapp, thereby reducing the ion migration. At voltage Vapp ∼ 0.6 V ion migration is reduced significantly and hence no further polarization takes place. We do not observe any negative capacitance beyond an applied bias of 0.8 V. The origin of all the capacitances in the EEC is shown in the diagram. In the case of L-E devices, the band diagram is modified due to the presence of the electrolyte. The built-in voltage varies from −0.3 to 0.5 V depending upon the voltage scan direction.1 The Mott–Schottky plot for both devices is given in the ESI† (Fig. S7 and S8). There is less charge transfer/transport at the perovskite/electrolyte interface. Therefore, not much of ion (vacancy) migration can be observed under equilibrium conditions. In the low frequency regime, large dispersive transport can be seen due to the ionic conductivity of the liquid electrolyte. No negative capacitance or inductive loop is seen in this type of device geometry. In the case of the L-E device, the dielectric constant decreases with the increase in frequency. However, anomalous behaviour is seen in the S-S device (Fig. 4). Neglecting the part below 1 Hz, the dielectric constant first decreases with an increase in frequency, but later, a peak is observed around the 1–10 kHz frequency range. This might be attributed to the electronic–ionic coupling at the perovskite–transport layer interface. The dielectric loss shows a similar behaviour in both S-S and L-E devices, i.e., it decreases with an increase in frequency. However, both S-S and L-E devices show a nearly constant loss (NCL) behaviour at around 10–80 kHz and 1–10 Hz, respectively, which disappears at higher applied bias. The appearance of a large dielectric constant (LDC) in the low frequency regime in both S-S and L-E devices confirms that a LDC is an intrinsic property of HOIP materials.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic band diagram of the S-S device and (b) the L-E device showing ion (vacancy) migration and surface polarization. Vbi is the built-in field, Vapp is the applied potential, and W+ and W− are the Debye length due to ion (vacancy) accumulation. 
 Fig. 4  Real and imaginary permittivity of the perovskite-based device in solid-state (S-S) (a and c) geometry and liquid-electrolyte (L-E) (b and d) geometry. 
The ac conductivity vs. frequency behaviour of the S-S device is opposite to that of the L-E device (Fig. 5). In the S-S device a constant plateau is seen at lower frequency while in the case of the L-E device a constant plateau is seen at higher frequency. This corresponds to the dc ionic conductivity. In the low field regime the dc ionic conductivity in the S-S device is strongly influenced by the space charge at the interfaces. On the other hand, in the L-E device the voltage drop is mainly across the perovskite/electrolyte interface due to large double layer capacitance formation. Therefore, the ionic conductivity through the bulk perovskite film is weakly dependent on the applied bias as shown in Fig. 5(c). Both devices have a similar magnitude of dc ionic conductivity at higher applied bias. We have explained that the ion kinetics is responsible for the origin of this frequency dependent ((σion)dc) conductivity in S-S and L-E devices in our previous studies.35,36 Here, we will be discussing more about the dc ionic conductivity in S-S and L-E devices along with the hopping frequency of ions in two device geometries upon applied bias under dark. It is noted that the hopping frequency is three times higher in the S-S device in the low voltage regime and merges with the hopping frequency of the L-E device at high applied bias indicating a strong electronic-ionic coupling in the S-S device. Moreover, the hopping frequency increases with an increase in applied bias in both S-S and L-E devices as shown in Fig. 5(d). It can be noted that, in the case of the S-S device the dc ionic conductivity increases with an increase in applied bias till around 0.6–0.8 V and saturates thereafter. On the other hand, in the L-E device the (σion)dc is bias independent. As mentioned above, both types of free charge carriers, i.e., electrons and holes, are being extracted at the corresponding ETL/perovskite and HTL/perovskite interfaces leading to high surface polarization in the S-S device. This polarization increases with an increase in applied bias and leads to an increase in dc ionic conductivity. However, at much higher applied bias, the ion vacancies also start migrating significantly, thereby balancing the polarization effect due to free charge carriers. This leads to saturation in surface polarization and hence the dc ionic conductivity in the S-S device. On the other hand, only one type of charge carriers, i.e., holes, are being extracted by the HTL in L-E devices, whereas the electrons are just accumulating at the perovskite/electrolyte junction after participating in the redox reactions at the interface. As discussed above the perovskite/electrolyte interface acts more like a blocking interface rather than the diffusive interface. There is no such surface polarization in L-E devices and hence (σion)dc is independent of applied bias. The schematic of this process is shown in Fig. 3. We have used the following equation to fit the bias dependence of dc conductivity: (σion)dc = σ0e(−qV/nkT)(1)
 Fig. 5  (a and b) ac ionic conductivity for a solid-state device under different applied bias and the corresponding (c) dc ionic conductivity and (d) hopping frequency for S-S and L-E devices. 
Here, V is the applied external bias across the device and n is the correction factor which depends on ion trapping/accumulation at the interface. The correction factor for the S-S device is 9.15 for the equation fitted till an applied bias of 0.6 V. This equation indicates that the transport is dominated by hopping. After an applied bias of 0.6 V, the dc conductivity starts saturating and is no more applied bias dependent indicating that the transport is diffusion limited. In the case of the L-E device the dc ionic conductivity is always diffusion limited. It is demonstrated in the literature that, when the electric field is not a major factor in governing the extraction of charge carriers, they are mainly transported through diffusion, facilitated by the large diffusion length of carriers in HOIP materials.53
Conclusions
In this article we have demonstrated that the ion migration through the perovskite active layers not only depends on the cations or the halide ions, but also on the charge transport layers. In the solid state device structure balanced electron and hole transport makes the dc conductivity strongly affected by the application of an electric field especially in the low voltage regime, while in the liquid electrolyte-based device structure, one of the charge carriers is accumulated at the perovskite/electrolyte interface leading to a weak negative field dependent ionic transport behaviour. The absence of charge accumulation in solid state devices gives rise to a large polarization effect at the perovskite/electrode interface, and therefore negative capacitance can be observed. At low applied bias the ionic conductivity in solid-state devices is hopping limited and at high applied bias dc ion conductivity becomes diffusion limited. In perovskite/electrolyte-based devices electric double layer formation at the interface reduces the surface polarization due to ions. Therefore, no negative capacitance or inductive effect is observed in these types of geometries. The dc ionic conductivity is always diffusion limited. Our finding will be helpful to manipulate charge transport in perovskite/electrolyte-based devices, thereby optimizing the device structure for field effect transistors or hybrid perovskite-based supercapacitors.
Experimental
Materials
Methylammonium bromide (MABr) was brought from Tokyo Chemical Industry (TCI). N,N-Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous 99.8%), benzylamine, and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Device fabrication

S-S devices. 
The S-S device geometry for EIS analysis was FTO/cTiO2/MAPbBr3/P3HT/MoO3/Au (Fig. 1a). The MAPbBr3 precursor solution was spin-coated on TiO2 coated FTO substrates at 3000 rpm for 60 s. Anti-solvent (chlorobenzene with 0.5 wt% benzylamine) was dripped onto the film after 20 s from the start of spin coating. For the hole transport/injection layer, the P3HT solution (20 mg of P3HT in 1 mL of chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the 6–10 nm MoO3 layer was thermally deposited followed by 50 nm gold (Au) as a back electrode at 2 × 10−6 mbar vacuum pressure to complete the device geometry. The active area of S-S devices was 4 mm2.


L-E devices. 
The L-E device geometry used for EIS analysis was FTO/PEDOT: PSS/MAPbBr3 (200 nm)/TBAPF6 in DCM/Pt (see Fig. 2a). The PEDOT: PSS layer was coated on the FTO substrates at 4000 rpm for 50 s and annealed at 120 °C for 20 minutes. The MAPbBr3 films were coated on the PEDOT: PSS coated FTO by the same method as for S-S devices. The liquid electrolyte used was 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate in dichloromethane solvent. The active area of L-E devices was 0.2 cm2.

EIS measurements
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out by using the Zahner Electrochemical Workstation under dark conditions at an applied potential from 0 to 1 V. In EIS, the amplitude of the ac signal was 20 mV and the frequency range was varied from 1 MHz to 100 mHz. All measurements were carried out in the ambient environment. For the electrical equivalent circuit fitting of EIS data, ZView software was used.
Electrolyte solution preparation
Tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) was mixed with dichloromethane (DCM) to yield 0.1 M concentration and stirred till it got mixed completely.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
MB acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology, India (award no. DST/INT/SWD/VR/P-13/2019 dated 14/12/2020) for partial support to carry out this research work. R. K. and P. S. acknowledge the Ministry of Education, Government of India, for PhD fellowship. R. K. would like to thank Dr Dinesh Kabra from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay for some experimental facilities used in this study.
References
P. Srivastava and M. Bag, Elucidating Tuneable Ambipolar Charge Transport and Field Induced Bleaching at CH3NH3PbI3/Electrolyte Interface, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 11062 RSC .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Ambipolar solution-processed hybrid perovskite phototransistors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
N. Mondal, A. De and A. Samanta, Achieving Near-Unity Photoluminescence Efficiency for Blue-Violet-Emitting Perovskite Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. Woo Choi, H. C. Woo, X. Huang, W. G. Jung, B. J. Kim, S. W. Jeon, S. Y. Yim, J. S. Lee and C. L. Lee, Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite quantum dots with high PLQY and enhanced carrier mobility through crystallinity control by solvent engineering and solid-state ligand exchange, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13356–13367 RSC .
J. Kumar, R. Kumar, K. Frohna, D. Moghe, S. D. Stranks and M. Bag, Unraveling the antisolvent dripping delay effect on the Stranski-Krastanov growth of CH3NH3PbBr3 thin films: a facile route for preparing a textured morphology with improved optoelectronic properties, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 26592–26604 RSC .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, A. Kumar, S. P. Gopinathan, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, Band Gap Tuning of CH3NH3Pb(Br(1−x)Clx)3 Hybrid Perovskite for Blue Electroluminescence, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13119–13124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Cation-induced band-gap tuning in organohalide perovskites: interplay of spin–orbit coupling and octahedra tilting, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Ji, R. Liu, C. Zhang, C. H. Mak, X. Zou, H.-H. Shen, S.-Y. Leu and H.-Y. Hsu, A review on morphology engineering for highly efficient and stable hybrid perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12842–12875 RSC .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart | Photovoltaic Research | NREL.
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. D. Marco and Y. Yang, Improved air stability of perovskite solar cells via solution-processed metal oxide transport layers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 75–81 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Efficient and stable large-area perovskite solar cells with inorganic charge extraction layers, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Stability of perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
I. Menapace, G. Mera, R. Riedel, E. Erdem, R. A. Eichel, A. Pauletti and G. A. Appleby, Luminescence of heat-treated silicon-based polymers: promising materials for LED applications, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 5790–5796 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bag, S. Banerjee, R. Faust and D. Venkataraman, Self-healing polymer sealant for encapsulating flexible solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 418–422 CrossRef CAS .
N. Phung, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Meloni, A. Mattoni, S. Albrecht, E. L. Unger, A. Merdasa and A. Abate, The Role of Grain Boundaries on Ionic Defect Migration in Metal Halide Perovskites, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, Kinetics of Ion Transport in Perovskite Active Layers and Its Implications for Active Layer Stability, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vicente and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Organohalide Perovskites are Fast Ionic Conductors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De, Angelis, Defect migration in methylammonium lead iodide and its role in perovskite solar cell operation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. A. Renna, H. B. Thompson, Z. A. Page, T. Emrick, M. D. Barnes, M. Bag, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, Role of Ionic Functional Groups on Ion Transport at Perovskite Interfaces, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701235 CrossRef .
P. Wang, F. Cai, L. Yang, Y. Yan, J. Cai, H. Wang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, Eliminating Light-Soaking Instability in Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells by Interfacial Modifications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33144–33152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, S. H. Cheung, X. Meng, L. Zhu, Y. Bai, C. H. Y. Ho, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, S. K. So and S. Yang, Pinning Down the Anomalous Light Soaking Effect toward High-Performance and Fast-Response Perovskite Solar Cells: The Ion-Migration-Induced Charge Accumulation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5069–5076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Yin, X. Liu, M. Que and W. Que, Multi-Influences of Ionic Migration on Illumination-Dependent Electrical Performances of Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16051–16057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, N. Sakai, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, Microseconds, milliseconds and seconds: deconvoluting the dynamic behaviour of planar perovskite solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5959–5970 RSC .
F. Ebadi, N. Taghavinia, R. Mohammadpour, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Origin of apparent light-enhanced and negative capacitance in perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1574 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kumar, J. Kumar, P. Srivastava, D. Moghe, D. Kabra and M. Bag, Unveiling the Morphology Effect on the Negative Capacitance and Large Ideality Factor in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34265–34273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Smith, C. L. C. Ellis, H. Javaid, L. A. Renna, Y. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Bag and D. Venkataraman, Interplay between Ion Transport, Applied Bias, and Degradation under Illumination in Hybrid Perovskite p–i–n Devices, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13986–13994 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Yoo and T. Lee, High-Performance Solution-Processed Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite Unipolar Resistive Memory Devices in a Cross-Bar Array Structure, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Lead-free, air-stable hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite resistive switching memory with ultrafast switching and multilevel data storage, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8578–8584 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Miao, J. Li and Q. Li, Halide Perovskite Materials for Energy Storage Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–20 Search PubMed .
A. Senocrate, I. Spanopoulos, N. Zibouche, J. Maier, M. S. Islam and M. G. Kanatzidis, Tuning Ionic and Electronic Conductivities in the ‘Hollow’ Perovskite {en}MAPbI3, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 719–726 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Ferdani, S. R. Pering, D. Ghosh, P. Kubiak, A. B. Walker, S. E. Lewis, A. L. Johnson, P. J. Baker, M. S. Islam and P. J. Cameron, Partial cation substitution reduces iodide ion transport in lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2264–2272 RSC .
W. Peng, C. Aranda, O. M. Bakr, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, Quantification of Ionic Diffusion in Lead Halide Perovskite Single Crystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1477–1481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Srivastava, A. P. Parhi, R. Ranjan, S. Satapathi and M. Bag, Temperature Assisted Nucleation and Growth To Optimize Perovskite Morphology at Liquid Interface: A Study by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4420–4425 CrossRef CAS .
B. Suarez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. S. Ripolles, R. S. Sanchez, L. Otero and I. Mora-Sero, Recombination study of combined halides (Cl, Br, I) perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Srivastava, R. Kumar and M. Bag, Discerning the Role of an A-Site Cation and X-Site Anion for Ion Conductivity Tuning in Hybrid Perovskites by Photoelectrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 211–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, P. Srivastava and M. Bag, Role of A-Site Cation and X-Site Halide Interactions in Mixed-Cation Mixed-Halide Perovskites for Determining Anomalously High Ideality Factor and the Super-linear Power Law in AC Ionic Conductivity at Operating Temperature, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 4087–4098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Bag, L. A. Renna, Z. A. Page, P. Kim, T. Emrick, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, Understanding interface engineering for high-performance fullerene/perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501606 CrossRef .
E. Von Hauff, Impedance Spectroscopy for Emerging Photovoltaics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11329–11346 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. F. Hoque, M. Yang, Z. Li, N. Islam, X. Pan, K. Zhu and Z. Fan, Polarization and Dielectric Study of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Thin Film to Reveal its Nonferroelectric Nature under Solar Cell Operating Conditions, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ali, S. Chang, M. Imran, Q. Shi, Y. Chen and H. Zhong, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1–16 Search PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N.-G. Park and J. Bisquert, Mechanism of carrier accumulation in perovskite thin-absorber solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Ghahremanirad, A. Bou, S. Olyaee and J. Bisquert, Inductive Loop in the Impedance Response of Perovskite Solar Cells Explained by Surface Polarization Model, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1402–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ravishankar, C. Aranda, S. Sanchez, J. Bisquert, M. Saliba and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Perovskite Solar Cell Modeling Using Light- and Voltage-Modulated Techniques, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 6444–6449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravishankar, M. Garcia-Batlle, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Odrobina and C. A. Schiller, Removing Instability-Caused Low-Frequency Features in Small Perturbation Spectra of Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 15793–15799 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Shirai, M. Yanagida and K. Miyano, Effect of light and voltage on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of perovskite solar cells: an empirical approach based on modified randles Circuit, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3968–3978 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chavhan, O. Miguel, H.-J. Grande, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Seró and R. Tena-Zaera, Organo-metal halide perovskite-based solar cells with CuSCN as the inorganic hole selective contact, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12754–12760 RSC .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W. S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, General working principles of CH3NH3PbX3 perovskite solar cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, Properties of Contact and Bulk Impedances in Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells Including Inductive Loop Elements, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Samu, Á. Balog, F. De Angelis, D. Meggiolaro, P. V. Kamat and C. Janáky, Electrochemical hole injection selectively expels iodide from mixed halide perovskite films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10812–10820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Mathew, P. S. Mathew, G. F. Samu, G. F. Samu, C. Janáky, P. V. Kamat, P. V. Kamat and P. V. Kamat, Iodine(I) Expulsion at Photoirradiated Mixed Halide Perovskite Interface. Should i Stay or Should i Go?, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1872–1880 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dubose, P. S. Mathew, J. Cho, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, Modulation of Photoinduced Iodine Expulsion in Mixed Halide Perovskites with Electrochemical Bias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2615–2621 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bertoluzzi, C. C. Boyd, N. Rolston, J. Xu, R. Prasanna, B. C. O’Regan and M. D. McGehee, Mobile Ion Concentration Measurement and Open-Access Band Diagram Simulation Platform for Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2020, 4, 109–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravishankar, S. Gharibzadeh, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, M. Ralaiarisoa, A. M. Asiri, N. Koch, J. Bisquert and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Influence of Charge Transport Layers on Open-Circuit Voltage and Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2018, 2, 788–798 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp01214b‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture of perovskite solid-state devices. (b) Nyquist plots of the perovskite-based device in S-S geometry. (c) Generalised EEC of S-S based perovskite devices. An inductor (L) is used for fitting the negative capacitance at lower applied bias whereas a capacitor (C4) is used to fit positive capacitance. (d) High frequency response of the perovskite S-S device at different bias voltage.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture of liquid-electrolyte based devices. (b) Nyquist plots of the perovskite-based device in L-E geometry. (c) The generalised EEC of L-E based perovskite devices. (d) High frequency response of the perovskite L-E device at different bias voltage.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic band diagram of the S-S device and (b) the L-E device showing ion (vacancy) migration and surface polarization. Vbi is the built-in field, Vapp is the applied potential, and W+ and W− are the Debye length due to ion (vacancy) accumulation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Real and imaginary permittivity of the perovskite-based device in solid-state (S-S) (a and c) geometry and liquid-electrolyte (L-E) (b and d) geometry.	 
(σion)dc = σ0e(−qV/nkT)	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) ac ionic conductivity for a solid-state device under different applied bias and the corresponding (c) dc ionic conductivity and (d) hopping frequency for S-S and L-E devices.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp01214b
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
