Ag@Nb 2 O 5 plasmonic blocking layer for higher efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7DT04825D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7DT04825D
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 4685-4700Ag@Nb2O5 plasmonic blocking layer for higher efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            S. 
            Suresh
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gautam E. 
            Unni
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Satyanarayana
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. Sreekumaran 
            Nair
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            V. P. Mahadevan 
            Pillai
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Optoelectronics, University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram 695581, Kerala, India. E-mail: vpmpillai9@gmail.com
bDepartment of Electronics, Sree Ayyappa College, Eramallikkara, Chengannur, Alappuzha 689109, Kerala, India
cCentre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita University, AIMS PO, Kochi 682041, Kerala, India. E-mail: sreekumarannair@aims.amrita.edu
Received 
      21st December 2017
    , Accepted 26th February 2018First published on 26th February 2018AbstractEngineering photons on a nanoscale via guidance and localization by metal nanostructures has a profound influence on the performance of devices that try to mimic the process of photosynthesis. The conventional route for the synthesis of plasmonic nanoparticles and their integration into the porous structure of the photoanode either directly or after being capped with a dielectric material not only adds to the complexity but also to the cost of the cell. The present study introduces the concept of a plasmonic blocking layer that concurrently acts as a light harvester and an electron-blocking layer in a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), wherein the plasmonic silver nanoparticles are incorporated into an Nb2O5 blocking layer by a simple one-step process. The cell with the plasmonic blocking layer achieves an efficiency of 9.24% when compared with a cell with a non-plasmonic blocking layer (7.6%), registering an impressive enhancement in the efficiency by 22%. Moreover, the cell with the plasmonic blocking layer shows an improvement in the efficiency by 49% when compared with the cell without a blocking layer (6.19%).
1. Introduction
Light–matter interactions and the subsequent energy conversion, which is performed efficiently and beautifully by nature, stimulated the scientific community to emulate this process, and the study of this process experienced a quantum leap since the seminal paper by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991.1 Since then, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been considered to be a cost-effective and environmentally safe alternative to silicon photovoltaics.2–4 In DSSC, the photoexcited charge carriers move through different interfacial layers before delivering the power to the output load while encountering different sources of charge scavengers.3,5 The major charge recombination takes place near the transparent conducting electrode, which contains a porous wide-band-gap semiconductor for dye sensitisation.6 Hence, by placing an energy barrier layer at this electrode/porous material interface, the recombination of the photo-excited charge carriers can be relatively suppressed. Wide-band-gap semiconductors such as Nb2O5, ZnO, Al2O3, HfO2, SiO2, MgO, and ZrO2 have been investigated and reported as electron-blocking layers for performance enhancement in DSSCs.7
A metallic nanostructure that supports surface plasmons provides a different approach for improving the photon absorption in photovoltaic technologies. Surface plasmons are coherent oscillations of the conduction band electrons in nano-sized metals under the influence of an electromagnetic field at the metal-dielectric interface.8,9 In a planar thin metallic film, these oscillating electrons generate a strongly oscillating electric field that propagates through the surface and these waves are called surface plasmon polaritons (SPP), whereas in a metal nanoparticle this effect is localized. The photovoltaics community has investigated the effect of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) as well as localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) for performance enhancement in various solar cell technologies.10 Researchers in the field of DSSCs have incorporated plasmonic nanostructures of Au, Ag and Al with different sizes, shapes and morphologies into the cell architecture to enhance the absorption of the photosensitizer and hence the cell performance.11,12
In earlier studies on plasmonic DSSCs, the metal nanostructures were synthesized separately and then blended with a nano-crystalline semiconductor, and the mixture was used for making the photoanode.12 Thus, the plasmonic nanostructures were randomly distributed in the mesoporous layer and were in direct contact with dye/electrolyte, which may cause corrosion to the metal nanoparticles, especially to silver nanoparticles. To prevent such corrosion, the metallic nanoparticles needed to be isolated by being capped with a chemically inert material such as SiO2.13 These processes added to the complexity and cost of cell fabrication. Herein, we discussed an alternate anda simple method for introducing plasmonic nanostructures into the DSSC architecture. A thin layer of niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5), a refractory metal oxide with a high refractive index and dielectric constant, was reported to be an effective blocking layer (BL) but has not been investigated so far as a dielectric medium for plasmonic nanostructures in DSSCs.14,15 Herein, we report for the first time a simple method for preparing an Ag-incorporated plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layer (BL) that played the dual role of enhancing the absorption of the photosensitizer as well as acting as an energy barrier layer for the prevention of back electron transfer in DSSC.
In this study, pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 BL is prepared on an FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide) glass plate by the RF magnetron sputtering process. More often than not, the as-prepared sputtered films are amorphous in nature, and given that the crystal structure of Nb2O5 exhibits extensive polymorphism, the structural transformation of the film depends on post-deposition annealing. Furthermore, it has been reported that the crystalline Nb2O5 blocking layer excels in terms of cell performance when comparison with its amorphous counterpart, and the optimum thickness of the blocking layer for the best cell performance is ∼40 nm.15 It has been found that at an annealing temperature of 600 °C, the Nb2O5 film transforms into a highly crystalline orthorhombic phase and at the same time, the electrical and optical properties of the FTO glass plate are also remarkably stable at this temperature.16
Silver is a noble metal and when it is incorporated during the film formation of a suitable wide band-gap material, it may influence the growth process, surface morphology and crystal structure of the host material.17–19 Such changes in the properties of the host material can definitely influence the effect of the compact layer on the cell performance. In view of this, we have investigated the effect of Ag nanoparticles on the structural, optical and morphological properties of Nb2O5 films prepared on a quartz substrate.
2. Materials and methods
Preparation of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films
Nb2O5 powder (Sigma-Aldrich CAS 1313-96-8, 99.99%) and silver powder (Sigma-Aldrich CAS 7440-22-4, 99.99%) were purchased and used without further modification. Pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films were coated on quartz substrates to investigate the effect of Ag nanoparticles on the Nb2O5 films using the RF magnetron sputtering process in a pure argon atmosphere. Silver powder of different wt% was mixed with 1.8 g of Nb2O5 powder and was ground well with an agate mortar and pestle for 6 h to achieve homogeneous mixing of the samples. The blended powder was pressed well and used as the sputtering target in a vacuum chamber, which was evacuated to a base pressure of 5 × 10−6 mbar. Silver powder was mixed (1, 3, 5 and 10 wt%) with Nb2O5 powder, and the films were prepared on a quartz substrate at an RF power of 150 W in an argon atmosphere of 0.015 mbar for a duration of 30 min. All the films were air-annealed in a controlled furnace at a temperature of 600 °C for 1 h at atmospheric pressure. The samples were coded as NAg0, NAg1, NAg3, NAg5 and NAg10 in the order of the increasing Ag wt% in the films.
Preparation of plasmonic blocking layers for DSSC
Pure and Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 blocking layers were coated on an FTO glass plate using an RF magnetron sputtering process in a pure argon atmosphere. Silver powder in different wt% (0, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10) was mixed with 1.8 g of Nb2O5 powder and ground well with an agate mortar and pestle for 6 h to achieve homogeneous mixing of the samples. The FTO glass plates were successively cleaned in an ultrasonicator with a mild soap solution (Extran), distilled water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 5 minutes followed by heating on a hotplate at 80 °C for 2 h. The substrate-to-target distance was kept at 50 mm for the preparation of all the films. The sputter chamber was initially evacuated to a base pressure of 5 × 10−6 mbar and then, pure argon gas was admitted into the chamber and was maintained at a constant pressure of 0.015 mbar. The sputter deposition was carried out for a duration of 40 min at an RF power of 100 W. To crystallize in an orthorhombic phase, all the films underwent post-deposition annealing in a controlled furnace at a temperature of 600 °C for 1 h in air at atmospheric pressure.
DSSC fabrication
Nanocrystalline porous TiO2 films to be used for dye adsorption were prepared by the spray pyrolysis deposition method (KM-150, SPD Laboratory, Inc., Japan) on top of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 blocking layers. The synthesis of the colloidal solution of TiO2 nanoparticles for spraying was carried out as reported elsewhere,48 and the deposition was carried out for 20 cycles while maintaining the substrate temperature at 90 °C with a flow rate of 0.41 g s−1. The films were sintered at 450 °C for 1 h, and the measured thickness of each film was ∼6.5 μm (Fig. S3†). An active area of 0.2 cm2 was carved out from the photoanodes and immersed in a solution of N719 (Solaronix SA) dye (in an acetonitrile/tert-butanol mixture with a 1:1 ratio) for a planned duration of 24 h for maximum adsorption of the dye. The Weakly adsorbed dye was separated by washing in acetonitrile solution, and the cells were sealed using a spacer (Parafilm M, Neenah, WI 54956) with platinum-coated FTO plates. The redox mediator (iodide/tri-iodide liquid electrolyte) was prepared as reported elsewhere16 and was administered into the cells with a vacuum back-filling machine (SPD Inc., Japan). The DSSCs fabricated with PBLs with the incorporated Ag contents of 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 wt% were coded as FNAg1, FNAg3, FNAg5, FNAg7 and FNAg10, respectively, and DSSC with a pure Nb2O5 BL was coded as FNAg0. A plain cell without any blocking layer was also fabricated and was used as a control device.
Characterization tools
The phase formation of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films was investigated with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using Cu Kα (1.5406 Å, generator −45 kV and 30 mA) radiation. The grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns were recorded in the range from 10° to 80° (raw-step 0.04°), and the phase was identified by matching with data from the JCPDS international diffraction database. Micro-Raman spectra of the films were recorded using a LabRAM HR-800 spectrometer equipped with a Synapse CCD camera system (maintained at −70 °C). The spectra were recorded using an argon ion laser with an excitation radiation wavelength of 514 nm at a spectral resolution of about 1 cm−1. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using equipment from Kratos Analytical, UK. The optical characterizations of the films were conducted using a JASCO V-550 UV-visible double beam spectrophotometer in the wavelength region of 220–900 nm and a Horiba Jobin Yvon MM-16 system for spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements. Photoluminescence spectra of the films were recorded with a PerkinElmer LS50B (USA) luminescence spectrometer. The surface morphology of the films was identified using an atomic force microscope (Bruker Dimension Edge, Si3N4 cantilever) and a field emission scanning electron microscope (Nova NanoSEM 450) with an EDS attachment. DSSC characterizations were conducted using a Newport Oriel Class AAA solar simulator at 1 sun illumination. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was determined using an Oriel Newport (QE-PV-SI/QE) measurement kit, USA. The interfacial charge transfer resistance of the devices was determined via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) (Metrohm, Newport, the Netherlands) performed in the dark at a bias voltage of −0.75 V, and the data that were acquired were fitted with the Zview software.
3. Results and discussion
Structural and morphological analysis of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 film
Being a noble metal, the probability of an Ag atom replacing an Nb atom in the Nb2O5 matrix is least; the sputtered silver nanoparticles can either act as a catalyst for the growth of Nb2O5 crystals or hinder the crystal growth by creating small grain boundaries in the growing Nb2O5 film. The structural analysis of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films revealed that all the films were polycrystalline in nature. For the pure Nb2O5 film (NAg0), the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. 1) displayed two intense peaks at 2θ values of 22.647° and 28.805° and a less intense peak at 36.86°, which was indexed to the (001), (200) and (201) lattice reflection planes of the orthorhombic (T-Nb2O5) crystalline phase (JCPDS CAS no. 30-0873). Although the (001) and (201) peaks were present in the XRD patterns of the Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films, their intensities showed a systematic decrease with an increase in the content of incorporated silver, and for the films with a higher content of incorporated Ag (≥5 wt%), these peaks almost vanished. At the same time, the intensity of the (200) peak exhibited a slight enhancement with an increase in the content of the incorporated Ag up to 5 wt%. This made it obvious that the preferred direction of crystal growth in the Nb2O5 films with Ag incorporation shifted from the c-axis to a-axis. A similar observation was reported by Bose et al. for gold-incorporated WO3 films in which a suppression of the crystalline growth along the c-axis was observed.20 Besides, an increase in the content of the incorporated Ag resulted in an increase in the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the highest intensity peak and a reduction in the size of the crystallites (Table S1†). These observations implied that the crystalline quality of the films deteriorated in the films with a higher content of incorporated Ag, and thus, it can be presumed that silver nanoparticles inhibit the growth of Nb2O5 crystallites. Justifying this observation, the thickness determined from ellipsometric data (Table S3†) was also found to decrease in films with a higher content of incorporated silver. A similar observation was reported by Chalana et al.18 for Ag-incorporated ZnS films in which the crystallinity of the ZnS film exhibited deterioration with the incorporation of Ag.
 Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction patterns of pure Nb2O5 film (NAg0) and Nb2O5 films incorporated with 1, 3, 5 and 10 wt% of Ag prepared by the RF magnetron sputtering process on a quartz substrate and post-deposition annealed at a temperature of 600 °C. 
Both the (001) and (200) diffraction peaks showed a progressive shift towards lower diffraction angles with an increase in the content of incorporated Ag. The shift in the position of the diffraction peaks implied the presence of strain in the films, which may have originated due to various reasons such as lattice mismatch, difference in the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) between the substrate and film and the incorporation of Ag in the Nb2O5 films.21 The strain (T) that developed in the films was calculated using eqn (1),22 and the values are shown in Table S1 (ESI†). (1)
It can be seen that the strain in the films increases with an increase in the amount of incorporated silver. In the present case, the lattice mismatch and difference in CTE were the same for all the films because amorphous quartz substrates were used for the deposition of all the films, and the films were subjected to identical thermal treatment (post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C for 1 h). Therefore, the increase in strain in the films can be attributed to the incorporation of silver.
Even though the crystallinity of the Nb2O5 film diminishes progressively with an increase in the content of incorporated silver, the absence of peaks associated with silver or allied compounds suggests that no change in the structure of Nb2O5 occurs as a result of the incorporation of silver. To shed more light on this observation, Raman spectral analysis is carried out on pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films. If the incorporation of silver in the Nb2O5 structure leads to the formation of new phases or compounds such as AgNbO3 (silver niobate), the Raman spectrum displays new bands since it is sensitive to changes at the molecular level.17,23 The micro-Raman spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films are shown in Fig. S1.† The Raman spectrum of the NAg0 film showed a strong and sharp band centred at 700 cm−1 and two weak bands around 227 and 320 cm−1. The band at 700 cm−1 was assigned to Nb–O stretching vibration (ν4 mode) of cations in the NbO6 octahedra, and the weak Raman bands at 227 and 320 cm−1 may be due to Nb–O–Nb bending vibrations (ν2 and ν3 modes) of cations in the NbO4 tetrahedra.16,24,25 These bands were the fingerprint of the T–Nb2O5 crystalline phase and hence, their presence confirmed the formation of an orthorhombic phase in the NAg0 film. These bands were present in the Raman spectra of the Ag-incorporated films with a small or medium amount of incorporated silver (up to 5 wt%). In the Raman spectrum of the NAg10 film, the band around 320 cm−1 almost disappeared, and the intensities of the bands at 700 and 227 cm−1 reduced considerably. Furthermore, no Raman bands related to AgO or AgNbO3 were visible even in the spectrum of the NAg10 film, which indicated the existence of a heterogeneous film with Nb2O5 crystals and Ag nanoparticles.
X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the films were obtained to get an insight into the interaction of Ag nanoparticles with Nb2O5. The XPS spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated (5 wt% and 10 wt%) Nb2O5 films are shown in Fig. 2. The survey spectrum (Fig. 2a) of the pure Nb2O5 film showed peaks corresponding to Nb and O only, whereas those of the NAg5 and NAg10 films also showed additional peaks corresponding to Ag. The presence of a small peak corresponding to carbon in the spectra of all the films was believed to have originated from accidental contamination. The core-level spectra of Nb 3p and Ag 3d are shown in Fig. 2b. The binding energy (BE) values for Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 in bulk metallic silver were reported to be 368.3 and 374.3 eV,26 respectively. In the present case, Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 peaks were observed at the binding energy values of 367.75 and 373.75 eV, respectively, for both the NAg5 and the NAg10 films. Even though a difference of 6 eV between the BE values of Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 doublet peaks was maintained, a negative shift of 0.55 eV with respect to metallic Ag was observed for both the NAg5 and NAg10 films. A similar negative shift of 0.3 eV was reported by Gao et al. for heterostructured Ag@Nb2O5 nanobelts.27 The core-level spectra of the Nb 3d5/2 and Nb 3d3/2 doublet are shown in Fig. 2c, and the peak values that were obtained are shown in Table S2 (ESI†). The observed values were well within the range of values reported for bulk Nb2O5.28 In the spectrum of the NAg0 film, the Nb 3d5/2 and Nb 3d3/2 doublet peaks were observed at 206.85 and 209.65 eV, respectively, whereas in that of the NAg5 film, these peaks were blue-shifted by 0.1 eV and were located at 206.95 and 209.75 eV, respectively. Furthermore, another blue shift of 0.1 eV was observed for the NAg10 film, and the doublet peaks were located at 207.05 and 209.85 eV, respectively. These positive shifts in the BE values of the Nb 3d peaks upon incorporation of Ag when correlated with the negative shift in the BE values of the Ag 3d peaks strongly suggested the interaction of Ag with Nb2O5. The deconvolved fine spectra of Nb 3d for the NAg0, NAg5 and NAg10 films are shown in Fig. 2d–f, respectively. In the spectrum of the NAg0 film, the peaks at 206.85 and 207.25 eV corresponded to Nb 3d5/2 levels of an Nb5+ state, and those at 209.65 and 210.05 eV corresponded to Nb 3d3/2 levels of an Nb5+ (Nb2O5) state. The peaks located at 206.35 and 209.15 eV were assigned to Nb 3d5/2 and Nb 3d3/2 levels of an Nb4+ (NbO2) state, respectively.29,30 The deconvoluted fine spectra of the NAg5 and NAg10 films also displayed peaks similar to those of the NAg0 film but with positive shifts of 0.1 and 0.2 eV, respectively. The presence of trace peaks due to NbO2 as well as the absence of peaks related to NbO30,31 suggested that even though Nb2O5 is not stoichiometric, the films were richer in Nb2O5 (Nb5+). The successive shifts in the binding energy values of Nb 3d3/2 and Nb 3d5/2 levels with an increase in the amount of incorporated Ag indicated the transfer of electrons from semiconducting Nb2O5 to metallic Ag. The irradiated X-ray photons having higher energy than the optical band gap of Nb2O5 excite electrons to the conduction band (CB) of Nb2O5, and this may lead to a shift in the Fermi level to more negative values.32 The potential difference at the Schottky barrier (Ag/Nb2O5 interface) forced electrons to move from CB of Nb2O5 to that of Ag nanoparticles, and this transfer led to the accumulation of electrons in Ag nanoparticles. Subsequently, this made Nb2O5 more electropositive thereby shifting the binding energies of Nb5+ to higher values.33
 Fig. 2  XPS spectra of pure and silver-incorporated (5 wt% and 10 wt%) Nb2O5 films. (a) Survey spectra of Nb2O5 and Ag-Nb2O5 films; (b) fine spectra of Nb 3p and Ag 3d; (c) fine spectra of Nb 3d; and deconvoluted fine spectra of Nb 3d for (d) NAg0, (e) NAg5 and (f) NAg10 samples. 
The structural analysis showed that interactions with Ag nanoparticles degraded the crystallinity of Nb2O5 crystals and therefore, these interactions may have also influenced the surface morphology of the Nb2O5 film. Fig. 3 shows the FESEM images of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films. It was seen that the surface morphology of the pure Nb2O5 film (Fig. 3a) presented a smooth pinhole-free surface with a dense distribution of small grains. This morphology progressively changed to a porous form when the silver content in the Nb2O5 film was increased beyond 3 wt%. In accordance with this observation, the AFM images (Fig. S2†) of the Nb2O5 films with 5 wt% and 10 wt% of incorporated Ag exhibited a six-fold increase in surface roughness (Table S1†) when compared with those of pure Nb2O5 film. From these results, it was inferred that silver nanoparticles exerted parasitic drag forces such as form drag and skin friction drag in the growing Nb2O5 film, which eventually restricted the boundary motion of Nb2O5 particles. Thus, the structural and morphological analysis proved that a higher silver content in the Nb2O5 film strongly inhibited the crystallinity of Nb2O5 crystals.
 Fig. 3  FESEM images of Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films prepared on a quartz substrate by an RF magnetron sputtering process: (a) NAg0 (pure Nb2O5 film); (b to e) NAg1, NAg3, NAg5 and NAg10 (1, 3, 5, and 10 wt% of Ag in Nb2O5 films); (f) EDX spectra of pure and Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films (NAg0 to NAg10). All the films underwent post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C. 
To determine the size of the Ag nanoparticles, a TEM image of the NAg3 film was obtained and is exhibited in Fig. 4. It was seen that Ag nanoparticles with different sizes were randomly distributed in the Nb2O5 film (Fig. 4a). A very thin covering of the Nb2O5 film around Ag nanoparticles was seen as shown in Fig. 4b and c. Fig. 4b shows that the shape of the Ag nanoparticle was spherical, and the lattice spacing measured from the HRTEM image (Fig. 4d) was 0.24 nm, which corresponded to the [111] plane. From the TEM analysis, it was confirmed that Ag nanoparticles were distributed randomly in the blocking layer with a thin covering of Nb2O5.
 Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) the NAg3 film showing a random distribution of Ag nanoparticles, (b) a spherical Ag nanoparticle with a size of 21.6 nm covered by an Nb2O5 layer of 2 nm, and (c) Nb2O5 covering an Ag nanoparticle; (d) HRTEM image of Ag nanoparticles showing a lattice spacing of 0.24 nm corresponding to the [111] plane. 
Optical properties of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films
The optical properties of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films were investigated using UV-vis spectroscopy and spectroscopic ellipsometry. The optical transmittance, absorbance and reflectance spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films are shown in Fig. 5a–c, respectively. The pure Nb2O5 film (NAg0) exhibited an average transmittance of 86.1% in the visible region. As the amount of the incorporated Ag increased, the average transmittance of the films in the visible region underwent a regular decrease (Fig. 5a), and the NAg10 film displayed an average transmittance of 67.8% (Table S1†). The scattering of incident photons can be one of the possible reasons for this decline in transmittance. XRD analyses showed a decline in crystallinity upon incorporation of silver in the Nb2O5 film. The morphological analysis revealed the formation of a porous structure with enhanced surface roughness in the films with higher amounts of incorporated Ag. Therefore, the porous surface morphology and reduced crystallinity of the films might have contributed to the reduction in the average transmittance. However, a closer observation of the absorption spectra of the films revealed an increase in absorbance in the wavelength region of 400–600 nm upon the incorporation of Ag (Fig. 5b). It is widely known that the absorption properties of a thin semiconducting layer can be enhanced via plasmonic absorption by metal nanoparticles embedded in the semiconducting layer.10,34,35 The underlying mechanism of this plasmonic absorption may arise from the following processes: (i) far-field scattering, (ii) near-field enrichment and (iii) resonant energy transfer.11 However, as the enhancement was achieved simultaneously due to the presence of more than one mechanism, it was difficult to interpret the experimental observations based on a single process. The energy transfer between the excited plasmons and host material can take place via hot electrons that are directly injected into the conduction band edge of the semiconductor36 or by the dephasing of plasmons by means of the generation of excitons in the semiconductor via dipole–dipole interactions between metal nanoparticles and the semiconductor.37 Therefore, the observed decline in transmittance with a higher content of incorporated Ag was attributed to scattering loss in the Nb2O5 film as well as the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)-assisted absorption from Ag nanoparticles.
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical transmittance, (b) absorbance and (c) reflectance spectra of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films on a quartz substrate prepared by the RF magnetron sputtering process and post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C; (d) Tauc plot obtained from the transmittance spectra for band gap energy calculations. 
The absorption edge near the optical band gap obeys eqn (2),38 and the band gap energy is calculated from a Tauc plot (Fig. 5d) by the linear extrapolation of (α2 (hν)) to the energy axis: α(hν) = A(hν − Eg)n(2)
Here, α is the absorption coefficient, and Ea is the optical band gap energy of the semiconductor. In the present case, the best fitted values are obtained for n = 1/2, which indicates the direct nature of the band gap in the films. The values of the band gap energy obtained for the films are in the range of 4.20–4.24 eV and are in agreement with the reported values.39 An intimate contact between metal (Ag) nanoparticles and the host semiconductor material (Nb2O5) can form a Schottky barrier; the conduction band edge of Nb2O5 may suffer a band bending and for that reason, a decrease in the band gap energy of Nb2O5 is expected as observed by Toledo-Antonio et al. for TiO2 nanorods decorated with Ag nanoparticles.33 The shift in the binding energies of Ag 3d and Nb 3d, which is evident from the XPS analysis, also reveals an interaction between the metal nanoparticles and semiconductor. However, the band gap energy (BGE) of the Nb2O5 film exhibits only a small red shift upon the incorporation of silver when compared with that of the pure Nb2O5 film (BGE = 4.20 eV for NAg10 and BGE = 4.24 eV for NAg0). Moreover, a reduction in crystallinity is observed in the structural analysis, and the subsequent augmentation of defect states in the Nb2O5 lattice suggests the possibility of an increase in its BGE.18,40 Thus, it is believed that the conflicting nature of these two mechanisms keeps the optical BGE almost invariable.
The index of refraction (n) and dielectric constant (ε) of the surrounding medium strongly influence the plasmonic properties of metal nanoparticles.41 The values of the refractive index, dielectric constant and thickness of the Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films were obtained via spectroscopic ellipsometry. By employing a three-layer model, namely, quartz/Nb2O5/Nb2O5 + void, the ellipsometric data were fitted using the Delta–Psi software with low χ2 values. The fitted results are shown in Fig. (S3) and Table (S3) (ESI†), and it was seen that the experimental and fitted data matched very well. Fig. S4(a) and S4(b)† show the variations in n and ε of Nb2O5 films of various Ag concentrations as a function of wavelength and both displayed normal dispersion behaviour. The index of refraction for the pure Nb2O5 film gave a value of 2.28 (at a wavelength of 550 nm), which was in agreement with the reported values of n for Nb2O5.16,42 However, an increase in both n and ε was observed for Nb2O5 films when the amount of silver incorporated in the film was increased. With an increase in the amount of silver incorporated in the Nb2O5 films from 0 wt% to 10 wt%, the value of n at λ = 550 nm showed an increase from 2.28 to 2.50 and at the same time, the thickness of the film suffered a sharp decline from 156 nm to 62 nm. The value of the refractive index of a thin film is influenced by the atomic density and atomic mass of the material, and when a heavier atom is incorporated in a host matrix of lighter atoms, the index of refraction may increase. In the present case, the atomic density (∼10.5 × 103 kg m−3) and atomic mass (107.86 u) of silver were higher than those of niobium (atomic density of ∼8.4 × 103 kg m−3 and atomic mass of 92.9 u) and hence, when Ag is incorporated in an Nb2O5 host matrix, the index of refraction can increase. In addition, the decline in the thickness of the film with an increase in the amount of incorporated Ag indicated densification of the film, which may also increase the refractive index. When surrounded by a dielectric medium, the extinction cross-section, Kext, of metal nanoparticles indicates the amount of energy acquired from an incident electromagnetic field due to absorption and/or scattering. For a given wavelength (λ), it can be represented by the following equation:41,43 (3)
Here, R is the radius, ε(λ) = εr + jεi is the complex dielectric function of the metal nanoparticle and εm is the dielectric function of the surrounding medium. At the resonance wavelength of εr = −2εm, the localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) frequency, ωLSP, is given by the expression:41 (4)
Here, N is the electron density in the conduction band, m* is the effective mass of an electron and ε0 is the permittivity in vacuum. The index of refraction (nm) and dielectric constant (εm) of the medium are related by εm ≈ nm2, whereas the LSPR wavelength and index of refraction are related by the following equation:20,41 (5)
Here, λp is the bulk plasmon wavelength. According to eqn (5), the LSPR wavelength of a metal nanoparticle changes with variations in the refractive index of the surrounding medium, and such a shift in the LSPR wavelength was observed by Bose et al. for gold-incorporated WO3 films. Hence, in the present case an increase in the value of n of the host material also led to a red shift in the LSPR wavelength. Surprisingly, no such red shift in the absorption wavelength (Fig. 5b) was observed for the Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films. This was probably due to a reduction in the thickness of the film when the amount of Ag incorporated in the Nb2O5 film was increased. However, when in contact with a strong light-harvesting material such as a dye, Ag nanoparticles in an Nb2O5 host matrix can enhance the absorbance of light via LSPR and can be used for performance enhancement in DSSCs.
In the band structure of crystalline Nb2O5, an Nb atom has an empty 4d band due to the transfer of d electrons to the 2p band of an O atom and therefore, the Fermi level is located near the top of the valence band. Consequently, a defect-free Nb2O5 film can generate a UV emission when excited with a source with energy greater than its energy gap. The presence of crystal defects can also lead to emissions in the visible region. In general, defect-assisted emissions from a transition metal oxide (MxOy) semiconductor are broad in nature and are influenced by various factors such as oxygen vacancies, interstitial oxygen, oxygen antisites, M vacancies, interstitial M and M antisites.44Fig. 6 shows the photoluminescence spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films recorded with an excitation wavelength of 290 nm. The pure Nb2O5 film exhibits a broad PL emission in the visible region, and on deconvolution (inset of Fig. 6), two emission peaks at 419 nm (2.95 eV) and 450 nm (2.75 eV) are observed. These emission peaks may have been due to the presence of defects and/or impurities in the film. For hydrothermally grown Nb2O5 nano-rod arrays, He et al. observed two such emissions at 456 nm and 490 nm at an excitation wavelength of 379 nm, and they attributed these emissions to conduction band-to-acceptor transitions and donor–acceptor pair transitions, respectively.45
 Fig. 6  Photoluminescence spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 thin films at an excitation wavelength of 290 nm. The inset shows the deconvoluted spectrum of the pure Nb2O5 film. All the films underwent post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C. 
The intensity of the PL emission from the Nb2O5 film suffered quenching with the incorporation of a higher amount of Ag. Interestingly, the structural and morphological analysis of the Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films revealed that their crystallinity is reduced and the films became porous with the incorporation of a higher amount of silver. These structural defects enhanced the intensity of the defect-assisted PL emission, but quenching of the emission intensity was observed when the amount of Ag incorporated in the Nb2O5 film was increased; the possible reasons for this effect can be LSPR-related absorption by silver nanoparticles and/or direct electron transfer from the conduction band of Nb2O5 to that of the silver nanoparticles. Since LSPR wavelength of silver nanoparticles is located in the region of 400–600 nm, there is a greater probability of recapturing the PL emission from the Nb2O5 material. This can be the reason for the observed quenching of the emission intensity from the Nb2O5 film.
Plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layer for DSSCs
In DSSC, the absorption of photons and subsequent charge separation take place between dye molecules attached to the surface of a nanocrystalline semiconductor and the electrolyte. The excited electrons are driven into the semiconductor (TiO2) on a femtosecond timescale, which is primarily due to the band edge separation between the dye and TiO2.46,47 Therefore, the photovoltaic performance of DSSC largely depends on the absorption of the dye and subsequent charge transport through various interfacial layers. An indirect way of accomplishing an enhancement in absorption is by incorporating plasmonic nanostructures in close vicinity of the dye, which enables resonant energy transfer between the dye and LSPR-assisted metal nanoparticles. In the present study, the Nb2O5 thin film (with a thickness of ∼40 nm) embedded with silver nanoparticles, which is prepared by the RF magnetron sputtering process on the surface of an FTO glass plate, is intended to act as a plasmonic blocking layer (PBL). The compact Nb2O5 layer is intended to function as a dielectric medium for the plasmonic silver nanoparticles and as an electron-blocking layer for reducing back electron transfer. To adsorb the dye, TiO2 nanoparticles with a size of ∼10 nm are synthesized as reported elsewhere.48
The phase purity of the synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles was ascertained by XRD and micro-Raman spectral analysis, and their morphology and particle size were confirmed from TEM images. The XRD pattern revealed the anatase crystalline phase (JCPDS 71-1169) of the TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. S5a†). The micro-Raman spectrum of the TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. S5b†) displayed bands at 143, 196, 397, 514 and 639 cm−1. The bands observed at 143, 196 and 639 cm−1 were assigned to Eg modes, and the bands at 397 and 514 cm−1 were assigned to B1g and A1g modes, respectively; these bands were identified as Raman bands representing the anatase phase of TiO2.49 Even though the rutile phase of TiO2 exhibited a weak but sharp band at 143 cm−1, the absence of its other prominent bands ascertained that the strong intense band at 143 cm−1 observed in the present case was due to the anatase phase.50 Furthermore, the lattice spacing of 0.35 nm measured from a high-resolution TEM image (Fig. S5d†) fitted to the (101) plane of the anatase phase of TiO2, and this validated the above observation. The TEM image revealed the spherical shape of the synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles, and the average size of the particles was found to be ∼10 nm (Fig. S5c†).
A thick layer (∼6.5 μm, Fig. S6†) of a highly porous TiO2 adsorbing layer was deposited on the plasmonic as well as pure Nb2O5 blocking layer by the spray pyrolysis deposition method. The photoanodes were immersed in a 0.5 mM solution of N719 dye (prepared in acetonitrile/tert-butanol with a 1:1 ratio) for 24 h for maximum physisorption of the dye. The absorption spectra of the dye-sensitized photoanodes with pure Nb2O5 BL as well as those of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 BLs with different silver concentrations were recorded and are shown in Fig. 7(a). The absorption spectra of all the photoanodes before dye loading were also recorded; however, as these spectra did not display any variations among them, a representative spectrum of only one sample (NAg0) was shown in the figure. The absorption spectrum of this sample after dye loading (FNAg0) showed two broad peaks at 404 nm and 540 nm, and these peaks were attributed to the metal centre-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) in the dye molecule.51 On the other hand, the absorption peak of the dye was pH-sensitive, and the absorption spectrum of the dye unloaded from the photoanodes (inset picture, Fig. 7a) in an NaOH solution displayed two bands at 368 nm and 500 nm. The red shift observed for these bands in the absorption spectra of the dye-sensitized photoanodes may have been due to a strong interaction between the dye and the TiO2 surface through carboxyl groups, leading to the lowering of pH value.52
 Fig. 7  (a) Absorption spectra of dye-loaded photoanodes with plasmonic Nb2O5 compact layer incorporating silver nanoparticles at 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 wt%. The inset shows the absorption spectrum of N719 dye unloaded from the photoanodes in an NaOH solution. (b) Difference between the absorbances of the plasmonic blocking layer (3 wt% Ag) and the non-plasmonic blocking layer showing absorption peaks in the wavelength regions of 437, 498 and 631 nm confirming the occurrence of localized surface plasmon-assisted enhancement due to Ag nanoparticles in the PBLs. 
All the photoanodes with Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 BL showed improved absorbance when compared with photoanodes with pure Nb2O5 BL, and this indicated plasmonic absorption by silver nanoparticles. As was discussed earlier, this improvement may have been due to various factors such as far-field scattering, near-field enrichment and resonant energy transfer due to plasmonic metal nanoparticles.11 To get a clear picture of the plasmonic enhancement, the difference between the absorbances of a plasmonic photoanode (FNAg3) and non-plasmonic photoanode (FNAg0) was calculated and is presented in Fig. 7b. If the increase in absorption by the plasmonic photoanode was due to an increase in dye loading, the difference between the absorbances of FNAg3 and FNAg0 would be highly linear, whereas in the present case it was highly nonlinear and displayed three distinct peaks at 437, 498 and 631 nm. These peaks, which were widely shifted from the absorption peaks of the dye, might have originated from the plasmonic resonant energy transfer between silver nanoparticles and the dye. Since the LSPR wavelength of silver nanoparticles is size-dependant, the three distinct peaks observed in the spectrum suggested that the sizes of the sputtered Ag nanoparticles were non-uniform. The absorption spectra of the dyes unloaded from different photoanodes (inset picture, Fig. 7a) displayed almost identical absorbance behaviour, and this implied that the amount of dye adsorbed onto the photoanodes was almost the same and also reinstated the fact that the amplification achieved in the silver-incorporated photoanodes was indeed plasmon-assisted.
DSSCs were fabricated with pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 BLs using an iodide/tri-iodide liquid electrolyte as the redox mediator for an active area of 0.2 cm2. The deposition sequence used for the fabrication of the DSSCs is shown in Fig. 8a, and an energy level diagram of the various interfacial layers involved in the manufacture of the cells together with the charge transport after irradiation with light is shown in Fig. 8c. The completed DSSC architecture with an external load connection is depicted in Fig. 8b. Silver at concentrations of 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 wt% was incorporated in the blocking layer, and the corresponding devices were coded as FNAg1, FNAg3, FNAg5, FNAg7 and FNAg10, respectively. The device with a pure Nb2O5 BL was coded as FNAg0. A plain cell without a blocking layer was also fabricated as a control device. A set of 15 devices was fabricated for each concentration, and the average values of the efficiencies of the best 10 devices with standard deviations are displayed in Table 1. The J–V characteristics of the best DSSCs are shown in Fig. 9a, and their important photovoltaic parameters are displayed in Table 1. The plain cell displayed an efficiency of 6.19% and a fill factor of 66.22%. It produced an open-circuit voltage of 0.76 V and a current density of 12.18 mA cm−2. By placing an Nb2O5 blocking layer at the FTO/TiO2 interface, the photovoltaic performance of the device (FNAg0) was improved by ∼23% when compared with that of the plain cell. In this cell, the efficiency as well as the fill factor increased to 7.6% and 69.14%, respectively. The open-circuit voltage displayed a small increase to 0.77 V, and the current density increased to 14.23 mA cm−2. The increase in the current density was ascribed to the Nb2O5 blocking layer owing to its better prevention of back electron transfer involving the FTO/TiO2 interface. The pinhole-free dielectric interface not only prevented the liquid electrolyte from direct contact with the working electrode but it also served as an innate energy barrier for electrons, precluding them from being deactivated by holes in the redox mediator. Le Viet et al. reported that the wider band gap along with a higher conduction band edge in contrast to TiO2 may bring about a better open-circuit voltage in Nb2O5 photoanodes.53 For this reason, the improvement observed in the FNAg0 cell was attributed to a shift in the Fermi level towards the conduction band of TiO2 owing to the presence of the crystalline Nb2O5 blocking layer.
 Fig. 8  (a) Deposition sequence used in the fabrication of DSSCs with a plasmonic blocking layer; (b) completed cell architecture with external load connection, the inset shows a silver nanoparticle wrapped by an Nb2O5 blocking layer after sputtering; (c) energy level diagram of various interfacial layers and the subsequent charge transport after photon excitation. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Jsc–V characteristics of DSSCs fabricated with Nb2O5 blocking layer and a plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layer with silver concentrations of 1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%; (b) IPCE spectra of DSSCs with non-plasmonic and plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layers. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs fabricated with photoanodes containing pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 blocking layers with Ag contents of 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 wt%, respectively




Sample code

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (%)
Efficiency (%)




Plain
0.76
12.18
66.22
6.19 ± 0.11


FNAg0
0.77
14.23
69.14
7.6 ± 0.33


FNAg1
0.78
15.08
69.87
8.17 ± 0.19


FNAg3
0.78
17.33
69.11
9.24 ± 0.21


FNAg5
0.78
16.44
71.01
9.06 ± 0.20


FNAg7
0.76
14.58
67.64
7.47 ± 0.09


FNAg10
0.76
11.74
65.85
5.85 ± 0.12




In DSSCs with silver incorporated in Nb2O5 BL, a systematic increase in current density and efficiency (Fig. S7a and b†) was observed up to an Ag incorporation of 3 wt% and thereafter, the efficiency and current density decreased. The efficiency of DSSC increased to 8.17% when 1 wt% of Ag was added (FNAg1) and reached a maximum value of 9.24% when 3 wt% of Ag was incorporated in Nb2O5 BL. The further addition of Ag in Nb2O5 BL resulted in lower performance and when 7 wt% of Ag was incorporated, the efficiency was reduced to a value of 7.47%, which was lower than that in the DSSC with non-plasmonic blocking layer. When 10 wt% of Ag was incorporated, the efficiency was further reduced to 5.85% with a fill factor of 65.85%. The increase in current density was attributed to the plasmonic effect of silver nanoparticles embedded in Nb2O5 BL. When light was incident on DSSC, the silver nanoparticles surrounded by the dielectric medium began a resonant energy transfer between LSPR-assisted Ag nanoparticles and the dye adsorbed onto TiO2 surface sites. The enhanced absorbance observed in the wavelength region of 400–600 nm in the absorption spectra of the dye-loaded photoanodes with a plasmonic blocking layer (PBL) (Fig. 7a) validated this observation. However, the increase in absorption observed in the entire absorption region of the dye for photoanodes with PBL indicated the presence of far-field scattering and near-field enrichment. The IPCE spectra (Fig. 9b) recorded for the cells with PBL also displayed an enhancement in the entire absorption region of the dye. Since, the silver nanoparticles were distributed randomly on the surface of the transparent electrode (FTO), reflection and scattering events may take place simultaneously. Fig. S8a (ESI†) shows the reflectance spectra of Nb2O5 PBL and Nb2O5 non-PBL, and their average reflectance is shown in the inset. It is observed that the average reflectance increased exponentially with an increase in the amount of incorporated Ag. The transmittance spectra of Nb2O5 PBL (Fig. S8b†) also exhibited a decreased transmittance with an increase in the amount of incorporated Ag. Surprisingly, even with this enhanced reflection of photons from the incident photon flux caused by silver nanoparticles, all DSSCs with PBL showed better current densities when compared with non-PBL DSSC. This strongly suggested that the observed increase in photocurrents may also have been due to far-field scattering, which multiplied the optical path length of photons inside the cell and hence increased the probability of dye absorption and the subsequent charge generation. Accordingly, the champion cell with a plasmonic blocking layer (FNAg3) exhibited an increase of 22% in its current density when compared with its non-plasmonic counterpart (FNAg0).
The open-circuit voltage of the DSSCs with PBL displayed a marginal increase of ∼10 mV in the FNAg1, FNAg3 and FNAg5 cells when compared with that of the non-PBL cell (Table 1). This improvement can be explained as follows: the strong interaction between the metal nano-particles and the semiconductor (Ag@Nb2O5) was evident from the XPS analysis on account of the shift in their respective binding energies. Hence, when Ag@Nb2O5 was placed in close vicinity of the TiO2/dye matrix, the metal nano-particles could accept electrons from the matrix under light illumination. Such storing of charge may lead to equilibration of the Fermi level equilibration and as a result, the Fermi level may shift to a more negative potential and an increase in open-circuit voltage can be expected.13 In the present study, this increase was about 20 mV with respect to that of the plain cell and 10 mV with respect to that of the non-PBL cell. Choi H et al. observed an increase of 42 mV with TiO2–gold nanoparticles, whereas with SiO2-capped gold nanoparticles, the same group found little change in the open-circuit voltage.13 This showed that when metal nanoparticles re capped with a dielectric medium with a large band gap, the increase in the open-circuit voltage is greater when the Fermi level of the metal nanoparticle and the conduction band edge of the surrounding material are as close as possible. In the case of Nb2O5, its conduction band edge was located above that of TiO2 and hence, the separation between the Fermi level of Ag nanoparticles and the conduction band of Nb2O5 was greater when compared with that for Ag with TiO2. Therefore, the shift in the Fermi level on account of Fermi level equilibration was less for Ag capped with Nb2O5 when compared with the results when Ag was capped with TiO2. Thus, the observed marginal increase in the open-circuit voltage of cells with PBL justified this observation.
Now the question is why did the photocurrent density decrease (Table 1) in the cell when the amount of silver incorporated in BL exceeded 5 wt%. The answer to this question was deduced from the structural and morphological analysis of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films. Therein, we saw that defect states in the Nb2O5 film increased with the incorporation of larger amounts of Ag (Fig. 1), and the surface morphology changed from a smooth pinhole-free surface to a rough and porous surface. In our earlier study, we reported that a defect-rich Nb2O5 BL will promote charge recombination and reduce the current density in DSSC.15 In addition, with a porous BL, the liquid electrolyte may leak through and develop a short-circuit path with the transparent electrode, which can further diminish the cell performance. For these reasons, the cell performance declined with the incorporation of larger amounts of Ag. In fact, when 10 wt% of silver was incorporated, the cell performance was exceptionally low and the efficiency was reduced to 5.85%, which was less than that of a plain cell.
Therefore, when the amount of Ag incorporated in PBL increases, a competition between plasmon-assisted enhancement of absorption and defect state-promoted charge recombination takes place in DSSC. To demonstrate these extraordinary charge transfer mechanisms, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of DSSCs was conducted in the frequency region from 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz at an applied bias potential of −0.73 V in the dark.54–56Fig. 10 displays the Nyquist plots (measured and fitted data) and Bode plots for representative cells (cell with a non-plasmonic BL and cell with a PBL having 3 wt% and 7 wt% Ag, respectively), and the inset picture of Fig. 10a shows the model circuit used for fitting the measured data. Table 2 shows the interfacial charge transfer resistance (Rct), electron life time (τn), electron transport time (τs), charge collection efficiency (η) and chemical capacitance (Cμ) of the cells determined after fitting the data. The Nyquist plots for DSSCs (Fig. 10a) consist of two semicircles: one in the high-frequency zone along with another in the mid-frequency zone and these two semicircles are related to the charge transfer processes at the electrolyte/Pt electrode interface and TiO2-dye/electrolyte interface, respectively.54 The series resistance (Rs) of the device was calculated from the meeting point of the high-frequency semicircle with the real axis and was found to be lower in cells with a plasmonic blocking layer when compared with that in cells with a non-plasmonic blocking layer. In addition, the interfacial charge transfer resistance Rct also decreased considerably when the amount of Ag incorporated in BL was 7 wt%, which indicated the promotional effect of charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface.56 Surprisingly, both electron transport time (τs = Rs × Cμ)57,58 and the electron lifetime (τn = Rct × Cμ)57,58 were reduced after an increase in the Ag content in the plasmonic blocking layer, whereas the charge collection efficiency (η = [1 + (Rs/Rct)]−1)57,58 showed an increase for DSSCs with a PBL.
 Fig. 10  (a) Nyquist plots and (b) Bode plots for DSSCs with a non-plasmonic blocking layer (FNAg0) and a plasmonic blocking layer with Ag incorporated in amounts of 3 wt% (FNAg3) and 7 wt% (FNAg7), respectively. The inset in (a) shows the electrical equivalent circuit model used for fitting. 
Table 2 Results of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis of DSSCs with non-plasmonic and plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layers. (The EIS spectra were recorded at −0.73 V in the dark in the frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz)




Sample code

R
s (Ω)

C
μ (μF)

R
CT (Ω)

τ
s (ms)

τ
n (ms)

η
c (%)




FNAg0
29.74
9.8
130.75
0.29
1.28
81.5


FNAg3
10.00
9.14
128
0.09
1.17
92.8


FNAg7
13.01
7.66
94.55
0.01
0.72
87.9




The charge transfer resistance (Rct) suffered a decrease when higher amounts of Ag were incorporated in PBL, this observation was contrary to the observations in previous reports in which Ag nanoparticles were embedded directly onto the TiO2 porous layer in plasmonic DSSCs.59,60 In fact, Rct represented the combined effect of RTCO (charge transfer resistance involving the interface of the bare TCO with the electrolyte) and Rr (charge transfer resistance involving the TiO2-dye/electrolyte interface).61 In the present study, since Ag was incorporated along with Nb2O5 BL at the TCO/TiO2 interface, any morphological/structural modifications at this interface may change the value of RTCO and consequently, the inclusive charge transfer resistance of the DSSC may be modified. The structural and morphological analysis of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films proved that when higher amounts of Ag were incorporated, the Nb2O5 film became porous and its crystallinity was reduced. Therefore, an Ag@Nb2O5 film at the TCO/TiO2 interface reduced the value of RTCO when higher amounts of Ag were incorporated due to enhanced recombination, which could be the reason for the decrease in the Rct value and the subsequent short electron lifetime (τn). From the I–V characteristics, we observed that the FNAg7 cell exhibited a lower Jsc value when compared with the FNAg3 cell, which substantiated these findings. Even with these shortcomings, DSSCs with PBL displayed a better Jsc value due to strong LSPR.
The presence of Ag on the surface of TCO reduced the value of Rs, as is clear from the EIS analysis and hence, the electron transport time (τs) was reduced. For this reason, the charge collection efficiency of DSSCs with PBL showed better values when compared with that of the FNAg0 cell. van de Lagemaat et al. reported that a charge created near the TCO surface had a greater probability of being collected than a charge created at a farther distance. Furthermore, an electron injected in close vicinity of the TCO/TiO2 interface had a probability of being collected that is close to unity.54 In this study, Ag nanoparticles were placed at the TCO/TiO2 interface, and the LSPR-assisted enhancement of absorption and subsequent increase in charge generation occurred very close to the TCO surface, which could be the reason for the improved collection efficiency of DSSCs with PBL.
4. Conclusions
Plasmonic silver nanoparticles were introduced into a dye-sensitized solar cell through Nb2O5 blocking layer prepared by a simple one-step sputtering process. The effect of the silver nanoparticles on the Nb2O5 thin film was also investigated, and it was found that the incorporation of a larger amount of Ag in the Nb2O5 matrix deteriorated its crystallinity as well as changed its surface morphology. The TEM image showed the formation of a thin covering of an Nb2O5 layer over Ag nanoparticles. The luminescence quenching observed in silver-incorporated Nb2O5 films supported the plasmonic behavior of the embedded Ag nanoparticles. The plasmonic blocking layer enhanced the absorption of photons by the dye via localized surface plasmon resonance, which was corroborated by the increase in photocurrent observed in these cells when compared with that in the cells having a non-plasmonic blocking layer. The presence of a Schottky barrier at the Ag/Nb2O5 interface together with the Fermi level equilibration of the Ag nanoparticles with that of the photoanode was instrumental in increasing, albeit marginally, the open-circuit voltage. The best cell performance was achieved when 3 wt% of Ag was incorporated in the Nb2O5 blocking layer. However, when larger amounts of Ag (7 and 10 wt%) were incorporated in the Nb2O5 blocking layer, the cell performance was reduced, which was primarily due to the reduced crystallinity of the Nb2O5 blocking layer and an increase in the reflection of light from Ag nanoparticles. This study introduced the concept of a plasmonic blocking layer formed from Ag nanoparticles and Nb2O5 in a simple one-step procedure, and also achieved an improvement in cell performance comparable with those of the more complex and costlier procedures of the separate synthesis of metal nanoparticles and their subsequent blending with the TiO2 photoanode.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Mr S. Suresh thanks the University Grants Commission (FIP/12th Pan/KLKE059 TF-20), New Delhi, India for granting the teacher fellowship through the faculty development programme. The authors thank Chengsheng NI, Associate Professor, College of Resources and Environment, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, PR China for fitting the EIS data. We thank Dr Mariyappan Shanmugam of the Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita University for his valuable suggestions.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
L. M. Gonçalves, V. de Zea Bermudez, H. A. Ribeiro and A. M. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 655 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443 CAS .
L. Li, S. Chen, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, N. G. Rudawski and K. J. Ziegler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20978–20984 CAS .
K. Zhu, E. A. Schiff, N. G. Park, J. Van De Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 685–687 CrossRef CAS .
U. Sulaeman and A. Zuhairi Abdullah, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 74, 438–452 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Ritchie, Phys. Rev., 1957, 106, 874–881 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Stern and R. A. Ferrell, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120, 130–136 CrossRef .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 865–865 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jang, Y. J. Jang, S. Kim, L. N. Quan, K. Chung and D. H. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(24), 14982–15034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577–1601 CAS .
H. Choi, W. T. Chen and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4418–4427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8092–8097 CAS .
S. Suresh, T. G. Deepak, C. Ni, C. N. O. Sreekala, M. Satyanarayana, A. S. Nair and V. P. M. Pillai, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6228–6237 RSC .
S. Suresh, G. E. Unni, C. Ni, R. S. Sreedharan, R. R. Krishnan, M. Satyanarayana, M. Shanmugam and V. P. M. Pillai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 720–732 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Bose, R. S. Sreedharan, R. R. Krishnan, V. R. Reddy, M. Gupta, V. Ganesan, S. K. Sudheer and V. P. M. Pillai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 145, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Chalana, V. Ganesan and V. P. Mahadevan Pillai, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 0–17 CAS .
R. J. Bose, R. Vinod Kumar, S. K. Sudheer, V. R. Reddy, V. Ganesan and V. P. Mahadevan Pillai, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 114311–114319 CrossRef .
R. J. Bose, V. S. Kavitha, C. Sudarsanakumar and V. P. M. Pillai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 379, 505–515 CrossRef CAS .
N. Illyaskutty, S. Sreedhar, H. Kohler, R. Philip, V. Rajan and V. P. M. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7818–7829 CAS .

          B. D. Cullity, Elements of X-ray diffraction, Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Read, MA,  1978, vol. 100, 105–279 Search PubMed .
K. N. Yu, Y. H. Xiong, Y. L. Liu and C. S. Xiong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 2666–2671 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Jehng and I. E. Wachs, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, C. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Qiao, L. Ling and D. Long, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol and K. D. Bomben, Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy,  1992, vol. 3 Search PubMed .
B. Gao, J. Fu, K. Huo, W. Zhang, Y. Xie and P. K. Chu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 2330–2338 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Naumkin, A. Kraut-Vass, C. J. Powell and S. Gaarenstroom, NIST Standard Reference Database 20 version 4.1, http://srdata.nist.gov/xps Search PubMed .
N. Ozer and C. M. Lampert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 54, 147 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fontaine, R. Caillat, L. Feve and M. J. Guittet, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1977, 10, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Bahl, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1975, 36, 485–491 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Toledo-Antonio, M. A. Cortes-Jácome, C. Angeles-Chavez, E. Lopez-Salinas and P. Quintana, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10195–10201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Stuart and D. G. Hall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 2327 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Stuart and D. G. Hall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3815–3817 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C. J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362–7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tauc, Opt. Acta: Int. J. Opt., 1974, 17, 952–952 Search PubMed .
R. A. Rani, A. S. Zoolfakar, A. P. O'Mullane, M. W. Austin and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15683–15703 CAS .
G. Sanal Kumar, N. Illyaskutty, S. Suresh, R. S. Sreedharan, V. U. Nayar and V. P. M. Pillai, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 698, 215–227 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Zhao, Q.-Y. Cai, Y.-X. Zheng, J.-B. Zhang, S.-D. Yang, L. Yang, Z.-H. Liu, R.-J. Zhang, S.-Y. Wang and L.-Y. Chen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 265304 CrossRef .
T. Ung, M. Giersig, D. Dunstan and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 1773–1782 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sreedharan, R. R. Krishnan, R. J. Bose, V. S. Kavitha, S. Suresh, R. Vinodkumar, S. K. Sudheer and V. P. M. Pillai, J. Lumin., 2017, 184, 273–286 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Hu, Z. Wang, W. Lu, S. Yang, Y. Wang, S. Wang, H. Gu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8185–8190 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 20056–20062 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthorl, A. J. Nozik, M. Gratzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Deepak, G. S. Anjusree, K. R. N. Pai, D. Subash, S. V. Nair and A. S. Nair, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23299–23303 RSC .
T. Ohsaka, F. Izumi and Y. Fujiki, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1978, 7, 321–324 CrossRef .
S. P. S. Porto, P. A. Fleury and T. C. Damen, Phys. Rev., 1967, 154, 522–526 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Jones and M. A. Fox, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5095–5099 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakoshi, G. Kano, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida, H. Miyazaki, M. Matsumoto and S. Murasawa, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 396, 27–34 CrossRef .
A. Le Viet, R. Jose, M. V. Reddy, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21795–21800 CAS .
J. van de Lagemaat, N.-G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2044–2052 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945–14953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17715–17718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7084–7092 CAS .
S. P. Lim, A. Pandikumar, H. N. Lim, R. Ramaraj and N. M. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11922 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jiang, H. Liu, L. Yin and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6433–6440 CAS .
F. Fabregatsantiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garciabelmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117–131 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural and optical parameters, micro-Raman spectra, AFM images, reflectance spectra, ellipsometric data and variations in n and ε values of pure and Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films. XRD, micro-Raman spectrum and TEM images of TiO2 nanoparticles. Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of photoanode. Variations in VOC, JSC, FF and η values of the DSSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt04825dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction patterns of pure Nb2O5 film (NAg0) and Nb2O5 films incorporated with 1, 3, 5 and 10 wt% of Ag prepared by the RF magnetron sputtering process on a quartz substrate and post-deposition annealed at a temperature of 600 °C.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  XPS spectra of pure and silver-incorporated (5 wt% and 10 wt%) Nb2O5 films. (a) Survey spectra of Nb2O5 and Ag-Nb2O5 films; (b) fine spectra of Nb 3p and Ag 3d; (c) fine spectra of Nb 3d; and deconvoluted fine spectra of Nb 3d for (d) NAg0, (e) NAg5 and (f) NAg10 samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  FESEM images of Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films prepared on a quartz substrate by an RF magnetron sputtering process: (a) NAg0 (pure Nb2O5 film); (b to e) NAg1, NAg3, NAg5 and NAg10 (1, 3, 5, and 10 wt% of Ag in Nb2O5 films); (f) EDX spectra of pure and Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films (NAg0 to NAg10). All the films underwent post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) the NAg3 film showing a random distribution of Ag nanoparticles, (b) a spherical Ag nanoparticle with a size of 21.6 nm covered by an Nb2O5 layer of 2 nm, and (c) Nb2O5 covering an Ag nanoparticle; (d) HRTEM image of Ag nanoparticles showing a lattice spacing of 0.24 nm corresponding to the [111] plane.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical transmittance, (b) absorbance and (c) reflectance spectra of Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 films on a quartz substrate prepared by the RF magnetron sputtering process and post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C; (d) Tauc plot obtained from the transmittance spectra for band gap energy calculations.	 
α(hν) = A(hν − Eg)n	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  Photoluminescence spectra of pure and Ag-incorporated Nb2O5 thin films at an excitation wavelength of 290 nm. The inset shows the deconvoluted spectrum of the pure Nb2O5 film. All the films underwent post-deposition annealing at a temperature of 600 °C.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Absorption spectra of dye-loaded photoanodes with plasmonic Nb2O5 compact layer incorporating silver nanoparticles at 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 wt%. The inset shows the absorption spectrum of N719 dye unloaded from the photoanodes in an NaOH solution. (b) Difference between the absorbances of the plasmonic blocking layer (3 wt% Ag) and the non-plasmonic blocking layer showing absorption peaks in the wavelength regions of 437, 498 and 631 nm confirming the occurrence of localized surface plasmon-assisted enhancement due to Ag nanoparticles in the PBLs.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Deposition sequence used in the fabrication of DSSCs with a plasmonic blocking layer; (b) completed cell architecture with external load connection, the inset shows a silver nanoparticle wrapped by an Nb2O5 blocking layer after sputtering; (c) energy level diagram of various interfacial layers and the subsequent charge transport after photon excitation.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Jsc–V characteristics of DSSCs fabricated with Nb2O5 blocking layer and a plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layer with silver concentrations of 1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%; (b) IPCE spectra of DSSCs with non-plasmonic and plasmonic Nb2O5 blocking layers.	 

Plain	0.76	12.18	66.22	6.19 ± 0.11
FNAg0	0.77	14.23	69.14	7.6 ± 0.33
FNAg1	0.78	15.08	69.87	8.17 ± 0.19
FNAg3	0.78	17.33	69.11	9.24 ± 0.21
FNAg5	0.78	16.44	71.01	9.06 ± 0.20
FNAg7	0.76	14.58	67.64	7.47 ± 0.09
FNAg10	0.76	11.74	65.85	5.85 ± 0.12

 	Fig. 10  (a) Nyquist plots and (b) Bode plots for DSSCs with a non-plasmonic blocking layer (FNAg0) and a plasmonic blocking layer with Ag incorporated in amounts of 3 wt% (FNAg3) and 7 wt% (FNAg7), respectively. The inset in (a) shows the electrical equivalent circuit model used for fitting.	 

FNAg0	29.74	9.8	130.75	0.29	1.28	81.5
FNAg3	10.00	9.14	128	0.09	1.17	92.8
FNAg7	13.01	7.66	94.55	0.01	0.72	87.9
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural and optical parameters, micro-Raman spectra, AFM images, reflectance spectra, ellipsometric data and variations in n and ε values of pure and Ag-incorporating Nb2O5 films. XRD, micro-Raman spectrum and TEM images of TiO2 nanoparticles. Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of photoanode. Variations in VOC, JSC, FF and η values of the DSSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt04825d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
