Fast fabrication of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO using a perfect colloidal monolayer enabled by a predictive self-assemb ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA00125H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00125H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5943-5951Fast fabrication of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO using a perfect colloidal monolayer enabled by a predictive self-assembly method†

        
          
            Yizhi 
            Wu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Chen‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yunxi 
            Liu§
, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoliang 
            Xu¶
*, 
      
        
          
            Zhou 
            Yang||
, 
      
        
          
            Haiming 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Liu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Zhang
          
        
      
School of Science, Tianjin Polytechnic University, Tianjin, 300387, China. E-mail: wuyizhi@tjpu.edu.cn; xlxu@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      5th January 2017
    , Accepted 23rd February 2017First published on 23rd February 2017AbstractDust greatly influences the light transmittance of solar panels and their corresponding photovoltaic (PV) performance. However, this critical issue (dust resistance for PV devices) has not been given much attention. In this work, a new self-cleaning coating is proposed to address this problem. The coating consists of patterned scallion-like zinc oxide (ZnO), which is hydrothermally grown on a colloidal monolayer template. The crystallization and fluorescence properties of the scallion-like ZnO are quite good. This self-cleaning coating can reduce the light reflection of the PV device as well as convert the ultraviolet (UV) photons into visible photons, thus reducing light-induced degradation of amorphous silicon PV devices. Also, the surface of this coating possesses superhydrophobic properties, with a water contact angle (CA) larger than 150° and a sliding angle (SA) less than 10°, after modification with heptadecafluorodecyltrimethoxysilane (HTMS). Most importantly, a predictive self-assembly method enabled by Monte Carlo (MC) simulation is developed to obtain a wafer-scale colloidal monolayer consisting of hexagonal-close-packed polystyrene (PS) spheres. This method combines spin-coating with thermal treatment which plays a key role in forming a high-quality colloidal monolayer. As commonly known, identifying the optimized self-assembly temperature through experiments is a great challenge and no studies are located in the literature investigating predictive self-assembly of the colloidal monolayer. Herein, we develop MC simulation to predict the optimized temperature of the colloidal monolayer self-assembly, which can effectively reduce experimental burden, and then fabricate a wafer-scale colloidal monolayer with high quality for the first time.
Introduction
The transmittance diminishment of solar cells caused by dust accumulation is more than 52.54% every year,1 which greatly reduces the overall power conversion efficiency. Thus a self-cleaning coating characterized by super-hydrophobicity is highly desirable to prevent the accumulation of dust on photovoltaic (PV) devices. However, most currently available papers on self-cleaning are not targeted for solar cells.2–6 For example, Wang and his co-workers2 reported superhydrophobic surfaces consisting of a bean sprout-like copper structure via a facile surface oxidation approach. Those fabricated surfaces cannot be transferred to solar cells due to in situ etching of copper foil and low light transmittance nature. Many others just applied super-wetting membranes to various oil–water separation processes.4 Here, we report a new method of constructing a self-cleaning coating, which is patterned with nano-scale scallion-like zinc oxide (ZnO) via the hydrothermal technique7 using the colloidal monolayer as the template. This coating has a water contact angle (CA) larger than 150° and a sliding angle (SA) less than 10°, after being modified by heptadecafluorodecyltrimethoxysilane (HTMS). Besides, the properties of crystallization and photoluminescence of the scallion-like ZnO are also investigated for the application of PV devices.
Although enormous research efforts8–10 have been devoted to synthesizing ZnO nanostructures, the use of colloidal lithography in the case of wet chemical synthesis is still rare and patterned arrays of ZnO have mainly been demonstrated using vapor-phase methods.11 In this paper, we show a time-saving, inexpensive and versatile method for fabrication of patterned ZnO nanostructures, which combines the hydrothermal synthesis approach with the spin-coating approach assisted by Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. Our proposed method is greatly different from previous studies in terms of procedures.11–13 In previous reports, photolithography or microstamping is needed to create the periodical nucleation of ZnO on a substrate,12,13 which is of low sample output and high sample cost. Moreover, interface-mediated processes11,14–16 are required, making those methods generally time consuming.
To fabricate patterned ZnO nanostructures via colloidal lithography using wet chemical synthesis, a colloidal monolayer is needed as a template. The preferred method to assemble a colloidal monolayer is the interface-mediated technique14,17 for its inherent benefits of less restriction of substrates and nature of formation of monolayers. One disadvantage of the interface-mediated process is that it is time consuming.11,18 It may take several hours or even more than one day to fabricate one batch. The spin-coating method offers an alternative strategy to overcome the drawbacks mentioned above. And there are only a few reports19–21 using spin-coating to prepare colloidal monolayers. Fischer's group19 directly spread a droplet of latex spheres on the glass and harvested a colloidal monolayer of 10 μm in length. The obtained crystal has imperfections including point defects, dislocations and grain boundaries. Li and his coworkers have much improved the colloidal crystal (2 cm × 2 cm) consisting of PS spheres (with a diameter of ≥ 1 μm) by the spin-coating method,21,22 and the PS sphere arrays should be further improved (including the crystal area and crystalline quality). Very recently, thermal treatment, which plays a key role in forming high-quality colloidal monolayers, was introduced to improve the quality of colloidal monolayers using the spin-coating technique.20 A lot of experiments must be performed to obtain the colloidal monolayer of high quality,20 which is mainly caused by the cumbersome process of identifying the optimized parameters via experiments.20,23,24 Unlike the choice of parameters of spin-coating, such as latex concentration, final spin-coating speed and spin-coating time, which can be guided by available theory, the optimum temperature parameter is a great challenge.25 Herein, we improve the theory of polystyrene (PS) sphere self-assembly based on thermal treatment, and then simulate the self-assembly process with the MC method.26 With the help of MC simulation, we are able to predict the optimized self-assembly temperature and fast fabrication of colloidal monolayers with high crystalline quality can be achieved (within half an hour). Only a few experiments are needed to achieve the colloidal monolayer with “best quality”. It is worthwhile to mention here that the simulation of latex sphere crystallization is challenging work and only a few publications are available to date.27–29 Skjeltorp's group presented an experimental study of crack growth in a two-dimensional system, with a monolayer of uniformly sized microspheres confined between two parallel sheets of glass and simulated the fracture in microsphere monolayers.29 It is indifferent from the process of aggregation behavior of PS spheres. For a many-body system consisting of PS spheres, it is difficult to describe the dynamics of the self-assembly process. We deal with this problem by an energy approach and introduce the potential energy of the capillary force,30 which predominates over the self-assembly process. With the aid of numerical simulation, the optimum temperature to fabricate a wafer-scale and highly ordered colloidal monolayer with few defects can be quickly achieved. To our knowledge, we are the first to harvest high-quality self-assembled colloidal monolayers using thermal treatment with the assistance of MC simulation.
Results and discussion
A simple cartoon of the procedure to achieve scallion-like ZnO is shown in Scheme 1. The sample is coated with a thin film of latex using spin-coating (Scheme 1(a)). The details of spin-coating have been well documented by Middleman.31 Briefly, a certain volume of PS latex solution is deposited onto the substrate and the latex spreads all over the surface after spin coating. Considering that the final film thickness is inversely proportional to the final spin speed and the square root of the final time of spin-coating, we set moderate spin-coating parameters, namely 3500 rpm for 30 seconds, to achieve the thin latex film. To improve the quality of the colloidal monolayer, the sample is then quickly transferred to an electric thermostatic drying oven for thermal treatment. When the latex film is dried, a monolayer colloidal crystal is formed (Scheme 1(b)). We should point out that thermal treatment plays a very important role in harvesting high-quality colloidal monolayers. However, a large number of experiments are needed to identify the optimum temperature of self-assembly through experiments. Herein, we develop a model to predict the optimum temperature of self-assembly based on MC simulation. Subsequently, a patterned ZnO seed (Scheme 1(d)) is prepared via our obtained colloidal monolayer and magnetron sputtering (Scheme 1(c)). Finally, scallion-like ZnO is successfully synthesized in aqueous solution containing Zn(NO3)3·6H2O and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT).
 Scheme 1  Fast fabrication of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO. (a) Spin-coating process; (b) sample after thermal treatment; (c) depositing ZnO via the colloidal monolayer; (d) ZnO seed after removing the colloidal monolayer (top view); (e) fabrication of ZnO in nutrient solution; (f) scallion-like ZnO. 
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) can quantificationally evaluate the lattice ordering of the colloidal crystal.32 The detailed process may refer to ESI S7.† Briefly, for a perfect lattice, the sharp bright spots can be approximated by an array of delta functions. In contrast, the magnitude of a harmonic in a disordered lattice decreases with the harmonic index. Each sample is examined based on a series of SEM images taken from 18 equidistant positions at 1 mm separation across the sample. And the SEM images were captured with the same magnification, brightness, and contrast along the direction normal to the film. Fig. 1(a) shows that the PS spheres are packed in a loose way at the low temperature (35 °C), which is caused by the weak capillary attraction. Another phenomenon shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a) is that multilayer spheres may exist at the low temperature. It can be explained as follows: the Brownian motion is not strong enough to thoroughly scatter the multilayer spheres into monolayer ones. With increasing the temperature of self-assembly, the liquid evaporates more quickly and hence the capillary attraction becomes stronger, leading to more close-packed PS spheres compared to the low temperature condition. We can see that the spheres gradually become close-packed when the temperature of self-assembly reaches 65 °C (Fig. 1(b)). It is confirmed that the magnitude of the first harmonic of the crystal obtained at 65 °C (M1 = 17.5) is higher than that of the crystal obtained at 35 °C (M1 = 17.1), indicating a better regularity of its lattice (Fig. 1(a), (b) and (d)). However, the ratio M1 = M2 increases from 1.27 in the sample obtained at 35 °C to 1.32 in the sample obtained at 65 °C, which points to a higher concentration of lattice defects in this sample obtained at 65 °C. The degree of crystallinity of the PS sphere arrays was not further improved when the temperature of self-assembly is increased to 85 °C (Fig. 1(c)). The multilayer spheres will appear more severely at this extremely high temperature. The difference between samples A (Fig. 1(b)) and B (Fig. 1(c)) is ΔM = 1.2, 2.1, and 1.6 for the first, the second, and the third harmonics, respectively, indicating the higher lattice ordering in the crystallites of the colloidal crystal obtained at 65 °C. Obviously, over-high temperature decreases the self-assembly time significantly, which leaves little chance to scatter multilayer PS spheres into monolayer PS spheres. Based on these analyses, an optimum temperature parameter can be expected for self-assembly of the PS spheres.
 Fig. 1  Typical top-view SEM images of the colloidal monolayer by thermal treatment: (a) 35 °C; (b) 65 °C; (c) 85 °C; (d) the magnitudes of the first three harmonics in the FT patterns obtained from the SEM images (a)–(c). The scale bar is 2 microns. 
In this section, we describe the mechanism of PS sphere self-assembly based on Denkov's33 and Kralchevsky's34 studies to conform our thermal treatment process. PS sphere latex spreads over the surface of the silicon substrate after the spin-coating, which is driven by shear forces. Multilayers in some small domains are inevitable at room temperature. The thermal treatment can intensify the Brownian motion of the spheres, and the multilayer spheres are scattered into monolayer spheres (Fig. 2(a)). Later, the slightly concave layer formed gradually owing to the liquid evaporation. When the thickness of the liquid in the center of the area becomes equal to the PS sphere's diameter, a nucleus of the 2D colloidal crystal suddenly forms. The liquid film around the PS sphere deforms and capillary force arises. This deformation translates into a Laplace pressure that causes attraction of the identical colloids to minimize the curvature of the interface. The capillary forces make the PS spheres close-packed (Fig. 2(b)). The surrounding liquid level is higher than that of the center and convective force appears, governing the PS spheres towards the ordered nuclei (Fig. 2(c)). Point defects and line defects might appear if a sphere does not fit well into the space formed by its neighbors. The thermal treatment can enhance both the convective force and capillary force because of the acceleration of the evaporating liquid, which makes the PS spheres pack closer and the self-assembly time becomes shorter compared to room temperature.
 Fig. 2  The mechanism of thermal treatment assisted self-assembly: (a) thermal treatment enhancing the process of multilayer sphere scattering into monolayers; (b) capillary forces making the PS spheres close-packed; (c) thermal treatment enhancing capacity of transferring spheres to nucleate areas. 
Here we develop a model to predict the optimized self-assembly temperature via MC simulation. It is difficult to consider the detailed dynamics of such huge amounts of PS spheres. We turn to the energy approach to analyse the crystallization processes. The capillary force plays a leading role among all the forces imposing on the PS sphere (refer to our previous work,23 namely, “Force analysis” in the ESI† of Langmuir, 2013, 29(46), 14017–14023) and determines the quality of the resultant colloidal monolayer. Thus it is reasonable to only consider the capillarity potential energy associated with the PS sphere system in the energy landscape. Kralchevsky and Nagayama have reported that the potential energy of the PS sphere reads,30,34 Un = Qln(rn)(1)where the subscript n index the PS spheres to identify them and rn is the distance between the position of a certain particle and its corresponding nuclei. Q characterizes the ability of the particle to deform the liquid interface, and the effect of the meniscus surface tension. And the Q is written as follows: (2)where A is a constant, τ0 is the “relaxation time”, Tc is the temperature of the dispersion media boiling point, s is the number of accepted simulation steps (corresponding to evaporation time of the real system), and Δ is the potential barrier of the PS sphere movement. Q consists of two terms (namely, exp[−Δ/T] and exp[−s/τ0(1 − T/Tc)]) with a clear physical significance. exp[−Δ/T] characterizes the effect of Brownian motion, which will promote the formation of monolayer PS spheres and find the minimum energy state in the free energy landscape. exp[−s/τ0(1 − T/Tc)] characterizes the evolutionary time under the thermal treatment, which will tend to zero when the number of MC steps is large enough (corresponding to the final state of the self-assembly). When the temperature is high, Q will quickly tend to a constant value (corresponding to the liquid drying quickly).
The monolayer of close-packed PS sphere arrays can be represented by a triangular lattice (Fig. 3), which is commonly used and an effective strategy used in a simple model.29 Considering that our goal is to achieve the hexagonal-close-packed sphere arrays, this operation is allowed although the particle cannot move continuously in a two-dimensional plane. The side length of the lattice is equal to the diameter of the PS sphere. The whole region is divided into several nucleate areas and each area has one nuclei. The nodes of the network are divided into two kinds, namely occupied and unoccupied, depending on whether the node has a PS sphere or not.
 Fig. 3  A triangular lattice used for the PS spheres' self-assembly simulation. Blue dotted lines denote the triangular lattice, solid black spots denote occupied nodes, hollow black circles denote unoccupied nodes and the solid gray spot denotes the nucleating point. 
We assume that every particle only interacts with its nearest nuclei, so the potential energy of an occupied node, for example, the ith occupied node, is Ui = Qln(ri), where ri is the distance between any ith occupied node and its nearest nuclei. This is reasonable because there is “no deforming liquid” interface between two neighbor nuclei. The liquid film is “thick” and the sphere would not feel the interaction from other nucleus areas (Fig. S1†). And thus there is no contribution to U(r) for the second neighbor or other nuclei. Also, the sphere would not experience the interaction from its nearest spheres according to the existing theory of self-assembly.33,35,36 Consequently, the capillary interaction is limited to the nearest deforming liquid interface, and the energy associated with this two-dimensional network is given by: (3)
In addition, the morphology of the network remains the same during the simulation process and each of the nodes is assumed to be bonded to an underlying rigid substrate by a relatively weak bond, which can be neglected. Periodic boundary conditions are used in simulations so that every node is joined to six nearest neighbors.
At the start of each simulation, all the nodes are occupied with the same probability, which reflects different concentrations of the PS latex. The nodes can be divided into three different categories: (1) all neighbors are occupied, (2) some neighbors are occupied and (3) no neighbor is occupied. Some nodes are selected at random to be the nucleating points (denoted by c in Fig. 3). As the simulation proceeds, we randomly select an occupied node to be the probe node (denoted by s in Fig. 3). Since s falls into the latter two categories, the occupied probe particle can move into one of its un-occupied neighbors. The probability of a particle above node s walking into the jth (1 ≤ j ≤ 6) un-occupied neighbors is given by: Pj ∝ exp[−(Ej − Es)/kBT](4)where kB is the Boltzmann constant. The normalized probability of the PS sphere moving from node s to node k reads (5)
We generate a uniformly distributed random number r ∈ [0, 1]. We choose node k as the selected particle's next potential position if  (here we assume ). A trial move to node n is accepted if the energy of the system decreases, i.e. Un < Us. Otherwise, the probability to accept this trial move is given by its normalized probability. In other words, the probability for the probe particle to move from node s to node n is: P(s → n) = min[1, Pn](6)
Each time when the PS sphere's move is accepted, we update the corresponding change of energy of the system and prepare for the next MC circulation and repeat the above steps many times to simulate the self-assembly of PS spheres. The simulation process will be stopped when the fluctuation of the energy of the system δUsum relative to the total change of energy of the system ΔU is smaller than the predefined final value [such as δUsum/ΔU ≤ 1%] (Fig. S2†).
There may be two concerns regarding this simulation procedure, namely the time dependent aspect of the Hamiltonian and detailed balance in our case. In our simulation, S denotes the number of accepted steps, not like common MC simulation. The more steps are accepted, the more adjustment there is to the configuration of the system, corresponding to the fact that the longer the time of the self-assembly (before the liquid dries) is, the more likely it is to reach the ultimate state. Consequently, MC steps S corresponds to evaporation time of the real system in our case and our operation is reasonable.27,37 Moreover, detailed balance can still be satisfied although eqn (4) and (5) are employed, and the detailed process of proof is illustrated in ESI S2.† So, the Metropolis acceptance criterion still works.
We should point out here that the simulation of the PS sphere self-assembly is carried out in a two dimensional (2D) plane and the simulation lattice is 100 × 100. Consequently, what we have taken into account in the simulation corresponds to the processes illustrated in Fig. 2(b) and (c). However, our model still works because we have set the concentration of the latex to be a low value (VF = 20%) and PS spheres could only cover about three fifths of areas of the substrate, which would result in the self-assembly process in a quasi 2D plane.

Fig. 4 shows our simulation and experimental results when the temperature of self-assembly varies from 25 °C to 75 °C. Fig. 4(a) and (b) are the MC simulation pattern at 45 °C and its corresponding DFT pattern, respectively. The bright and regular spots in the DFT pattern (Fig. 4(b)) reveal the good quality of the colloidal crystal shown in Fig. 4(a). Fig. 4(c) reveals that the difference of the magnitudes of the first harmonics (M1) is not pronounced and we can find that the largest power (17.72) is achieved at the temperature of 45 °C, which indicates that the line cracks and point defects of the crystal obtained at 45 °C are fewer than those obtained at other temperatures. We believe that the little difference among M1 of different temperatures is the natural result of many empty areas in the simulation patterns caused by “low concentration latex” which are mixed with “defects”. The differences among M2 and M3 are both more pronounced and they show the largest power, which corresponds to the best order, can be achieved at 45 °C, indicating that 45 °C is the optimized self-assembly temperature. In a word, our simulation data predict that 45 °C is the optimized temperature for the PS sphere self-assembly.
 Fig. 4  The MC simulation pattern of 45 °C (a) and the corresponding typical scanning electron micrographs of the colloidal monolayer (with the PS sphere diameter of 462 nm) treated at the temperature of 45 °C (d), (b) and (e) show the corresponding Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) patterns of the panels (a) and (d), respectively. The panels (c) and (f) show magnitudes of the first three harmonics in the DFT patterns obtained from the MC simulations setting different temperature parameters and the colloidal crystal treated at different temperatures, respectively. All the concentration of the latex is VF = 20%. 
In order to test the accuracy of our simulation, we implemented a series of self-assembly of PS spheres at different temperatures. All these experiments kept other conditions constant, final spin-coating speed, VF of the latex and spinning coating time were 3500 rpm, 20% and 30 seconds, respectively. The results are summarized in Fig. 4(d)–(f). Fig. 4(c) and (f) show that our simulation results are consistent with the experimental results: firstly, the first three harmonics variation trends in the simulations are consistent with those in experiments; secondly, the best quality of the colloidal monolayer is indeed achieved at the temperature of 45 °C. The second harmonics of the experiments (VF = 20%) at 45 °C and 25 °C are 14.15 and 13.28, respectively. Moreover, the ratio M1/M2 reduces from 1.3 in the sample obtained at 25 °C to 1.2 in the sample obtained at 45 °C. This clearly corresponds to the improved sharpness and symmetry of lattice points in the SEM image of the sample after thermal treatment. Consequently, defects are greatly reduced with the help of thermal treatment.
As mentioned above, only about three fifths areas of the substrate is covered by the colloidal monolayer when the concentration of latex is VF = 20%. It is clear that the area covered by the colloidal monolayer grows larger as the latex concentration increases. It is easy to adjust the latex concentration to harvest wafer-scale colloidal monolayers, which have been reported in our previous work.23 The wafer-scale colloidal monolayer consisting of hexagonal-close-packed PS spheres prepared under optimized conditions (spin-coating parameters of 3500 rpm for 30 seconds, latex volume fraction of 40% and self-assembly temperature of 45 °C) and relative SEM images and macrophotograph can be seen in Fig. S3† and a table of contents entry, respectively. We should point out here that our proposed method can also be applied to other kinds of spheres for self-assembly, such as silica nanospheres, Au nanospheres, etc., whose mass density is higher than the dispersion media.
Although beautiful and periodical ZnO arrays have been successfully fabricated,12,13 expensive processes, such as microstamping or photolithography patterning, are needed. Also, the ZnO nanostructures in those studies are too “small” to achieve good hydrophobicity according to Cassie–Baxter theory. In this paper, the use of colloidal lithography driven by the spin-coating technique using wet chemical synthesis, which is time-saving and of low cost, has been proposed to obtain patterned ZnO nanostructures. Moreover, our objective for ZnO nanostructures is for them to serve for solar cells. And hence, self-cleaning (preventing accumulation of dust on the surface) and photoluminescence properties (converting “high energy” photons into visible photons for anti-degradation in an amorphous silicon cell) should be taken into account. No reports are located in the literature investigating this kind of valuable coating. Herein, we investigate the coating constructed with ZnO nanostructures grown from the ZnO seeds patterned by our obtained colloidal monolayer. The detailed processes for fast fabrication of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO can be seen in Scheme 1. For comparison, ZnO nanostructures grown from the random ZnO seeds are also given in Fig. 5(c).
 Fig. 5  Typical top-view SEM images of ZnO grown from the seeds patterned by the colloidal monolayer (a) and of ZnO grown from the random seeds (c), the insets being corresponding HRTEM images of ZnO shown in this figure. XRD pattern of ZnO grown from the seeds patterned by the colloidal monolayer is also given in (b). ZnO hydrothermal growth conditions: 10 nm ZnO seeded silicon as the substrate, nutrient solution consisting of 2.5 mM of both zinc nitrate hexahydrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT), growing ZnO nanostructures at 95 °C for 12 h. 

Fig. 5(a) shows that ZnO nanostructures are scallion like (named as “ordered ZnO scallion” hereafter) and the average diameter of the ZnO nanorods in ZnO scallion is 62 nm. Obviously, the diameter of the ZnO nanorods grown from the patterned seeds is larger than that of the ZnO nanorods grown from the random seeds (with the average diameter of 50 nm, Fig. 5(c)). Considering that the random ZnO seeds spread over the whole substrate after annealing treatment of the 10 nm thick ZnO film, there are more actual growing points for random ZnO seeds than the patterned ZnO seeds, resulting in the smaller ZnO nanorod given the same nutrient solution. Importantly, the crystallinity of the ZnO grown from the patterned seeds is also better than the ZnO nanorods grown from the random seeds (HRTEM images in the insets of Fig. 5). The insets of Fig. 5(a) and (c) show the lattice fringe width of “ordered ZnO scallion” and random ZnO are 5.4 Å (001) and 5.6 Å (001), respectively. This is a quite interesting phenomenon, which may be ascribed to the better initial crystal orientation provided by the patterned ZnO seeds, namely, periodical ZnO seeds with the trigonal-lattice-like morphology. In addition, Fig. 5(b) shows that the scallion-like ZnO nanostructures are phase-pure wurtzite-type ZnO (hexagonal system, space group P63mc, a = 3.25 Å and c = 5.21 Å), which is also confirmed by our HRTEM results to some extent. The unmarked XRD peak located at 33° is caused by harmonic of X-rays rather than the silicon (200) and the diffraction peak located at 69° belongs to the crystal plane (400) of single crystal silicon38 (see ESI S8 and S9,† and refer to JCPDF-89-5012).
The growth mechanism of scallion-like ZnO can be postulated based on the axial orientation growth mechanism.39,40 ZnO has an inherent polarity to the crystal along the c-axis, which is caused by anisotropy of zinc and oxygen atoms being alternately arranged in the c-axis of the hexagonal phase with no center of inversion.39 The patterned ZnO seed (Scheme 1(d)) acts as heterogeneous nucleation sites. The ZnO particles, which are grown through an intermediate amorphous Zn(OH)2 pathway,39 absorb preferentially on the nucleation sites formed by the patterned ZnO seed. As indicated by Tian and his coworkers, the ZnO growth is mostly randomly oriented at the beginning.40 However, after a long period of growth, ZnO grows along the c-axis (the 〈001〉 direction), namely the fastest growth orientation,40 due to the growth velocity along the 〈001〉 orientation being greater than other directions.41 These nanorods are randomly grown on the patterned seed (inset of Scheme 1(f)). However, as these randomly oriented nanorod crystals grow further, they begin to overlap and their growth becomes physically limited, which may be ascribed to the fact that the misaligned nanorods begin to impinge on other neighbouring crystals (inset of Scheme 1(f)). With increasing the length of ZnO nanorods, scallion-like ZnO is eventually formed (Scheme 1(f)).
The characteristics of our synthetic self-cleaning coatings are further investigated by photoluminescence spectra and water contact angle measurement. Fig. 6(a) describes that the emission peak of both the ordered ZnO scallion and random ZnO is λmax = 378 nm with illumination at 320 nm. Integrating the area under the PL curves of them over the entire emission wavelength range, we find that the emission intensity of the ordered ZnO scallion is approximately 2.3 times higher than that of the random ZnO. We believe that the better crystallization of the ordered ZnO enables this result, which can be evident from the HRTEM images in the insets of Fig. 5. With the outstanding performance of PL, ordered ZnO scallion can effectively convert ultraviolet light into visible light. And hence, it has good prospect for amorphous silicon photovoltaic devices which are troubled by light-induced degradation.
 Fig. 6  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of ZnO nanostructures at the excitation wavelength of 320 nm (a). Water CA of ordered ZnO scallion (b) and random ZnO nanostructures (c) modified by HTMS. 
After being modified by HTMS, the surface roughness generated is insufficient to construct a superhydrophobic surface for simple random ZnO nanostructures, and its water static contact angle (CA) value is only of 138°, while the CA of 154° can be reached for ordered ZnO scallion combined with markedly low sliding angles on the order of 8° and less (estimated from 4 μL water droplets). This great distinction of hydrophobic properties can be understood from the theory of Cassie–Baxter.42,43 The Cassie equation reads: cosθA = f(cosθY + 1) − 1(7)here θA is the apparent CA on a rough surface, θY is the intrinsic CA on the corresponding smooth surface, and f is the solid surface fraction. The water drop is not only in contact with the top of ZnO nanorods but also with the side of ZnO nanorods and the substrate for random ZnO. Since the distribution of random ZnO scallion is sparser and more slanted than the ordered ZnO scallion, the f of ordered ZnO scallion is smaller than that of random ZnO. As the solid surface fraction decreases, more air can be trapped at the water and ZnO nanostructure interface. Moreover, air may become trapped between ZnO nanostructures underneath a water droplet, which further enhances the surface hydrophobicity.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated the fast synthesis of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO using the simple hydro-thermal synthesis approach with our colloidal monolayer template. This new self-cleaning coating, which possesses UV-resistant and superhydrophobic properties, has good prospects in the application of photovoltaic devices. Moreover, the MC assisted self-assembly method is proposed to fabricate the high-quality and wafer-scale colloidal monolayer. The traditional self-assembly theory is improved according to our simulation based on the MC method. And then the optimized self-assembly temperature can be predicted using MC simulation. The study of this simple model system can also provide insights into more complex systems which are often of considerable practical importance. What is more, our method is not only less time-consuming but also easier to control. In addition, the approach we developed is highly compatible with contemporary micro- or nano-fabrication, which may accomplish the eventual mass production of low-cost practical devices.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Professor Zejun Ding of the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) for his kind help in MC simulation. And we appreciate Professor Ning Xu of USTC, who comes from CAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences, for the useful discussion and valuable advice on the theoretical modeling. Also, we thank Professor Lei Shi and laboratory technician Zhenyu Yao so much for their useful discussion of harmonic of XRD. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11504264, No. 61604091, No. 51501128, No. 11304224 and No. 61274064).
Notes and references
H. K. Elminir, A. E. Ghitas, R. H. Hamid, F. El-Hussainy, M. M. Beheary and K. M. Abdel-Moneim, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 3192–3203 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Wang, J. Yu, Y. Z. Wu, W. J. Shao and X. L. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5010–5017 CAS .
F. Wan, D. Q. Yang and E. Sacher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16953–16960 CAS .
X. Lin, J. Heo, H. Jeong, M. Choi, M. Chang and J. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17970–17980 CAS .
E. J. Lee, H. M. Lee, Y. Li, L. Y. Hong, D. P. Kim and S. O. Cho, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Z. Yang, X. Xu, D. Jasion, S. Mou, H. Zhang, Y. Long and S. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6180–6184 CAS .
M. Sinha, R. Mahapatra, B. Mondal, T. Maruyama and R. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3019–3025 CAS .
J. D. Major, R. Tena-Zaera, E. Azaceta, L. Bowen and K. Durose, Sol. Energ. Mat. Sol. C, 2017, 160, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Sung, W. P. Liao, D. W. Chen, C. T. Wu, G. J. Chang and J. J. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, X. Chen, J. Li, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6193–6200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dev, B. D. Choudhury, A. Abedin and S. Anand, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4577–4583 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Cheng, B. Yan, S. M. Wong, X. L. Li, W. W. Zhou, T. Yu, Z. X. Shen, H. Y. Yu and H. J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter., 2010, 2, 1824–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Sounart, J. Liu, J. A. Voigt, J. W. P. Hsu, E. D. Spoerke, Z. Tian and Y. B. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, G. Duan, G. Liu and W. Cai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614–3627 RSC .
Z. Honghua, L. Dilong, H. Lifeng, L. Xinyang, L. Guangqiang, C. Weiping and L. Yue, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 395304 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, F. Zhou, M. Liu, D. Liu, D. Men, W. Cai, G. Duan and Y. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500031 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, M. Liu, F. Zhou, D. Liu, G. Liu, G. Duan, W. Cai and Y. Li, Small, 2015, 11, 844–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, V. Gohri, S. Pillai, A. Arpanaei, M. Foss and P. Kingshott, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3542–3551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. C. Fischer and H. P. Zingsheim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1981, 19, 881–885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wu, C. Chen, X. L. Xu, Y. X. Liu, W. J. Shao, N. Q. Yin, W. T. Zhang, J. X. Ke and X. T. Fang, Chin. Phys. B, 2014, 23, 088703 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2169–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. P. Cai, G. T. Duan, B. Q. Cao, F. Q. Sun and F. Lu, J. Colloid Interf. Sci., 2005, 287, 634–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Zhang, Y. Yuan, Z. Wang, W. Shao, H. Wang and X. Xu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 14017–14023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, S. Ren, X. Xu, L. Liu, H. Wang and J. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 126, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Li and D. Yang, Chin. Phys. B, 2017, 26, 038105,  DOI:10.1088/1674-1056/26/3/038105 .
J. P. Biersack and L. G. Haggmark, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 1980, 174, 257–269 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabani, D. R. Reichman, P. L. Geissler and L. E. Brus, Nature, 2003, 426, 271–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Ku, D. M. Aruguete, A. P. Alivisatos and P. L. Geissler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 838–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Skjeltorp and P. Meakin, Nature, 1988, 335, 424–426 CrossRef .
P. A. Kralchevsky and K. Nagayama, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 85, 145–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Middleman, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 2530–2532 CrossRef .
W. Khunsin, G. Kocher, S. G. Romanov and C. M. S. Torres, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2471–2479 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Denkov, O. D. Velev, P. A. Kralchevsky, I. B. Ivanov, H. Yoshimura and K. Nagayama, Nature, 1993, 361, 26 CrossRef .
P. A. Kralchevsky and K. Nagayama, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 23–36 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vogel, C. K. Weiss and K. Landfester, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4044–4061 RSC .
N. D. Denkov, O. D. Velev, P. A. Kralchevsky, I. B. Ivanov, H. Yoshimura and K. Nagayama, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 3183–3190 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li and G. Ahmadi, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1992, 16, 209–226 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Yu, Z. G. Bai, Y. Ding, Q. L. Hang, H. Z. Zhang, J. J. Wang, Y. H. Zou, W. Qian, G. C. Xiong, H. T. Zhou and S. Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3458–3460 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Padmanabhan, D. Ledwith, S. C. Pillai, D. E. McCormack and J. M. Kelly, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9250–9259 RSC .
Z. R. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie, M. J. McDermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. F. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weintraub, Z. Z. Zhou, Y. H. Li and Y. L. Deng, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1573–1587 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Y. Lin, W. Lin, K. S. Moon and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3959–3964 CAS .
Y. Q. Gao, I. Gereige, A. El Labban, D. Cha, T. T. Isimjan and P. M. Beaujuge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2219–2223 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, the reason for only considering that every particle only interacting with its nearest nuclei; the total energy of the system varying with the evolution steps of the Monte Carlo simulation; details of proof for satisfying detailed balance when eqn (4) and (5) were employed; SEM images of the colloidal crystal prepared under optimum conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00125h‡ Present address: Purdue University.§ Present address: University of Florida.¶ Present address: Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China.|| Present address: School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanxi Normal University.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Fast fabrication of a self-cleaning coating constructed with scallion-like ZnO. (a) Spin-coating process; (b) sample after thermal treatment; (c) depositing ZnO via the colloidal monolayer; (d) ZnO seed after removing the colloidal monolayer (top view); (e) fabrication of ZnO in nutrient solution; (f) scallion-like ZnO.	 

 	Fig. 1  Typical top-view SEM images of the colloidal monolayer by thermal treatment: (a) 35 °C; (b) 65 °C; (c) 85 °C; (d) the magnitudes of the first three harmonics in the FT patterns obtained from the SEM images (a)–(c). The scale bar is 2 microns.	 

 	Fig. 2  The mechanism of thermal treatment assisted self-assembly: (a) thermal treatment enhancing the process of multilayer sphere scattering into monolayers; (b) capillary forces making the PS spheres close-packed; (c) thermal treatment enhancing capacity of transferring spheres to nucleate areas.	 
Un = Qln(rn)	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  A triangular lattice used for the PS spheres' self-assembly simulation. Blue dotted lines denote the triangular lattice, solid black spots denote occupied nodes, hollow black circles denote unoccupied nodes and the solid gray spot denotes the nucleating point.	 
	(3)
Pj ∝ exp[−(Ej − Es)/kBT]	(4)
	(5)
P(s → n) = min[1, Pn]	(6)

 	Fig. 4  The MC simulation pattern of 45 °C (a) and the corresponding typical scanning electron micrographs of the colloidal monolayer (with the PS sphere diameter of 462 nm) treated at the temperature of 45 °C (d), (b) and (e) show the corresponding Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) patterns of the panels (a) and (d), respectively. The panels (c) and (f) show magnitudes of the first three harmonics in the DFT patterns obtained from the MC simulations setting different temperature parameters and the colloidal crystal treated at different temperatures, respectively. All the concentration of the latex is VF = 20%.	 

 	Fig. 5  Typical top-view SEM images of ZnO grown from the seeds patterned by the colloidal monolayer (a) and of ZnO grown from the random seeds (c), the insets being corresponding HRTEM images of ZnO shown in this figure. XRD pattern of ZnO grown from the seeds patterned by the colloidal monolayer is also given in (b). ZnO hydrothermal growth conditions: 10 nm ZnO seeded silicon as the substrate, nutrient solution consisting of 2.5 mM of both zinc nitrate hexahydrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT), growing ZnO nanostructures at 95 °C for 12 h.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of ZnO nanostructures at the excitation wavelength of 320 nm (a). Water CA of ordered ZnO scallion (b) and random ZnO nanostructures (c) modified by HTMS.	 
cosθA = f(cosθY + 1) − 1	(7)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, the reason for only considering that every particle only interacting with its nearest nuclei; the total energy of the system varying with the evolution steps of the Monte Carlo simulation; details of proof for satisfying detailed balance when eqn (4) and (5) were employed; SEM images of the colloidal crystal prepared under optimum conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00125h
‡ Present address: Purdue University.
§ Present address: University of Florida.
¶ Present address: Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China.
|| Present address: School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanxi Normal University.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
