Designing flexible, smart and self-sustainable supercapacitors for portable/wearable electronics: from conductive polymers  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00800E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00800E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12702-12743Designing flexible, smart and self-sustainable supercapacitors for portable/wearable electronics: from conductive polymers

        
          
            Zhenyun 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kequan 
            Xia
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Hou
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qinghua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhizhen 
            Ye
          
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            Jianguo 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *ad
aState Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: lujianguo@zju.edu.cn
bOcean College, Zhejiang University, Zhoushan 316021, China
cCollege of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
dWenzhou Key Laboratory of Novel Optoelectronic and Nano Materials, Institute of Wenzhou, Zhejiang University, Wenzhou 325006, China
Received 
      24th August 2021
    First published on 13th October 2021AbstractThe rapid development of portable/wearable electronics proposes new demands for energy storage devices, which are flexibility, smart functions and long-time outdoor operation. Supercapacitors (SCs) show great potential in portable/wearable applications, and the recently developed flexible, smart and self-sustainable supercapacitors greatly meet the above demands. In these supercapacitors, conductive polymers (CPs) are widely applied due to their high flexibility, conductivity, pseudo-capacitance, smart characteristics and moderate preparation conditions. Herein, we’d like to introduce the CP-based flexible, smart and self-sustainable supercapacitors for portable/wearable electronics. This review first summarizes the flexible SCs based on CPs and their composites with carbon materials and metal compounds. The smart supercapacitors, i.e., electrochromic, electrochemical actuated, stretchable, self-healing and stimuli-sensitive ones, are then presented. The self-sustainable SCs which integrate SC units with energy-harvesting units in one compact configuration are also introduced. The last section highlights some current challenges and future perspectives of this thriving field.
Zhenyun Zhao
Dr Zhenyun Zhao is currently a doctoral candidate at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Dr Zhao received her bachelor's degree and master's degree from Southwest University, Chongqing, China, in 2017. Her current research interests include flexible wearable electronics, flexible supercapacitors, smart textiles, conductive polymers and their composites.
Kequan Xia
Dr Kequan Xia is currently a doctoral candidate at Ocean College, Zhejiang University, China. He received his BS degree from Central South University in 2015. His research interests include triboelectric nanogenerators and flexible electronics. He has authored or coauthored more than twenty technical papers.
Yang Hou
Prof. Yang Hou is a Professor at College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. He was awarded Young Prizes of Hou Debang Chemical Science and Technology, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He received his PhD degree from School of Environmental Science & Technology at Dalian University of Technology in 2011, and then did postdoctoral research at the University of California, Riverside, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and Technische Universität Dresden. His current research mainly focuses on renewable energy and hydrogen energy, lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors, energy nanomaterials and novel functional compound materials.
Qinghua Zhang
Prof. Qinghua Zhang is currently a professor in College of Chemical and Biological Engineering Zhejiang University (ZJU). He received his PhD degree in 2007 from ZJU. He moved to University of Washington in America as a visiting scholar from 2012 to 2013. He developed a number of design concepts for biomimetic interface functional materials. His research topics include biomimetic superwetting interface functional materials, nonfouling- and fouling-release biocompatibility materials, lithium (sulphur) battery electrolyte/membrane materials, and intelligent responsive and self-repairing materials.
Zhizhen Ye
Prof. Zhizhen Ye is an academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences and a professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He received a PhD degree from Zhejiang University in 1987. He was a visiting scholar at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1990–1992. He became a Professor at Zhejiang University in 1994, and served as the Director of State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials in 1997–2009, and the Department Head of MSE in 2009–2013. His research interests include growth, doping, and optoelectronic devices of wide bandgap semiconductor thin films and low-dimensional nanostructures.
Jianguo Lu
Prof. Jianguo Lu is currently an associate professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He got a PhD degree from Zhejiang University in 2005. He worked as a JSPS Foreign Researcher at Kyoto University, Japan in 2005–2007. He is a Distinguished Young Scholar, Qianjiang Talent, and “151” Talent of Zhejiang Province. His research interest mainly lies in new energy and information electronic materials, including nanoscale materials and new energies, semiconductor films and transparent electronics, and new coating & biomimetic materials for marine applications.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, portable/wearable electronics have gained rapid development in various fields, such as biomedical, environmental, healthcare, sports and mobile electronics applications.1,2 The increasing energy consumption proposes more and stricter demands for energy storage devices. Undoubtedly, the energy storage devices need to have high energy density and power density, which are two factors directly reflecting their energy storage performance. For portable/wearable electronics, three issues are critical for energy storage devices. Firstly, flexibility has become a new research trend. Flexible energy storage devices can still maintain their performance to a large degree even under bending, folding, twisting and rolling conditions in portable/wearable applications. Such flexible designs are also structurally compatible with portable/wearable electronics and can be easily integrated with them.3,4 Secondly, smart functions for energy storage devices have gained extensive attention. These smart functions greatly improve man–machine interaction, increase durability and widen applications of energy storage devices.5 Thirdly, long-term outdoor operation is very important for portable/wearable electronics. In practical uses, once energy storage devices exhaust the electricity charged before, the portable/wearable electronics would stop working.6–8 Thus, self-sustainable energy storage devices which can effectively capture and store surrounding energy from the sun, body motions or body heat as electricity to power electronics have become another research direction.9,10 To meet the demands, the corresponding flexible, smart and self-sustainable energy-storage devices have become the critical areas of focus.
In the area of energy storage devices, capacitors, supercapacitors (SCs) and batteries are all widely investigated. Capacitors feature ultrahigh power density but very low energy density, while batteries are just the opposite, and SCs are between the two.11 In other words, SCs possess relatively high energy and power densities, which means that they can be charged to a relatively high level in a short time.12 Besides, SCs have the advantages of long cycle life, high safety and easy designability. These features make them very suitable as energy storage devices for portable/wearable electronics.13
SCs perfectly meet the demands posed by portable/wearable electronics. Firstly, with the study of flexible electrodes, all-solid-state electrolytes and encapsulation materials, flexible SCs have made great progress and achieved wide applications in portable/wearable electronics.14 Secondly, SCs feature simple and versatile configurations, and hence some smart functions are easy to be incorporated into them, obtaining smart SCs.5,15,16 Thirdly, SCs should be the most promising candidate for self-sustainable energy storage devices. SCs have the nature of high energy and power densities, long cycle life and excellent safety even under high current densities. Hence, they are very suitable to be charged by solar, medical and thermal energies that are known to fluctuate in a wide range for long cycles.10,17 In short, SCs are progressing much more rapidly in the flexible, smart and self-sustainable energy-storage fields than capacitors and batteries. The past decade has witnessed the rapid development of flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs, and hence it is necessary to summarize the advancements and weaknesses.
Various nanomaterials, such as carbon materials (Cs),18,19 conductive polymers (CPs)20–22 and metal compounds (MCs),12,23 have made great contributions in flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs. Herein, we mainly focus on the CP-based ones, because CPs show the most all-round properties, including high conductivity (from ∼10−11 to ∼103 S cm−1), high pseudo-capacitance (up to ∼2000 F g−1), high flexibility, multiple smart characteristics (i.e., electrochromic, electrothermal, photothermal and electrochemically actuated functions) and catalytic activity. This means that CPs can play multiple roles in flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs, providing more investigating and designing possibilities for researchers and showing great research potential.
To be more detailed, flexible SCs are the earliest developed ones among the three types of SCs, and actually, their development began with investigations on Cs and CPs.14 This is mainly due to the excellent flexibility of Cs and CPs. Cs-based flexible SCs possess impressive power density and cycle life while CP-based ones show excellent energy density. Also, various MCs with high pseudo-capacitance are important contributors, yet their natures of severe brittleness and relatively low conductivity limit their applications in flexible SCs. Accordingly, CPs present very balanced performance in terms of conductivity, pseudo-capacitance and flexibility, so the CP-based flexible SCs usually show relatively high power and energy densities, rate capabilities and flexibilities. As for the smart SCs, the use of CPs along with some configuration designs can endow the final devices with some smart functions, such as transparency,24,25 electrochromism,26 electrochemical actuation,27 stimuli-sensitive functions,28etc. As reported, CPs can be used as transparent current collectors, energy-storage layers and the corresponded smart functional layers in smart SCs. The flexible preparation approaches and moderate preparation conditions also give CPs wide applications in smart SCs.29 In self-sustainable SCs which are prepared through integrating SC units with energy harvesting units in one compact configuration, CPs also get wide attention due to their high conductivity, redox activity, catalytic activity and pseudo-capacitance. So far, they have been reported to serve as hole transport layers, Pt-free counters, energy-storage electrodes, shared electrodes, triboelectric layers, redox reactive compositions of electrolytes, and additives of piezoelectric layers.30,31 Sometimes, they can serve as a multi-purpose layer in one device, which further decreases the size/weight, simplifies the structure of SCs and makes them more suitable for portable/wearable electronics. As demonstrated, CPs possess very all-round properties, and hence they have gained extensive attention in the fields of flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs for portable/wearable electronics.
Therefore, a summary of CP-based flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs for portable/wearable electronics is highly required. Herein, we first present the latest progress of flexible SCs based on CPs and their composites with Cs (biocarbon, carbon fibers, carbon nanofiber yarns, carbon cloth, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc.) and MCs (metal oxides, metal sulphides, metal hydroxides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, metal carbonitrides and MXenes, etc.). The progress in the related technologies is also introduced, such as wet-spinning, electro-spinning, gelation, and some chemical or electrochemical synthesis technologies. Besides, the CP-based smart SCs, i.e., electrochromic, electro-actuated, stretchable, self-healable and stimuli-sensitive types, are presented. In this section, the detailed working mechanism of every smart function and the roles of CPs in them are discussed. Furthermore, the self-sustainable SCs which are prepared through integrating SC units with energy-harvesting units in one compact device are presented. The innovative configuration designs and working mechanisms are discussed. Finally, based on these latest advances, a summary of perspectives is provided for future research.
2. Conductive polymers
2.1 Structures
Conductive polymers (CPs) have typical π-conjugated structures which endows them with wide applications in electrical,21 energy,32 sensor33 and medical34 areas. The backbones of insulating polymers are usually composed of sp3 hybridized carbons where the shared electrons are localized. However, the carbon atoms of CP backbones are sp2 hybridized and thus they would generate significant overlap of pz orbitals, making electrons able to delocalize and move along the polymer backbones.35 Thus, CPs show typical electrical, electrochemical and optical properties. The common CPs are mainly polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PT) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), as shown in Fig. 1(a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the representative CPs, (b) the reversible doping/de-doping mechanism of PANI, and (c) two charge-storage mechanisms of CPs. 
2.2 Conductive mechanism
CPs feature high conductivity which is changeable in a certain range under control (from ∼10−11 to ∼103 S cm−1),36 and thus they are widely used in electrical and electrochemical fields. As introduced above, the carbon atoms of CP backbones are sp2 hybridized and thus they would generate significant overlap of pz orbitals, making electrons able to delocalize and move along the polymer backbones. However, just such conjugated structures are not enough to obtain electrical conductivity, which is also highly dependent on doping. Doping, which is a type of redox reaction, can transform CPs from a nonconducting to a conducting state through forming polymeric cations/anions along with counterions. In short, the π-conjugated structures would accept or lose electrons, forming polymeric anions or cations, respectively, and the counterions from dopants would combine with them through electrostatic actions to neutralize the charges (Fig. 1(b) takes the doping/dedoping of PANI as an example). Such processes would generate polarons and bipolarons in CP polymer chains, significantly improving electron mobility and electrical conductivity.37
CP conductivity highly depends on the doping level. Besides, CP conductivity varies with the temperature, humidity and pH values. In short, CPs can show high conductivity but their conductivity is sensitive to some factors. In the energy field, such electrical instability of CPs is not beneficial for developing highly stable electrode materials. Considering this, many researchers composite CPs with carbon materials (Cs) and metal compounds (MCs) to make full use of their synergistic effect and finally to obtain high-performance energy storage devices. Additionally, many studies take advantage of such electrical sensitivity to prepare various sensors instead, such as pH,33 temperature38 and humidity39 sensors.
2.3 Energy storage mechanism
The charge-storage mechanism of CPs is essentially fast reversible redox reactions, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The charge-storage mechanisms can be divided into p- and n-type. Most CPs belong to the p-type mechanism, and only PT and its derivatives are based on the n-type mechanism.40 CPs possess excellent theoretical pseudo-capacitance of up to ∼2000 F g−1, and their practical capacitance is tightly related to their own structures and morphologies, and preparation methods and conditions.41 They can show high conductivity as introduced above, and they are also widely used as pseudo-capacitive electrode materials. In some cases, they can be simultaneously used as current collectors and electrode active materials, showing great potential in electrical and electrochemical fields.
Various Cs and MCs are also reported to be good electrode materials for SCs. Cs-based flexible SCs possess impressive power density and cycle life while CP-based ones show excellent energy density. Also, various MCs with high pseudo-capacitance are important contributors, yet their natures of severe brittleness and relatively low conductivity limit their applications in flexible SCs to some degree. Accordingly, CPs present very balanced performance in various aspects, including conductivity, pseudo-capacitance and flexibility. Currently, many researchers are focusing on the composites of CPs, Cs and MCs along with their synergistic effects for preparing electrode materials with high and stable performance.
2.4 Smart characteristics

2.4.1 Electrochromic properties. 
Electrochromic materials are known to show different colours which can be distinguished by the naked eye during electrochemical redox reactions.42 CPs are capable of showing different colours under different redox states when the switching electro-potential is added. Thus, they are of great interest to the electrochromic community and get wide attention in sensors, smart windows, signal transduction, electrochromic SCs, and flexible displays.43
PANI would show reversible electrochromic transitions from the light yellow leucoemeraldine (fully reduced), the green emeraldine salt (partially oxidized), and the blue emeraldine base (partially oxidized) to the black pernigraniline (fully oxidized).44,45 PT is rarely solely applied as an electrochromic material because PT is easy to be over-oxidized and light-degraded.46 To overcome these problems, some studies investigated using thiophene oligomers to prepare PT. Such PT appears navy blue in the oxidized state and orange-yellow in the reduced state. Compared with PT, its derivatives, especially PEDOT, are more widely investigated in electrochromic devices. PEDOT would change between light and dark blue under switching electro-potential.47 Besides, PPy appears dark grey in the oxidized state and yellow in the reduced state.48 Also, there are some new electrochromic CPs reported which will be detailed in the following sections.


2.4.2 Electrothermal and photothermal properties. 
CPs are effective to convert electricity to thermal energy, showing impressive electrothermal properties. Compared with the commonly used metals and their oxides (i.e., copper, silver or ITO), Cs and MXene, CPs are much more flexible, lightweight and facile to process.49 Therefore, they have been widely investigated in wearable heaters.50
When exposed to light, CPs are able to absorb photon energy and convert it into heat. Among the common CPs, PPy and PANI show superior photothermal properties.51 In recent years, CPs have become a promising candidate for photothermal therapy.34 Besides, some studies reported CPs’ applications in self-healing materials, which are taking advantage of CPs’ photothermal effect as the stimulus to accelerate the self-healing process.52


2.4.3 Electrochemically actuated property. 
When switching electro-potential is applied, CPs can be reversibly electrochemically oxidized/reduced and show volumetric expansion/contraction, respectively.27 This typical performance is not beneficial for energy storage devices but can be skilfully designed to be an electrochemical actuator (EA), which has received wide attention in many fields, such as microswitches, lab on a chip, artificial muscles and sensors.53–55 Nowadays, electrochemically actuated SCs (EASCs) that combine energy-storage and electrochemically actuated functions in one are also developed, which will be introduced in the following sections.

3. Flexible supercapacitors
CPs are considered as one of the most promising electroactive materials owing to their high flexibility, conductivity, pseudocapacitive activity, environmental friendliness, and easy fabrication. The CP flexible electrodes have the advantages of high capacitance, energy density and energy-storage stability under mechanical deformation. However, their conductivity is not that stable due to the reversible doping/dedoping nature, and their cycle life is unsatisfactory because of the dramatic swelling/shrinkage during repeated charging/discharging processes. For further improving their properties, many studies combine CPs with carbon materials (Cs) and metal compounds (MCs) to prepare flexible composite electrodes. In short, CPs and their composites have made substantial progress and play an important role in flexible SCs.
3.1 Conductive polymer electrodes
All kinds of CP flexible electrodes, mainly including CP-functionalized fibers, fabrics, yarns, films, foams, sponges and hydrogels,56,57 have been developed. The preparation approaches of CP flexible electrodes can be divided into two, as shown in Fig. 2: (1) substrate-supported deposition: this is the in situ deposition of CPs on flexible substrates, like the dip-coating, blade-coating, spin-coating, spray-coating, in situ chemical polymerization, in situ vapor phase chemical polymerization and in situ electrochemical polymerization; (2) substrate-free strategies: these include mixing some agents with monomers of CPs followed by the polymerization, or just mixing with CP macromolecules. After getting the processible solutions, some process technologies are carried out, like wet-spinning, electrospinning and gelation techniques.
 Fig. 2  Preparation methods of CPs electrode. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 

3.1.1 Substrate-supported deposition. 
Various substrate-supported deposition methods have been explored to prepare high-performance CP electrodes. The dip-coating, blade-coating, spin-coating or spray-coating methods are very easy to perform and get wide applications in practice. These methods are particularly feasible for PEDOT:PSS,58 whereas they are difficult for other CPs, because they require high solubility which is the fatal weakness of most CPs. In situ chemical polymerization is the most widely used method as it is easy to perform and to control the final CP morphologies, and meanwhile, it is feasible on most flexible substrates. Even so, a strongly acidic solution is required and may cause some corrosion to flexible substrates. In situ vapor chemical polymerization is also applicable for most flexible substrates, and its corrosion on substrates is very small because it avoids the long-time immersion in acidic solutions. Besides, it can form even and dense nano-thin films of CPs on substrates.59 However, just a few types of CP micro-morphologies can be obtained through this method. In situ electrochemical polymerization is well established and mainly includes four modes which are cyclic voltammetry, potentiostatic, galvanostatic and pulse modes.60 It is easy to perform and to control the micro-morphologies of CPs, whereas it is not suitable for mass production.
From the perspective of electrode compositions, the recent investigations in substrate-supported strategies are mainly based on flexible substrates and the deposited CPs. First of all, different substrates display different shapes, microstructures, chemical compositions and mechanical properties, which highly influences the final energy-storage and mechanical performance. Various commercial textiles (including fibers, yarns and fabrics), foams, sponges, papers, plastics, etc.,61–64 have been widely investigated as flexible substrates. For example, Zou et al.65 performed the in situ vapor phase polymerization of 2,5-dibromo-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (DBEDOT) to deposit PEDOT on PET fabrics (Fig. 3(a)). The PEDOT/PET fabric showed much higher conductivity after stretching. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor showed larger specific capacitance under 150% tensile strain than that of the original state, and retained 81% of its initial capacitance after 2000 stretching–releasing tests. The excellent mechanical flexibility and stretchability are attributed to the high strength and the tightening of the originally loose structures of PET fabrics, which results in a large tensile strain and tighter contact of PEDOT after stretching. Besides, a relatively high volumetric capacitance of 5.12 F cm−3 for fabric-based electrodes as well as a capacitance retention of 100% after 50000 charging/discharging cycles were obtained, owing to high pseudo-capacitance of PEDOT synthesized from a DEBOT monomer.
 Fig. 3  CP flexible electrodes prepared through the substrate-supported deposition strategy. (a) Optical and SEM images of the PEDOT/PET fabric electrode. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation scheme of the PPy nanowires/PVA-co-PE nanofiber membrane/PET fabric electrode. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Optical and SEM images of the PEDOT coated 3D porous PVP mat electrode. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
As such, different flexible substrates would provide the final devices with unique energy-storage and mechanical properties. The cotton, silk, wool and synthetic textiles can provide high mechanical strength and compatibility with wearable electronics,66 cellulose paper can lead to light weight, ultrathin devices and foldability,62 and foams or sponges can act as three-dimensional supports to greatly improve the deposition weight of active materials, and the final capacitance and energy density.61 Although these ready-made flexible substrates provide much convenience for depositing active materials, the relatively low specific surface area and compact internal structures would restrain the deposition of active materials and cause their aggregation. Thus, the power and energy densities, rate capabilities and cycling life would be highly limited.
For breaking through the necklace, designing novel flexible substrates with high specific surface area, especially with porous interconnected three-dimensional morphologies, has attracted great interest. For example, Alexis et al.67 prepared a 3D porous polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) mat through electrospinning and then conducted the in situ vapor phase polymerization of PEDOT (Fig. 3(c)). Benefiting from the interconnected structures of the PVP mat and the uniform PEDOT coating, the resulting SC showed a high capacitance of ∼20 F g−1 which still maintained 90% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. Wang et al.68 coated a porous interlayer of poly(vinyl alcohol-co-ethylene) (PVA-co-PE) nanofiber membrane between PET fabrics and PPy coats, in which the porous nanofiber interlayer provided more loading sites for PPy deposition and enlarged the PPy/electrolyte interfacial area for faradaic reactions. The assembled symmetric SC showed excellent performance with a capacitance of 339 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and an energy density of 20 W h kg−1 at the power density of 800 W kg−1, which outperformed most of the commercial SCs (<10 W h kg−1). The capacitance retentions under flat and repeated bending states were almost the same, owing to the tighter interfacial combination between PET and PPy after the addition of the PVA-co-PE interlayer.
In addition to the innovations based on flexible substrates, developing CPs with porous morphologies is always a research hotspot. The conventional nanoparticle- or film-like morphologies suffer from low specific surface area and compact aggregations, preventing the diffusion of electrolyte ions and decreasing the electroactive regions. To solve these problems, agents for morphology tuning are introduced, such as methyl orange (MO),69 sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS),70 hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB),71 sodium 4-butylbenzene sulfonate,72 anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium (AQS),68 naphthalene sulfonic acid (NSA),73 acid blue (AS),74etc.
Until now, CP-nanosheet, -nanoflower, -nanotube,69,70 -nanowire68,72 and -nanorod75 coated flexible electrodes have been developed. Among them, the 1D-microstucture CP-coated flexible electrodes show great potential in flexible SCs. Compared with other morphologies, the 1D-microstructured CPs are demonstrated to show impressive conductivity, capacitance, rate capability and cycle life, which are mainly attributed to their large conjugated structures, large specific surface areas and high ease to build 3D interconnected networks. Wang et al.68 applied AQS as a morphology tuner and in situ chemically deposited PPy nanowires onto PET fabrics (Fig. 3(b)). The symmetric SC possessed a high capacitance of 339 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1, which turned to be 215 F g−1 at 2 A g−1, showing much higher rate capability compared with most PPy electrodes. In their another work,73 NSA/AQS was applied as a morphology tuner, and sea urchin spine-like PPy arrays were in situ electrochemically deposited on modified PET fabrics. The assembled asymmetric SC showed a capacitance of 669 mF cm−2 and a retention of 100% after 10000 cycles. The almost ideal cycling life is very rare in pseudocapacitive electrodes, which was caused by the shortened electron/ion transport pathways and the weakened swelling/shrinkage of the PPy skeletons in the spiny PPy arrays.
More recently, electrodes with hollow morphologies, known for their large quantity of fast ion/electron transport pathways, are among the most promising electrode materials of flexible SCs. Utilizing substrates as a sacrificial template is proved to be an effective way to achieve hollow-structured electrodes. Liu et al.76 used an electro-spun poly(amic acid) nanofiber membrane as the sacrificial template followed by the in situ chemical polymerization of PANI, preparing membrane electrodes of hollow PANI fibers with a high capacitance of 601 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The capacitance was much higher than that of most PANI electrodes, because the hollow nanotubes with thin walls and orderly pore passages dramatically improved the ion diffusion and also the PANI utilization. However, the capacitance retention was only 52% after 500 cycles, owing to the swelling/shrinkage of PANI and also the cracking of the hollow nanotube morphology. Admittedly, the hollow-structured electrodes show great potential in flexible SCs but still have a long way to go in practice. Last but not least, some artful in situ deposition methods have also been reported, such as rapid mixing polymerization,77 the combination of in situ chemical-electrochemical polymerization78 and interfacial polymerization (placing flexible substrate at the interface),79etc.


3.1.2 Substrate-free preparation strategy. 
Compared with the above-mentioned substrate-supported deposition, the substrate-free strategies can produce electrodes with CPs homogenously dispersed in the whole electrodes, exhibiting better durability and energy-storage stability in practical uses. The electrospinning, wet-spinning and gelation techniques all belong to the substrate-free strategy.80 However, this strategy is highly limited by the poor dispersion of CPs (except for PEDOT) due to the curling and tangling natures of CP chains. As such, the severe aggregations, bad connections and low utilization of CPs would lead to weak energy-storage and mechanical properties. To solve this problem, some dopants, solvents, and binders (or crosslinkers) are added. However, these insulating components may remain and influence the final electrical and electrochemical properties.
3.1.2.1 Spinning technology. 
The spinning technology, known for large-scale and continuous production, is among the most promising technologies for preparing flexible electrodes. It mainly includes wet- and electro-spinning technologies, which are performed through mixing assistant agents (including dopants, solvents and binders) with monomers or macromolecules of CPs to generate homogeneous spinnable solutions followed by spinning processes.
Among spun CP fibers/films, PEDOT fibers/films are the most rapidly developed ones. This is attributed to the wonderful match of PEDOT and PSS. Actually, PEDOT:PSS agents have been commercially available, such as the water-soluble Clevios PH series (Heraeus, Germany) and organic polar solvent-dispersible PEDOT:PSS (Orgacon DRY).36 In the work of M. Razal et al.,81 ultra-conductive PEDOT fibers were prepared through wet-spinning in which PH1000 (Heraeus, Germany) was used as a raw material, and concentrated H2SO4 was used as the coagulation bath to coagulate the fibers and simultaneously to remove insulating PSS (Fig. 4(a)). The proposed wet-spinning method can remove PSS within seconds and increase the orientation of the PEDOT chains, enabling a super high conductivity of 3828 S cm−1 that is comparable to the highest value of ∼4000 S cm−1 to date. The retention of the conductivity could reach up to 91% after 2000 bending cycles at 180°. The assembled 12 cm-long supercapacitor showed an ultrahigh capacitance of 70.5 F cm−3 which still remained 95.8% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles, showing great potential in wearable electrical and energy-storage textiles. Notably, the removal of insulating PSS can improve the electrical conductivity with 1–2 magnitude, and can also greatly enhance the final energy and power densities. Ethylene glycol (EG), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethylformamide (DMF) and concentrated H2SO4 are all effective agents for removing PSS, in which concentrated H2SO4 is proved to be the most effective one.81 However, concentrated H2SO4 features strong acidity and corrosivity that would cause great damage to equipment. Thus, more efforts are required to develop alternative agents that are high-efficiency and environmentally friendly. Besides, most of the spun PEDOT products show relatively smooth and compact morphologies which are not beneficial for the ion diffusion in charge–discharge processes, and hence how to spin microporous PEDOT products is a critical issue.
 Fig. 4  CP flexible electrodes prepared through the substrate-free preparation strategy. (a) Wet-spinning preparation of ultra-conductive PEDOT fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) Electro-spinning preparation of the PANI–PEO nanofiber membrane electrode. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Structure and compositions of the PANI/phytic acid hydrogel electrode. (d) Optical and SEM images and the synthesis mechanism of the PANI/PVA hydrogel electrode which used boronic acid as the crosslinker. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (e) Preparation and structure of the 3D-crosslinked water-soluble triblock copolymer (namely IAOAI) hydrogel electrode. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Arbitrary structures of the PEDOT:PSS hydrogels and their SEM images. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 
In comparison with PEDOT, other types of CP fibers (or films) prepared through spinning technologies are not that satisfactory whether in energy-storage or mechanical aspects. For instance, J. Linhardt et al.82 utilized electro-spinning technology to prepare polyaniline–poly(ethylene oxide) (PANI–PEO) nanofibers. They mixed PANI with CSA/m-cresol/PEO to prepare a spinning solution and collected nanofibers with a rotating drum (Fig. 4(b)). CSA and m-cresol were used as the first and the second dopants, and PEO acted as the binder. The fiber electrode exhibited a conductivity of 1.74 S cm−1 and an ultrahigh capacitance of 3121 F g−1, while the capacitance retention was 85% after just 80 cycles. Admittedly, it is still a challenge to spin PPy or PANI materials with both high mechanical and energy-storage performances. The main reason is that PANI and PPy are characterized by tangle coil-like macromolecular structures and heavy aggregation, and thus they are difficult to be dispersed into extended chain structures unless high-content binders are added. Moreover, the binders suitable for PANI and PPy mainly include poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polycaprolactone (PCL), etc., which unfortunately, are difficult to remove and would remain in the final products.82,83 The remaining high-content binders would badly influence the final electrical and electrochemical properties.
3.1.2.2 Gelation technology. 
Gelation technology has the advantages of easy operation and scalable production. The hydrogel electrodes can provide fast electron transport pathways, an interconnected ion diffusion network and large active area for redox reactions, and the aerogel electrodes are famous for abundant open pores, high inner surface area and ultralight weight, which are beneficial for improving the final energy-storage performance. The excellent energy-storage performance, good processibility and high flexibility of gels make them among the most promising candidates for electrodes of flexible SCs.
For preparing CP gel electrodes, dopants, solvents and crosslinkers are needed. Polystyrene sulfonate (PSS),84 polyacrylamide (PAAm), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA),85 poly(acrylic acid) (PAA),86 lignosulphonate, cellulose and their derivatives,87etc. are common physical crosslinkers. However, these macromolecular crosslinkers are relatively large, leading to a large insulating phase in hydrogels. More recently, small molecular crosslinkers with multitype functional groups are proposed to be highly efficient, such as phytic acid (PA), copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt (CuPcTs), indigo carmine and isatin-5-sulfonic acid sodium salt dehydrate.86 These small molecular crosslinkers can interact with several CP chains and form stable networks.
For example, Bao et al.88 mixed aniline (ANI) monomer with phytic acid (PA) before the addition of oxidant solution, allowing the polymerization of PANI and simultaneously quick gelation within 3 min (Fig. 4(c)). The resulting PANI hydrogel electrode showed a high capacitance of ∼480 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, which could retain 83% after 10000 charge/discharge cycles. It also showed high rate capability of 92% with increasing the current density from 0.5 to 5 A g−1. The high performance is mainly attributed to the 3D porous nanostructures constructed by coral-like dendritic nanofibers. In another work,89 they also prepared a PPy hydrogel electrode through an interfacial polymerization method with PA as the crosslinker. The PPy hydrogel electrode showed a capacitance of ∼380 F g−1 and a capacitance retention of ∼90% after 3000 charge/discharge cycles. Besides, the capacitance decay was almost negligible even under a small curvature radius of 3 mm. The wonderful energy-storage stability under repeated charging/discharging and mechanical reformations were mainly ascribed to the 3D porous nanostructures that could accommodate the deformation of the PPy backbones.
More recently, chemically crosslinked ones are attracting more and more attention. Compared with the physically crosslinked gels, although the preparation of chemically crosslinked CP gels seems more complicated and time-consuming, the resultant electrodes are usually superior in mechanical stability and energy-storage stability under various mechanical conditions, which strongly meets the high durability demand of flexible SCs.
For example, Ma et al.90,91 did some work on using boronic acid as a chemical crosslinkers to prepare PANI/PVA hydrogels in which boronic acid groups are covalently incorporated onto PANI after copolymerization of 3-aminophenylboronic acid (ABA) and aniline (ANI). As shown in Fig. 4(d), the prepared hydrogel showed a 3D interconnected network-like morphology with a large quantity of open mesopores, which was assembled by PANI nanoparticles. Such a hierarchically mesoporous morphology is beneficial for charge transfer and mass transportation, resulting in a large electrode capacitance of 928 F g−1 or 1856 mF cm−2 at 0.5 A g−1. Besides, the assembled device showed 100% of capacitance retention after 1000 folding/unfolding cycles and 90% after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. It also showed a very small capacitance decay of 2.4% after 1 week and 8.5% after 7 weeks, presenting superior lifetime compared to most of the reported CP flexible SCs. The stable energy-storage performance was mainly attributed to the robust PANI backbones and the elastic PVA network. Wang et al.92 designed a water-soluble triblock copolymer (namely IAOAI), which consisted of a central poly(ethylene oxide) block (A) and terminal poly(acrylamide) (PAAm) block with aniline moieties randomly incorporated (B). Subsequently, the copolymerization of aniline monomers with the terminated aniline moieties on the IAOAI was performed (Fig. 4(e)). The as-prepared hydrogel electrode showed a 3D well-ordered interconnected structure, which could guarantee high flexibility of the hydrogel and facilitate electrolyte ion movement and mass transfer. Consequently, the symmetrically assembled SC showed an excellent capacitance of 919 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, a capacitance retention of 90% after 1000 cycles, and almost identical capacitance at 0–180° bending status.
In particular, gels feature arbitrary structures, and hence they can be transformed into other types of flexible electrodes, like films, fibers and bulks. That's to say, gels can be processed into desired shapes for practical applications, showing inimitable production flexibility in industry. For example, Wang et al.84 prepared PEDOT hydrogels with a low solid content of 4% but a relatively high conductivity of 880 S m−1 through a simple combined treatment of dilute and concentrated H2SO4 on PEDOT:PSS (PH100) suspension. Interestingly, the hydrogels were cut into films, or the hydrogels were prepared in glass capillary molds to get fibers (Fig. 4(f)). The obtained fiber electrodes were twisted to get a yarn-type SC with a high volumetric capacitance of 202 F cm−3 at 0.54 A cm−3, which was nearly unchanged after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. As indicated, the reason for the high performance mainly lies in the porous morphology that could improve the diffusion of electrolyte ions into the fiber matrix.

3.2 Conductive polymer/carbon composite electrodes
Although CP flexible electrodes have the advantages of facile preparation, low cost and high energy density, their unstable electrical conductivity and cycling stability has highly restricted their practical applications. Compositing CPs with carbon materials (Cs) is proved to be an effective approach to solve the above-mentioned problems through their synergistic effects.
The deposition of CPs to all kinds of carbon materials has been widely investigated, like carbon cloth,87 carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or reduced graphene oxide (RGO) or graphene oxide (GO) fibers/films/papers/gels/foam,93,94 biocarbon materials,95 carbon nanofiber yarns,96 carbon paper,97etc. For example, Han et al.98 deposited carbon black (CB) and PEDOT:PSS films on mulberry tree-derived paper (MP) through a simple dip-coating strategy to obtain MP/CB/PEDOT:PSS electrodes. The electrode exhibited an energy density of 29.8–39.8 W h kg−1 and a power density of 2.8–13.9 kW kg−1 with 90.7% retention of its original capacitance after 15000 charge–discharge cycles, which are superior to the previously reported paper-type supercapacitors. The high performance was mainly due to the porous morphology of mulberry tree-derived paper and the uniform loading of CB/PEDOT:PSS. Notably, the electrode also showed excellent mechanical strength, flexibility (an almost unchanged capacitance after 48 h of continuous twisting and bending), and chemical toughness (a capacitance retention of 98% when soaked in strong acid solutions of H2SO4 and HCl), owing to the mechanically and chemically reliable natures of mulberry tree-derived paper.
When the CPs/Cs coats are in a smooth film form, the active areas for charge exchange between the electrolyte and electrode active materials would be highly limited. For increasing active areas and specific capacitance, great efforts are devoted to depositing high-specific-surface-area electroactive materials to carbon-based substrates for preparing composite electrodes, like nanoparticles,87 nanowires,96 nanoflowers,97 nanorods99 and their arrays, as well as some hollow microstructures.100 For example, Chen et al.99 grew orderly and highly dense PANI nanorod arrays via the in situ chemical oxidation method onto carbon nanofibers (CNFs) to prepare PANI NRAs@CNFs electrodes (Fig. 5(a)). The assembled symmetric supercapacitor showed a capacitance of 287 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which maintained 85% after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. The energy density was 10.04 W h kg−1 at a power density of 225 W kg−1, which showed a very small decay under the bending angles of 45° and 90°. As demonstrated, the ordered PANI nanorod arrays could facilitate the inflow and outflow of electrolyte ions, and meanwhile, the narrow diameter of these PANI nanorods can shorten the electron transport, leading to high electrochemical performance. For now, synthesizing an array-type morphology of CPs on carbon substrates attracts widespread attention. Interestingly, the array-type morphology is not common to see when those cotton, viscose, silk, wool, PET textiles, etc. were used as substrates. It seems that the carbon substrates may have an induction effect on CP morphology through the conjugate stacking effect.
 Fig. 5  CP–Cs flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation and SEM images of the PANI nanorod array@carbon nanofiber electrode, and the energy-storage performance of the samples with and without PANI. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Preparation of the carbon cloth/graphene hydrogel/PANI electrode, and energy-storage performance of the samples with and without graphene hydrogel filling gaps and voids of carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the GO/CNT/PEDOT:PSS coaxial fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
In addition, making full use of the carbon nanomaterials that possess highly porous morphologies as scaffolds is another way to improve the specific surface area of composite electrodes. For example, Zhong et al.87 filled gaps and voids in carbon cloth with p-phenylenediamine-functionalized graphene hydrogel (FGH) before the loading of a lignosulfonate/PANI hydrogel (Fig. 5(b)). The electrode showed a wonderful capacitance of 1223 mF cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2, and the assembled symmetric supercapacitor displayed a competitive energy density of 160.6 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 1000 μW cm−2. Besides, the CV curves were totally overlapped when the bend angle changed from 0° to 180°, and the capacitance could maintain 93.4% after 1000 bending cycles at 180°. The results were ascribed to the 3D interconnected porous network of functionalized graphene hydrogel (FGH), which served as a 3D conductive scaffold to improve the mass loading of lignosulfonate/PANI and the specific surface area of the electrodes.
Recently, various modern textile technologies, like wet-spinning, electro-spinning and weaving techniques, have greatly fuelled the development of one-dimensional electrodes. In comparison with the two-dimensional electrodes, the one-dimensional ones show several advantages, including high flexibility, knittability and design versatility, which are considered as promising candidates of flexible electrodes.101 Among the one-dimensional composite electrodes, the coaxial core–sheath structure got great interest in recent years as the structure can shorten the charge transport distance and improve the power and energy densities. For example, Qin et al.96 coated a polyacrylonitrile nanofiber (PAN NF) film on aligned carbon fiber yarn (CFY) via electro-spinning followed by the carbonation treatment to obtain the CFY@carbon nanofiber film core, and deposited PANI nanowire arrays on that as the sheath through in situ chemical polymerization. The supercapacitor showed a capacitance of 234 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2 with an outstanding charge–discharge cycling stability of 90% after 8000 cycles. The corresponding energy and power densities were 21.4 μW h cm−2 and 0.52 mW cm−2. It was indicated that the core–sheath structure has abundant open channels for ion storage and transport. Besides, the high specific surface area and pseudo-capacitance of PANI nanowire arrays are also responsible for the high performance.
In addition to the Cs/CP core/sheath structure, the Cs/CPs interpenetrating structure was also a good choice for the one-dimensional electrodes. As for the Cs/CPs core/sheath structure, the sheath layer is usually controlled in a limited thickness to ensure the short distances of electron transport and ion diffusion. In this way, the interfacial area between the sheath layer and electrolyte would be highly restrained. Besides, if the core part is made from two-dimensional Cs (i.e., graphene and its derivate materials), it is likely to show a pretty compact and even highly stacked microstructure, impeding ion diffusion. Conversely, the Cs/CP interpenetrating structure can make full use of the highly porous Cs as the conductive scaffold, and the CPs as the stacking-inhibitor. As a result, higher specific surface area and more electroactive regions can be guaranteed, which are beneficial for charge–discharge cycle life, rate capability and power density. For example, Gao et al.102 applied the coaxial wet-spinning technology to prepare RGO/CNTs/PEDOT:PSS@carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC) fibers (Fig. 5(c)). In the interpenetrating composite electrode, the GO and CNTs worked as a conductive electric-double-layer matrix for electron transport and ion absorption, and PEDOT:PSS could provide the pseudo-capacitance and its wettability could facilitate ion diffusion. The highly wrinkled microstructure increased the specific surface area, which is also beneficial for energy-storage performance. Besides, the ionically conductive but electrically nonconductive CMC layer was used as a protective layer for avoiding short circuit of electrodes. Consequently, the assembled yarn-type SC showed a high capacitance of 396.7 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2, which remained 90.4% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. Admittedly, in the Cs/CPs interpenetrating structure, the distribution of CPs throughout the Cs conductive scaffolds may cause the electrical conductivity to slightly decrease. Besides, the time of ions diffusing into the inner part to exchange charges with CPs may be prolonged, which is not beneficial for making the pseudo-capacitive effect of CPs. By the way, two crucial issues of the one-dimensional electrodes are fiber orientation and specific surface area, which directly determine their mechanical and energy-storage properties, respectively, and deserve more investigations in the future.
3.3 Conductive polymer/metal compound composite electrodes
CPs and metal compounds (MCs), both well-known for their high theoretical pseudo-capacitance (∼2000 F g−1), have made significant advances as pseudocapacitive substances in the field of flexible SCs. Thus, compositing CPs with MCs can produce electrodes with high specific capacitance and energy density. However, CPs and MCs are both poor in cycling stability, and hence enhancing the cycling stability of CP/MC composite electrodes seems to be an eternal topic.
At the beginning of the 21st century, CP/MC composite electrodes were reported, and various metal oxides (MOs), metal sulphides (MSs) and metal hydroxides (MOHs) were all widely investigated in the composite electrodes.103–107 For example, in 2013, Wei et al.105 grew CoAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH)@PEDOT core/shell nanoplatelet arrays on Ni foil as a flexible electrode, which showed a high specific capacitance of 672 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Besides, the capacitance retention of 92.5% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles was obtained, which was much higher than most pseudocapacitive supercapacitors. The results were related to the high pseudo-capacitance of the LDH core, improved conductivity after the PEDOT shell coating, and porous nanoplate-arrayed morphology. Cheng et al.108 prepared bacterial cellulose fabrics@polyaniline@Ni–Co layered double hydroxide (BC@PANI@NiCo-LDH) electrodes through a layer-by-layer chemical oxidation method (Fig. 6(a)). The composite electrode showed a high capacitance of 1690 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which was attributed to the 3D conductive network constructed by BC@PANI, high pseudo-capacitance of PANI and NiCo-LDH, and the 3D hierarchical porous morphology of the small NiCo-LDH nanosheet-coated BC@PANI nanofiber network. Besides, it displayed outstanding foldability, stable energy-storage properties under 0–180° bending angle, high tensile strength (90.8 ± 4.9 MPa) and high breaking elongation (7.2 ± 0.7%). The excellent energy-storage stability under mechanical deformations and strong mechanical properties were ascribed to the 3D network structure of BC@PANI and the nano-glue effect of PANI which could uniformly and robustly immobilize NiCo-LDH on that. In short, the different combinations of MCs and CPs really boosted the development of high-energy-density SCs. Currently, more and more MCs are being developed, enriching the combinations and providing larger research room for investors.
 Fig. 6  CPs–MCs flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation of the bacterial cellulose fabrics@polyaniline@Ni-Co layered double hydroxide (BC@PANI@NiCo-LDH) electrode, and their GCD and EIS curves. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2018. (b) Protective effect of PPy on the inside MnO2 in acidic electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the PANI@3D MXene film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019 (d). Preparation of the wet-spun MXene/PEDOT:PSS fibers, and their SEM images and EDS mapping. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 
Besides, MCs usually suffer from poor cycling stability mainly due to the loss of active materials into the electrolyte and the collapse of the porous morphology. One effective way to solve the problem is to deposit CPs outside MCs,109–112 and the protective effect of the CP coat on MCs was formally proposed approximately in 2016. In 2017, Yu et al.112 designed a novel 3D-nanostructured TiO2 nanotube array/MnO2 nanosheet/PPy electrode that could work under acidic conditions (Fig. 6(b)), and assembled a solid-state asymmetric SC with a high energy density of 2.12 mW h cm−3 and a power density of 0.04 W cm−3 which retained 80.3% after 20000 cycles. The high cycling stability was due to the protective effect of the PPy shell on the inside MnO2. In 2018, Zhai et al.109 prepared a core–shell nanofiber film containing a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)/MnO2 core and a PPy shell through electrospinning of PAA/Mn2+ followed by in situ chemical oxidation of MnO2 and polymerization of PPy. The resultant electrode showed a capacitance of 580 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 in aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte, and an excellent charge–discharge cycle life that was high with up to 100% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. It was suggested that the PPy shell remarkably prolonged the cycle life by preventing MnOO− from dissolving into the electrolyte during charge–discharge processes. Until now, the investigations on the synergistic effects between MCs and CPs have become more and more in-depth. Not only have some theoretical models been authoritatively confirmed, but also some new synergistic effects have been discovered.
More recently, MXenes, as a new member of the 2D materials family, have received wide attention due to their excellent conductivity (up to ∼105 S cm−1), high pseudo-capacitance (up to 1600 F cm−3), strong mechanical properties and also good hydrophilicity, showing great potential in flexible SCs. Nevertheless, preparing MXene electrodes with good electrical, electrochemical and mechanical properties at the same time is still a big challenge due to their inherently weak interlaminar interactions and small size.113 To solve the problem, some reports incorporated CPs with MXenes. In situ polymerizing CPs on MXene substrates is among the most common methods to prepare MXene/CP composite electrodes. As reported, 2D MXene materials are wonderful templates or substrates for CPs because they are rich in some functional groups (such as –F, –OH or –O), which would facilitate the absorption of the positively charged monomer and the in situ polymerization of CPs on their surface. For instance, in 2019, Jian et al.114 performed the in situ chemical polymerization of PPy on MXene nanosheets, generating 3D carambola-like MXene/PPy composite films with an electrode capacitance of 416 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and a retention of 86.4% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. In fact, the electrochemical properties are not that satisfactory because the poor wettability of the PPy shell and the slightly compacted microstructures of the MXene nanosheets limit the ion diffusion. Thus, more and more works are focusing on creating a porous morphology and increasing the specific surface area to improve the energy-storage properties. Currently, the rapidly developed 3D MXene materials provide a very promising substrate or template for CPs. In 2019, Gogotsi et al.115 prepared a PANI@MXene cathode by casting PANI onto a porous 3D Ti3C2Tx film (Fig. 6(c)). The 3D open porous morphology is beneficial for electronic and ionic transport. As a result, the electrode showed a high electrical conductivity of 600 S cm−1, a record high volumetric capacitance of 1632 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1 and an ultrahigh rate capability with 827 F cm−3 at 5000 mV s−1. The assembled asymmetric supercapacitor with PANI@MXene and MXene as the cathode and anode, respectively, showed an energy density of 50.6 W h L−1 at a power density of 127 kW L−1. Besides, this work enabled MXene to be used as a cathode through compositing MXene with PANI, which is very meaningful.
In addition, due to the 2D atomic thick morphology and the hydrophilic nature, MXenes can be prepared into flexible fibers (nanofibers) and films through facile solution-processible strategies, like wet-spinning, electro-spinning, vacuum filtration, spin-coating, spray-coating, etc. This provides much convenience for preparing MXene/CP composite electrodes and greatly meets the demand of mass production. For example, in 2019, M. Razal et al.116 proposed a scalable one-step wet-spinning method to fabricate Ti3C2Tx MXene nanoflakes/PEDOT:PSS hybrid fibers, in which PEDOT:PSS chains exist between MXene nanoflakes and served as a conductive binder to glue the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanoflakes together, thus providing the required spinnability and flexibility (Fig. 6(d)). As demonstrated, PEDOT:PSS chains and MXene nanoflakes both aligned along the fiber axis, leading to a record conductivity of ∼1489 S cm−1. Besides, the fibers showed a high capacitance of ∼614.5 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1, and the planar supercapacitor prepared through placing two such fibers in parallel on a flexible PET under the cover of PVA/H2SO4 maintained 95% of its initial capacitance after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. However, MXene/CP composite electrodes prepared through such solution-processible strategies generally show densely packed morphologies, which highly limited the energy-storage properties and deserves more investigation in the future (Table 1).
Table 1 Recently reported flexible supercapacitors and their energy-storage performance




Electrode
Electrolyte
Configuration
Scan rate
Device specific capacitance
Ref.




Graphene/PEDOT:PSS film
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.25 A g−1
206 F g−1

22



PPy-coated cotton, linen, viscose and polyester fabrics
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
5 mV s−1
268, 244, 178, 164 F g−1

56



PDMS sponge/PPy
PVA/KOH
Sandwich
10 A g−1
126 F g−1

57



PEDOT nanofiber film
NBu4PF6 0.1 M in acetonitrile


5 mV s−1
30 mA h g−1 for electrode

59



Polypropylene/Au/PEDOT
PVA/H3PO4
All in one
0.02 mA cm−2
27.8 mF cm−2

60



Bacterial cellulose paper/PEDOT
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.83 A cm−3
106.3 F cm−3

62



PPy
Boron cross-linked PVA/KCl
All in one
0.8 mA cm−2
224 mF cm−2

63



PET fabrics/PEDOT
Polyurethane/Na2SO4
Sandwich
2 mA cm−2
0.62 F cm−2 (5.12 F cm−3)

65



Silk fabrics/Au/PEDOT
PVA/LiClO4
Yarn
0.0012 mA cm−1
500 F g−1 (or 62 mF cm−2)

66



Cotton yarn/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.42 mA cm−2
74 mF cm−2

69



Ni foam/PTFE/carbon black/hollow PPy
Aqueous KCl


0.2 A g−1
380 F g−1 for electrode

70



Filter paper/PPy
PVA/H3PO4
Planar-interdigital
2 mV s−1
201 mF cm−2

72



PET/PVA-co-PE film/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
2 A g−1
215 F g−1

68



Cotton fabric/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.2 mA cm−2
669 mF cm−2

73



Ni foam/carbon black/PVDF/PPy
Aqueous NaNO3


20 mA cm−2
427 F g−1 for electrode

74



Cotton fabric/PPy
Aqueous NaCl
Sandwich
0.6 mA cm−2
325 F g−1

75



Polyvinylpyrrolidone/PEDOT nanofiber film
PVDF-co-HFP/EMIBF4
Sandwich
1 A g−1
20 F g−1

67



Hollow PANI nanofiber film
Aqueous H2SO4


1 A g−1
601 F g−1

76



Glass fiber filter paper/PANI
Aqueous H2SO4


1 A g−1
490.6 F g−1 for electrode

77



PPy-coated woven cotton, woven silk, wool gauze, knitted cotton, and knitted PET
Aqueous H2SO4


1 mA cm−2
1748, 1349, 1007, 4848 and 1213 mF cm−2

79



Cladophora nanocellulose paper/PEDOT
Cellulose paper/H2SO4
Sandwich
10 mA cm−2
90 F g−1 (920 mF cm−2, 54 F cm−3) for one electrode

80



Wet-spun PEDOT:PSS fibers
PVA/H3PO4
Yarn
5 mV s−1
70.5 F cm−3, 0.59 mF cm−1

81



Electrospun PANI/PEO nanofiber film
Aqueous H2SO4/m-cresol


0.1 A g−1
3121 F g−1 for electrode

82



PEDOT:PSS fibers from hydrogels with arbitrary-structures
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.54 A cm−3
202 F cm−3

84



PEDOT:PSS/PVA/PMAA hydrogels
PVA/PMAA/H3PO4
Sandwich
10 mV s−1
7.38 mF cm−2

85



Carbon cloth modified by sodium lignosulfonate/PANI hydrogel
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
2 mA cm−2
1223 mF cm−2

87



Carbon cloth/phytic acid modified PANI
Aqueous H2SO4


0.2 A g−1
480 F g−1 (2.3 F cm−2) for one electrode

88



Carbon cloth/phytic acid modified PPy
Aqueous H2SO4


0.25 A g−1
380 F g−1 (6.4 F cm−2) for one electrode

89



PVA/PANI hydrogel
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.25 A g−1
306 mF cm−2 (153 F g−1)

90



PVA/PANI hydrogel
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.25 A g−1
420 mF cm−2 (210 F g−1)

91



PANI-functionalized triblock copolymer hydrogel
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.25 A g−1
187 F g−1 (919 F g−1 for electrode)

92



Carbon nanofiber scroll/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.1 A g−1
339 F g−1 (85.1 mF cm−1, 123.2 mF cm−2)

93



Chitosan-derived carbon sheet/microfibrillated cellulose fiber film coated with PANI
Filter paper/KCl
Sandwich
1 mA cm−2
1688.88 mF cm−2 (139.6 F g−1) for electrode

95



Carbon nanofiber yarn/PAN/PANI yarn
EMIEMBF4/PVDF/DMF
Planar
0.1 mA cm−2
234 mF cm−2

96



Carbon fiber paper/PEDOT
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.5 A g−1
111 F g−1 (836 mF cm−2, 28 F cm−3)

97



GO/PPD/PANI hydrogel
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.5 mA cm−2
3488.3 mF cm−2 (872 F cm−3)

94



Mulberry tree-derived paper/carbon black/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
1 A g−1
366.7 F g−1

98



Carbon nanofiber film/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.5 A g−1
285 F g−1

99



Hollow fibers/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.5 mA cm−1
278 mF cm−1 (622 mF cm−2)

100



Ti/PAN/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.97 A g−1
68 F g−1

101



Wet-spun GO/CNTs/PDEOT:PSS@CMC fiber
PVA/H2SO4
Yarn
0.1 mA cm−2
396.7 F g−1

102



Bacterial cellulose film/PANI/NiCo-LDH
PVA/KOH
Sandwich
1 A g−1
235.5 F g−1

108



Ni foam/(MnO2–PANI) composite
PVA/KOH
Sandwich
0.5 A g−1
129.2 F g−1

104



Ni foil/CoAl-LDH/PEDOT
Aqueous KOH


1 A g−1
672 F g−1 for electrode

105



Ni(OH2)/GOPS/PEDOT:PSS
Polypropylene/KOH
Sandwich
1 A g−1
90.1 F g−1

106



Poly(acrylic acid)/MnO2/PPy nanofiber film
Aqueous Na2SO4


5 A g−1
580 F g−1 for electrode

109



Ni/NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT fiber
PVA/KOH
Yarn
0.4 mA cm−2
31.6 mF cm−2 (3.16 F cm−3)

110



Vertically aligned CNTs/graphene foam/V2O5/PEDOT
PVA/LiNO3
Sandwich
1 A g−1
48.83 F g−1

111



Ti foil/TiO2/MnO2/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
1 mA cm−2
122.5 mF cm−2

112



Silicone elastomer fiber/Ti3C2Tx MXene/PEDOT
PVA/H2SO4
Planar
0.5 A cm−3
285.2 F cm−3

116



ITO glass/Ti3C2Tx MXene/PPy
Aqueous H2SO4
Sandwich
0.5 A g−1
160 F g−1

114



Ti3C2Tx MXene film/PANI
Swagelok cell/H2SO4
Sandwich
1 A g−1
87.3 F g−1 (298.5 F cm−3)

115



Ramie-derived carbon fibers/MnO2/PEDOT on plastic film
PVA/KCl
Sandwich
1 A g−1
138 F g−1

117



Ni foam/RGO/FeCoS/PPy
Filter paper/KOH
Sandwich
1 A g−1
94 F g−1

118



GO/WO3/PPy composite coated on glassy carbon
H2SO4


1 A g−1
473 F g−1 for electrode

119



Ti/TiN/PANI
HCl


10 mA cm−2
242 mF cm−2 for electrode

120



Cu foil/Co3O4/PPy/MnO2
KOH


0.5 A g−1
782 F g−1

121



Active carbon fiber cloth/PANI/CNTs/MnO2
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
5 mA cm−2
2606 mF cm−2

122



Carbon fiber cloth/PANI/Ni–Mo–P
PVA/H2SO4
Sandwich
0.5 mA cm−2
1072.5 mF cm−2

123



Carbon fiber cloth/(RGO/MoS2/PEDOT composite)
PVA/H3PO4
Sandwich
0.1 mF cm−2
10.35 mF cm−2

125



Graphite felt/PPy/MnO2
Aqueous Na2SO4


0.5 A g−1
821.3 F g−1 for electrode

126



SWCNTs film/MnO2/PPy
Aqueous Na2SO4


1 mV s−1
351 F g−1 for electrode

127



PEDOT/PANI fiber
PVA/H2SO4
Planar
5 mA cm−3 (6.7 mA cm−2)
554.1 F cm−3 (740 mF cm−2)

129



PVA-TEOS film/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
Planar-interdigital
0.05 A g−1
51.42 F g−1

130



Graphene/PVDF/graphene
PVDF/H3PO4
Fiber
0.6 mA cm−2
346.5 mF cm−2

131



PVA/H2SO4 chemical hydrogel coated with PANI
PVA/H2SO4
All in one
0.2 mA cm−2
488 mF cm−2

135



PEO/PEDOT film
PEO/NaCl
Sandwich
5 mV s−1
28.8 F g−1

136



Carbon cloth/PANI
β-Cyclodextrin grafted cellulose hydrogel
All in one
1 mA cm−2
1003.5 mF cm−2

137



α-D/PAAm/PANI hydrogel
Glass fiber separator/H2SO4
Sandwich
2 A g−1
322 F g−1

138





3.4 Ternary composite electrodes
Ternary composite electrodes of CPs, Cs and MCs have gained significant attention as flexible electrode materials due to their balanced electrical, electrochemical and mechanical properties. These are mainly benefited from their synergistic effects, for example, the increased electrical conductivity, high-specific-surface-area morphology, high electronic and ionic transport capability, improved wettability, unique interfacial interactions, and the combination of electrical-double-layer and faradaic capacitances. Until now, various CPs, Cs and MCs have been reported, as well as various preparation methods. Thus, ternary composite electrodes obtained through different combination types, orders and routes along with their synergistic effects present tremendous research potential.
The most classic prototype is in the form of Cs/MCs/CPs. For example, Zhu et al.117 used the ramie-derived carbon fibers (RCFs) as substrates with an interlayer of MnO2 nanoflakes and a wrapping layer of PEDOT (Fig. 7(a)). Benefited from the high electron transfer speed of the RCF backbone, the high pseudo-capacitance of MnO2 and the improved electrical conductivity of PEDOT, the hybrid electrode displayed a high capacitance of 922 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and impressive rate capability of 345 F g−1 at 40 A g−1. The corresponded symmetric device exhibited an energy density of 19.17 W h kg−1 at a power density of 500 W kg−1 which retained 83% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. Shahrochian et al.118 fabricated a ternary hybrid electrode of RGO/Fe–Co sulphide/PPy on nickel foam through a facile electrodeposition method, which showed a capacitance of 3178 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 and a good rate capability of 70% when the current density was increased to 30 A g−1. The asymmetric device of RGO/Fe–Co sulphide/PPy//RGO showed a capacitance of 94 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a retention of 97.5% after 2500 charge–discharge cycles. It was indicated that the structure of monolithic 3D RGO foam supported the Fe–Co sulphide ultrathin nanosheets and the PPy film remarkably enhanced the electronic conductivity and shortened the ion diffusion pathways, which should be responsible for the high performance.
 Fig. 7  Ternary CP–Cs–MC flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation of the ramie-derived carbon fibers@MnO2@PEDOT electrode, and their CV and EIS curves. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation and SEM images of the carbon cloth@PANI@Mo–Ni–P compounds flexible electrode. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Preparation of the RGO–MoS2/PEDOT flexible electrode. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) One-step preparation and SEM images of the interpenetrating ternary SWCNTs/PPy/MnO2 composite film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
Apart from the classic prototype (Cs/MCs/CPs), there are many other forms of flexible ternary composite electrodes, such as MCs/CPs/Cs,119 CPs/MCs/CPs,120 MCs/CPs/MCs,121 Cs/CPs/MCs122,123 and the completely interpenetrating ternary composites, etc. For example, Qian et al.123 demonstrated a novel approach to prepare carbon cloth@PANI@Mo–Ni–P compound flexible electrodes through the in situ polymerization of PANI on carbon cloth and then the electrodeposition of Mo–Ni–P compounds on PANI (Fig. 7(b)). The areal capacitance of the device was 1072 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2 with a retention of 92.3% after 2000 charge–discharge cycles, and the energy density was 0.38 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 0.40 mW cm−2. Notably, the ternary electrode of carbon cloth@PANI@Mo–Ni–P compounds showed much higher rate capability and cycling stability than the binary carbon cloth@PANI. It was concluded that the remarkably decreased ion transport resistance and the increased hydrophilicity after the Mo–Ni–P coat should be responsible for these. In the work of Diao et al.,124 PANI was firstly coated on RGO nanosheets through in situ chemical polymerization to prepare RGO/PANI which was then used as reductant. The afterwards added KMnO4 acted as an oxidant, generating nano-flaky MnO2 coated RGO/PANI flexible electrodes (RGO/PANI/MnO2). The electrode capacitance was 1092 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 with a retention of 82.3% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to the high-specific-surface-area MnO2 which increased the electroactive regions and shortened the ion transport distance. Besides, the protective effect of MnO2 nanoflakes inside PANI was found, which is that the MnO2 package could reduce the degree of swelling/shrinking of PANI and prolong the cycle life. Chen et al.125 firstly mixed GO sheets and MoS2 powders, and then used GO as an oxidant to directly initiate the polymerization of PEDOT (Fig. 7(c)). The final ternary electrode (RGO–MoS2/PEDOT) showed a relatively high capacitance of 241.81 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and a high retention of 93.7% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. The conductive framework of RGO, high pseudo-capacitive combination of MoS2/PEDOT and porous folded morphology are responsible for the high performance.
Despite great progress having been made in ternary composite electrodes, challenges still remain involving complicated and time-consuming preparation and poor reproducibility. In this context, some studies have already focused on a one-step or one-bath strategy to simplify preparation since 2013, mainly according to the oxidation of GO, some metal salts and metal oxides, and the reducing action of RGO. For example, Du et al.126 deposited PPy/MnO2 composites on graphite felts, and Hu et al.127 deposited PPy/MnO2 composites on free-standing single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films (Fig. 7(d)), both of which used KMnO4 as the oxidant to initiate the polymerization of PPy and to simultaneously obtain MnO2. Although the preparation process of ternary flexible electrodes is strongly simplified in this way, and their electrochemical properties are pretty competitive, the mechanical flexibility and energy-storage stability under mechanical deformations are still unsatisfactory.
In summary, different combination types, orders and routes would create composite electrodes with very different properties due to the daedal synergistic effects. Thus, the ternary composite electrodes and the behind synergistic effects show infinite research possibilities. Besides, facile, time-saving and reproducible preparation methods are desirably needed to facilitate the industrialization process.
3.5 Configuration designs of flexible supercapacitors
Until now, numerous innovations on flexible electrode materials have been made. Meanwhile, it is very important to pay attention to the configuration designs of SCs because the device configurations would highly affect their practical performances. In recent years, fiber-, yarn-, sandwich-, planar, and micro-type SCs have been demonstrated.

3.5.1 Sandwich-type supercapacitors. 
This type of SC is the most widely investigated one and will continue to play a main role in the future because of their easy assembly. They are composed of two electrodes with an interlayer of separator and electrolyte128 (Fig. 8(a)). The electrodes can be the above-mentioned films, textiles, sponges, papers, hydrogels, foams, etc. However, they are air-proof when used as wearable devices.
 Fig. 8  Configuration designs of flexible SCs. (a) Sandwich-, reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Planar/micro-, reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (c) Sandwich- and planar/micro- (in interdigital shape), reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (d) Fiber-, reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (e) Yarn-, reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016; reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (f) Integrated/all-in-one type SCs, reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. 


3.5.2 Planar/micro-type supercapacitors. 
Planar/micro-type SCs, known for shape and size designability, high flexibility and easy integration into wearable electronics, are composed of two electrodes placed on a flexible planar substrate. The electrodes can be flexibly designed to be different shapes, mainly including in-parallel129 (Fig. 8(b)) and interdigital130 (Fig. 8(c)) types. For example, Y. Kariduraganavar et al.130 prepared a PPy@PVA nanocomposite membrane with a thickness of ∼100 μm, and then assembled micro- and sandwich-type SCs (Fig. 8(c)). Their results showed that the micro-type SC had a specific capacitance of 51.42 F g−1 at 0.05 A g−1 which is two times higher than that of the sandwich-type one (25.49 F g−1). Noticeably, the energy-storage mechanism of planar-/micro-type SCs is still not that clear, and investigations on the configurations and working mechanisms are significant to enhance energy-storage performance.


3.5.3 Fiber-type supercapacitors. 
This type of SCs has a coaxial structure with electrolyte sandwiched between two electrodes. They are featured with tailorability and extremely high volumetric energy and power densities. They can be weaved into textiles in any patterns without scarifying air permeability, showing great potential in wearable energy-storage cloth131 (Fig. 8(d)). However, they are difficult to connect with external wires and usually lack a separator. Therefore, open or short circuits may occur during applications, which should be paid much more attention in future studies.


3.5.4 Yarn-type supercapacitors. 
The type of SC is assembled by two fiber electrodes. Two fiber electrodes are usually dip-coated with electrolytes, and then assembled in parallel,132 twist133 or spiral-twist134 forms, as shown in Fig. 8(e), showing versatile configurations. They are also tailorable, and can be weaved into textiles in any patterns without scarifying air permeability. The yarn-type SCs are very promising to be applied as energy-storage cloth if the issues of electrolyte leakage and failure can be well dissolved. By the way, yarn-type SCs are also called as fiber-type ones in some reports, and both types are classified into the 1D-type SCs.


3.5.5 Integrated type supercapacitors. 
This type of SC is the same as the sandwich-type ones in structure, and the difference lies in the preparation process. Coating electroactive substances directly on separators or solid-state electrolytes, cutting the edge and the integrated type (also called the all-in-one type) SCs are obtained.135–137 For example, Wei et al.135in situ chemically deposited PANI on a chemically-crosslinked PVA/H2SO4 film, forming a piece of film with PVA/H2SO4 in the middle and PANI on both sides, which can be directly used as a SC (Fig. 8(f)). This type of SC was newly developed in the last five years, remarkably simplifying the preparation process of SCs and also decreasing device thickness. More importantly, the direct deposition enables electroactive materials to tightly contact with electrolytes, which creates larger electroactive regions and tighter electrode/electrolyte interfacial combination. As a result, the integrated type SCs promote the development of high-performance ultrathin flexible SCs. Interestingly, they also emerge as a strong competitor in stretchable and self-healable SCs, which will be demonstrated below.

4. Smart supercapacitors
CPs depend on quick reversible redox reactions to achieve energy storage. Along with this, reversible colour changes and volumetric expansion/contraction usually occur. Therefore, CPs can endow SCs with unconventional electrochromic and electrochemical actuated functions. Besides, benefiting from their high electrical conductivity, high pseudo-capacitance, unique supramolecular structures, flexible preparation methods and moderate preparation conditions, CPs also play an important role in stretchable, self-healable and stimuli-sensitive SCs. These make CP-based SCs more intelligent and durable, which would widen their application areas, prolong their operation life, reduce electronic waste and promote wearable electronics to come into people's real life.
4.1 Electrochromic supercapacitors
Electrochromic devices are known to show different colours which can be distinguished by the naked eye during electrochemical redox reactions. Integrating electrochromic and energy-storage properties in one single device to prepare electrochromic SCs (ESCs) allows users to estimate the charge/discharge degree just through the colour in real time, making SCs more intelligent and providing much convenience for users. As introduced in Section 2.4.1, PANI, PT, PEDOT and PPy all own electrochromic characteristics, and hence can be used as both charge-storage and electrochromic layers of electrodes in ESCs. In particular, PEDOT is also widely used as a transparent current collector due to its high electrical conductivity and easy solution-processible preparations.
Among CPs, PANI is most widely used in ESCs because of its unique dichromic transitions from the light yellow leucoemeraldine (fully reduced), the green emeraldine salt (partially oxidized), and the blue emeraldine base (partially oxidized) to the black pernigraniline (fully oxidized),44,45 which is easy to identify. In 2012, Wei et al.139 used transparent PET as the supporting substrate and a spin-coated PEDOT:PSS layer as the current collector layer, and then in situ chemically polymerized PANI nanowire arrays on that as the charge-storage and electrochromic layer (Fig. 9(a)). The H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte was scrape-coated on the surface, and two such electrodes were stacked face to face to form the final device. The ESC device delivered 17 mF cm−2 (400 F cm−3) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, which maintained 90% of its original capacitance after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. Fixing one electrode at the bleached state, the device would change from light yellow green to deep blue when charged from 0 V to 1 V. Besides, the device showed no obvious changes in electrochromic and energy-storage properties after 200 bending cycles. The ESC could also work as an energy-storage smart window through integration with solar cells. When sunshine is strong, the ESC window can be charged by solar cells and turn to deep blue colour, blocking off strong sunshine, and meanwhile, the stored electricity in the ESC window can power some small electronics. When the stored charges are used up or the sunshine disappears, the ESC window would return to high transparency.
 Fig. 9  Transparent and electrochromic SCs (ESCs). (a) Preparation and electrochromic and energy-storage properties of the PET/PEDOT/PANI ESC device. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2012. (b) Electrochromic and energy-storage properties of the PET/PEDOT/Ni(OH)2 ESC device. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) New CPs with high pseudo-capacitance and electrochromic properties. Left, reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016; middle, reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Novel design configurations of ESC devices: the asymmetric sandwich (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019), staggered and patterned sandwich (reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019), and planar (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018) assembly styles. 
For simultaneously enhancing the electrochromic and energy-storage properties of ESCs, more and more studies switch the focus on composite electrodes of CPs, carbon materials (Cs) and metal compounds (MCs). For example, Hsiao et al.106 modified Ni(OH)2 surfaces with a layer of PEDOT:PSS using (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS) as a covalently connecting bridge (Fig. 9(b)). The composite film showed a capacitance of 503 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with a rate capability of 66.3% at 7 A g−1. The high energy-storage performance was attributed to the enhanced electronic and ionic transfer and the reduced restacking of Ni(OH)2 after the coating of PEDOT:PSS. The composite electrode gradually turned from light grey to dark grey with the electro-potential increasing from 0 V to 0.8 V, revealing a high coloration efficiency of 90.2 cm2 C−1 and a reversible transmittance change of 52.7%. Notably, it also showed almost 100% retention of capacitance and 91% retention of transmittance change after 500 bending cycles under 20 mm of curvature diameter, showing great potential in flexible wearable ESCs. This was caused by the strong adhesion and mechanical buffer effect of the PEDOT:PSS coat. Besides, Guo et al.140 used ITO/PET as the flexible transparent conductor, drop-coated GO film and then in situ electrochemically deposited PANI on that. The GO/PANI electrode showed a capacitance of 25.7 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1, and retained 53.1% of its initial capacitance after 1000 charge–discharge cycle. The GO/PANI composite film turned from light yellow, light green and blue to dark blue when the electro-potential varied from 0 V to 1.0 V, displaying a higher coloration efficiency of 59.3 cm2 C−1 than the PANI film (50.0 cm2 C−1). The higher coloration efficiency indicates that fewer charges can cause more obvious changes in optical density, which is mainly due to the affinity of oxygen-contained groups from GO with the hydrogens from PANI during the bleaching kinetics.
In addition, new CPs with excellent electrochromic and pseudo-capacitive properties were also developed through a molecular structure design, and got wide attention in recent years.141–144 For example, Meng et al.142 designed a new solution-processible donor–accepter (D–A) polymer, which is poly[4,7-bis(3,6-dihexyloxy-thieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)]-benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (PBOTT-BTD) (Fig. 9(c) left), and spray-coated it on ITO/PET to obtain a flexible electrode. The electrode showed a capacitance of 2.5 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2 with 86% capacitance retention after 2000 charge–discharge cycles. Besides, it appeared from green to blue when charged from −0.4 to 0.6 V; Xu et al.143 introduced 3,4-dihexoxythiophene as a π-spacer into the donor–accepter–donor (D–A–D) polymer, preparing the D–π–A–π–D type polymer (poly(4,7-bis(5-(2,3-dihydrothienodioxin-5-yl)-3,4-bis(hexyloxy)thiophen-2-yl)benzo thiadiazole) (poly(BT-Th-EDOT)) (Fig. 9(c) middle). The introduction of the π-spacer created a porous morphology and facilitated ion diffusion, leading to higher energy-storage and electrochromic properties. The polymer coated ITO glass showed a capacitance of 92 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, and a capacitance retention of 90% after 1000 cycles. Besides, it turned from light blue to deep green when charged from −0.2 to 1 V, with 46% of optical contrast in the visible region, 0.4 s switching time and 271 cm2 C−1 of coloration efficiency which are all among the highest values in neutral green polymers; Ruhlmann et al.144 designed a solution-processible poly(tris[4-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)phenyl]amine) (PTEPA) (Fig. 9(c) right) and drop-coated it on ITO as one electrode. It was then placed face-to-face with another ITO between which an interlayer of PVA/H2SO4 was set, obtaining an all-solid-state ESC. The device showed a capacitance of 13.3 mF cm−2 at 0.015 mA cm−2, and turned from steel-blue to yellow-green when discharged from 0.2 V to −0.8 V with a coloration efficiency of 122.8 cm2 C−1 and an optical contrast of 14.29% at 660 nm.
Noticeably, just the investigations on electrode materials cannot promise the final performances of ESCs, and the device configuration design is also of vital significance. In the conventional symmetric configuration, the device colour is dependent on the two stacked electrodes. To eliminate the colour interference between the two electrodes, some studies reported novel assembly styles, including asymmetric assembly145 (which was stacking an electrochromic electrode and a transparent electrode together, shown in Fig. 9(d) left), staggered sandwich-146,147 (Fig. 9(d) middle), patterned sandwich-147 (Fig. 9(d) middle), and planar type148 (Fig. 9(d) right) assemblies. As an example, Gu et al.147 prepared an ITO/PET@PANI electrode by depositing PANI on ITO/PET through the combined cyclic voltammetry-galvanostatic (CV-GS) electrochemical polymerization with the help of a tape mask (Fig. 9(d) middle). The electrode showed a capacitance of 40 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2, and turned from yellow-green, light green, green and blue to dark blue when charged from −1 to 1 V. In the novel staggered assembly, the positive and negative electrodes locate on either side and show reverse colour change during the charge/discharge process. In the patterned assembly, the charge/discharge condition can be simply identified according to the pattern's colour. Through such configuration designs, the colour-indication gets much more recognizable. Besides, the ESCs were connected with a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) to store the electricity harvested from human motions and meanwhile to self-indicate the charge/discharge degree, which greatly meets the market demands of green energy and intelligence. Cheng et al.148 reported a skin-like ESC in which PET was used as the substrate, and the chemically grown vertical Au nanowires underneath electrodeposited PANI were used as electrodes (Fig. 9(d) right). The ESC was in a planar shape with a capacitance of 11.76 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1. When charged from −0.8 to 0.8 V, the positive side gradually turned from light yellow, to green, to deep blue, while the negative side changes in the opposite way. Moreover, the ESC could be adhered onto human skin to power small wearable or implantable electronics and simultaneously self-indicate its energy levels.
Although such ESCs have made impressive progress, there are still some burning problems. First of all, their areal capacitances are very limited because the charge-storage and electrochromic layers need to be very thin for ensuring high transparency and electrochromic behaviours. Compositing CPs with Cs and MCs, developing new CP materials and investigating more novel configurations are all efficient solutions. Besides, PET, ITO and PET/ITO are widely used as substrates, which restrain the flexibility of ESCs. In the future, enhancing the flexibility would be one of the most significant research directions.
4.2 Electrochemically actuated supercapacitors
CPs have been used in the construction of electrochemical actuators (EAs) on account of their volumetric expansion/contraction during reversible electrochemical reactions.149,150 Among EAs, the multilayer type becomes a hotspot because they can operate in both wet and dry environments. Their configuration can be depicted to be two ultrathin film electrodes separated by a soft dielectric film which contains electrolytes in their internal pores. Under a certain electro-potential, the electrolyte ions migrate between the two electrodes in which the receiving side would expand while the other side (donating side) would contract, leading to bending of the device.151 Therefore, multilayer EAs are very similar to SCs in working mechanism and device configuration. Accordingly, there have been some studies reporting the electrochemically actuated SCs (EASCs) which show dual functions of electrochemical actuation and energy storage. Such SCs show great development potential in many fields, including microswitches, lab on a chip, artificial muscles, sensors and also energy storage/conversion areas.53–55
The most generally investigated approach to prepare such EASCs is to coat CPs on both faces of a dielectric film containing electrolytes. Kiefer et al.152 fabricated a tri-layer PEDOT:PSS@NBR/PEO@PEDOT:PSS film with a total thickness of 12.7 μm through inkjet-printing PEDOT:PSS onto both faces of the nitrile butadiene rubber/poly(ethylene oxide) (NBR/PEO) film (Fig. 10(a)). In the linear actuation mode, which used aqueous bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) solution as the electrolyte, the EASC showed a largest tip displacement of ∼6 mm, a strain of 3% and a cell capacitance of ∼197 F g−1 (based on weight of the whole device). Besides, the ink-jet printing technology used in this work opens up a new road to the mass production of EASCs.
 Fig. 10  Electrochemically actuated SCs (EASCs). (a) Preparation of the tri-layer PEDOT:PSS@NBR/PEO@PEDOT:PSS film, and its energy-storage and electro-actuating properties. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Structure of the five-layer PPy/CN–M/Nafion/CN–M/PPy and PEDOT:PSS/CN–M/Nafion/CN–M/PEDOT:PSS film, and the comparison of PPy with PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Afterwards, the synergistic effects of electric-double-layer (EDL) and faradaic (FD) capacitances were proposed to improve both the electro-mechanical and energy-storage properties.153–155 Naji et al. compared different CPs153 and investigated the influence of EDL and FD capacitances on the final properties.154,155 In their studies, they spray-coated multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)/carbon nanoparticles/Nafion solutions on both faces of a Nafion membrane (as electrolyte and separator) to prepare a tri-layer film, and then electrochemically deposited PPy or PEDOT:PSS on both faces of it to get a five-layer film (Fig. 10(b)). They found that combing EDL with FD capacitances could simultaneously improve the electro-mechanical and energy-storage properties, and the EDL capacitance played a more important role in the electro-mechanical aspect. Besides, they also compared the properties of EASCs prepared from different CPs. The PPy-coated device showed a capacitance of 146 mF cm−2 at 0.24 mA cm−2, which retained 87.41% of its original capacitance after 100 charge–discharge cycles. It showed a largest tip displacement of ∼25 mm under 6 V. However, the PEDOT:PSS coated one only showed a capacitance of 85 mF cm−2 and a largest tip displacement of ∼4 mm under the same conditions.
The development of EAs started as early as 1989, however, combining electrochemical actuated with energy-storage functions together in one single device to prepare EASCs was proposed since approximately 2016. The EASCs show great potential in various applications, but it has to be admitted that their development is relatively slow. Firstly, the application scenarios of such EASCs are rarely presented in current studies, which makes them seem less attractive for researchers and less significant in practice. Secondly, there exist some conflicts between the two functions. Thin film devices (<100 μm) and large swelling/shrinking are required for the electrochemically actuated behaviour, but these would cause low specific capacitance and short cycle life. Besides, the separators and electrolytes, which are suitable for the electrochemically actuated behaviour, usually lead to poor energy-storage performance. As such, increasing device conductivity and compositing CPs with other nanomaterials as electrodes seem to be effective solutions.
4.3 Stretchable supercapacitors
Stretchable SCs are able to be integrated into wearable and implantable electronics to power them on account of their mechanical flexibility and structural compatibility, providing much convenience and comfort for users. Thus, developing stretchable SCs with high energy-storage performance and robust stretchability is of high significance. CPs have the advantages of high flexibility, high pseudo-capacitance, feasible preparation and also moderate preparation conditions, making them get wide investigations in stretchable SCs.
The roles of CPs in stretchable SCs can be summarized to be (1) help to release stress and enhance mechanical stability.156,157 Noticeably, CP macromolecules possess extensibility, but pure CP products are usually in the form of powders or films of which breaking strength and elongation (<1%) cannot satisfy their practical uses. Therefore, additional stretchable components are highly needed, which can be designed to be stretchable electrodes, supporting substrates, separators, electrolytes and encapsulation films of SCs. Herein, we mainly review the CP-based stretchable electrodes; (2) improve the energy-storage stability under repeated stretching/releasing cycles. The coated CPs layers or the introduced CPs phase is usually continuous, which would increase the connectivity of electroactive substances and facilitate the electronic/ionic transport under stretching/releasing cycles; (3) provide pseudo-capacitance. This would increase the final capacitance and energy density, and prolong the power-supply time for wearable/implantable electronics.

4.3.1 Based on conductive polymers. 
The first-generation stretchable CP electrodes widely used elastomers as supporting substrates, such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), silicone rubber (Ecoflex series), polyurethane (PU), polyurethane acrylate (PUA), poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), acrylate rubber, poly(styrene-ethylene/butylene-styrene) (SEBS) and poly(styrene-block-isobutylene-block-styrene) (SIBS).158–161 They are usually pre-strained before CP deposition and finally released so that the buckled surface morphology with large specific surface area and good stretchable properties could be created. For example, G. Wallace et al.158 electrodeposited PPy onto the pre-strained Au-coated poly(styrene-block-isobutylene-block-styrene) (SIBS) elastomer films to prepare stretchable electrodes. The H3PO4–PVA electrolyte was well designed through optimizing the PVA molecular weight and its weight ratio to H3PO4. Finally, the symmetrically assembled stretchable SC showed a capacitance of 23.2 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. The capacitance remained 94.4% at 30% strain and 81% after 1000 cycles of such stretching/releasing. The high performance was mainly attributed to the high stretchability and ionic conductivity of the well-designed H3PO4–PVA electrolyte, and the buckled microstructure of the PPy/Au/SIBS film electrodes. Although the first-generation stretchable SCs own the advantages of facile preparation and remarkable diversity, the elongation strains that they can withstand are very limited.
Afterwards, commercial textiles with suitable braided structures65 and some cellulose-based films108,162 are proved to be good choices for supporting substrates of stretchable electrodes. For instance, Zou et al.65 deposited PEDOT on commercial stretchable PET fabrics to prepare stretchable PEDOT/PET fabric electrodes. Two such electrodes were stacked face to face with an elastic polyurethane textile separator and Na2SO4 electrolyte in the middle, and were finally wrapped with PDMS. The assembled sandwich-type device showed a capacitance of 0.64 F cm−2 (or 5.12 F cm−3) at 2 mA cm−2, which increased at first and tended to be stable when the strain gradually increased to 150%. Only a capacitance loss of 19% was observed after 2000 stretching/releasing cycles at 50% strain. Such excellent performance was mainly attributed to the high mechanical strength and loose braided structure of PET fabrics and the tight connection between PEDOT and PET fabrics. However, a fatal weakness of this type of stretchable SC is the high modulus and low elastic recovery which are caused by the inherent natures of textiles and cellulose-based films. In this context, utilizing high-elastic textiles or films as supporting substrates of stretchable electrodes, such as spandex, chinlon and some spiral coil-structure fibers/yarns, seems to be a highly efficient solution.
For now, the hydrogel electrodes show obvious advantages over other types of electrodes in stretchable SCs, such as, higher energy and power densities, longer cycle life and also better energy-storage stability under extreme strains. The development of high-elastic and high-ion-conductivity hydrogels, such as poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), polyacrylamide (PAAm) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), provide a solid research foundation for stretchable hydrogel electrodes. Besides, CPs are pretty suitable for stretchable hydrogel electrodes in terms of their supramolecular structures and moderate synthesis conditions. For instance, Kaskel et al.138in situ chemically synthesized PANI networks into the pre-organized α-cyclodextrin-containing polyacrylamide (αCD-PAAm) hydrogels. The affinity between the electronically conductive PANI phase and the ionically conductive αCD-PAAm phase was incredibly good, creating a highly homogeneous distribution of PANI and numerous interconnected macro/mesopores. As a result, the hydrogel could be stretched to 5.1 times of its initial length, which outperforms most conductive hydrogels. The symmetrically assembled device showed a capacitance of 304 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1, a high rate capability of 88% when the current density was increased to four times, and a high capacitance retention of 92% after 35000 charge–discharge cycles. Surprisingly, it showed a slightly increased capacitance to 315 F g−1 after being stretched to 150% strain due to the better contact between electrically and ionically conductive phases. As shown, the stretchable hydrogel electrodes would greatly boost the development of stretchable SCs as long as the water loss issue of hydrogels is well solved.


4.3.2 Based on conductive polymer-containing composites. 
To further improve the final properties, many researchers composited CPs with Cs and MCs as stretchable electrodes. The earliest stretchable electrodes were actually developed from Cs. Many studies deposited Cs on pre-strained elastomer rubber substrates (i.e., PDMS,163,164 silicone rubber,165 PU,133 acrylate rubber products (including films, fibers and yarns),166etc.) via transferring or in situ deposition approaches to prepare Cs stretchable electrodes. On this basis, various CPs can be directly deposited onto these Cs stretchable electrodes through coating or in situ growth methods, leading to the fast development of stretchable composite electrodes. For instance, Chou et al.164in situ electrochemically deposited PANI on omnidirectionally pre-strained CNTs/PDMS film and finally released it, obtaining the PANI/CNTs/PDMS film electrode with isotropic buckled morphology (Fig. 11(a)). First of all, the CNTs/PDMS film showed a very low sheet resistance of 2.75 Ω sq−1 which just increased 3% under 200% strain. The stable electrical property and excellent stretchability are mainly due to the sound interfacial combination between CNTs and PDMS, and also the well-designed omnidirectional buckled morphology. To increase the specific capacitance and energy density, PANI was then deposited on the CNTs/PDMS films, and the obtained PANI/CNTs/PDMS films were symmetrically assembled into a stretchable SC, which showed a high capacitance of 1147.12 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1 and a slightly improved capacitance under 200% omnidirectional strain. After 20 cycles of such extreme stretching/releasing, only a small capacitance loss of 3.13% was observed. The excellent properties can be ascribed to the high electrical conductivity and stretchability of CNTs/PDMS films, strong interfacial combination between CNTs/PDMS film and PANI, and the large deposition weight of PANI on buckled CNTs/PDMS films.
 Fig. 11  Stretchable SCs. (a) Optical and SEM images of the omnidirectionally stretchable PANI/CNTs/PDMS film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation, SEM image, dynamic stretching and the corresponding CV curves of the PPy/CNTs array fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the over-twisted CNTs/MnO2//CNTs/PPy coaxial fiber SC. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) Preparation of the acrylate rubber/MWCNTs/CPs composite film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Preparation and dynamic stretching of the Au NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel SC. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 
Although the insulating elastomer rubber compositions are of vital significance for stretchability, they take up large room/weight and make no contribution to the final specific capacitance. Therefore, more and more studies are focusing on developing elastomer rubber-free stretchable electrodes. Some studies directly used Cs as a stretchable supporting substrate to replace the elastomer rubber based on the fact that large conjugated structures of Cs enable them to be mechanically stretchable. For example, Wei et al.167in situ electrochemically deposited PPy on CNT array films and then transformed the composite films to fibers by drawing through diamond wire-drawing dies (Fig. 11(b)). Two such fibers were placed in parallel on an elastic slide and coated with PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte. The CNTs/PPy fibers showed a ultrasmall density of 70 mg cm−3. The final device capacitance was high up to 9.9 F cm−3 (or 3.5 mF cm−1 or 71 mF cm−2) at 2 mV s−1, which maintained 92% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. Besides, it showed 101% capacitance retention after 5000 stretching/releasing cycles at 5% strain, indicating excellent energy-storage stability under long-time dynamic stretching/releasing tests. As demonstrated, the sound conductive network of CNT bundles and the core–shell CNTs-PPy structure should be responsible for these. Chou et al.168 wrapped CNTs/PPy film around MnO2/CNTs fiber that had been coated with gel electrolyte. The fiber-shaped SC was then over-twisted to form a helical structure (Fig. 11(c)), which exhibited a capacitance of 9.46 F cm−3 (or 60.435 mF cm−2, or 19.86 F cm−1) at 10 mV s−1 and a retention of ∼80% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles with or without 20% strain. Besides, it also maintained 88% of its original capacitance after 200 stretching/releasing cycles at 20% strain. As revealed, the compact CNT fibers with numerous ripples on the surface, the high specific surface area of MnO2 nanoflowers and PPy films, and the wide potential window of 1.5 V after asymmetric assembly should be responsible for the excellent performance. Notably, the high stretchability was achieved via the over-twisting design without using any elastic compositions, which made a great breakthrough.
Not using insulating elastomers can not only improve energy-storage performance, but also is beneficial for preparing light-weight and mini-size stretchable supercapacitors, which highly meets the market demands of portable/wearable electronics. Nevertheless, the tensile strength, elongation and elasticity are highly limited when no elastic compositions are used. For balancing the performances, the stretchable electrodes with conductive/electroactive networks homogenously distributed in elastic substrates are gradually developed. For example, Wang et al.166in situ electrodeposited poly(1,5-diaminoanthraquinone) (PDAA) or PANI inside acrylate rubber (ACM)/MWCNTs composite film (Fig. 11(d)) as the anode and cathode, respectively. The ACM/Et4NBF4-AN was used as the quasi-solid-state electrolyte, placed between two electrodes and finally wrapped by PDMS. The asymmetric device showed a capacitance of 2.2 F cm−3 at 1 mA cm−2 and a high rate capability of 86% at 30 mA cm−2, which was due to the uniform coating of pseudo-capacitive PDAA and PANI on the MWCNTs’ surface at the nanoscale. Besides, the electrochemical behaviour was almost unchanged after 300 stretching/releasing cycles at 50% strain, which was caused by the high mechanical stretchability of ACM/MWCNTs films, the even dispersion of electroactive substances throughout the ACM matrix, and the use of ACM matrix both in electrodes and electrolyte; Yu et al.169in situ chemically deposited PPy inside Au NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel (CGP), obtaining the GCP@PPy hydrogels as electrodes (Fig. 11(e)), etc. The corresponding device with Ag NWs as current collectors, GCP@PPy as electrodes and GCP as the electrolyte revealed a high capacitance of 885 mF cm−2. Besides, its capacitance retention was high up to 100% and 89.5% at 400% and 800% strains, respectively, and reached 72% after 200 stretching/releasing cycles at such strains. As indicated, the solid covalent connections between PAM and Au, the dynamic metal–thiolate bonds and the even dispersion of electroactive materials throughout the PAM matrix are the main reasons for the top stretchability. Notably, the device also showed outstanding self-healing properties, which will be discussed in the next section.
To conclude, developing intrinsically stretchable electrodes is a serious bottleneck in stretchable SCs. As reported, the energy-storage performances under various stretching states mainly depend on the electroactive materials along with their distributions at stretchable substrates. The mechanical stretchability of devices is mainly determined by material characteristics of stretchable substrates, influences of electroactive materials and designs of device configurations. Although great progress has been made in recent years, stretchable SCs still have a long way to go before their practical applications. In the future, improving energy density and capacitance retention under large elongation strains are two critical issues.

4.4 Self-healable supercapacitors
Wearable SCs can be probably cracked or broken in practical applications. The self-healing ability enables them to repair their own damages and to restore their original performance to a large degree. This would significantly prolong their lifetime and decrease electronic waste, which is cost-effective and environmentally friendly. The self-healing mechanisms can be divided into two,52 which are (1) the intrinsic self-healable polymer matrix with reversible bonds. When damage occurs, weak covalent bonds (i.e., S–S) and non-covalent bonds (i.e., hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds) of the polymer matrices would be broken and then reform at wounds driven by the polymer chains’ movements; (2) the extrinsic self-healing behaviour after the release of healing agents. Microcapsules wrapping healing agents (liquid metal alloys, monomers or catalysts) are embedded. Upon damage, the microcapsules at wounds would break up and release healing agents to recombine separated parts. To date, most self-healable SCs are based on the former intrinsic self-healing mechanism.
Obviously, CPs are not self-healable polymers because their reversible bonds are far from enough to repair wounds of SCs. In self-healable SCs, CPs mainly play the role of electrical and electrochemical active substances, and it is the self-healable polymers that are responsible for the mechanically self-healable properties, such as PAA,156 PAM,169 PVA170,171 and PU.172 The reasons why CPs are widely used as electrodes of self-healable SCs are very similar to those of stretchable SCs. In brief, (1) CPs possess high pseudo-capacitance; (2) CPs can be fabricated in various ways and the preparation conditions are relatively moderate, which makes them easy to deposit onto self-healable polymer materials’ surfaces or inside self-healable polymer matrices; (3) in particular, the mobility of CP chains is beneficial for the electrical and electrochemical recoveries at cracked interfaces, but this has not been paid much attention.
The earliest developed strategy to prepare self-healable SCs is to use the self-healable polymers as supporting substrates, electrolytes or encapsulation films of SCs, which is also the simplest and most common method at present. For example, in 2014, Peng et al.173 proposed a self-healable yarn-type SC of which electrodes were prepared through wrapping aligned CNT sheets around a self-healable polymer (SHP) fiber (Fig. 12(a)) (crosslinked by fatty dimer acids and urea; the polymer was previously reported by Leibler174 in 2008, which was the first self-healable polymer). After the first breaking/healing process, the tensile strength of the fiber maintained 80%, and the resistance just increased by 8.5% (from 140 Ω cm−1). The high mechanical and electrical stabilities are mainly due to the aligned CNT strand bridging the broken cross-sections. For increasing its specific capacitance, PANI was coated on the aligned CNT sheet/SHP fiber, and the final yarn-type SC showed a capacitance of 140 F g−1 (1.34 mF cm−1) at 0.33 A g−1, which retained 92% after one breaking/healing cycle. Besides, the device that underwent one breaking/healing cycle showed a capacitance retention of 86% after 1000 charge–discharge cycles, which is comparable to those conventional SCs. Afterwards, Li et al.175 proposed a sandwich-type SC composed of the self-healable polyelectrolyte (crosslinked from acrylic acid, stearyl methacrylate and ferric salt) and two PANI-coated carbon cloth electrodes (Fig. 12(b)). The polyelectrolyte containing 1 M H2SO4 displayed tensile stress of >230 kPa, elongation at break of >2400% and ionic conductivity of >30 mS cm−1 even after one breaking/healing cycle. Based on excellent self-healable properties of the polyelectrolyte, the device with an original capacitance of 217.43 F g−1 at 1.67 A g−1 showed a capacitance retention of 86% after 7 breaking/healing cycles. It also showed a capacitance retention of 85% after 21 days under ambient conditions, which was due to the excellent water-holding ability of the polyelectrolyte. Besides, the capacitance retention of the first-healing SC reached 73% after 2000 charge–discharge cycles, which was close to that of the unbroken one (80%). Gao et al.170 proposed an in-parallel planar type SC with MWCNTs/RGO/PPy fiber springs as electrodes and self-healable PU as the encapsulation film (Fig. 12(c)). The device capacitance was 8 F cm−3 at 1 mV s−1, which retained 82.4% at 100% stretch strain and 54.2% after 3 breaking/healing cycles. The capacitance loss for the original and the third-healing device was 9.6% and 16%, respectively, after 3000 charge–discharge cycles. This work really provides a good prototype for bifunctional stretchable and self-healable SCs.
 Fig. 12  Self-healable SCs. (a) Structure of a self-healable conductive fiber prepared through wrapping the self-healable polymer fiber with aligned CNTs. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (b) SC composed of the self-healable polyelectrolyte PAA and two PANI-coated carbon cloth electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) SC with MWCNTs/RGO/PPy fiber springs as electrodes and self-healable PU as the encapsulation film. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (d) Preparation of the self-healable all-in-one SC with PVA/PHEA as the self-healable electrolyte and PANI as electrodes, and the self-healing mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (e) Self-healing mechanism of the SC with intrinsically self-healable Au NPs/CNTs/PAAm/PPy as electrodes and PAAm as the electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 
From the above examples, it can be seen that the self-healable polymers can be designed into supporting substrates, electrolytes and encapsulation films to prepare self-healable SCs. The recombination force caused by these self-healable polymers pushes electroactive materials of bisected electrodes to physically contact again, resulting in energy-storage recovery. Actually, the energy-storage recovery is mainly determined by the electrical/electrochemical re-connections at wounds. Therefore, developing intrinsically self-healable electrodes is of great significance.
On one hand, the fully embedded structure got wide attention due to its high energy-storage and self-healing properties. The easiest way to achieve this is to in situ polymerize CPs inside self-healable polymer matrices. For example, in 2019, Yu et al.169in situ chemically deposited PPy inside Au NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel (CGP), obtaining the GCP@PPy hydrogels as electrodes (Fig. 12(e)). The corresponding device that was assembled via using GCP@PPy as the electrode, CNT-free GCP as the electrolyte and Ag NWs as current collectors showed a high capacitance of 885 mF cm−2. The capacitance retention reached 89.5% under 800% elongation strain, which has been introduced in the last section. Besides, NIR laser or electricity was used as stimulus to initiate the reconnection of metal–thiolate bonds at wounds, achieving the self-healing process. In particular, not only Au (in electrolyte and electrodes) but also Ag (in current collector) would participate in the reconnection of metal–thiolate bonds, and such an integrated device-level healing process could highly improve the capacitance retention after breaking/healing processes. As delivered, the capacitance retention was 80% after the 10th NIR-irradiated healing process. The device withstanding three breaking/NIR-healing cycles still showed a high capacitance retention of 90.5% after 2500 charge–discharge cycles. Under the electricity-irradiated healing conditions, it showed a capacitance retention of 84% after 6 breaking/healing cycles, and the damaged device still presented stable energy-storage performance at 450% elongation strain. The work represents a top level of multifunctional SCs, which combines high energy density, robust stretchability, and smart and fast self-healing properties in one single device.
On the other hand, the semi-embedded structure, which combines the advantages of layered and fully embedded structures, was also proposed recently. In 2020, Chen et al.176 used poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide) (PVA/PHEA) hydrogel as the self-healable electrolyte and decorated both faces with PANI through in situ rapid polymerization, generating an all-in-one self-healable SC with PANI semi-embedded into self-healable polyelectrolyte matrix (Fig. 12(d)). As shown, no obvious interface boundary between PANI and PVA/PHEA was observed, and hence the outmost and the semi-embedded PANI layers can both be considered as electrode active layers. In this way, the mechanical and electrical/electrochemical reconnections after breaking can be achieved through the multiple hydrogen bonds and ionic interactions existing among the phytic-decorated PANI, PVA and PHEA. Consequently, the device showed a capacitance of 98 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2 and high charge–discharge stability of 98% after 8000 cycles. Besides, the capacitance retentions were high up to 81% after 2000 stretching cycles at an ultrahigh strain of 700%, and up to 84% after 7 breaking/healing cycles, showing impressive stretchable and self-healable properties.
Additionally, many researchers have combined self-healable with stretchable properties together, for example, the studies of ref. 169 and 170, which have been introduced above in detail. The two properties can be easily simultaneously realized because self-healable polymers are usually stretchable, for example, PVA, PAA, and PU, etc. Such bifunctional self-healable and stretchable SCs are of great significance in improving durability and comfortability of SCs in portable/wearable applications.
Although impressive advancements have been made in self-healable SCs, great challenges still remain. First of all, the capacitance loss is severe within just 10 breaking/healing cycles, so the self-healing properties still need improving. Besides, the SCs are cut into two halves in the laboratory, and the fracture surface is flat. However, the SCs are usually stretched or torn apart in practice, leading to an irregular facture surface. The difference between laboratory and practice should be considered and the related investigations should follow as soon as possible. Furthermore, CPs have the characteristics of photothermal and electrothermal effects, which have great potential to be used as an external stimulus to initiate or to accelerate self-healing processes, but there are few reports on such intelligent self-healable properties.
4.5 Stimuli-sensitive supercapacitors
Endowing SCs with stimuli-sensitive properties at the level of the device can expand SCs’ applications into energy-storage and stimuli-sensitive areas, which highly meets the market demands of intelligence, multi-functions and integration. CPs have been widely investigated in the fields of sensors and SCs, which provide solid research foundations for CP-based stimulus-sensitive SCs.
First of all, with the increasing concerns about health care and the fast development of motion monitors, the strain-sensitive SCs were proposed and got wide attentions. The easiest way to integrate sensor and SC units in one single device is through some rational configuration designs. For example, Wang et al.177 proposed a coaxial design to integrate strain sensor with stretchable SCs in one single fiber (Fig. 13(a)). The SC was assembled on an elastic fiber with a MnO2/PPy-deposited aligned CNT sheet as the positive electrode and with PPy-deposited aligned CNTs sheet as the negative electrode. A CNTs-embedded thermal plastic elastomer film was wrapped around the fiber SC as the sensor shell. A rational coaxial design with SC at the core part to power the strain sensor in the shell was fabricated. The SC part showed a wide working voltage of 1.8 V and a high energy density of 1.42 mW h cm−3. It also showed a high capacitance retention of 85.1% after 6000 stretching cycles at 200% strain, which ensured its powering stability during dynamic stretching/releasing processes and its structural compatibility with the strain sensor shell. To stimulate the practical use, the strain-sensitive SC was fully charged and then tested in various strains, showing a large gauge factor of 4.12 at 0–30% strain and 15.16 at 40–140% strain, and also reproducible responses to dynamic strains (∼0.2 Hz), which were efficient enough as strain monitors in real-time health care. Strictly speaking, the device does not belong to the category of intrinsically strain-sensitive SCs. Theoretically, developing intrinsically strain-sensitive SCs is viable since deformations of SCs can cause signal changes in electrical conductivity, ionic conductivity, capacitance, etc.178 However, this is very challenging at present mainly because a high sensing reproducibility and a high specific capacitance cannot be achieved at the same time.
 Fig. 13  Stimuli-sensitive SCs. (a) Coaxial design of a strain sensitive SC. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Sweat sensitivity and energy storage properties of the sweat-sensitive PET-cotton/PEDOT cloth SC. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. (c and d) Structures and working mechanisms of the photo detective SCs, and their energy storage and photo detection properties. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014; reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (e) Structure of the bR modified PANI coated gold electrode, and its energy storage property before and after sunlight. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
Besides, a sweat-sensitive and sweat-powered SC was reported by Dahiya et al.179 In their work, PEDOT:PSS was drop-coated onto the cellulose/polyester cloth, serving as both electrode and current collector. The cellulose/polyester cloth was selected as the separator and electrolyte carrier mainly because of its great absorption of sweat (Fig. 13(b)). The device capacitance was 7.64 F g−1 at 0.07 A g−1 in artificial sweat, which turned to 3.88 F g−1 in real human sweat. Besides, the capacitance changed from pF to μF with the increase of human sweat, showing a qualitatively positive correlation with human sweat. Thus, not only could it power some wearable biosensors through using body sweat as fuel, but also it could be regarded as a simple sweating monitor. Unfortunately, it cannot be used for the two functions at the same time. It is believed that such stimulus-sensitive SCs can pave the way for external connection-free integrated systems and then provide much convenience for customers, which would be a very promising area in the field of health care.
Additionally, some studies also reported photo-sensitive SCs. In 2014, Shen et al.180 reported an all-solid-state SC that simultaneously exhibited energy-storage and photo-detection properties (Fig. 13(c)). In this work, Co3O4 nanowires were grown on a titanium fiber as the positive electrode, and graphene was deposited on carbon fibers as the negative electrode and also photo-sensitive material. The asymmetric fiber-shaped all-solid-state device could work like normal SCs to store electricity with a capacitance of 2.1 F cm−3 at 20 mA cm−3. Meanwhile, it could be used as a photo-detector of which the leakage current increased after exposure to light and returned to its initial value after turning off the light, and the peak value of leakage current was positively related to light intensity. Even under various bent states, the energy-storage and photo-detecting properties remain stable. Similarly, in 2017, Niu et al.181 fabricated a foldable symmetric all-solid-state device with energy-storage and photo-detection bifunctions based on TiO2 nanoparticle-coated SWCNT films as electrodes, which also used leakage current to indicate light intensity (Fig. 13(d)). The capacitance was 28 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1, which remained nearly unchanged after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. Also, the authors made great efforts to investigate the photo-detecting property, including proposing an equation to express the relationship between photocurrent and light intensity in a flat state, and between sensitivity and folding angle in a folded state. The device showed quite stable energy-storage and photo-detecting performances at various folded states and can withstand 200 folding cycles. Compared with previous reports, this work makes a great improvement in quantitative photo-detection, and paves the way to integrate the quantitative photo-detective, high energy-storage and robust foldable properties altogether into one single electronic. Interestingly, in 2020, Jin et al.182 prepared a photo-sensitive SC which used the capacitance change, instead of the above-discussed leakage current, to qualitatively indicate light intensity. They modified a PANI-coated Au electrode with oriented bacteriorhodopsin (bR) monolayers (Fig. 13(e)), and the obtained electrode showed increased capacitance upon exposure to light irradiation due to the photoelectric function of bR and the light-induced proton pumping capacity. The capacitances were 1146 and 804 F g−1 at 60 A g−1 with and without light irradiation, respectively. Although it could not accurately indicate light intensity, it provided a novel route for photo-sensitive SCs.
For now, endowing SCs with stimuli-sensitive functions at the level of the device is still very challenging and the related reports are very rare, which desirably requires more efforts. In short, making innovations from the points of materials property, operation mechanism, configuration design and circuit integration are all effective ways to create stimuli-sensitive SCs. Notably, there exist two great research gaps in this field. Firstly, the CP-based stimuli-sensitive SCs are rarely reported. CPs feature photothermal and electrothermal effects,183 and hence they show great research potential in stimuli-sensitive SCs, which deserve more attention. Secondly, the advances made in smart hydrogels are pretty attractive, such as temperature-, photo-, humidity- and press-sensitive hydrogels.184,185 Reasonably, utilizing these smart hydrogels as gel electrolytes of SCs seems to be another effective way, however, few works on this have been reported.
5. Self-sustainable supercapacitors
Long-term outdoor operation is very important for portable/wearable electronics. In practical uses, once SCs exhaust the energy charged before, the portable/wearable electronics would stop working. The strategy of integrating SCs with energy harvesting devices can effectively transform surrounding energy from the sun, body motions or body heat into electricity to continuously power portable/wearable electronics.186 The simplest way to achieve this is to connect SCs with energy harvesting devices through external wires.7,187 However, the external wires, adhesive and encapsulation can lead to relatively large energy loss and are not that convenient in portable/wearable applications. Compared with this, the self-sustainable SCs which integrate SC and energy harvesting units into one compact configuration are able to simplify device structure, decrease device size and improve energy conversion efficiency.188 They highly satisfy the wearable/portable and sustainable demands, but they are still at their start stage.
5.1 Solar energy-chargeable supercapacitors
Up to now, solar energy-chargeable supercapacitors (SCSCs), which are also known as photo-supercapacitors or photo-rechargeable supercapacitors, can be divided into the photocatalytic (pc-SCSCs) and photovoltaic chargeable supercapacitors (pv-SCSCs) according to their working mechanisms. The pv-SCSCs, known for relatively high photoelectrical conversion efficiency (ηPCE) and overall energy conversion efficiency (ηOECE), are prepared through integrating SC units with silicon-based solar cell (SSCl) or perovskite solar cell (PSCl) units. Compared with them, the pc-SCSCs, which are fabricated through integrating SC units with dye sensitive solar cell (DSSCl) units, get much more rapid development. Although they show lower ηPCE and ηOECE than pv-SCSCs, they can be designed into various 1D- or 2D-shaped devices with high flexibility, greatly facilitating their development in portable/wearable fields. CPs, as one type of semiconductor material, are known for their excellent conductivity, pseudo-capacitance and catalytic activity, and thus they play important roles in both SCs and solar cells (SCls). They are capable of simultaneously improving the ηPCE of SCl units and energy density of SC units, finally increasing ηOECE of the whole self-sustainable devices.

5.1.1 Photovoltaic charging supercapacitors. 
5.1.1.1 Integrated with SSCl units. 
The heterojunction-type SSCl units are widely used in pv-SSCls because of their high ηPCE (over 13%).189 Generally speaking, in the SSCl unit of such pv-SSCls, inorganic silicon nanowires (Si NWs) are used as the light absorption layer and the CP coat is covered on their top as the hole transport layer. The most common CP coat is PEDOT:PSS due to its high transparency (when it is in a thin film form), facile solution-processible preparations and high electrical conductivity. In the SSCl unit, PEDOT:PSS was mainly responsible for hole transport and also prevented sunlight reflection inside Si NWs, strongly increasing the ηPCE. For instance, Pei et al.190 reported a pv-SCSC composed of a Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SSCl unit on the top of a laser-scribed graphene symmetric SC unit (Fig. 14(a)). The two units shared a common current collector of Au layer. Under illumination, the photogenerated electrons move through the Si NWs and Au layer of the SSCl unit, and were collected by the graphene electrode of the SC unit. Simultaneously, holes travel through the PEDOT:PSS and wire to the other graphene electrode of the SC unit. The SSCl unit showed a high ηPCE of 12.37% mainly because the tight contact between PEDOT:PSS and Si NWs improved hole transport and reduced light reflection, and also the Al2O3 passivation decreased the leakage current. The SC unit showed a high capacitance of 350.66 F g−1 (16.37 mF cm−2) at 200 mV s−1 and a high capacitance retention of over 90% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles, which were attributed to the porous structure and high conductivity of laser-scribed graphene. As a result, the whole device during photo-charging processes showed a ηOECE of 2.92%. Objectively speaking, the ηOECE is not very advantageous mainly due to the limit of the SC unit which totally depends on the EDL capacitance.
 Fig. 14  Configurations and photo-charging properties of photovoltaic charging SCs (pv-SCSCs). (a) The pv-SCSC composed of Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SCl unit and laser-scribed graphene symmetric SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) The pv-SCSC composed of Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SCl unit and PPy-based symmetric SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) The pv-SCSC using PEDOT-carbon as the shared electrode to bridge SCl and symmetric SC units. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) The pv-SCSC using carbon-supported graphene/PEDOT to bridge SCl and symmetric SC units. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
In this context, CPs are also introduced into SC units as pseudo-capacitive compositions for improving the specific capacitance of SC units and finally the ηOECE of whole devices. Sun et al.189 proposed a pv-SCSC containing a Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SSCl unit and a PPy-based symmetric SC unit, and the two units shared a Ti layer (current collector) (Fig. 14(b)). Benefiting from the surface passivation of Si NWs with methyl groups, the antireflecting coat of PEDOT:PSS, the tight junction contact between PEDOT:PSS and Si NWs, and the increased light trapping ability of Si NWs with the orderly arrayed morphology, the SSCl unit showed a high ηPCE of 13.39%; the SC unit showed a high capacitance of 252 mF cm−2 at 3 mA cm−2 with a voltage window of 0.5 V, which was attributed to the high pseudo-capacitance of PPy; the high performances of the SSCl and SC units both contributed to a record high ηOECE of 10.5% during photo-charging processes.
5.1.1.2 Integrated with PSCl units. 
Perovskite solar cells (PSCls) have been reported to reach very high ηPCE of 21%.191 Stacking a CP-based SC unit on the top of a PSCl unit can obtain the pv-SCSCs, in which the bottom perovskite is responsible for absorbing light and storing solar energy, and CPs can serve as the hole transport layer, counter electrode and also shared electrode. For example, Fan et al.192 proposed a conceptual pv-SCSC with the PEDOT-carbon layer as the shared electrode to bridge the PSCl and the symmetric SC units (Fig. 14(c)). The PSCl unit was constructed by FTO current collector/TiO2 block layer/TiO2 nanocrystalline layer/ZrO2 spacer/mesoporous carbon electrode/ClO4−-doped PEDOT/perovskite MAPbI3via facile screen printing combined with electrodeposition technologies, which showed a ηPCE of 7.1% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.71 V. The SC unit with two symmetric PEDOT-carbon electrodes had a capacitance of ∼12.8 mF cm−2 at 0.25 mA cm−2 with a retention of 95% after 2000 charge–discharge cycles. The whole device showed a ηOECE of 4.70% during photo-charging processes. Under illumination, the photogenerated electrons and holes in the perovskite were collected by the TiO2 photoanode and the bridge PEDOT-carbon electrode, respectively, and meanwhile, the electrons moved from the photoanode through ITO and the wire to the other PEDOT-carbon electrode, resulting in the simultaneous energy conversion-storage process. Interestingly, the SC unit showed a larger capacitance in photo-charging processes than in external power-supplied processes, which might be caused by the photothermal effect-induced increased redox rate of PEDOT and the delay effect of the voltage transient in the PSCl unit.
For further improving the ηOECE, great efforts are focusing on enhancing the energy density of SC units or the ηPCE of SSCl units. Herein, we mainly focus on the improvement of SC units. As a demonstration, in the work of Zhang et al.,193 the PSCl unit was composed of FTO glass/SnO2 blocking layer/lead perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer, and the asymmetric SC unit was assembled by carbon-supported graphene/PEDOT and carbon-supported graphene/PANI electrodes, in which the former was used as the bridge electrode (Fig. 14(d)). The PSCl unit had a ηPCE of 8.65%, the SC unit had a capacitance of 388 mF cm−2, and the final ηOECE during photo-charging processes reached 5.6%. Afterwards, the PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte of the SC unit was replaced by the 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIBF4) ionic liquid electrolyte, which greatly widened the potential window to 1.8 V. Accordingly, two PSCl units were stacked together to charge the SC unit. Finally, although the ηPCE slightly decreased to 8.03%, the ηOECE showed an obvious increase to 7% due to the wider potential window.
Although there has been some considerable progress, great challenges still remain. The pv-SCSCs are newly developed, and hence the varieties of working mechanisms and device configurations are very limited. Furthermore, flexible pv-SCSCs are very rare because of the slow progress of flexible photovoltage solar cells. The related exploitations are highly required in portable/wearable fields.


5.1.2 Photocatalytic charging supercapacitors. 
Dye sensitive solar cells (DSSCls) are composed of photoelectrode, counter electrode and redox electrolyte, and are similar to SCs both in device structure and electrochemical nature. Therefore, they are feasible to be integrated with SC units in one compact configuration to obtain the pc-SCSCs. According to the device configuration, the pc-SCSCs can be divided into two-electrode, three-electrode and four-electrode types. Among them, the four-electrode type is mainly based on Cs or MCs,30 so it will not be discussed here.
5.1.2.1 Two-electrode configuration. 
In the two-electrode pc-SCSCs, CPs take part in photoelectrical reactions to convert and store solar energy into electricity. First of all, CPs were generally investigated as electrode materials. For instance, Takshi et al.194 proposed a pc-SCSC using porphyrin dye/PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO as the photoelectrode, active carbon as the counter electrode and methyl viologen (MV) as the redox electrolyte (Fig. 15(a)). The porphyrin dye would generate electron–hole pairs under illumination; the electrons were injected to the CPs and stored; the remaining holes would oxidize MV+ into MV++, and the MV++ would then be stored in the active carbon electrode. The device could be photo-charged to 430 mV which could be stored for over 10 min in the dark, and it showed a capacitance of 2.08 mF cm−2 during photo-charging processes. Also, this work replaced the porphyrin dye with a ruthenium (Ru)-based dye, and the corresponding device could be photo-charged to 198 mV and retained ∼90% for 2 h in the dark, showing great charge-storage stability. However, the high expense of Ru-based photosensitive dyes limits their applications in practice, and the discovery of their substitutes is very significant.
 Fig. 15  Configurations and photo-charging properties of photocatalytic charging SCs (pc-SCSCs). Two-electrode systems: (a) The pc-SCSC using porphyrin dye/PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO as the photoelectrode. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. (b) The pc-SCSC using MWCNTs/PVA/HCl/PANI/APS hydrogel as electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. Three-electrode systems: (c) the pc-SCSC using Pt/PEDOT as electrodes of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. (d) The fiber-type pc-SCSC using PANI-deposited segment as one electrode of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (e) The pc-SCSC using PPy/RGO-deposited graphite sheet as the counter electrode of DSSCl unit and electrodes of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (f) The fiber-type pc-SCSC using PEDOT fiber as the counter electrode of a DSSCl unit and electrodes of an SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Besides as electrode materials, CPs were recently proved to be able to act as the redox electrolytes of two-electrode pc-SCSCs. In 2019, Takshi et al.195 fabricated a composite hydrogel of MWCNTs/PVA/HCl/PANI/APS, and used it as the redox electrolyte sandwiched between an ITO/TiO2 electrode and porous carbon electrode (Fig. 15(b)). Herein, PANI worked as a photoactive substance and also redox electrolyte on account of its three distinct oxidation states. Under illumination, the ES form of PANI would be transformed into the excited state along with the injection of electrons to TiO2/ITO. PANI would be regenerated by the S2O82−/SO42− redox couples, and the transition between EB and ES would also occur, causing the generated ions stored in the carbon electrode. The device showed a capacitance of 1.53 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 in the dark. It could be photo-charged from 92 to 137 mV within 400 s, and showed a small drop of 10 mV when placed in the dark for 600 s. As shown, the photo-chargeable properties of this device are not that satisfactory, and their practical applications are very limited. Even so, the hydrogel can be sandwiched between different electrodes and assembled into various devices, including supercapacitors, solar cells and also photo-chargeable supercapacitors, showing great adaptability to industrial and commercial demands.
5.1.2.2 Three-electrode configuration. 
Compared with the two-electrode pc-SCSCs, the three-electrode ones are more widely investigated and show much better photo-chargeable properties. Three-electrode pc-SCSCs are prepared through the back-to-back connection of DSSCl and SC units, which consist of the photoelectrode, shared electrode and energy-storage electrode. The shared electrode plays multiple roles, which are the counter electrode of the DSSCl unit, the electrode of the SC unit and the wire connecting two units. Actually, the strategy can be understood as connecting DSSCl and SC units with an infinite short wire.
First of all, CPs are mainly investigated as the energy-storage electrode of SC units. For example, in 2010, Ho et al.196 used PEN/ITO/TiO2/N719 as the photoelectrode and Pt electrode as the counter electrode in the DSSCl unit; they used the Pt/PEDOT as electrodes to assemble a symmetric SC unit; the two units shared the Pt electrode (Fig. 15(c)). Through well altering the thickness of the TiO2 film, the trade-off between dye adsorption and electron transfer resistance/electron recombination was well balanced, resulting in a relatively high ηPCE of 4.37%. The whole device could be photo-charged to 0.69 V within 80 s, and it could discharge for 150 s at 2 mA cm−2 in the dark after 900 s of illumination. The high photo-chargeable performance was closely related to the large specific surface area and high electrical conductivity of PEDOT. In another study,197 they also investigated the poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine) (PProDOT-Et2) for replacement of PEDOT. Although PEDOT owns much higher charge–discharge rate, the PProDOT-Et2 showed higher areal specific capacitance owing to its more porous structure. Consequently, the device could be rapidly photo-charged to 0.75 V, and discharged for over 200 s at 2 mA cm−2 in the dark. It showed a capacitance of 390 mF cm−2 and a capacitance retention of 80% after 10 such photo-charge/-discharge cycles.
Compared with the stacked pc-SCSCs, the fiber-shaped ones have the advantages of high flexibility and light weight, which are able to be woven into various patterns and are easy to be integrated into portable/wearable electronics. In 2020, Chen et al.198 deposited PANI or Pt inside different segments of a continuous graphene tube of which the Pt-deposited segment was used as the counter electrode of the DSSCl unit and the PANI-deposited segment was used as one electrode of the symmetric SC unit. The photoanode of the DSSCl unit was a dye-sensitized anodized titanium wire, and the DSSCl and SC units shared the graphene tube (Fig. 15(d)). The DSSCl unit showed a comparable ηPCE of 4.73% due to the excellent catalytic activity of the Pt-deposited graphene tube. The SC unit showed a capacitance of 284 mF cm−2 with a retention of 88% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles, and a small capacitance loss of 4% after 10000 bending cycles at 135°. The whole device could be quickly photo-charged to 0.62 V, and the stored electricity could power other electronics in the dark with a ηOECE of 3.07%.
In the field of DSSCls, candidates of Pt counter electrode are highly required due to the high expense and scare reserves of Pt. CPs are among the most widely investigated Pt-free counter electrodes mainly due to their relatively high electrical conductivity, electro-catalytic activity and thermal stability.199,200 Therefore, CP-based electrodes can be used as not only the energy-storage electrode of SC units but also the counter electrode of DSSC units. For example, Lim et al.201 used the ITO/TiO2/ruthenium dye as the photoelectrode and the PPy/RGO-deposited graphite sheet as the counter electrode of the DSSCl unit; they also used the PPy/RGO-deposited graphite sheet as an electrode to assemble the symmetric SC unit; the two units were back-to-back stacked and shared the double-face PPy/RGO-deposited graphite sheet (Fig. 15(e)). The ηPCE of the isolated DSSCl unit was 2.4%, and the isolated SC unit showed a capacitance of 308.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a small capacitance loss of 4.8% after 500 charge–discharge cycles. Besides, the integrated device was charged under illumination and discharged in the dark, showing a capacitance of 124.7 F g−1 and a retention of 70.9% after 50 photo charging–discharging cycles.
The Pt-free fiber-shaped pc-SCSCs were also reported. For example, Wang et al.202 fabricated a highly crystalline PEDOT fiber, and integrated DSSCl and SC units into the fiber. One half of the fiber was used as the counter electrode and placed in parallel with a N719-sensitized TiO2 nanowire array-coated Ti wire which acted as the photoanode to form the DSSCl unit; the other half was assembled with another PEDOT fiber to form the SC unit (Fig. 15(f)). The DSSCl unit showed an impressive ηPCE of 8.2%, which was very compatible in Pt-free DSSCls. The SC unit showed a high capacitance of 251.2 mF cm−2 at 100 μA cm−2 and a high charge–discharge stability of 76.1% after 20000 cycles. The integrated device could be photo-charged to 0.706 V in just 7.2 s and continuously discharge for around 20 s at 200 μA, showing an excellent ηOECE of 5.1%. Even after 1700 photo-charge/-discharge cycles (63 days), it still maintained 70.6% of its original ηOECE, showing incredible stability and great potential in portable/wearable electronics.
The three-electrode pc-SCSCs have attracted wide attention and really made remarkable progress in recent years. In the future, they will play an important role in sustainably powering portable/wearable electronics on account of their high flexibility and fast photo-chargeable speed. Still, more efforts should be made to improve their flexibility, ηOECE and photo-charging stability.

5.2 Mechanical energy-chargeable supercapacitors
PENGs and TENGs are able to convert mechanical energy of body motions, vibration, wind, water waves and sound into electricity.203–206 Integrating them with SCs is able to store the electricity and sustainably power some small electronics, especially the portable/wearable electronics and the “Internet of Things” systems. To obtain the integrated devices, connecting SCs with TENGs or PENGs through external connections is the easiest way, but the separated structures are not that convenient in practical uses and the energy loss in external connections cannot be ignored. Thus, more and more investigations focus on the mechanical energy-chargeable supercapacitors (MCSCs) with all-in-one configurations.

5.2.1 Integrating SCs with TENGs. 
The simplest way to integrate SCs with TENGs is through external connection. Besides, rectifiers or other power management circuits are required for converting alternating current output (AC) of TENGs to direct current output (DC). For example, Lu et al.207 utilized a TENG to power three V2O5/PEDOT-based stretchable SCs connected in series. The capacitance of the SC was 240 mF cm−2 at 1 mV s−1 under 50% strain, and the capacitance retention reached 85% after 100 such stretching cycles. A stretchable wristband was also designed from the in-series connected SC group, and was charged to 2.3 V within 3 min by a TENG, which could light a red LED. Zhou et al.57 fabricated the PPy/Cu-deposited PDMS sponges, used them as electrodes to assemble a single-electrode TENG and also an all-solid-state symmetrical SC, and finally connected the two together. The TENG unit showed peak output voltage, current and charge of 50 V, 400 nA and 20 nC, respectively. The SC showed a capacitance of 145.8 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and a retention of 92.9% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles, which remained relatively stable under 0–30% compression and 0–180° bending. Moreover, such three SCs were connected in series and charged by the TENG, which could be charged to 2.4 V under 3 Hz in ∼50 min. This work used the same electrodes to prepare TENGs and SCs, and also connected them together to achieve the mechanical energy-chargeable goal, providing a new route for multifunctional and self-sustainable power sources.
However, integrating TENGs and SCs within one compact configuration to obtain all-in-one MCSCs is very difficult. The strategy of sharing electrodes which was often used in solar energy-chargeable SCs is impracticable here. This is because the TENGs’ output is in the alternating pulse form and the peak voltage is high, making it nearly impossible for them to directly charge SCs unless power management circuits are introduced.7,208 To this end, another strategy, which is structural design, was proposed for fabricating MCSCs. For example, Wang et al.209 replaced the traditional metal materials with a PPy horn-array film as the triboelectric layer for the first time, preparing a TENG with superior short-circuit current (Isc) of 30 mA cm−2 at 10 Hz and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 48 V. The corresponding SC assembled with two PPy deposited Kapton electrodes showed a capacitance of 7.8 mF which was almost unchanged after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. More importantly, four PTFE/PPy-based TENGs connected in parallel were used to power three PPy-based SCs connected in series through the stacking design (Fig. 16(a)). The wholly stacked configuration with the aid of Kapton greatly increased space efficiency and decreased device size. Consequently, the SC unit could be charged from 10 to 40 mV in 30 s through simple finger tapping and powered a calculator. Liu et al.210 prepared yarn-type TENGs and SCs based on the conformal Ni/Cu coated polyester yarns as the current collector of SCs and the electrode of TENGs. The TENGs showed high output performance with Voc of 60 V and Isc of 3 μA at ∼3 Hz, and the SCs showed a capacitance of 70 mF cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2, both of which showed excellent stability under various mechanical bending states and long-term bending cycles. Moreover, the yarn-type TENGs and SCs were weaved together into self-sustainable fabrics which could supply electricity for an electronic watch just through the daily human motions.
 Fig. 16  Integrating TENGs with SCs. (a) PTFE/PPy-based TENGs connected in parallel to power the PPy-based SC through stacking them. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (b) PPy/CB SC unit wrapped by the silicone rubber which is also the friction layer of the TENG unit and encapsulation materials of the whole device. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) The coaxial fiber by fabricating a TENG sheath layer outside a SC core fiber. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
On the basis of configuration design, skilfully sharing some compositions (not including electrodes) can further simplify the device structure. Some package, supporting substrate and separator materials of SCs are also the contact friction triboelectric materials of TENGs, such as silicone rubber, PDMS, PU, Kapton, polyamide (PA), etc. Therefore, designing package, supporting substrate or separator materials of SCs into contact friction triboelectric layers of TENGs, or vice versa, seems to be highly effective. For instance, Wang et al.211 connected one TENG and two SC unis in series and wrapped them with silicone rubber. The silicone rubber acted as the package of both the SC unit and the whole device, and it also provided the device with great washability (Fig. 16(b)). The TENG was prepared through using silicone rubber and carbon black (CB) as contact friction triboelectric layers, which showed a Voc of ∼400 V and a Δσsc of ∼97 μC m−2 from repeated bending, compressing, stretching and twisting; the SC was fabricated by using CB/PPy-coated silicone rubber as the electrode, which showed a capacitance of 2.8 mF and kept stable at 100% elongation strain; the enclosed integrated device could power an electronic watch for 16 s after 8 min of hand pressing (1.3 Hz). Sun et al.212 demonstrated a coaxial fiber by fabricating a TENG sheath layer outside a SC core fiber (Fig. 16(c)), in which the TENG was composed of carbon fiber bundles electrode and silicone rubber triboelectric layer, and the SC used carbon fiber bundles as two electrodes. As shown, the silicone rubber layer served as the package of the SC unit and also the triboelectric layer of the TENG unit. Through such a unique design, TENG and SC units are integrated into one single fiber. The fabric woven from 8 such fibers could be charged through tapping and no voltage leakage was observed when stopping tapping, so they are able to be developed into “power clothes” to sustainably power portable/wearable electronics.


5.2.2 Integrating SCs with PENGs. 
PENGs are composed of two conductive electrodes sandwiching a piezoelectric layer, such as BaTiO3, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), sodium niobate (NaNbO3), potassium niobate (KNbO3), potassium sodium niobate (KNN), polypropylene (PP), nylon-11, poly(lactic) acid (PLA), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its copolymers (P[VDF-TrFE], P[VDF-TFE] and P[VDF-HFP], etc.213 CPs are widely used in PENGs, and the roles of CPs can be summarized to be: (1) CPs can be employed as the conductive electrodes, such as PEDOT:PSS which could be used as a transparent and stretchable electrode to prepare PENGs converting mechanical energy of stretching, pressing and other movements into electricity;214,215 (2) CPs, especially PANI, can be added into the piezoelectric layers to improve their conductivity and then boost the output performance of PENGs.216,217
Integrating SCs with PENGs can store the electricity converted from various mechanical movements, achieving a sustainable power supply for some portable/wearable electronics. The simplest way to integrate them together is through external connections where rectifiers or other power management circuits are required. For example, as early as 2012, Wang et al.218 fabricated all-solid-state PANI-coated paper SCs for storing PENG-harvested energy (Fig. 17(a)). The voltage of six such SCs connected in series reached 2.6 V after being charged for 11 h by a PENG, which could charge a blue LED for ∼5 min.
 Fig. 17  Integrating PENGs with SCs. (a) Scheme of charging the all-solid-state PANI-coated paper SCs with a PENG through external wires. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012. (b) The all-in-one mechanical energy-chargeable SC (MCSC) which used piezoelectric ZnO/RGO/PVDF film as the separator sandwiched by PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte and then MnO2/RGO electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
However, the external connections, rectifiers and other power management circuits would cause energy loss, and are not that convenient in portable/wearable applications either. To address these issues, great efforts have been devoted to integrating PENGs and SCs into one compact configuration to prepare all-in-one MCSCs. Theoretically speaking, this is feasible mainly because PENGs and SCs show great similarities in structures and working mechanisms. Besides, rectifiers can be avoided as the output voltage of PENGs is not that high, which is beneficial for achieving the all-in-one structure. The most widely reported strategy to develop all-in-one MCSCs is through sharing electrodes, in other words, is to insert piezoelectric layers into SCs as the separator.219,220 There have been some all-in-one MCSCs which used carbon- and metal compound-based nanomaterials as electrodes. For instance, Kang et al.221 proposed an MCSC with the piezoelectric ZnO/RGO/PVDF film as the separator sandwiched by a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte and then MnO2/RGO electrodes (Fig. 17(b)). The self-charging process mainly contains three stages (1) mechanical deformation initiated the piezoelectric effect, generating a potential difference between two electrodes; (2) electrolyte ions are driven to migrate through the piezoelectric layer to the corresponding electrodes; and (3) faradaic reactions would occur between electrodes and electrolytes, accumulating and storing charges. This work incorporated ultrathin ZnO nanoflakes and RGO in PVDF as the separator and piezoelectrically active layer of the device, highly enhancing output performance and mechanical stability and also decreasing energy loss. As measured, the peak output voltage, current density and power density are 44 V, 1000 nA cm−2 and 193.6 μW cm−2, respectively, under the force of 10 N. Besides, the device was able to store 0.0015 mC within 100 s of hand-tapping and remained stable after stopping hand-tapping, showing a total energy density of ∼10.34 mW h kg−1.
The all-in-one PENG-SC integrated devices can achieve a rectifier-free circuit, which provides much convenience for users, and hence has become among the hottest research directions. However, CP-based all-in-one PENG-SC integrated devices have not been paid much attention in this field, and show tremendous research potential.

5.3 Thermal energy-chargeable supercapacitors
Thermoelectric generators (TEGs), which convert heat to electricity, can make full use of the heat energy from the sun, human bodies, surrounding engines and industrial production to power electronics. The working mechanisms of TEGs can be divided into two, which are the electronic charge carriers’ thermo-diffusion and the ionic charge carriers’ electrochemical reactions.222
In the electronic TEGs, CPs themselves are wonderful electronic thermoelectric materials. Compared with those inorganic thermoelectric substances, CPs are typically suitable for harvesting low-temperature heat, for example, body, geothermal and oceanic heat223,224 (Fig. 18(a) and (b)). However, there are a few studies integrating the electronic TEGs with SCs in one compact configuration to prepare the all-in-one TCSCs. This is mainly because of the large differences in structure and working mechanism. As for the ionic TEGs, their core compositions are ionic electrolytes, such as polystyrene sulfonate sodium (PSS−Na+), PSSH (polystyrene sulfonic acid), PEO (polyethylene oxide)–NaOH and some ionic liquids. The ionic charge carriers would migrate from the hot to the cold end.222 Unlike electrons, the ions cannot enter metal terminals but just accumulate at the electrolyte/terminal interface. Based on this, some researchers sandwiched ionic thermoelectric materials between electrocapacitive electrodes, preparing the all-in-one TCSCs (also called the thermally charging or thermally chargeable SCs).225,226 The ions accumulated at the electrolyte/terminal interface can be stored in the terminal electrodes through the electric double layer effect or the faradaic electrode reactions. Such TCSCs can achieve energy-conversion and -storage at the same time.
 Fig. 18  Thermoelectric generators (TEGs) and thermal energy-chargeable SCs (TCSCs). (a) Working mechanism and structures of the TEGs based on electronic charge carriers. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Photos of a flexible TEG that is based on electronic charge carriers. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) The TCSC with PSSH as the ionic thermoelectric electrolyte sandwiched by two CNTs/porous graphene/PANI-coated PTFE electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) The TCSC with PSSH as the ionic thermoelectric electrolyte and PDAQ-BC/Au as electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
As a demonstration, in 2016, Yu et al.225 reported a TCSC with PSSH as the ionic thermoelectric electrolyte sandwiched by two CNTs/porous graphene/PANI-coated polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) electrodes (Fig. 18(c)). The use of PSSH film electrolyte greatly improved the output voltage to 8 mV K−1. The highly porous morphology constructed by graphene micro-/nano-flowers entangling with tubular CNTs and the full access of PSSH into tortuous electrodes contributed to the high capacitance of the TCSC (∼500 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2). Besides, an output voltage of 38 mV was generated within 350 s when a spatial temperature difference of 5.3 K was applied, and it kept stable for almost 24 h after removal of the temperature difference, showing a capacitance of 120 mF cm−2. This device could utilize the temperature difference between bodies and the environment to charge themselves, and the stored electricity could sustainably power portable/wearable electronics. Afterwards, the investigations were mainly focused on the electrode materials of such TCSCs. In 2019, Wu et al.226 prepared a TCSC composed of the PSSH thermoelectric electrolyte and PDAQ-BC coated Au electrodes (prepared through the Buchwald-Hartwig coupling of 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAQ) and 3,6-dibromo-9-(4-bromophenyl)carbazole (DBC)) (Fig. 18(d)). Unlike the common linear CPs, PDAQ-BC owns unique multi-branched structures with a redox-active moiety grafted along the backbone, which greatly improves its pseudo-capacitance and morphological porosity. As a result, the electrode showed a capacitance of 180.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 84% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. The TCSC assembled from two electrodes sandwiching PSSH electrolyte showed a high output voltage of 6.67 mV K−1, which could be charged to 72 mV when a temperature difference of was applied 10.8 K and kept stable for over 30 h after the removal of the temperature difference.
Currently, great efforts are being devoted to converting ubiquitous thermal energy into electricity and simultaneously store the electricity for powering wearable/portable electronics. However, the related research is in its infancy, and there are many basic issues to be solved, like developing more ionically thermoelectric electrolytes, improving the compatibility between electrodes and ionically thermoelectric electrolytes, and further exploiting the working mechanisms.
6. Perspective
For modern portable/wearable electronics, flexibility, smart functions and long-time outdoor operation are the necessary conditions that must be fulfilled. Undoubtedly, the energy storage device is the crucial and core unit in portable/wearable electronics, and SCs are the most suitable ones in this field. To meet these requirements, flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs, with CPs as the key material, have received extensive attention and made remarkable progress in the last decade. In this work, we give a comprehensive and detailed review on designing flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs for portable/wearable electronics based on CPs. The commonly used CPs are PANI, PPy, PT and PEDOT, with unique chemical, conductive and smart characteristics. Based on these CPs, as well as the composite of CPs with Cs and MCs, flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs have been fabricated with different configurations.
Flexible SCs have been widely investigated in the last decade. The high flexibility could be achieved through designing various shapes of electrodes, i.e., fiber-, yarn-, fabric-, paper-, foam-, hydrogel-, aerogel-, etc. The remarkably improved energy-storage performance makes CP-based flexible SCs show great potential as the energy-storage modules of portable/wearable electronics. In contrast, smart SCs have been more recently developed to satisfy the market demands of multi-functions and intelligence, including electrochromic, electrochemically actuated, stretchable, self-healable and stimuli-sensitive ones. The development of smart SCs strongly relies on smart materials, rational device configurations and novel working mechanisms, and these basic research studies are highly needed. In the last five years, with the development of various green energy-harvesting devices, many researchers integrated them with SCs into one compact configuration to prepare all-in-one self-sustainable SCs. They can simultaneously convert and store surrounding energy into electricity to continuously power portable/wearable electronics, mainly including solar energy-, mechanical energy- and thermal energy-chargeable types. The ground-breaking device configurations along with the behind working mechanisms were revealed in detail.
Naturally, with the development of artificial intelligence and “internet of things”, portable/wearable electronics will be highly demanded.227,228 Thus, flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs have attracted extensive attention, and considerable achievements have been obtained. Even so, the research in this field is still at an early stage. In the future, more efforts urgently need to be devoted to the fundamental research, from material design to working mechanism to configuration architectures and to device fabrication, focusing on resolving the critical issues towards practical applications.
(1) Flexible SCs. It is well known that conventional SCs have been widely used in commercial applications, but flexible SCs are still in the laboratory. The low energy density of flexible SCs is the bottleneck to prevent them from commercial use. To meet the demand of long-term power supply for portable/wearable electronics, we have to improve the energy density of flexible SCs without affecting their flexibility, which is one of the main issues for now. The efficient routes include exploiting CPs and their composite electrodes with high specific surface area, searching for electrolytes with expanded diversity, wide potential window and environmental stability, and strengthening the study of energy-storage mechanisms.
(2) Smart SCs. Due to the trend of intelligence in portable/wearable fields, smart SCs are becoming among the most promising research directions. However, this type of SC is just newly developed, and there are many basic issues remaining to be solved. For example, the introduction of smart functions to SCs usually leads to the severe descending of the energy-storage performance, which is the obstacle that should be solved first. How to make the smart SCs more intelligent is another question that is worthy of study in depth, such as multiple functions of one smart unit, integration of different smart units, and response with the variable external environment.
(3) Self-sustainable SCs. The self-sustainable SCs are also a new topic appearing in recent years. Also, there are many basic issues remaining to be solved. Firstly, most of the self-sustainable SCs are still in a rigid form. Besides, the introduction of energy-generation function to SCs generally results in the mismatch of the impedance circuit, evidently reducing the energy-storage performance. For the all-in-one devices, an improvement in energy conversion efficiency is desirably needed. The problems can be addressed through exploiting functional materials, and rational device configurations along with deep understanding of the working mechanisms.
(4) Integration of flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs. Certainly, the SCs that simultaneously exhibit flexible, smart and self-sustainable behaviours hold great promise in portable/wearable electronics. So far, flexible SCs have been widely studied, and smart SCs have also been investigated to some extent, but self-sustainable SCs are still in their very early stage. Integrated SCs with flexible, smart and self-sustainable properties are very rare. In the future, the integration of flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs will be a very promising but challenging topic for development. To achieve this, investigations on new materials, rational configurations and novel fabrication techniques are highly needed.
(5) Integration of energy-harvesting, -storage and -utilization units for portable/wearable electronics. For portable/wearable electronics, they commonly consist of energy-harvesting, -storage and -utilization units in all. At present, there have been some works reporting the integrated systems of energy-harvesting (e.g., solar energy cell, PENG, and TENG), energy-storage (mainly SCs, even with filtering regulation) and energy-utilization (e.g., LED, sensor, and neural synapse) units connected through external wires.229–231 However, it is much more attractive for the integration of energy-harvesting, -storage and -utilization units in an all-in-one configuration, which can greatly meet the development of light weight and mini size in tendency. Unfortunately, all-in-one devices have been rarely reported so far, let alone flexible ones. To achieve this, more efforts on multi-layered configuration design and interfacial matching should be made. It is also important to make sure that every unit shows high compatibility with others for high working efficiency. This issue will certainly be a blue ocean for research in the future.
(6) Mass production for practical applications. The aim of our scientific research is naturally to be used in practice. In this regard, a lot of questions will be faced in the future. Firstly, for the abovementioned devices, regardless of whether they are discrete or integrated ones, the wearability, portability and durability are all necessary to be seriously considered in practical porting/wearing states. Secondly, the package of devices does not gain much attention at present, but it is required in practice, which can protect the device from bad effects of the surrounding environment. Thirdly, actual working environments must be considered in studies, such as the simultaneous occurrence of bending, twisting and stretching in real wearing states, and the washability, breathability, waterproof, sweatproof, safety and flammability of products. Fourthly, standard and scientific evaluation systems should be built up to evaluate the portable/wearable electronic devices, including suitable methods to evaluate the energy-storage performance of SCs in systems. Fifthly, efforts should be made to achieve industrialization in terms of mass production, storage, transportation and utilization, for which we will have to strengthen investigations on the technologies and develop new scalable techniques for production.
Overall, as informatization and energy-saving progresses in society, especially with the development of artificial intelligence and “internet of things”, portable/wearable electronics will be the indispensable products in the future. Flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs are the critical and core unit of portable/wearable electronics, and CPs are the key materials in fabricating flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs. Therefore, we reviewed the recent progress of CP-based flexible, smart and self-sustainable SCs for portable/wearable electronics. Researchers have made considerable efforts in this field and applausive results have been achieved. Of course, there are still a lot of difficult issues in the way for practical applications, but we believe that they can be well resolved in the future. Designing flexible, smart and self-sustainable supercapacitors from CPs will make portable/wearable electronics come into people's real life in the near future.
Abbreviations

ABA3-Aminophenylboronic acid
ACAlternating current output
ACMAcrylate rubber
ANIAniline
AQSAnthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium
ASAcid blue
BCBacterial cellulose
bRBacteriorhodopsin
CBCarbon black
CFYCarbon fiber yarn
CGPAu NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel
CMCCarboxyl methyl cellulose
CNFsCarbon nanofibers
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
CPsConductive polymers
CsCarbon materials
CTABHexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide
CuPcTsCopper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt
CV-GSCyclic voltammetry-galvanostatic
D–ADonor–accepter
D–A–DDonor–accepter–donor
DAQ2,6-Diaminoanthraquinone
DBC3,6-Dibromo-9-(4-bromophenyl)carbazole
DBEDOT2,5-Dibromo-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene
DCDirect current output
DMFDimethylformamide
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DSSClDye sensitive solar cell
EAsElectrochemical actuators
EASCsElectrochemically actuated SCs
EDLElectric-double-layer capacitance
EGEthylene glycol
EMIBF41-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
ESCsElectrochromic SCs
FDFaradaic capacitance
FGHFunctionalized graphene hydrogel
GOGraphene oxide
GOPS(3-Glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane
KNNSodium niobate
LDHLayered double hydroxide
LiTFSIBis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt
MCsMetal compounds
MOMethyl orange
MOHsMetal hydroxides
MOsMetal oxides
MPMulberry tree-derived paper
MSsMetal sulphides
MVMethyl viologen
MWCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
NBRNitrile butadiene rubber
NSANaphthalene sulfonic acid
PAPhytic acid
PAPolyamide
PAAPoly(acrylic acid)
PAAmPolyacrylamide
PAN NFsPolyacrylonitrile nanofibers
PANIPolyaniline
PBOTT-BTDPoly[4,7-bis(3,6-dihexyloxy-thieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)]-benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole
PCLPolycaprolactone
pc-SCSCsPhotocatalytic chargeable supercapacitors
PDAAPoly(1,5-diaminoanthraquinone)
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PENGPiezoelectric nanogenerator
PEOPoly(ethylene oxide)
PHEAPoly(N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide)
PLAPoly(lactic) acid
PMAAPoly(methacrylic acid)
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
Poly(BT-Th-EDOT)Poly(4,7-bis(5-(2,3-dihydrothienodioxin-5-yl)-3,4-bis(hexyloxy)thiophen-2-yl)benzo thiadiazole)
PPPolypropylene
PProDOT-Et2Poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine)
PPyPolypyrrole
PSClsPerovskite solar cells
PSSPolystyrene sulfonate
PSSHPolystyrene sulfonic acid
PSS-Na+Polystyrene sulfonate sodium
PTPolythiophene
PTEPAPoly(tris[4-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)phenyl]amine)
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PUPolyurethane
PUAPolyurethane acrylate
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PVA-co-PEPoly(vinyl alcohol-co-ethylene)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
pv-SCSCsPhotovoltaic chargeable supercapacitors
PZTLead zirconate titanate
RCFsRamie-derived carbon fibers
RGOReduced graphene oxide
SClsSolar cells
SCsSupercapacitors
SCSCsSolar energy-chargeable supercapacitors
SDBSSodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate
SEBSPoly(styrene-ethylene/butylene-styrene)
SHPSelf-healable polymer
Si NWsSilicon nanowires
SIBSPoly(styrene-block-isobutylene-block-styrene)
SSClsSilicon-based solar cells
SWCNTsSingle-walled carbon nanotubes
TCSCsThermally charging or thermally chargeable supercapacitors
TEGsThermoelectric generators
αCD-PAAmα-Cyclodextrin-containing polyacrylamide

I
sc
Short-circuit current

V
oc
Open-circuit voltage

η
OECE
Overall energy conversion efficiency

η
PCE
Photoelectrical conversion efficiency

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. G. Lu and Z. Z. Ye acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U20A20209), Zhejiang Provincial Key Research and Development Program (2021C01030), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LD19E020001), and Open Project of Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang University. Y. Hou acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundations of China (21878270, 21922811, and 21961160742) and Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LR19B060002). Q. H. Zhang acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21878267 and 21776249). The authors especially thank Prof. Yang Hou for his guidance on this article.
References
I. K. Moon, S. Yoon, H. U. Lee, S. W. Kim and J. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40580–40592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, Y. Yang, N. Sun, G. Li, Y. Liu, C. Chen, J. Shi, L. Xie, H. Jiang, D. Bao, Q. Zhuo and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803684 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. Yuan, J. Yang, L. Meng, H. Tang, Y. Zeng, Z. Ye and J. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 6116–6123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, C. Xu, Y. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang, Q.-H. Yang and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4659–4685 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Deng, X. Duan, D. Liu and P. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2015, 153, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, H. Tang, L. Meng, Y.-J. Zeng, Q. Zhang, Z. Ye and J. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 404, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, H. Tang, J. Fu, Y. Tian, Z. Xu, J. Lu and Z. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, Y. Lu, B.-E. Jia, H. Tang, L. Chen, Y.-J. Zeng, Y. Hou, Q. Zhang, Q. He, L. Jiao, J. Leng, Z. Ye and J. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, Z. Wen, F. Zhao, Y. Yang, H. Shao, C. Zhou, Q. Shen, K. Feng, M. Peng, Y. Li and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, S. Pak, Y.-G. Lee, J. S. Hwang, P. Giraud, G.-H. An and S. Cha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Yuan, W. Wang, H. Tang, Z. Ye and J. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Y. Yuan, L. Meng, W. Wang, J. Lu, Y. Zeng, T. Huang and C. Gao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800074 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Pan, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Cheng and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3217–3222 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
R. Wang, M. Yao and Z. Niu, InfoMat, 2019, 2, 113–125 CrossRef .
W. S. Chow and Z. A. Mohd Ishak, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2020, 14, 416–435 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, N. Wang, T. Yang, L. Wang, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2158–2167 RSC .
Y. Zou, Z. Zhang, W. Zhong and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9245–9256 RSC .
C. Xiong, Y. Zou, Z. Peng and W. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7304–7316 RSC .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhou, H. Xiao, Y. Liu and M. Lu, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 24, 101042 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Kayser and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806133 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Teng, J. Song, G. Xu, F. Gao and X. Luo, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 355, 136772 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, W. Wang, J. Yang, H. Tang, Z. Ye, Y. Zeng and J. Lu, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 10446–10454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
S. B. Singh, T. Kshetri, T. I. Singh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Ginting, M. M. Ovhal and J.-W. Kang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 650–657 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gaihre, G. Alici, G. M. Spinks and J. M. Cairney, Sens. Actuators, A, 2011, 165, 321–328 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kazemi, S. M. Naghib and Z. Mohammadpour, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 16, 100249 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Jia, K. Shu, C. Yu, G. G. Wallace and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4677–4699 RSC .
B. Luo, D. L. Ye and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700104 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yun, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Liu and Y. Qin, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 600–619 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, J. Tong, X. Tang, D. Zhou, H. Duan, B. Li and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10479–10489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yue, T. S. Ngin and G. Hailin, Sens. Actuators, B, 1996, 32, 33–39 CrossRef .
S. Ulasevich, N. V. Ryzhkov, D. V. Andreeva, D. S. Ozden, E. Piskin and E. V. Skorb, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000980 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bubnova and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9345–9362 RSC .
J. Kim, J. Lee, J. You, M.-S. Park, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 517–535 RSC .
J. L. Bredas and G. B. Street, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 18, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, N. Tang, X. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Jiang, H. Zhang and X. Duan, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Joulazadeh, A. H. Navarchian and M. Niroomand, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2014, 33, 21461 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1978–1987 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Wang, Q. Chu, Z. Wang, F. Zhang and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shinde and H. Kim, Synth. Met., 2019, 254, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, B. Yan, G. Sun, J. L. Xu, Y. C. Gu, S. J. Lin, S. H. Zhang, B. C. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3154–3160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Xu, T. Qiu, L. Zhi and G. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 491–497 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Zhou, H. Wang, J. T. Jiu, J. B. Liu, H. Yan and K. Suganuma, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chotsuwan, U. Asawapirom, Y. Shimoi, H. Akiyama, A. Ngamaroonchote, T. Jiemsakul and K. Jiramitmongkon, Synth. Met., 2017, 226, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Ko, K. Shim, J. H. Kim and J. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33175–33182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Winther-Jensen, S. Desai, R. L. Shepherd, P. C. Innis, B. Winther-Jensen, M. Forsyth, G. G. Wallace and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1505–1508 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, H. Cheng, J. Zhu, Y. Yuan and C. Wang, Org. Electron., 2020, 85, 105819 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Zhang, K. Xia, X. Gong, H. Wang, Z. Yin, B. Guan and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13331–13338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ruiz-Perez, L. Rizzello, J. P. Wang, N. Li, G. Battaglia and Y. W. Pei, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 4569–4573 RSC .
D. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, S. Zhu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700890 CrossRef .
E. Smela, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang and X. Tan, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 158, 121–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Torop, V. Palmre, M. Arulepp, T. Sugino, K. Asaka and A. Aabloo, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3113–3119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Firoz Babu, S. P. Siva Subramanian and M. Anbu Kulandainathan, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 94, 487–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, K. Hu, M. Yang, Y. Zou, J. Yang, M. Yu, H. Wang, X. Qu, P. Tan, C. Wang, X. Zhou and Z. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 852–861 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Ma, W. Du, L. Qu, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 559–565 RSC .
A. Laforgue and L. Robitaille, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4194–4200 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, G. Han, H. Song, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 228–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, C. Z. Jiang and W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7041–7061 RSC .
Y. Bu, M. Cao, Y. Jiang, L. Gao, Z. Shi, X. Xiao, M. Wang, G. Yang, Y. Zhou and Y. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 271, 624–631 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, E. Feng, G. Zhao, H. Peng, G. Wei, Y. Lv and G. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 165–173 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhou, T. Fan, L. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and M. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 203, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, X. Su, K. Yan, H. Hu, M. Peng, X. Cai and D. Zou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600009 CrossRef .
C. Das and K. Krishnamoorthy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29504–29510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Laforgue, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. Wang, J. Chen, F. Li, K. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Li, Z. Lu, W. Wang and D. Wang, Composites, Part A, 2017, 101, 30–40 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, W. Rao, L. Fan, Y. Yuan, Z. Bai and J. Xu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 169, 50–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Yang and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1191–1197 RSC .
M. Lu, R. Xie, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, H. Xu and Z. Mao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 43601 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, X. Yao, L. Yuan, B. Yao, X. Gao, J. Wan, P. Zhou, M. Xu, J. Wu, H. Yu, Z. Hu, T. Li, Y. Li and J. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 191–196 CrossRef .
D. Sun, Q. Liu, C. Yi, J. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Liu, M. Li, K. Liu, P. Zhou and G. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Yang and P. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 172, 1137–1144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, D. Wang, L. Fan, Y. Yuan, W. Wei, R. Liu, S. Gu and W. Xu, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Miao, W. Fan, D. Chen and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4423–4428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Liu, P. Du and P. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yue, F. Li, F. Tan, G. Li, C. Chen and J. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64068–64074 RSC .
J. Lv, P. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Zhong, X. Sui, B. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Xu and Z. Mao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 897–907 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, P. Tammela, J. Huo, P. Zhang, M. Strømme and L. Nyholm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1714–1722 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, P. A. Lynch, Z. Wang, W. Yang, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6401–6410 RSC .
S. Bhattacharya, I. Roy, A. Tice, C. Chapman, R. Udangawa, V. Chakrapani, J. L. Plawsky and R. J. Linhardt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19369–19376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Yu, J. Zhang, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y. Long, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100704 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700974 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Shih, Y.-C. Lin, M. Gao, M. Wu, H.-C. Hsieh, N.-L. Wu and W.-C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 205–215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi and G. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2466–2477 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu and W. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5819–5830 RSC .
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Pan, B. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. Bao and G. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6086–6091 RSC .
W. Li, F. Gao, X. Wang, N. Zhang and M. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9196–9201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, H. Lu, N. Zhang and M. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20142–20149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Deng and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36301–36310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, W. Ni, J. Cheng, Z. Wang, C. Li, Y. Zhang and B. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 196–204 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, R. Liu, W. Zhong and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8568–8578 RSC .
Q. Liu, Z. Chen, S. Jing, H. Zhuo, Y. Hu, J. Liu, L. Zhong, X. Peng and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20338–20346 RSC .
N. Mao, W. Chen, J. Meng, Y. Li, K. Zhang, X. Qin, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Qiu and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 406–413 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anothumakkool, A. T. A. Torris, S. N. Bhange, M. V. Badiger and S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5944–5952 RSC .
T. G. Yun, D. Kim, S.-M. Kim, I.-D. Kim, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800064 CrossRef .
C. Hu, X. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liu and J. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135846 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, K. Yang, X. Fan, Y. Tong, Z. Zhang, X. Lu, K. Mai, Q. Ni, M. Zhang and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12250–12258 RSC .
H. Lai, W. Li, Y. Zhou, T. He, L. Xu, S. Tian, X. Wang, Z. Fan, Z. Lei and H. Jiao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, T. Huang, H. Chen, M. Salman, K. Gopalsamy and C. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22489–22494 RSC .
J. Sun, C. Wu, X. Sun, H. Hu, C. Zhi, L. Hou and C. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9443–9464 RSC .
K. Ghosh, C. Y. Yue, M. M. Sk and R. K. Jena, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15350–15363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, Y. Dou, J. Zhao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Small, 2013, 9, 98–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-C. Lee, C.-W. Chang-Jian, E.-C. Cho, J.-H. Huang, W.-T. Lin, B.-C. Ho, J.-A. Chou and Y.-S. Hsiao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Xu, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Shang and X. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 333, 111–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Yuan, Y. Zhao, S. Luo, X. Yuan, L. Zheng and L. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16617–16626 RSC .
X. Lu, C. Shen, Z. Zhang, E. Barrios and L. Zhai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4041–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1774–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, X. Cai, Y. Qian, C. Zhang, L. Zhou, W. Liu, B. Li, L. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23727–23736 RSC .
Q. Zhu, K. Liu, J. Zhou, H. Hu, W. Chen and Y. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 321, 554–563 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, X. Li, K. Ding, C. Huang, Q. Li, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14–37 RSC .
X. Jian, M. He, L. Chen, M.-M. Zhang, R. Li, L.-J. Gao, F. Fu and Z.-H. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 820–827 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, Small, 2020, 16, 1906851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, Z. Wang, S. Moradi, F. Yang, P. A. Lynch, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, Small, 2019, 15, 201804732 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xiong, W. Wang, S. Qin, H. Cheng, Y. Zeng, B. Wang and Z. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1201–1211 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karimi, I. Kazeminezhad, L. Naderi and S. Shahrokhian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 4393–4407 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Yang, H. Li, R. Fu, W. Tan, Y. Qin, Y. Tao and Y. Kong, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 311, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, K. Huo, J. Fu, X. Zhang, B. Gao and P. K. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10172–10174 RSC .
B. Wang, X. He, H. Li, Q. Liu, J. Wang, L. Yu, H. Yan, Z. Li and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12968–12973 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Dong, C. Xu, D. Ren, X. Ma and F. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10851–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, C. Yang, P. Shen, Z. Wang, C. Deng, L. Yang, J. Li and D. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 249, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, M. Chen, S. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Huan and G. Diao, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Bai, D. Yang, P. Sun and X. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135205 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, Y. Zheng and Q. Du, Mater. Lett., 2013, 104, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liang, T. Gu, Z. Cao, X. Tang, W. Hu and B. Wei, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, B. i. Hwang, D. Kim, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9228–9234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, W. Teng, Y. Jin, L. Sun, P. Hu, H. Li, L. Wang and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135530 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Torvi, B. B. Munavalli, S. R. Naik and M. Y. Kariduraganavar, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 469–479 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Jia, Y. Niu, Z. Yong, K. Wu, C. Zhang, M. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Q. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, X.-L. Cheng, G.-J. Liu, D.-S. Hong, S.-S. He, B.-J. Wang, X.-M. Sun and H.-S. Peng, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Fu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, C. Zhi and H. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, H. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, W. Ni, B. Wang, S. He and H. Peng, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Li, X. Sun, Q. Meng, Y. Ma and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Fong, T. Wang, H. K. Kim, R. V. Kumar and S. K. Smoukov, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2014–2020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gong, Y. Li, X. Liu, Z. Xia and Y. Yang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 245, 116611 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Hao, F. Hippauf, M. Oschatz, F. M. Wisser, A. Leifert, W. Nickel, N. Mohamed-Noriega, Z. K. Zheng and S. Kaskel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7138–7146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 RSC .
H. Wei, J. Zhu, S. Wu, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1820–1831 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kavak, C. N. Us, E. Yavuz, A. Kivrak and M. İçli Özkut, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Li, H. Yu, D. F. Perepichka and H. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601623 CrossRef .
S. Ming, Z. Li, S. Zhen, P. Liu, F. Jiang, G. Nie and J. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124572 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, X. Yang, W. Du, P. Ma, H. Wang, A. Bonnefont, D. S. Wright, L. Ruhlmann and C. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3844–3854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D.-H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I.-D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, W. Meng, Q. Gong, G. Li and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21321–21327 RSC .
Z. He, B. Gao, T. Li, J. Liao, B. Liu, X. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Feng and Z. Gu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS .
T. An, Y. Ling, S. Gong, B. Zhu, Y. Zhao, D. Dong, L. W. Yap, Y. Wang and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800473 CrossRef .
A. Maziz, C. Plesse, C. Soyer, C. Chevrot, D. Teyssié, E. Cattan and F. Vidal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4851–4859 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Madden, P. Madden and I. Hunter, presented in part at the Smart Structures and Materials 2002: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices, San Diego, California, United States, 2002.
Y. Dobashi, A. Fannir, M. Farajollahi, A. Mahmoudzadeh, A. Usgaocar, D. Yao, G. T. M. Nguyen, C. Plesse, F. Vidal and J. D. W. Madden, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 149–162 CrossRef CAS .
I. Põldsalu, K. Rohtlaid, T. M. G. Nguyen, C. Plesse, F. Vidal, M. S. Khorram, A.-L. Peikolainen, T. Tamm and R. Kiefer, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 1072–1079 CrossRef .
H. Rasouli, L. Naji and M. G. Hosseini, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 279, 204–215 CrossRef CAS .
N. Terasawa and K. Asaka, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 7210–7218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rasouli, L. Naji and M. G. Hosseini, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 806, 136–149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Wang, Z. Yue, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9008–9014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, M. Chen, G. Wang, H. Bao and P. Saha, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Gu, L. Zheng, S. Ma and X. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123645 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Sun, Z. Pan, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yao, W. Lu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, D. Huang, B. Zhang, X. Xu, M. Wang, G. Yang and Y. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301655 CrossRef .
F. Meng, L. Zheng, S. Luo, D. Li, G. Wang, H. Jin, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Liao and W. J. Cantwell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4397–4403 RSC .
J. Yu, W. Lu, S. Pei, K. Gong, L. Wang, L. Meng, Y. Huang, J. P. Smith, K. S. Booksh, Q. Li, J.-H. Byun, Y. Oh, Y. Yan and T.-W. Chou, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5204–5211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, J. M. Lee, S. H. Kim, S. J. Kim, J. Di and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7677–7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Yang, J. Jin, X. Li, Q. Cheng and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4432–4442 RSC .
F. M. Guo, R. Q. Xu, X. Cui, L. Zhang, K. L. Wang, Y. W. Yao and J. Q. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9311–9318 RSC .
J. Yu, W. Lu, J. P. Smith, K. S. Booksh, L. Meng, Y. Huang, Q. Li, J.-H. Byun, Y. Oh, Y. Yan and T.-W. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600976 CrossRef .
C. Chen, H. Qin, H. Cong and S. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900573 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kim, H. Park, G. Lee, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. Hong, K. Keum, J. Yoon, M. S. Kim and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905968 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9526–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulie-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, H. Zhang, H. Liao, Y. Zhao and K. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 367, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Yu, X. Sun, Q. Kang, L. Zhu, G. Qin, A. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9736–9745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, J. Yang, L. Li, X. Gao, L. Kang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Kou, T. Zhang, L. Wei, Y. Yao and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 124–130 CrossRef .
K. Guo, N. Yu, Z. Hou, L. Hu, Y. Ma, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16–30 RSC .
L. Manjakkal, A. Pullanchiyodan, N. Yogeswaran, E. S. Hosseini and R. Dahiya, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Hou, D. Chen, R. Wang and G. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604639 CrossRef .
H. Li, M. Wang, G. Qi, Y. Xia, C. Li, P. Wang, M. Sheves and Y. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8268–8272 RSC .
J. Hur, K. Im, S. Kim, J. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T.-H. Kim, K. H. Jo, J. H. Hahn, Z. Bao, S. Hwang and N. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10066–10076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Naficy, J. M. Razal, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace and P. G. Whitten, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3425–3433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Li, J. Lan, B. Yan, L. Shi and R. Ran, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47350–47357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Ruan, W. S. Ng, H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Hu and C. Zhi, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800150 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, Z. Wang, J. Fu, K. Xia, J. Lu, H. Tang, K. Rabia, H. Chen, Z. Zhu, Q. Zhang, Y.-J. Zeng and Z. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10960–10963 RSC .
X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Wang, T. Sun, M. Wang, C. Wu, H. Zou, T. Song, X. Zhang, S. T. Lee, Z. L. Wang and B. Sun, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4240–4247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Li, R. B. Kaner, S. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15609–15615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, Q. Yin, J. Zhou, W. Li, K. Zhang and Y. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8206–8214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Z. Ku, Y. Zhang, D. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600074 CrossRef .
K. Gao, D. Ti and Z. Zhang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1937–1942 RSC .
A. Takshi, H. Yaghoubi, T. Tevi and S. Bakhshi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 621–626 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aljafari, S. K. Indrakar, M. K. Ram, P. K. Biswas, E. Stefanakos and A. Takshi, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5888–5895 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu, J.-G. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-C. Wang, K.-C. Huang and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6225–6231 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Hsu, H.-W. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-W. Hu and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6232–6238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, T. Lv, N. Li, Z. Chen, C. Zhang and T. Chen, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 486–495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, G. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Xie and Y. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5975–6023 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Duan, Y. Zhao, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 291, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Lau, H. N. Lim, T. B. S. A. Ravoof, M. H. Yaacob, D. M. Grant, R. C. I. MacKenzie, I. Harrison and N. M. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 238, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Huang and B. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 255–264 CrossRef .
K. Xia, J. Fu and Z. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000426 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang, C. Du, Z. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 571–580 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang, C. Du, J. Fu and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 400–410 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Zhu, J. Fu, Y. Li, Y. Chi, H. Zhang, C. Du and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 61–71 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qi, J. Nie, M. Liu, M. Xia and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7719–7725 RSC .
K. Xia, D. Wu, J. Fu and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Wen, Y. Zi, P. Zhou, J. Lin, H. Guo, Y. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1070–1076 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Cong, X. Pu, W. Guo, T. Liu, M. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806298 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yi, J. Wang, X. Wang, S. Niu, S. Li, Q. Liao, Y. Xu, Z. You, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6519–6525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. Xie, Z. Wen, C. Chen, X. Chen, A. Wei, P. Cheng, X. Xie and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42356–42362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bairagi and S. W. Ali, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 11462–11484 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, X. Chen, G. Li, N. Sun, H. Jiang, D. Bao, L. Xie, M. Peng, Y. Liu, Z. Wen and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7513–7519 RSC .
T. Park, B. Kim, Y. Kim and E. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5462–5469 RSC .
M. Khalifa, A. Mahendran and S. Anandhan, Polym. Compos., 2018, 40, 1663–1675 CrossRef .
M. Khalifa and S. Anandhan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 7328–7339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. Ding, J. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4934–4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Cheng, S.-C. Chou and J.-A. Chang, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 3015–3019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y. S. Kim, S. J. Kim and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4337–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rasheed, W. He, Y. Qian, H. Park and D. J. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20891–20900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. U. Khan, S. Puzinas, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700013 CrossRef .
M. Bharti, A. Singh, S. Samanta and D. K. Aswal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 93, 270–310 CrossRef CAS .
T. Park, C. Park, B. Kim, H. Shin and E. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 788–792 RSC .
S. L. Kim, H. T. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600546 CrossRef .
X. Wu, B. Huang, Q. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, J. Lu, H. Tang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, P. Hu, L. Zhou, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, R. Khatoon, Q. Zhang, Q. He, Y. He, M. Qiu, Y. Hou and Z. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 422, 130054 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Yu, J. Zhao, Y. Chen, G. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002506 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Y. Tian, J. Fu, Z. Zhu, J. lu, Z. Zhao, H. Tang, Z. Ye and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Xia, J. Lu, J. Fu, Z. Zhu, Y. Tian, Y. Wang, M. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Xu, Y. Guo, R. Khatoon, H. Chen and Z. Ye, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105931 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, M.-K. Song, T. Sung, S. Jang and J.-Y. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104912 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Zhenyun Zhao
	Dr Zhenyun Zhao is currently a doctoral candidate at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Dr Zhao received her bachelor's degree and master's degree from Southwest University, Chongqing, China, in 2017. Her current research interests include flexible wearable electronics, flexible supercapacitors, smart textiles, conductive polymers and their composites.

Kequan Xia
	Dr Kequan Xia is currently a doctoral candidate at Ocean College, Zhejiang University, China. He received his BS degree from Central South University in 2015. His research interests include triboelectric nanogenerators and flexible electronics. He has authored or coauthored more than twenty technical papers.

Yang Hou
	Prof. Yang Hou is a Professor at College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. He was awarded Young Prizes of Hou Debang Chemical Science and Technology, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He received his PhD degree from School of Environmental Science & Technology at Dalian University of Technology in 2011, and then did postdoctoral research at the University of California, Riverside, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and Technische Universität Dresden. His current research mainly focuses on renewable energy and hydrogen energy, lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors, energy nanomaterials and novel functional compound materials.

Qinghua Zhang
	Prof. Qinghua Zhang is currently a professor in College of Chemical and Biological Engineering Zhejiang University (ZJU). He received his PhD degree in 2007 from ZJU. He moved to University of Washington in America as a visiting scholar from 2012 to 2013. He developed a number of design concepts for biomimetic interface functional materials. His research topics include biomimetic superwetting interface functional materials, nonfouling- and fouling-release biocompatibility materials, lithium (sulphur) battery electrolyte/membrane materials, and intelligent responsive and self-repairing materials.

Zhizhen Ye
	Prof. Zhizhen Ye is an academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences and a professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He received a PhD degree from Zhejiang University in 1987. He was a visiting scholar at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1990–1992. He became a Professor at Zhejiang University in 1994, and served as the Director of State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials in 1997–2009, and the Department Head of MSE in 2009–2013. His research interests include growth, doping, and optoelectronic devices of wide bandgap semiconductor thin films and low-dimensional nanostructures.

Jianguo Lu
	Prof. Jianguo Lu is currently an associate professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He got a PhD degree from Zhejiang University in 2005. He worked as a JSPS Foreign Researcher at Kyoto University, Japan in 2005–2007. He is a Distinguished Young Scholar, Qianjiang Talent, and “151” Talent of Zhejiang Province. His research interest mainly lies in new energy and information electronic materials, including nanoscale materials and new energies, semiconductor films and transparent electronics, and new coating & biomimetic materials for marine applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the representative CPs, (b) the reversible doping/de-doping mechanism of PANI, and (c) two charge-storage mechanisms of CPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Preparation methods of CPs electrode. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 3  CP flexible electrodes prepared through the substrate-supported deposition strategy. (a) Optical and SEM images of the PEDOT/PET fabric electrode. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation scheme of the PPy nanowires/PVA-co-PE nanofiber membrane/PET fabric electrode. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Optical and SEM images of the PEDOT coated 3D porous PVP mat electrode. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 4  CP flexible electrodes prepared through the substrate-free preparation strategy. (a) Wet-spinning preparation of ultra-conductive PEDOT fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) Electro-spinning preparation of the PANI–PEO nanofiber membrane electrode. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Structure and compositions of the PANI/phytic acid hydrogel electrode. (d) Optical and SEM images and the synthesis mechanism of the PANI/PVA hydrogel electrode which used boronic acid as the crosslinker. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (e) Preparation and structure of the 3D-crosslinked water-soluble triblock copolymer (namely IAOAI) hydrogel electrode. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Arbitrary structures of the PEDOT:PSS hydrogels and their SEM images. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  CP–Cs flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation and SEM images of the PANI nanorod array@carbon nanofiber electrode, and the energy-storage performance of the samples with and without PANI. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Preparation of the carbon cloth/graphene hydrogel/PANI electrode, and energy-storage performance of the samples with and without graphene hydrogel filling gaps and voids of carbon cloth. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the GO/CNT/PEDOT:PSS coaxial fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  CPs–MCs flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation of the bacterial cellulose fabrics@polyaniline@Ni-Co layered double hydroxide (BC@PANI@NiCo-LDH) electrode, and their GCD and EIS curves. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2018. (b) Protective effect of PPy on the inside MnO2 in acidic electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the PANI@3D MXene film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019 (d). Preparation of the wet-spun MXene/PEDOT:PSS fibers, and their SEM images and EDS mapping. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

Graphene/PEDOT:PSS film	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.25 A g−1	206 F g−1	
22

PPy-coated cotton, linen, viscose and polyester fabrics	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	5 mV s−1	268, 244, 178, 164 F g−1	
56

PDMS sponge/PPy	PVA/KOH	Sandwich	10 A g−1	126 F g−1	
57

PEDOT nanofiber film	NBu4PF6 0.1 M in acetonitrile	
	5 mV s−1	30 mA h g−1 for electrode	
59

Polypropylene/Au/PEDOT	PVA/H3PO4	All in one	0.02 mA cm−2	27.8 mF cm−2	
60

Bacterial cellulose paper/PEDOT	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.83 A cm−3	106.3 F cm−3	
62

PPy	Boron cross-linked PVA/KCl	All in one	0.8 mA cm−2	224 mF cm−2	
63

PET fabrics/PEDOT	Polyurethane/Na2SO4	Sandwich	2 mA cm−2	0.62 F cm−2 (5.12 F cm−3)	
65

Silk fabrics/Au/PEDOT	PVA/LiClO4	Yarn	0.0012 mA cm−1	500 F g−1 (or 62 mF cm−2)	
66

Cotton yarn/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.42 mA cm−2	74 mF cm−2	
69

Ni foam/PTFE/carbon black/hollow PPy	Aqueous KCl	
	0.2 A g−1	380 F g−1 for electrode	
70

Filter paper/PPy	PVA/H3PO4	Planar-interdigital	2 mV s−1	201 mF cm−2	
72

PET/PVA-co-PE film/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	2 A g−1	215 F g−1	
68

Cotton fabric/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.2 mA cm−2	669 mF cm−2	
73

Ni foam/carbon black/PVDF/PPy	Aqueous NaNO3	
	20 mA cm−2	427 F g−1 for electrode	
74

Cotton fabric/PPy	Aqueous NaCl	Sandwich	0.6 mA cm−2	325 F g−1	
75

Polyvinylpyrrolidone/PEDOT nanofiber film	PVDF-co-HFP/EMIBF4	Sandwich	1 A g−1	20 F g−1	
67

Hollow PANI nanofiber film	Aqueous H2SO4	
	1 A g−1	601 F g−1	
76

Glass fiber filter paper/PANI	Aqueous H2SO4	
	1 A g−1	490.6 F g−1 for electrode	
77

PPy-coated woven cotton, woven silk, wool gauze, knitted cotton, and knitted PET	Aqueous H2SO4	
	1 mA cm−2	1748, 1349, 1007, 4848 and 1213 mF cm−2	
79

Cladophora nanocellulose paper/PEDOT	Cellulose paper/H2SO4	Sandwich	10 mA cm−2	90 F g−1 (920 mF cm−2, 54 F cm−3) for one electrode	
80

Wet-spun PEDOT:PSS fibers	PVA/H3PO4	Yarn	5 mV s−1	70.5 F cm−3, 0.59 mF cm−1	
81

Electrospun PANI/PEO nanofiber film	Aqueous H2SO4/m-cresol	
	0.1 A g−1	3121 F g−1 for electrode	
82

PEDOT:PSS fibers from hydrogels with arbitrary-structures	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.54 A cm−3	202 F cm−3	
84

PEDOT:PSS/PVA/PMAA hydrogels	PVA/PMAA/H3PO4	Sandwich	10 mV s−1	7.38 mF cm−2	
85

Carbon cloth modified by sodium lignosulfonate/PANI hydrogel	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	2 mA cm−2	1223 mF cm−2	
87

Carbon cloth/phytic acid modified PANI	Aqueous H2SO4	
	0.2 A g−1	480 F g−1 (2.3 F cm−2) for one electrode	
88

Carbon cloth/phytic acid modified PPy	Aqueous H2SO4	
	0.25 A g−1	380 F g−1 (6.4 F cm−2) for one electrode	
89

PVA/PANI hydrogel	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.25 A g−1	306 mF cm−2 (153 F g−1)	
90

PVA/PANI hydrogel	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.25 A g−1	420 mF cm−2 (210 F g−1)	
91

PANI-functionalized triblock copolymer hydrogel	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.25 A g−1	187 F g−1 (919 F g−1 for electrode)	
92

Carbon nanofiber scroll/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.1 A g−1	339 F g−1 (85.1 mF cm−1, 123.2 mF cm−2)	
93

Chitosan-derived carbon sheet/microfibrillated cellulose fiber film coated with PANI	Filter paper/KCl	Sandwich	1 mA cm−2	1688.88 mF cm−2 (139.6 F g−1) for electrode	
95

Carbon nanofiber yarn/PAN/PANI yarn	EMIEMBF4/PVDF/DMF	Planar	0.1 mA cm−2	234 mF cm−2	
96

Carbon fiber paper/PEDOT	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.5 A g−1	111 F g−1 (836 mF cm−2, 28 F cm−3)	
97

GO/PPD/PANI hydrogel	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.5 mA cm−2	3488.3 mF cm−2 (872 F cm−3)	
94

Mulberry tree-derived paper/carbon black/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	1 A g−1	366.7 F g−1	
98

Carbon nanofiber film/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.5 A g−1	285 F g−1	
99

Hollow fibers/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.5 mA cm−1	278 mF cm−1 (622 mF cm−2)	
100

Ti/PAN/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.97 A g−1	68 F g−1	
101

Wet-spun GO/CNTs/PDEOT:PSS@CMC fiber	PVA/H2SO4	Yarn	0.1 mA cm−2	396.7 F g−1	
102

Bacterial cellulose film/PANI/NiCo-LDH	PVA/KOH	Sandwich	1 A g−1	235.5 F g−1	
108

Ni foam/(MnO2–PANI) composite	PVA/KOH	Sandwich	0.5 A g−1	129.2 F g−1	
104

Ni foil/CoAl-LDH/PEDOT	Aqueous KOH	
	1 A g−1	672 F g−1 for electrode	
105

Ni(OH2)/GOPS/PEDOT:PSS	Polypropylene/KOH	Sandwich	1 A g−1	90.1 F g−1	
106

Poly(acrylic acid)/MnO2/PPy nanofiber film	Aqueous Na2SO4	
	5 A g−1	580 F g−1 for electrode	
109

Ni/NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT fiber	PVA/KOH	Yarn	0.4 mA cm−2	31.6 mF cm−2 (3.16 F cm−3)	
110

Vertically aligned CNTs/graphene foam/V2O5/PEDOT	PVA/LiNO3	Sandwich	1 A g−1	48.83 F g−1	
111

Ti foil/TiO2/MnO2/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	1 mA cm−2	122.5 mF cm−2	
112

Silicone elastomer fiber/Ti3C2Tx MXene/PEDOT	PVA/H2SO4	Planar	0.5 A cm−3	285.2 F cm−3	
116

ITO glass/Ti3C2Tx MXene/PPy	Aqueous H2SO4	Sandwich	0.5 A g−1	160 F g−1	
114

Ti3C2Tx MXene film/PANI	Swagelok cell/H2SO4	Sandwich	1 A g−1	87.3 F g−1 (298.5 F cm−3)	
115

Ramie-derived carbon fibers/MnO2/PEDOT on plastic film	PVA/KCl	Sandwich	1 A g−1	138 F g−1	
117

Ni foam/RGO/FeCoS/PPy	Filter paper/KOH	Sandwich	1 A g−1	94 F g−1	
118

GO/WO3/PPy composite coated on glassy carbon	H2SO4	
	1 A g−1	473 F g−1 for electrode	
119

Ti/TiN/PANI	HCl	
	10 mA cm−2	242 mF cm−2 for electrode	
120

Cu foil/Co3O4/PPy/MnO2	KOH	
	0.5 A g−1	782 F g−1	
121

Active carbon fiber cloth/PANI/CNTs/MnO2	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	5 mA cm−2	2606 mF cm−2	
122

Carbon fiber cloth/PANI/Ni–Mo–P	PVA/H2SO4	Sandwich	0.5 mA cm−2	1072.5 mF cm−2	
123

Carbon fiber cloth/(RGO/MoS2/PEDOT composite)	PVA/H3PO4	Sandwich	0.1 mF cm−2	10.35 mF cm−2	
125

Graphite felt/PPy/MnO2	Aqueous Na2SO4	
	0.5 A g−1	821.3 F g−1 for electrode	
126

SWCNTs film/MnO2/PPy	Aqueous Na2SO4	
	1 mV s−1	351 F g−1 for electrode	
127

PEDOT/PANI fiber	PVA/H2SO4	Planar	5 mA cm−3 (6.7 mA cm−2)	554.1 F cm−3 (740 mF cm−2)	
129

PVA-TEOS film/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	Planar-interdigital	0.05 A g−1	51.42 F g−1	
130

Graphene/PVDF/graphene	PVDF/H3PO4	Fiber	0.6 mA cm−2	346.5 mF cm−2	
131

PVA/H2SO4 chemical hydrogel coated with PANI	PVA/H2SO4	All in one	0.2 mA cm−2	488 mF cm−2	
135

PEO/PEDOT film	PEO/NaCl	Sandwich	5 mV s−1	28.8 F g−1	
136

Carbon cloth/PANI	β-Cyclodextrin grafted cellulose hydrogel	All in one	1 mA cm−2	1003.5 mF cm−2	
137

α-D/PAAm/PANI hydrogel	Glass fiber separator/H2SO4	Sandwich	2 A g−1	322 F g−1	
138


 	Fig. 7  Ternary CP–Cs–MC flexible electrodes. (a) Preparation of the ramie-derived carbon fibers@MnO2@PEDOT electrode, and their CV and EIS curves. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation and SEM images of the carbon cloth@PANI@Mo–Ni–P compounds flexible electrode. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (c) Preparation of the RGO–MoS2/PEDOT flexible electrode. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) One-step preparation and SEM images of the interpenetrating ternary SWCNTs/PPy/MnO2 composite film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 8  Configuration designs of flexible SCs. (a) Sandwich-, reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Planar/micro-, reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (c) Sandwich- and planar/micro- (in interdigital shape), reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (d) Fiber-, reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (e) Yarn-, reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016; reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (f) Integrated/all-in-one type SCs, reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 9  Transparent and electrochromic SCs (ESCs). (a) Preparation and electrochromic and energy-storage properties of the PET/PEDOT/PANI ESC device. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2012. (b) Electrochromic and energy-storage properties of the PET/PEDOT/Ni(OH)2 ESC device. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) New CPs with high pseudo-capacitance and electrochromic properties. Left, reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016; middle, reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Novel design configurations of ESC devices: the asymmetric sandwich (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019), staggered and patterned sandwich (reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019), and planar (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018) assembly styles.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrochemically actuated SCs (EASCs). (a) Preparation of the tri-layer PEDOT:PSS@NBR/PEO@PEDOT:PSS film, and its energy-storage and electro-actuating properties. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Structure of the five-layer PPy/CN–M/Nafion/CN–M/PPy and PEDOT:PSS/CN–M/Nafion/CN–M/PEDOT:PSS film, and the comparison of PPy with PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  Stretchable SCs. (a) Optical and SEM images of the omnidirectionally stretchable PANI/CNTs/PDMS film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Preparation, SEM image, dynamic stretching and the corresponding CV curves of the PPy/CNTs array fiber electrode. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Preparation and SEM images of the over-twisted CNTs/MnO2//CNTs/PPy coaxial fiber SC. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) Preparation of the acrylate rubber/MWCNTs/CPs composite film electrode. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Preparation and dynamic stretching of the Au NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel SC. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  Self-healable SCs. (a) Structure of a self-healable conductive fiber prepared through wrapping the self-healable polymer fiber with aligned CNTs. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (b) SC composed of the self-healable polyelectrolyte PAA and two PANI-coated carbon cloth electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) SC with MWCNTs/RGO/PPy fiber springs as electrodes and self-healable PU as the encapsulation film. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (d) Preparation of the self-healable all-in-one SC with PVA/PHEA as the self-healable electrolyte and PANI as electrodes, and the self-healing mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (e) Self-healing mechanism of the SC with intrinsically self-healable Au NPs/CNTs/PAAm/PPy as electrodes and PAAm as the electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  Stimuli-sensitive SCs. (a) Coaxial design of a strain sensitive SC. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Sweat sensitivity and energy storage properties of the sweat-sensitive PET-cotton/PEDOT cloth SC. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. (c and d) Structures and working mechanisms of the photo detective SCs, and their energy storage and photo detection properties. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014; reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (e) Structure of the bR modified PANI coated gold electrode, and its energy storage property before and after sunlight. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  Configurations and photo-charging properties of photovoltaic charging SCs (pv-SCSCs). (a) The pv-SCSC composed of Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SCl unit and laser-scribed graphene symmetric SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) The pv-SCSC composed of Si NWs/PEDOT:PSS heterojunction SCl unit and PPy-based symmetric SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) The pv-SCSC using PEDOT-carbon as the shared electrode to bridge SCl and symmetric SC units. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) The pv-SCSC using carbon-supported graphene/PEDOT to bridge SCl and symmetric SC units. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 15  Configurations and photo-charging properties of photocatalytic charging SCs (pc-SCSCs). Two-electrode systems: (a) The pc-SCSC using porphyrin dye/PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO as the photoelectrode. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. (b) The pc-SCSC using MWCNTs/PVA/HCl/PANI/APS hydrogel as electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. Three-electrode systems: (c) the pc-SCSC using Pt/PEDOT as electrodes of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. (d) The fiber-type pc-SCSC using PANI-deposited segment as one electrode of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (e) The pc-SCSC using PPy/RGO-deposited graphite sheet as the counter electrode of DSSCl unit and electrodes of SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (f) The fiber-type pc-SCSC using PEDOT fiber as the counter electrode of a DSSCl unit and electrodes of an SC unit. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 16  Integrating TENGs with SCs. (a) PTFE/PPy-based TENGs connected in parallel to power the PPy-based SC through stacking them. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (b) PPy/CB SC unit wrapped by the silicone rubber which is also the friction layer of the TENG unit and encapsulation materials of the whole device. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) The coaxial fiber by fabricating a TENG sheath layer outside a SC core fiber. Reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 17  Integrating PENGs with SCs. (a) Scheme of charging the all-solid-state PANI-coated paper SCs with a PENG through external wires. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012. (b) The all-in-one mechanical energy-chargeable SC (MCSC) which used piezoelectric ZnO/RGO/PVDF film as the separator sandwiched by PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte and then MnO2/RGO electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 18  Thermoelectric generators (TEGs) and thermal energy-chargeable SCs (TCSCs). (a) Working mechanism and structures of the TEGs based on electronic charge carriers. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Photos of a flexible TEG that is based on electronic charge carriers. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from The Royal of Society Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) The TCSC with PSSH as the ionic thermoelectric electrolyte sandwiched by two CNTs/porous graphene/PANI-coated PTFE electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. (d) The TCSC with PSSH as the ionic thermoelectric electrolyte and PDAQ-BC/Au as electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 
ABA	3-Aminophenylboronic acid
AC	Alternating current output
ACM	Acrylate rubber
ANI	Aniline
AQS	Anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium
AS	Acid blue
BC	Bacterial cellulose
bR	Bacteriorhodopsin
CB	Carbon black
CFY	Carbon fiber yarn
CGP	Au NPs/CNTs/poly(acrylamide) composite hydrogel
CMC	Carboxyl methyl cellulose
CNFs	Carbon nanofibers
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
CPs	Conductive polymers
Cs	Carbon materials
CTAB	Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide
CuPcTs	Copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt
CV-GS	Cyclic voltammetry-galvanostatic
D–A	Donor–accepter
D–A–D	Donor–accepter–donor
DAQ	2,6-Diaminoanthraquinone
DBC	3,6-Dibromo-9-(4-bromophenyl)carbazole
DBEDOT	2,5-Dibromo-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene
DC	Direct current output
DMF	Dimethylformamide
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DSSCl	Dye sensitive solar cell
EAs	Electrochemical actuators
EASCs	Electrochemically actuated SCs
EDL	Electric-double-layer capacitance
EG	Ethylene glycol
EMIBF4	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
ESCs	Electrochromic SCs
FD	Faradaic capacitance
FGH	Functionalized graphene hydrogel
GO	Graphene oxide
GOPS	(3-Glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane
KNN	Sodium niobate
LDH	Layered double hydroxide
LiTFSI	Bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt
MCs	Metal compounds
MO	Methyl orange
MOHs	Metal hydroxides
MOs	Metal oxides
MP	Mulberry tree-derived paper
MSs	Metal sulphides
MV	Methyl viologen
MWCNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
NBR	Nitrile butadiene rubber
NSA	Naphthalene sulfonic acid
PA	Phytic acid
PA	Polyamide
PAA	Poly(acrylic acid)
PAAm	Polyacrylamide
PAN NFs	Polyacrylonitrile nanofibers
PANI	Polyaniline
PBOTT-BTD	Poly[4,7-bis(3,6-dihexyloxy-thieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)]-benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole
PCL	Polycaprolactone
pc-SCSCs	Photocatalytic chargeable supercapacitors
PDAA	Poly(1,5-diaminoanthraquinone)
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PENG	Piezoelectric nanogenerator
PEO	Poly(ethylene oxide)
PHEA	Poly(N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide)
PLA	Poly(lactic) acid
PMAA	Poly(methacrylic acid)
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
Poly(BT-Th-EDOT)	Poly(4,7-bis(5-(2,3-dihydrothienodioxin-5-yl)-3,4-bis(hexyloxy)thiophen-2-yl)benzo thiadiazole)
PP	Polypropylene
PProDOT-Et2	Poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine)
PPy	Polypyrrole
PSCls	Perovskite solar cells
PSS	Polystyrene sulfonate
PSSH	Polystyrene sulfonic acid
PSS-Na+	Polystyrene sulfonate sodium
PT	Polythiophene
PTEPA	Poly(tris[4-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)phenyl]amine)
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PU	Polyurethane
PUA	Polyurethane acrylate
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PVA-co-PE	Poly(vinyl alcohol-co-ethylene)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
pv-SCSCs	Photovoltaic chargeable supercapacitors
PZT	Lead zirconate titanate
RCFs	Ramie-derived carbon fibers
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
SCls	Solar cells
SCs	Supercapacitors
SCSCs	Solar energy-chargeable supercapacitors
SDBS	Sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate
SEBS	Poly(styrene-ethylene/butylene-styrene)
SHP	Self-healable polymer
Si NWs	Silicon nanowires
SIBS	Poly(styrene-block-isobutylene-block-styrene)
SSCls	Silicon-based solar cells
SWCNTs	Single-walled carbon nanotubes
TCSCs	Thermally charging or thermally chargeable supercapacitors
TEGs	Thermoelectric generators
αCD-PAAm	α-Cyclodextrin-containing polyacrylamide

I
sc
	Short-circuit current

V
oc
	Open-circuit voltage

η
OECE
	Overall energy conversion efficiency

η
PCE
	Photoelectrical conversion efficiency

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
