Monolithic graded-refractive-index glass-based antireflective coatings: broadband/omnidirectional light harvesting and self-cleaning characteristics   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TC00499C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TC00499C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5440-5449Monolithic graded-refractive-index glass-based antireflective coatings: broadband/omnidirectional light harvesting and self-cleaning characteristics†

        
          
            Tolga 
            Aytug
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew R. 
            Lupini
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gerald E. 
            Jellison
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pooran C. 
            Joshi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ilia H. 
            Ivanov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rajesh 
            Menon
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rosa M. 
            Trejo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Edgar 
            Lara-Curzio
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Scott R. 
            Hunter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            John T. 
            Simpson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. Parans 
            Paranthaman
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            David K. 
            Christen
          
        
      a
aOak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA. E-mail: aytugt@ornl.gov
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
Received 
      19th February 2015
    , Accepted 23rd April 2015First published on 23rd April 2015AbstractA revolutionary impact on the performance of many optical systems and components can come from the integrative design of multifunctional coatings. Such coatings should be mechanically robust, and combine user-defined optical and wetting functions with scalable fabrication formulations. By taking cues from the properties of some natural biological structures, we report here the formation of low-refractive index antireflective glass films that embody omni-directional optical properties over a wide range of wavelengths, while also possessing specific wetting capabilities. The coatings comprise an interconnected network of nanoscale pores surrounded by a nanostructured silica framework. These structures result from a novel fabrication method that utilizes metastable spinodal phase separation in glass-based materials. The approach not only enables design of surface microstructures with graded-index antireflection characteristics, where the surface reflection is suppressed through optical impedance matching between interfaces, but also facilitates self-cleaning ability through modification of the surface chemistry. Based on near complete elimination of Fresnel reflections (yielding >95% transmission through a single-side coated glass) and corresponding increase in broadband transmission, the fabricated nanostructured surfaces are found to promote a general and an invaluable ∼3–7% relative increase in current output of multiple direct/indirect bandgap photovoltaic cells. Moreover, these antireflective surfaces also demonstrate superior resistance against mechanical wear and abrasion. Unlike conventional counterparts, the present antireflective coatings are essentially monolithic, enabling simultaneous realization of graded index anti-reflectivity, self-cleaning capability, and mechanical stability within the same surface. The concept represents a fundamental basis for development of advanced coated optical quality products, especially where environmental exposure is required.
1. Introduction
Suppression of light reflection from glass surfaces is a critical consideration for improved performance in numerous and diverse optical applications. Due to step discontinuity in refractive index, about 4% of light is reflected (essentially lost) from each air–glass interface. To suppress these undesirable, so-called Fresnel-reflections, various designs of antireflective (AR) coatings are implemented extensively in a wide variety of optical systems. As such, AR coatings can: (i) raise the efficiency and power output of the photovoltaic devices;1,2 (ii) enhance the light extraction from light emitting diodes;3 (iii) increase transmissivity and eliminate unwanted ghost images in flat panel displays, architectural windows and lenses;4–7 (iv) reduce background noise, thereby increasing the sensor performance in imaging systems and detectors;8,9 and (v) minimize the reflection induced failure of laser components in high-power laser systems.10,11 To realize the full potential of AR coatings, it is highly desirable that the coated optical element provide spectrally broadband reduction in reflectance over a wide range of incident angles. However, there exists no single inorganic optical material with a low index of refraction (i.e., close to that of air, n = 1) that can be applied to any glass platform to enable broadband and omnidirectional AR characteristics. Traditional single or multilayer step-index AR coatings either target only a limited spectral range and have narrow field of vision, or exhibit broadband anti-reflectivity but suffer from high-cost due to low-throughput complex fabrication processes.12,13 Recently, much of the research on broadband and omnidirectional AR coatings has focused on layered designs or creation of subwavelength structures, often inspired from biological surfaces, where the refractive index varies step-wise or continuously from the ambient medium to the substrate.14,15 However, commercially such graded-index-coatings presently are very challenging, being mainly based on either expensive, elaborate and limited resolution top-down lithography techniques (e.g., photolithography, e-beam lithography, nanoimprint lithography, interference lithography)16–20 or on bottom-up approaches (e.g., colloidal self-assembly, anodic alumina films, carbon nanotubes),21,22 or a combination of both.23 While the latter methods can be relatively cost-effective, they are mostly pertinent to laboratory-scale fabrication. Moreover, coatings based on both general approaches have a propensity to exhibit poor mechanical and thermal stability, impeding the integration into large-scale development and production.21 In addition to AR attributes, coatings also should often possess environmental stability and multifunctional surface characteristics, especially for integration into systems that have extended operational exposures to extreme climates including humid conditions or dust prone environments. In these cases, great benefit will be derived from self-cleaning and/or anti-fogging functionality of the coatings (e.g., for solar cells, lenses, sensors, photodetectors, architectural windows, etc.).24–27
In this study, we demonstrate a novel approach that enables dramatic suppression of light reflection losses at glass–air interface over a broad range of wavelength (λ) and incident angles. The present technique exploits material phase-separation through spinodal decomposition in low-alkali borosilicate glass systems to produce porous, nanostructured graded refractive index AR glass film coatings with self-cleaning and antifogging capabilities.28–30 When simulated as a cover glass on various solar cells having different band gaps, these nanostructured glass surfaces enabled substantial gains in light-to-electricity conversion efficiency, compared to uncoated counterparts. Unlike other step-index AR coatings, the present monolithic coating has a controllable porous submicron structure that offers game-changing advances, such as tunability of the refractive index, ability to optimize the coating for any glass substrate-ambient material system, tailored wettability, and compatibility with current industrial scale manufacturing practices.
2. Results and discussion
The basic approach to fabrication begins with deposition of a glass coating that will spinodally (i.e., non-nucleation, continuous phase separation) decompose when properly thermally processed. Following film deposition by magnetron sputtering onto transparent substrate platforms, the subsequent heat treatment renders the glass coating phase separated into an interpenetrating pattern consisting of alkali-borate-rich and a silica-rich phases, the former being relatively more soluble by a variety of chemicals. Subsequently, a controlled level of differential etching is employed to selectively dissolve the sodium-borate-rich phase, leaving behind a porous three-dimensional reticulated network of high-silica content glass phase. Fig. 1 illustrates the general stages of coating fabrication. Since the spinodal phase separation is a kinetically driven diffusion controlled process, for a given glass composition the structure and dimensions of the resultant phases and matrix microstructure are controlled by the heat treatment temperature and time, combined with the etch conditions (i.e., etchant type, concentration, and etch duration). Interplay among such processing parameters enables ability to tune the microstructural features of the films for tailored performance. Fig. 2a–c are the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, illustrating the morphological evolution of the differentially etched spinodal film structure with respect to different heat treatment durations. Clearly, for a given heat treatment temperature (i.e., 710 °C in this case), prolonged processing time within the metastable immiscibility region of the SiO2–B2O3–Na2O system results in larger spinodal features (i.e., size of the silica skeleton) and a size distribution of the pore structure that is correlated with the dimensions of the etched out sodium borate phase.
 Fig. 1  Preparation of nanostructured silica films. (a) Specially formulated sputtering target, (b) deposition during magnetron sputtering, (c) photograph of the sputter-coated glass substrate (coated side is facing up and it is not possible to distinguish it from the uncoated side), (d) high resolution scanning electron microscopy image showing the nanostructured surface morphology of the coating after the post-deposition treatments (scale bar in the image represents 100 nm). 
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscopy images of fully processed, phase separating glass films on fused silica substrates at different heat treatment periods. Note that heat treatment temperature (710 °C) is kept identical for all samples. Heat treatment times are: (a) 5 min, (b) 30 min, and (c) 120 min. Images highlight the reticulated nature of the phase separation. Insets show the higher magnification images. (d) and (e) shows the cross-sectional morphologies of the same samples in parts (a) and (c), respectively. These Z-contrast images display the three dimensionally interconnected landscape of the pores and the silica-rich film matrix throughout the coating thickness. 
Since the two phases are completely intertwined, a prolonged exposure to the etchant solution gradually leads to the expansion of pores deep into the film matrix. In fact, the corresponding ‘Z-contrast’ cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images (Fig. 2d and e, for the same samples as presented in Fig. 2a and c) reveal the interpenetrating nature of the pores, as well as highlight the very different, heat treatment time dependent, size distribution of SiO2-skeleton/pore-structure throughout the film thickness. Note that the higher-Z elements (Si with Z = 14) appear brighter than the lower-Z elements in this imaging mode, revealing darker porous areas and brighter regions of mainly SiO2 phase. Whether the films are partially (Fig. 2d) or completely etched (Fig. 2e), the notable microstructural differences among the samples underscores the tunability of the present approach for the production of tailored nanostructured optical coatings. In particular, formulations that would enable simultaneous realization of excellent water-repellency and suppression of light scattering losses would convey significant value for a variety of devices.
Generally, the requirements of surface roughness for water-repellency, super-hydrophobicity, and optical functionality present competing constraints. However, as shown in Fig. 2 and further discussed below, the unique processing methods have led to coatings with phase separated feature sizes that are much smaller than visible wavelengths, for the attainment of superior optical properties, while simultaneously ensuring extreme non-wetting surface characteristics. Considering the former property – optical functionality – the microstructure of the present coatings can be designed (i.e., by modifying the processing protocols as discussed above) such that the pore fraction and its size can be gradually varied (i.e., progressively reduced), from the air–film interface towards the bulk-film medium, in order to achieve a graded refractive index profile for reduced reflection. An example of such gradation can be observed in Fig. 3, which shows the Z-contrast STEM images of a controllably etched silica film deposited on a borosilicate glass template. Clearly, the volume fraction of the pores progressively decreases from the top to the so-called etch front (demarcated with dotted line in Fig. 3). Below the etch front, the pores are significantly smaller (see right panel inset) and their fill density continuously declines until the film matrix assumes its unetched dense material structure.
 Fig. 3  Cross-sectional Z-contrast STEM image of a partially etched glass film (2000 nm thick). The etch-front is marked by the dotted line. The sample is annealed at 625 °C for 60 min. Dashed arrow denotes the interface between the film and the substrate. Right inset shows a higher magnification view in the vicinity of the etch-front, illustrating the microstructural differences above and below the etch-front. 
Because the scale of features in the film is much smaller than the wavelength of the visible light, from a fundamental viewpoint the effective refractive index at a certain depth can be approximated as a set of multiple layers composed of homogeneous mixtures of air and dense film material, weighted in proportion to the volume of the constituents.31 In order to determine the refractive index profiles of the nanoporous glass films, spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements have been made on a film that was processed under conditions similar to those of the sample shown in Fig. 3. We utilized the Levenberg–Marquardt fitting procedure, determining the χ2 as a figure of merit where the errors of the data are included as described in ref. 32 and 33. The model film structure consists of five media: air/interface-1/film/interface-2/glass-substrate. The optical functions of interface-1 and interface-2 were determined using the Bruggeman effective medium approximation,34 consisting of 50% of the medium above and 50% of the medium below. The film and the glass substrate optical functions were modeled using the Sellmeier approximation, where the dielectric functions (or refractive indices) are given by (1) In eqn (1), n is the refractive index, λ is the wavelength of light, and A and λ0 are fitted parameters. Details of the fitting procedure are given in the ESI.†
The simplest model consisted only of air, film and the substrate, where the interfacial film layers were not taken into account. For this fit, the resulting χ2 = 529.0 was excessively high. When the interfacial layers are added to the analysis, then the χ2 value reduced to 139.2. The best fit to the data was obtained using a seven-parameter fit, where a Gaussian distribution over the parameter Afilm was included for the film. The distribution is used to simulate the variation in the optical functions that the ellipsometer samples over the spot size (∼3 mm × 5 mm) with varying refractive indices.
In addition, Asubstrate was also included into the mix as a fitting parameter, since the ellipsometric measurement is highly sensitive only to the etched porous top-most region of the coating. Any small microstructural changes to the near-surface region of the substrate (or even the dense film section) will not be well represented by the optical functions of the untreated glass substrate.
Taking all these considerations into account, the χ2 was substantially reduced to 20.3, where the fitted data are displayed in ESI,† Fig. S1 and the fitted parameters with errors are documented in ESI,† Table S1. Further attempts to improve the fit resulted in very small reductions in χ2, but with much larger cross correlation coefficients, making these results less reliable. Although the best χ2 is greater than 1 and a more complicated model is required, it is clear that the general features of the model are reasonable. Fig. 4 shows the resulting spectroscopic refractive index profiles for the three modeled layers (interface-1/film/interface-2), as well as the refractive index of the substrate. The results show that the refractive index of the nanostructured glass film is considerably less than that of the bulk glass. Moreover, the refractive index is graded such that the near surface refractive index is very close to that of the air (n = 1.0) and the refractive index of interface-2 is between the film and the substrate, making the AR properties even more effective. In fact, a general variation in the refractive index with depth is established, where the refractive index progressively increases with depth into the film, finally assuming the substrate value. Accordingly, these two combined property enhancers – attainment of a very low index of refraction and tailoring of the refractive index through control of microstructure – make the present platform uniquely suited to produce optical coatings with the highest possible performance characteristics. In fact, next we show a near-complete elimination of Fresnel reflections from the single-side coated glass over a broad wavelength and angle-of-incidence range. Wavelength-dependent near-normal incidence transmittance measurements (obtained on the same sample as presented in Fig. 4) revealed significantly enhanced transmittance over a spectral range of 300–1000 nm, compared to that of the underlying reference borosilicate template, remaining on the average above 95.2% (versus ∼92%) within the entire visible regime (Fig. 5a). Fig. 5b illustrates the omnidirectional characteristics of the same sample at specific discrete wavelengths covering the visible spectrum. The measurements were carried out over a range of incidence angles from 0° to 80° in 10° increments, and exhibit increased transmittance through the nanotextured porous surface, compared to that of the unstructured counterpart, for incidence angles up to 70°. While light transmission through the coated substrate is always greater than the uncoated counterpart, the performance shows sensitivity to the angle of incidence due to the Fresnel reflections from the rear side. For the single-sided nanotextured surfaces, the transmission is limited by reflections arising from the abrupt change in refractive index from the uncoated back surface. In fact, according to theoretical analysis, nearly angle-independent performance could be obtained if the nanostructured coating is applied to both sides of the substrate to eliminate the contribution of the uncoated side.35 While efforts in this area are currently underway, it is noteworthy that the observed improved light transmittance characteristics of the present coatings are a direct consequence of the reduced surface reflections. To provide further insight into this behavior, as well as to evaluate the effects of light scattering from the nanostructured surface, the specular and diffuse reflectance spectra of the same nanostructured silica film were measured between 200 to 2000 nm, using an integrating sphere. The total reflectance was measured at an incident angle of 3.3°, where both the specular beam and the scattered light are collected. The diffuse reflectance was collected with the beam normal to the sample surface. The specular reflectance was determined by subtracting the diffuse reflectance from the total reflectance. In accord with the transmittance results, wavelength-dependent spectra, shown in Fig. 6a, reveal that the specular reflectance of the coated glass, relative to the uncoated reference sample, is significantly suppressed over the entire spectrum. Notably, in the visible range of the spectrum, the reflectance is reduced by ∼75–85% relative to the underlying flat template. For high performance antireflective characteristics, not only the specular reflectance but also the diffuse reflectance from the coating surface should be minimized, especially for surfaces having a roughness profile.36Fig. 6b illustrates the diffuse reflectance spectra of the same samples. Except at shorter wavelengths (i.e., ≤300 nm), the nanostructured silica coating enables lower reflectance over the entire spectral range, indicating that the observed reduction in specular reflectance (Fig. 6a) is not caused by the light scattering associated with the surface roughness of the etched glass film, but arises merely from the optical impedance matching between air and the substrate interfaces. Note that, although the final material character in both the coating and the substrate is similar, the fact that the coating is not dense and has a porous submicron structure, with dimensions gradually changing through the thickness, significantly changes its effective index of refraction (see Fig. 4). From a fundamental standpoint, performance can be modeled as a nanostructural-modulated refractive index gradient (i.e., the closer to the substrate, the higher the index), which decreases reflection because there are no abrupt index changes.37 Hence, the final etched-out film structure functions as a true graded-index anti-reflective coating. The combined results of enhanced transmission and reduced reflection over a broad spectrum, as well as the applicability of these coatings to a wide variety of glass platforms, would significantly benefit just about any application where light travels into or out of a material. In particular, for photovoltaic panels the light energy lost to reflection can be substantially reduced; this directly increases the light coupling into the solar cell, promoting the energy yield of the module. In conjunction with this, the effectiveness of the nanostructured glass surfaces in enhancing the performance of photovoltaic devices was demonstrated by simulating the coated samples as a protective cover glass on various solar cells having different optical band-gaps (see Fig. S2 in the ESI†). The measurements reported here were made using a broadband super-continuum source with the illumination beam collimated to a power density of 3.42 mW cm−2 (see Experimental section for the details of the measurements). The same coated and uncoated samples, where optical properties displayed in Fig. 4–6, are portrayed as the cover glass. In Table 1, the short-circuit current densities (Jsc) of the cells, with and without the nanostructured silica coatings, are compared; and the relative improvements in performance, termed as “boost”, are summarized. As anticipated, the increased light transmission, resulting from the graded index antireflective effect, leads to substantial enhancement in Jsc (i.e., ∼3–7% relative increase) for a diverse selection of direct and indirect bandgap solar cell devices. Hence, unlike other antireflective technologies, independent of the device chemistry or microelectronics design, the present technique offers a practical solution to improve the performance of the photovoltaic modules simply by integrating a thin layer of monolithic material onto the protective glass surface.
 Fig. 4  The spectroscopic refractive index of the various layers for the model described in the text, illustrating the gradual change of the refractive index from substrate to air. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Wavelength-dependent and (b) angle-dependent optical transmittance spectra of a borosilicate substrate with and without the nanoporous anti-reflective silica film coating. The dashed lines in (b) represent the spectra of the uncoated borosilicate reference. 
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the wavelength-dependent spectra for (a) specular reflectance and (b) diffuse reflectance of the same samples as presented in Fig. 5. The spectral features around 800–900 nm is an instrumental artifact, due to the switching of the detector. 
Table 1 Summary of the short-circuit current densities of the GaInP (Eg = 1.84 eV), GaAs (Eg = 1.42 eV), Si (Eg = 1.12 eV), and CuInGaSe (CIGS, Eg = 1.42 eV) solar cells. For the measurements, coated (sample) and uncoated (reference) borosilicate substrates were placed in front of the photovoltaic cells to simulate the outer protective cover glass. The relative gain in short-circuit current densities (labelled as boost) for each cell is also listed




 

J
sc [mA cm−2]
Boost [%]




GaInP


Reference
0.5438
6.60


Sample
0.5797






GaAs


Reference
0.8157
6.20


Sample
0.8663






Si


Reference
0.4782
3.37


Sample
0.4943






CIGS


Reference
0.6329
5.37


Sample
0.6669




In order to maintain the light-to-current conversion efficiency of the outdoor photovoltaic panels it is also crucial to prevent soiling of the cover glass surface by the accumulation of sand, dust, and other pollutants.38 The accumulated buildup of contaminants on the panels can result in energy losses reaching to 15%.39 One of the approaches to generating a self-cleaning surface is based on the principle of superhydrophobicity, induced by the combination of unique surface nano-/micro-structures and the surface chemical composition.40–42 This physicochemical fine surface construction traps a thin layer of air, which greatly reduces the area of contact between a water droplet and the roughened surface, thus preventing penetration of water into the surface structure. Akin to many non-wetting biological systems (e.g., lotus leaves and water strider legs), on such artificially created superhydrophobic surfaces the water droplets can effectively clean the surface due to the much weaker adhesion between the contaminant particles and the superhydrophobic surface compared to the water droplets and the particle. Prior to modification of the surface chemistry, the fabricated silica films, with approximate pore sizes of 10–20 nm, qualitatively demonstrate structural super-hydrophilicity. This promotes antifogging characteristics by allowing condensation to rapidly spread and wet the surface, in part through capillary action and in part due to the hydrophilic nature of the Si–O–Si network, as has been elucidated in our previous report.43 On the other hand, by simply changing the surface chemistry with low surface energy functional groups, these textured AR coatings support exceptional superhydrophobicity, where the static water droplet contact angle (CA) values extend to as high as 165° (Fig. 7). The water droplets on these surfaces assume a nearly spherical shape (see inset of Fig. 7) and roll off very easily at a tilt angle <5°. This implies that the water droplets do not penetrate into the porous silica film matrix, but instead are suspended on the mixed interface composed of the surface asperities, which are 10–100 nm apart, with air pockets trapped between them. Consequently, these surfaces demonstrate an intrinsic water-proof property and self-cleaning ability (discussed below in more detail); which is important not only for solar modules but also for other devices and surfaces that are exposed to typical environmental encumbrances.
 Fig. 7  Photograph of blue dyed water droplets on a borosilicate substrate coated with nanoporous antireflective glass film. The film surface is modified by a covalently bonded organosilane chemistry. Inset shows the profile of a 5 μl water droplet resting on a similarly processed film, displaying a static contact angle of 165°. 
Another significant merit of these nanostructured silica coatings is their mechanical and structural robustness. In particular, scratch and abrasion resistance are two important measures by which to assess the adhesion strength of a coating, as well as its resistance to permanent plastic deformation. The structural integrity of the coatings was assessed by conducting two complementary tests. The first test was performed by using a nanoindenter to qualitatively evaluate the relative scratch resistance as well as the adhesive strength of the coatings to the underlying glass platform. Through this procedure, a critical load (if any) can be established at which the material fractures or undergoes permanent plastic deformation. Films approximately 1 μm in thickness were fabricated on borosilicate glass templates and a conical indenter with a tip radius of 1 μm and cone angle of 90° was used for the measurements at ramping loads. Fig. 8a shows typical indenter generated scanning probe microscopy images of scratch tracks for a sputter deposited film, a fully processed film (i.e., heat treated and etched), and the underlying borosilicate substrate. The scratches, produced after the application of load ramped up to the equipment peak of 10000 μN, showed no evidence of cracking, brittle fragmentation or tendency toward delamination. Moreover, for loads at one-half and at full equipment maximum the average penetration depth (calculated from the lateral and vertical displacements) of the indenter is nearly the same for both the reference substrate and the coated sample (Table 2). This result suggests that the scratch resistance behavior of the as-deposited films is similar to that of the underlying substrate material. Accordingly, the coefficient of friction profiles for a representative template revealed similar behavior, as displayed in Fig. 8b. It is important to note that no accurate penetration depths could be measured for the etched samples due to a surface roughness (∼300 nm) that is nearly equivalent to the depth of the scratch grooves. It can also be inferred from Table 2 that the scratch characteristics of the films on fused silica platforms are very similar to those obtained on borosilicate counterparts. Slightly larger scratch depths for the coated samples indicate a softer nature of the glass films relative to the underlying substrate materials. In fact, hardness measurements performed on the same samples, using a Berkovich indenter, confirmed that the glass films, under a light force of 1.4 mN, are indeed softer than the substrate materials. Nevertheless, it is expected that the fully processed films may be more forgiving to scratch induced damages, because their porous microstructure should provide relatively lower interfacial and residual stresses than the as-deposited dense films.
 Fig. 8  (a) Topographical images of the scratches made on an as-deposited and a nanotextured glass thin film. Image for the underlying uncoated borosilicate substrate is also included for comparison. No debris is observed on any sample, aside from several small and large sized surface-bound particles on the sputtered film. Note that the as-sputtered borosilicate films are generally somewhat rougher than the underlying substrates. (b) Comparison of the coefficient of friction profiles as a function of scratch distance for fused silica substrates with and without a dense borosilicate film. 
Table 2 Average penetration depths of the conical indenter during the scratch tests for the coated and uncoated glass substrates. Data are listed at half and at the peak load of the equipment maximum




Sample
Penetration depth at 5000 μN [nm]
Penetration depth at 10000 μN [nm]




Fused silica
227.50 ± 1.56
342.53 ± 0.87


Film on fused silica
236.67 ± 3.27
344.40 ± 0.99


Borosilicate
254.18 ± 0.70
384.03 ± 1.96


Film on borosilicate
270.73 ± 4.25
403.10 ± 1.41




Following scratch tests, environmental stability as well as the self-cleaning property of the AR films were evaluated by performing Al2O3 impact abrasion tests. In this test, real outdoor field conditions (e.g., harsh desert environment with sand storms) are simulated based on a report provided by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).44 Employing the test procedure described in our previous report,43 a superhydrophobic AR sample on a fused silica platform was blasted with sharp and rugged-edged Al2O3 particles at a velocity of 80 km h−1 for 15 min. This impact velocity corresponds to an impingement energy of ∼ 6 × 10−7 J per particle (see Videos S1 and S2 in the ESI†), the maximum that was recited in the NOAA report. After this extremely abrasive test, the nano-silica film retained water repellent (see ESI,† Video S3) and self-cleaning properties (Fig. 9b), with a slightly reduced CA of 149°, down from 155°. The reason for this slight degradation is attributed to the formation of impact generated defects on the film surface that also led to increase in light scattering and substantial loss of light transmissivity. Fig. 9a shows the optical transmittance through the nanostructured film after the abrasion test, including data for uncoated fused silica and borosilicate glass reference materials.
 Fig. 9  (a) Specular transmission spectra of a sputter deposited and fully processed nanostructured sodium borosilicate film on a fused silica substrate after sand-storm conditions (see ESI,† Video S1), simulated using highly abrasive Al2O3 particles at 80 km h−1. For comparison, spectra for the uncoated fused silica and borosilicate substrates taken before and after the test are also included. (b) Appearance of the same sample after the impact abrasion test. While the surface demonstrates self-cleaning ability of the coating (water is applied and repelled only from the narrow section as shown in the photograph), a loss in transmissivity through that cleaned section of the sample can be visually observed. 
Clearly, the figure displays significantly better post-abrasion transmittance for the coated sample across the entire measured spectrum, when compared to the underlying reference fused silica template. For the coated sample, the relative decrease in transmittance at λ = 700 nm was estimated as ∼17%, while both the uncoated fused silica and borosilicate materials sustained severe degradation (at λ = 700 nm) by more than 30%, rendering those surfaces nearly translucent. Measurements also revealed that the softer borosilicate glass sustained more wear than the harder fused silica material. For the coated sample, the retention of water repellence and transmittance after this very aggressive abrasion test is not surprising, due to the continuous and consistent microstructure throughout the entire silica network thickness. Just below the surface damage, the remaining structured coating ensures preservation of hydrophobic attributes as well as reduced scattering losses. This undamaged film layer also protects, and impedes roughening of, the underlying substrate surface. Consequently, flat (un-textured) surfaces, lacking such protection, are more prone to AR degradation, as clearly evidenced from the observations of Fig. 9. Finally, it is noteworthy that since a much more aggressive abrasive, Al2O3, is used to simulate the outdoor sand/dust-storm conditions (rather than much softer and more natural SiO2) these nanostructured AR surfaces are expected to exhibit robust properties in even more aggressive, real outdoor environments.
3. Experimental
Fabrication of nanostructured glass films on glass substrates
The deposition of glass film coatings was performed with a radio-frequency magnetron sputtering system using a two inch diameter target that is made from a glass composition comprising 66 mol% SiO2, 26 mol% B2O3, and 8 mol% Na2O. Depositions were carried out on one side of the glass substrates in a sputter-gas mixture of Ar and O2 (oxygen/argon = 1/3), at a total pressure ranging from 3–10 mTorr. No substrate heating is employed during the depositions and the resulting film thickness was about 1 μm. After the depositions, the coated glass substrates were annealed in air at temperatures ranging from 625 °C to 710 °C for a series of hold times between 5 min to 120 min, in order to produce adequate spinodal phase decomposition as well as to investigate the variations in film microstructures. Following heat treatment, the phase separated coatings were differentially etched, using ultrasonic activation, in a dilute mixture of deionized water and 10:1 buffered oxide etchant (v/v, 1:0.075) for a duration of 3–4 min. This component of the methodology is vital since it enables post-deposition transformation of the phase separated coating into a three dimensional porous nanoscale silica network. During the process the sodium borate phase is eradicated to the desired depth that will satisfy visible-light antireflectivity with graded index profile. To create the added functionality of water-repellency, the nanostructured samples were then immersed in a 0.5 vol% 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane (Gelest, Inc.,) hexane solution. After 15–30 min of soaking, the samples were washed with isopropyl alcohol to remove the unreacted silane residues and then oven annealed at 115 °C for 15 min.
Microstructural and optical characterizations
Plan-view surface morphology of the nanostructured films was analyzed by a Hitachi S-4100 high-resolution field-emission type scanning electron microscope. Cross-sectional examinations of the samples were conducted by Z-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Specimen preparation was carried out by focused ion beam methods, and STEM images were recorded using a Nion UltraSTEM operating at 200 kV. Optical transmission measurements were conducted using a Carry 5000 UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer at normal incidence. Angle-dependent transmission measurements, with incidence angle defined relative to the surface normal, were collected by rotating the specimen. Reflection measurements were taken with an integrating sphere attachment, where the sample normal was mounted at an angle of 3.3° with respect to the incident light beam. Spectroscopic ellipsometry data were obtained using a two-modulator generalized ellipsometer (2-MGE) at an angle of incidence of 65.01°. Details concerning the instrument and its calibrations as well as underlying theory of 2-MGE were described previously.45,46
Electrical property characterizations of the solar cells
The electrical properties of the solar cells were evaluated using a broadband super-continuum source, which produces a spectral distribution close to global radiation AM1.5. The illumination beam is expanded and collimated to an effective area of 20 cm2, yielding a power density of 3.42 mW cm−2. The experiments were conducted in the same setup previously employed for testing a lateral multi-bandgap photovoltaic system using a diffraction-based spectral-splitting scheme (i.e., a diffractive optic laterally splits collimated spectrum), which requires a relatively large beam dimension, thereby limiting the illumination power density.47,48 The solar cell output current and voltage upon illumination were recorded with Keithley 2602A source meter. For the measurements, coated and uncoated borosilicate substrates were placed 1.5 cm in front of the cells.
Contact angle measurements
The static contact angle measurements were performed using an optical tensiometer (Attension Theta model T301, Biolin Scientific, Finland) equipped with a CCD camera. Deionized water droplets around 5 μl applied to at least ten different positions on the surface and contact angles were determined by taking the average of these points. Roll-off angles were established by using an automated tilting stage.
Scratch, hardness and abrasion resistance tests
Coating scratch resistance was evaluated by nanoindentation measurements using a Hysitron Triboindenter (Minneapolis, MN), on films approximately 1 μm in thickness. A linear ramp-load scratch test was used to conduct five tests on each sample. Measurements were made on as-deposited films (before the heat treatment and differential etching steps), on the final etched product as well as on an uncoated reference borosilicate substrate at equipment loads of 5000 μN and 10000 μN, the latter of which is the load capability of the instrument. The tests used a conical tip with a radius of 1 μm (90° cone angle) over a 10 μm long track at a constant velocity of 0.33 μm s−1. After scratch testing, topographical images of the surface were obtained using the same tip with a very small contact load (<70 nN). For the determination of coefficient of friction, three scratches on each sample were made at a constant load of 15 μN and for 10 μm displacements. During measurements, lateral and normal displacements as well as the lateral force were recorded. To correct for sample tilt and to establish the surface profile, a ramp load pre-scratch test was performed at a maximum of 8 μN for a distance of 5 μm prior to actual scan. Hardness measurements were carried out at the loading rate of 7.5 nm s−1 up to a peak displacement of 75 nm (in order to avoid the effect of the substrate for the film coated samples), where it was held for 5 s and then unloaded completely with the same rate. Indents were made using a Berkovich indenter with a tip radius of 150 nm.
For the abrasion tests, 50 g of commercial sharp and rugged-edged Al2O3 particles (∼100–300 μm in size) were impacted normal to the sample surface at a velocity of 80 km h−1 for 15 min using an in-house made apparatus, as described in ref. 43. The particle velocity was determined from wind speed measurements using a hot wire anemometer (General Tools model CIH20DL).
4. Conclusions
In summary, by exploiting vapor deposition of and metastable spinodal phase separation in low-alkali borosilicate glass coatings, we have demonstrated formation of nanostructured films on glass platforms that simultaneously provide graded-refractive-index anti-reflectivity and self-cleaning capability. The three-dimensionally interconnected nanoporous glass coatings significantly suppress Fresnel reflections and provide enhanced transmission over a wide range of wavelengths and incident angles. We have shown that the enhanced optical performance is related to the porosity modulated gradation of the refractive index through the film thickness. The technological potential of these glass coatings is demonstrated through improved light coupling into photovoltaic modules, yielding ∼3–7% increase in the short-circuit current densities of diverse direct and indirect bandgap solar cells. Super water-repellency and thus self-cleaning ability of the nanostructured AR surfaces is realized through appropriate chemical modification of the silica film surface energy. Additional experiments demonstrated that these nanostructured coatings are mechanically robust and exhibit superior abrasion resistance. With demonstrated scalable and manufacturable formulations, the present approach can provide an all-in-one combination of multiple salient and unique performance enhancers (i.e., antireflectivity, self-cleanability, mechanical durability), which will benefit a variety of optical device applications, especially those exposed to humid conditions or dust prone environments.
Author contributions
The project was originated by TA; planned and co-ordinated by TA, JTS and DKC. ARL conducted electron microscopy analysis. JCP and INI performed optical characterizations. TL and MPP contributed to material synthesis. GEJ performed spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements and simulations to derive optical parameters. PW and RM carried out electrical property measurements of the solar cells. SRH obtained water droplet contact angle values. RMT and ELC performed and analyzed the mechanical property measurements. TA wrote the manuscript with contributions from DKC and all other authors.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Laboratory Directed Tip Innovation Program of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy. STEM research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. Mechanical Property research conducted at High Temperature Material Laboratory, which is sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the U.S. DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. A portion of this research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. Other portions of this research were conducted at the Shared Research Equipment (SHaRE) user facility, which is sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of BES, U.S. DOE. Photovoltaic device measurements conducted at the University of Utah were supported by a DOE Bridge award no. EE0005959.
References
Y.-J. Lee, D. S. Ruby, D. W. Peters, B. B. McKenzie and J. W. P. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Kuo, D. J. Poxson, Y. S. Kim, F. W. Mont, J. K. Kim and S. Lin, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2527 CrossRef .
S. J. An, J. H. Chae, G.-C. Yi and G. H. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 121108 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xu, P. Jin, M. Tazawa and K. Yoshimura, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Hiller, J. D. Mendelsohn, M. F. Rubner, J. A. Hiller, J. D. Mendelsohn and M. F. Rubner, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Song, E. S. Choi, G. C. Park, C. Y. Park, S. J. Jang and Y. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 093110 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Okuno, Proc. SPIE, International Optical Design Conference, Jackson Hole,  2010, vol. 7652 Search PubMed .
C. Lee, S. Y. Bae, S. Mobasser and H. Manohara, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Upadhyaya and P. K. Bandyopadhyay, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2012, 390, 012018 CrossRef .
L. Vaissié, O. V. Smolski, A. Mehta and E. G. Johnson, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2005, 17, 732 CrossRef .
W. H. Lowdermilk and D. Milam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chhajed, D. J. Poxson, X. Yan, J. Cho, E. F. Schubert, R. E. Welser, A. K. Sood and J. K. Kim, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4, 052503 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 68, 313 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Diedenhofen, G. Vecchi, R. E. Algra, A. Hartsuiker, O. L. Muskens, G. Immink, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, W. L. Vos and J. G. Rivas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Poxson, M.-L. Kuo, F. W. Mont, Y.-S. Kim, X. Yan, R. E. Welser, A. K. Sood, J. Cho, S.-Y. Lin and E. F. Schubert, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 36, 434 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Chapman and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281 CrossRef .
Y. Kanamori, M. Sasaki and K. Hane, Opt. Lett., 1999, 24, 1422 CrossRef CAS .
Z. N. Yu, H. Gao, W. Wu, H. X. Ge and S. Y. Chou, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct., 2003, 21, 2874 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Clapman and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281 CrossRef .
K. Hadobás, S. Kirch, A. Carl, M. Acet and E. F. Wassermann, Nanotechnology, 2000, 11, 161 CrossRef .
K. Askar, B. M. Phillips, Y. Fang, B. Choi, N. Gozubenli, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 439, 84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yildirim, T. Khudiyev, B. Daglar, H. Budunoglu, A. K. Okyay and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 853 CAS .
Z. Huang, M. M. Hawkeye and M. J. Brett, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 275703 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Lee and C. Willis, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 3247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Dong, F. Jia, Z. Wang, Z. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Li, W. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 473 Search PubMed .
B. G. Prevo, E. W. Hon and O. D. Velev, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 791 RSC .

          W. Vogel, Structure and Crystallization of Glasses, Pergamon, New York,  1971, p. 60 Search PubMed .
M. J. Minot, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1976, 66, 515 CrossRef .
D. Enke, F. Janowski and W. Schwieger, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 60, 19 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chattopadhyay, Y. F. Huang, Y. J. Jen, A. Anguly, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 69, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Jellison, Jr., Thin Solid Films, 1993, 234, 416 CrossRef .
G. E. Jellison, Jr., Thin Solid Films, 1998, 313, 33 CrossRef .
D. A. G. Bruggeman, Ann. Phys., 1935, 416, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Dobrowolski, D. Poitras, P. H. Ma, H. Vakil and M. Acree, Appl. Opt., 2002, 41, 3075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Dai, H. C. Chang, K. Y. Lai, C. A. Lin, R. J. Chung, G. R. Lin and J. H. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10924 RSC .
S. L. Diedenhofen, G. Vecchi, R. E. Algra, A. Hartsuiker, O. L. Muskens, G. Immink, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, W. L. Vos and J. G. Rivas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mani and R. Pillai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 3124 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Piliougine, J. Carretero, M. Sidrach-de-Cardona, D. Montiel and P. S. Friera, Proceedings of 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Valencia,  2008, vol. 2698 Search PubMed .
X. J. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roach, N. J. Shirtcliffe and M. I. Newton, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 224 RSC .
B. Bhushan, Y. C. Jung and K. Koch, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aytug, J. T. Simpson, A. R. Lupini, R. M. Trejo, G. E. Jellison, I. N. Ivanov, S. J. Pennycook, D. A. Hillesheim, K. O. Winter, D. K. Christen, S. R. Hunter and J. A. Haynes, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 315602 CrossRef PubMed .
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “Dust storms, sand storms, and related activities in the Middle East”, 2003, retrieved from http://www.magazine.noaa.gov/stories/mag86.htm.
G. E. Jellison, Jr. and F. A. Modine, Appl. Opt., 1997, 36, 8184 CrossRef .
G. E. Jellison, Jr. and F. A. Modine, Appl. Opt., 1997, 36, 8190 CrossRef .
P. Wang, J. A. Dominguez-Caballero, D. J. Friedman and R. Menon, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014 DOI:10.1002/pip.2516 .
N. Mohammad, P. Wang, D. J. Friedman and R. Menon, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc00499cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Preparation of nanostructured silica films. (a) Specially formulated sputtering target, (b) deposition during magnetron sputtering, (c) photograph of the sputter-coated glass substrate (coated side is facing up and it is not possible to distinguish it from the uncoated side), (d) high resolution scanning electron microscopy image showing the nanostructured surface morphology of the coating after the post-deposition treatments (scale bar in the image represents 100 nm).	 

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscopy images of fully processed, phase separating glass films on fused silica substrates at different heat treatment periods. Note that heat treatment temperature (710 °C) is kept identical for all samples. Heat treatment times are: (a) 5 min, (b) 30 min, and (c) 120 min. Images highlight the reticulated nature of the phase separation. Insets show the higher magnification images. (d) and (e) shows the cross-sectional morphologies of the same samples in parts (a) and (c), respectively. These Z-contrast images display the three dimensionally interconnected landscape of the pores and the silica-rich film matrix throughout the coating thickness.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cross-sectional Z-contrast STEM image of a partially etched glass film (2000 nm thick). The etch-front is marked by the dotted line. The sample is annealed at 625 °C for 60 min. Dashed arrow denotes the interface between the film and the substrate. Right inset shows a higher magnification view in the vicinity of the etch-front, illustrating the microstructural differences above and below the etch-front.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  The spectroscopic refractive index of the various layers for the model described in the text, illustrating the gradual change of the refractive index from substrate to air.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Wavelength-dependent and (b) angle-dependent optical transmittance spectra of a borosilicate substrate with and without the nanoporous anti-reflective silica film coating. The dashed lines in (b) represent the spectra of the uncoated borosilicate reference.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the wavelength-dependent spectra for (a) specular reflectance and (b) diffuse reflectance of the same samples as presented in Fig. 5. The spectral features around 800–900 nm is an instrumental artifact, due to the switching of the detector.	 

GaInP
Reference	0.5438	6.60
Sample	0.5797


GaAs
Reference	0.8157	6.20
Sample	0.8663


Si
Reference	0.4782	3.37
Sample	0.4943


CIGS
Reference	0.6329	5.37
Sample	0.6669

 	Fig. 7  Photograph of blue dyed water droplets on a borosilicate substrate coated with nanoporous antireflective glass film. The film surface is modified by a covalently bonded organosilane chemistry. Inset shows the profile of a 5 μl water droplet resting on a similarly processed film, displaying a static contact angle of 165°.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Topographical images of the scratches made on an as-deposited and a nanotextured glass thin film. Image for the underlying uncoated borosilicate substrate is also included for comparison. No debris is observed on any sample, aside from several small and large sized surface-bound particles on the sputtered film. Note that the as-sputtered borosilicate films are generally somewhat rougher than the underlying substrates. (b) Comparison of the coefficient of friction profiles as a function of scratch distance for fused silica substrates with and without a dense borosilicate film.	 

Fused silica	227.50 ± 1.56	342.53 ± 0.87
Film on fused silica	236.67 ± 3.27	344.40 ± 0.99
Borosilicate	254.18 ± 0.70	384.03 ± 1.96
Film on borosilicate	270.73 ± 4.25	403.10 ± 1.41

 	Fig. 9  (a) Specular transmission spectra of a sputter deposited and fully processed nanostructured sodium borosilicate film on a fused silica substrate after sand-storm conditions (see ESI,† Video S1), simulated using highly abrasive Al2O3 particles at 80 km h−1. For comparison, spectra for the uncoated fused silica and borosilicate substrates taken before and after the test are also included. (b) Appearance of the same sample after the impact abrasion test. While the surface demonstrates self-cleaning ability of the coating (water is applied and repelled only from the narrow section as shown in the photograph), a loss in transmissivity through that cleaned section of the sample can be visually observed.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc00499c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
