Impact of interfacial polymer morphology on photoexcitation dynamics and device performance in P3HT/ZnO heterojunctions   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B903849C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B903849C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4609-4614Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsImpact of interfacial polymer morphology on photoexcitation dynamics and device performance in P3HT/ZnO heterojunctions†

        
          
            Matthew T. 
            Lloyd
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rohit P. 
            Prasankumar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael B. 
            Sinclair
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alex C. 
            Mayer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dana C. 
            Olson‡
a and 

        
          
            Julia W. P. 
            Hsu
          
        
      a
aSandia National Laboratories, PO Box 5800, MS-1415, Albuquerque, NM 87185, New Mexico, USA. E-mail: mtlloyd@sandia.gov
bCenter for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
Received 
      26th February 2009
    , Accepted 7th May 2009First published on 20th May 2009AbstractTo understand the critical factor(s) that influence short-circuit current in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)/ZnO solar cells, we investigate the morphology of the interfacial polymer layer and the photoexcitation dynamics in the picosecond regime. Thin (∼6 nm) films of P3HT deposited on bare ZnO and ZnO modified with an alkanethiol monolayer are used as model systems for the heterojunction interface. Results are compared with thin P3HT films on glass for the behavior of the polymer alone. Synchrotron grazing incidence X-ray diffraction spectra of P3HT thin films deposited on glass and on an alkanethiol-modified ZnO surface identify a crystalline P3HT interfacial layer, while an amorphous interfacial layer of P3HT is found on unmodified ZnO. To investigate the decay dynamics of initial photoexcited states, the samples are interrogated by pump–probe spectroscopy with sub-picosecond time resolution. Compared to P3HT/ZnO composite films, the decay behavior for both polarons and excitons over a 500 ps time interval becomes significantly slower with alkanethiol modification, indicating a reduction in early-stage charge recombination. These experiments demonstrate how the interfacial polymer morphology has a critical role in determining device performance.
Introduction
Inorganic–organic (hybrid) solar cells are an attractive alternative to traditional silicon based photovoltaics due to low-temperature (<300 °C), solution based processing and the potential for rapid, easily scalable manufacturing. In these photovoltaic devices, light absorption occurs in the conducting polymer, resulting in bound electron–hole pairs (excitons). The excitons then dissociate to form free carriers with electrons being transfer to the inorganic acceptor materials and the holes remain in the conducting polymers. Due to the lattice distortions accompanying the charges in organic materials, charge carriers in the polymer are often called polarons. The separated electrons and holes can transport to their respective electrodes and generate photocurrent, or recombine across the interface without generating a photocurrent. Hence, the performance of these solar cells critically depends on the electron transfer and recombination at the inorganic–organic heterojunction interface. To date, the power conversion efficiencies of hybrid solar cells fall short of the requirements for commercial exploitation, in large partly due to low short-circuit currents.1,2 While the bulk energy levels of the inorganic acceptor materials indicate an offset sufficient to dissociate excitons, equivalent all-organic bilayer devices (utilizing a C60 acceptor)3,4 produce photocurrents five to ten times higher than equivalent bilayer hybrid devices.5 The causes underlying limited photocurrent generation in hybrid solar cells and the difference in inorganic vs. organic acceptors are currently poorly understood. Thus, factors that affect charge transfer efficiency and subsequent recombination at the polymer/metal oxide interface are critical issues. We report here that, by employing an organic surface modifier at the heterojunction interface, a change in the microstructure of the interfacial polymer layer occurs, resulting in reduced charge recombination and improved device performance through increased photocurrent. This finding has significant implications for hybrid device design and highlights the importance of interactions between donor and acceptor materials at the heterojunction interface.
Modification of the heterojunction interface is known to strongly influence charge transfer characteristics. Metal oxide/polymer devices have been modified with a library of surface-bound organic molecules, which affect both device photovoltaic properties and change the charge carrier recombination dynamics.5–9 In poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)/ZnO bilayer devices, we previously showed that surface modification of ZnO with alkanethiol monolayer resulted in an increase in short-circuit current and a red-shift in polymer absorption spectrum, both of which scaled with the chain length of the alkanethiols.5 While it was speculated that the enhancements were associated with ordering of P3HT, definitive measurements of the P3HT crystallinity were not reported in that work, and the mechanism responsible for the photocurrent increase was not identified. In order to understand the origin of the improvement in device performance of modified ZnO, in this paper we measure the effect of alkanethiol modification on the morphology of the interfacial polymer layer using grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXD) and the dynamics of early-stage photoexcited species using femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy.
Experimental
A P3HT/ZnO bilayer device architecture is used in this study to focus on the interfacial effects. Photovoltaic devices were fabricated and characterized as previously described.5 To model the heterojunction interface, thin films of P3HT were deposited on unmodified sol–gel derived ZnO and hexadecanethiol (C16SH) modified ZnO. Results are compared with neat P3HT films deposited on glass. Samples for absorption and GIXD were prepared using 1 mg mL−1 solutions of P3HT spin cast from chloroform to produce films of approximately 6 nm in thickness. After deposition, these films were annealed in a N2 environment at 225 °C and allowed to cool over a period of ∼45 min to room temperature. To obtain adequate signal strength, the thickness of the samples used in the transient photoinduced absorption experiment was increased to 15–20 nm. These films were annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. To ensure excitation at the heterojunction interface, samples were illuminated through the ZnO layer, which is transparent to the pump beam. As configured in previously published work, the pump–probe system is based on a 100 kHz regenerative amplifier producing 10 µJ, 50 fs pulses at 800 nm.10 The amplifier output is split into two beams to pump two optical parametric amplifiers (OPAs), one operating primarily in the visible and the other in the infrared. The pump beam is obtained from the visible OPA, allowing us to excite the sample near the P3HT absorption maximum at 550 nm with a pump fluence of 18 µJ cm−2 pulse−1. This value was chosen to avoid exciton–exciton annihilation at high incident light intensity (see ESI†).11 The probe beam comes from the infrared OPA with a range of 1090–3034 nm. The probe energy was maintained at <1% of the pump energy in all experiments. All measurements were carried out at room temperature and under vacuum to rule out any effects of photo-oxidation. The measured TPA data were fit with a triple exponential decay convolved with the pump pulse duration (see ESI†). GIXD was performed at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory using the 7–2 beamline at 8 keV. The scattering intensity was corrected for geometry and the incidence angle was at the critical angle of ∼0.2°.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra for P3HT deposited on three types of substrates. When deposited on glass, P3HT displays two intrachain π–π* absorption peaks at 525 and 560 nm and a low energy shoulder at 610 nm, which is associated with interchain interactions in highly crystalline polymers. In contrast, P3HT deposited on ZnO shows a ∼50 nm blue shift in the peak of the UV-Vis absorption spectrum and no discernible long wavelength absorption shoulder. Fig. 1a also illustrates how the blue shift of P3HT films deposited on ZnO substrates can be tempered and the low-energy shoulder can be recovered by the introduction of a C16SH self-assembled monolayer (SAM) at the interface. Furthermore, the I–V characteristics for ZnO/P3HT bilayer devices shown in Fig. 1b illustrate a 45% increase in short-circuit current (Jsc) for devices employing a C16SH interfacial layer.12Fig. 1c shows that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) for these devices behaves similarly to the absorption spectrum. In the bare ZnO device, there is a 10 nm blue shift in the peak value of the EQE as well as a suppression of the low-energy shoulder. This suggests that a region of disordered polymer exists within the exciton diffusion length of the interface (5–10 nm).13 The C16SH modified device exhibits an enhanced 610 nm shoulder, indicating an increase in crystallinity of the polymer layer at the heterojunction interface. Compared to P3HT/ZnO devices, we observe three trends for P3HT/C16SH/ZnO devices: (1) increase in photocurrent, (2) decrease in the degree of blue shift for the EQE peak, and (3) appearance of the low-energy absorption shoulder in the EQE spectra. These results are surprising because alkanethiol molecules are insulating and should present a barrier for charge transfer across the interface.14 Instead, interfacial modification increases the short-circuit current and EQE.5 The results presented below address the origin of improvements observed with alkanethiol modification.
 Fig. 1  (a) Normalized UV-Vis absorption spectra for thin films (∼6 nm) of P3HT on glass (squares), ZnO (circles), and C16SH modified ZnO (triangles). The peak absorption for P3HT deposited on bare ZnO blue-shifts by ∼50 nm, and the arrows indicate the low energy absorption shoulders that are lost for P3HT/ZnO. (b) I–V characteristics under simulated AM1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (c) external quantum efficiency (EQE) for P3HT/ZnO (circles) and P3HT/C16SH/ZnO (triangles) photovoltaic devices. A blue shift and suppression of the low energy shoulders (arrows) are also apparent in the EQE spectra for P3HT/ZnO devices. 
Until now, it has not been definitively shown whether the spectral shift in visible light absorption originates from ground-state electronic interaction between the polymer and ZnO semiconductor, or whether the change was purely morphological in nature. To investigate the morphology of the interfacial polymer layer, in-plane GIXD data were collected. As shown in Fig. 2, the salient feature for a P3HT film on glass (black curve) is a diffraction peak at 1.64 Å−1 emerging from a broad scattering background. For a grazing-incidence scan, the location of this peak indicates that the (010) direction (which is the polymer interchain π-stacking direction) of the crystalline P3HT domains are aligned parallel to the substrate, similar to published results.15,16 On glass substrates, polymer–substrate interaction is low and the 225 °C annealing treatment imparts sufficient conformational mobility for P3HT to adopt crystalline, preferentially oriented domains.17 Scattering from the amorphous glass substrate may account for the broad background signal centered at 1.64 Å−1. Given the lack of diffraction signal for the 0.39 Å−1 reflection, these in-plane diffraction results indicate little out-of-plane π-stacking, i.e. few domains align with the (100) direction oriented parallel to the substrate. This is typical of high crystalline regioregular P3HT films.16–18
 Fig. 2  In-plane GIXD for thin films of P3HT on glass (squares), P3HT deposited on ZnO (circles), and P3HT deposited on alkanethiol modified ZnO (triangles). The inset shows the GIXD geometry for X-rays collected over diffraction angle 2θ, corresponding to the in-plane scattering vector qxy. 
In stark contrast, P3HT deposited on ZnO shows a conspicuous absence of any polymer lattice scattering and displays only the ZnO crystallographic peaks (Fig. 2, circles). The lack of P3HT lattice reflections confirms the hypothesis that the blue shift observed in the absorption spectrum originates from amorphous P3HT formed within the first few nanometers of the ZnO surface. Fig. 2 also displays an in-plane GIXD spectrum for P3HT deposited on alkanethiol modified ZnO. Again, diffraction peaks are apparent from the ZnO substrate and the P3HT (010) direction scattering peak returns at 1.64 Å−1, although with slightly diminished intensity compared to P3HT on glass. Like P3HT on glass, the alkanethiol sample displays preferential alignment of the in-plane π-stacking direction. These results show that the interaction with the substrate has a dramatic effect on the interfacial polymer microstructure, and indicates that the observed blue shift in the absorption (Fig. 1a) and EQE (Fig. 1c) spectra arises from the amorphous P3HT deposited directly on ZnO.
Since annealing is often employed to induce crystallinity in P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells,16 the fact that these annealed films on ZnO remain amorphous provides unequivocal evidence that the substrate has a large impact on the morphology of the interfacial P3HT layer. These observations cannot be achieved when measuring ∼100 nm films that are typically used in solar cell devices. Our use of very thin (∼6 nm) P3HT films to model the interfacial polymer layer enables us to probe the changes at the interface.
Others have documented a blue shift in the EQE and microwave photoconductivity spectrum for dispersed ZnO nanoparticle/P3HT heterojunctions.1,19 They argued that the conformation of polythiophene chains in close proximity to ZnO nanoparticles deviates from the planar arrangement of the bulk, thus reducing the conjugation length of P3HT.19 Given that the sol–gel derived ZnO surface is essentially flat (3 nm RMS roughness as measured by tapping mode atomic force microscopy), disruption of polymer order due to the curvature of the ZnO surface cannot be the primary source of the blue-shifted absorption spectrum in our samples. Instead, we observed a systematic decrease in the degree of blue shift when the surface energy of ZnO is decreased.5 The high surface energy of bare ZnO causes immobilization of P3HT, resulting in an amorphous morphology. Since alkanethiol SAMs reduce the surface energy of ZnO, the conformational mobility of P3HT chains on alkanethiol modified ZnO during thermal annealing is greatly improved over unmodified ZnO, facilitating the growth of preferentially oriented crystalline domains seen here. This is an important finding as both the cause of the disordered interfacial P3HT layer and a method to mitigate the effect have been identified.
While the bulk energy levels for P3HT and ZnO indicate that efficient charge transfer should take place, such alignment assumes vacuum level alignment and neglects induced interfacial mid-gap states, interfacial dipole formation, and/or charge transfer that can occur and affect band alignment when the two materials are joined together. For example, it is shown that, depending on the substrate work function, the Fermi level in polymer films can be pinned at the polaron level or unpinned following the vacuum level alignment.20 Hence, there is a need to directly measure charge transfer and dynamics. Transient photoinduced absorption (TPA) is a spectroscopic technique used to measure sub-bandgap absorption of photoexcited species, such as polarons and excitons as illustrated in Fig. 3a (inset).21 The change in transmission ΔT through the sample (normalized by the unexcited transmission T of the sample) is monitored as a function of the delay between the excitation pulse and the probe. From spectrally resolved TPA data we can identify the type of photoexcited species by the energy of its characteristic optical transition. The dynamics of the signal at a specific energy provide information on the lifetime of the species.
 Fig. 3  TPA signal at t = 0 (no delay between pump and probe) as a function of probe energy for P3HT on glass (squares) and a P3HT/ZnO composite (circles) using 550 nm excitation and a pump power of 18 µJ cm−2 pulse−1. To account for the small difference in the film thickness, the data are normalized by the optical density (OD) at the pump wavelength. P1 and P2 correspond to the absorption peaks for low and high energy polarons, respectively, while PA1 has been assigned to the absorption peak for excitons. Lines between data points serve as a guide to the eye. Error bars calculated after multiple TPA scans are smaller than the data markers. Inset: Energy level diagram showing the optical transitions for polarons (left) and excitons (right) as described by Sheng et al.21 

Fig. 3 shows the TPA signal at t = 0 for both P3HT on glass and P3HT/ZnO composite films for probe energies between 0.41–1.14 eV. Distinct absorption peaks arise at ≤0.41, 0.92, and 1.14 eV for both P3HT on glass and the P3HT/ZnO composite. The TPA peak at ≤0.41 eV is assigned to low-energy polaron absorption with a great degree of certainty due to the fact that polarons are the only absorbing species in the 0.3–0.5 eV vicinity.22 Photoinduced absorption peaks PA1 (0.92 eV) and P2 (1.14 eV) are assigned to exciton and higher energy polaron absorptions, respectively, based on recent TPA studies of regio-regular P3HT.21 The exciton peak for P3HT has been reported as low as ∼0.85 eV on the femtosecond time scale,21 and as high as ∼1.05 eV in steady-state photoinduced absorption measurements.22,23 Assignment of the P2 polaron peak stems from I2 doping experiments which induce free carrier generation in P3HT to reveal polaron absorption bands above 1 eV.22
The most striking observation seen in Fig. 3 is the similarity between the TPA spectra for P3HT on glass and the P3HT/ZnO composite. The magnitude of the TPA signal at t = 0 reflects the initial concentration of the photoexcited species. The signals for P3HT on glass are from excitons and polarons photogenerated in the neat film. Exciton dissociation efficiency in regioregular P3HT is high compared to other conjugated polymers.21 Hence, polarons can be generated in P3HT films without an acceptor nearby. In a materials system with efficient charge transfer, polaron signals would be larger than the neat film as a result of additional exciton dissociation at the interface and electron transfer into the metal oxide. For example, in bilayers of P3HT/nanocrystalline SnO2, ultrafast pump–probe measurements showed that the t = 0 signal for polarons is larger by a factor of six compared to neat films of P3HT.24 In contrast, the t = 0 concentration measured in our P3HT/ZnO composite is remarkably similar to P3HT on glass. Furthermore, P2 shows a measurably larger initial polaron concentration in P3HT on glass. We conclude that ZnO appears not to promote additional exciton dissociation at the interface on the picosecond timescale. Our findings agree with recent work by Piris et al. who did not observe additional free carrier signals in time resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) for P3HT/Zn1−xMgxO composites.25 Both the TRMC results and the TPA data presented here indicate that ZnO does not provide an exciton dissociation interface, but instead functions as an electron collecting medium for photoexcited charges dissociated in the P3HT layer.
We note that the results shown in Fig. 3 differ significantly from spectrally resolved photoinduced absorption data taken at steady-state (millisecond time scale) for a nanocrystalline ZnO/P3HT composites.1 Beek et al. showed that, compared to neat films of P3HT, the ZnO/P3HT composite forms long-lived polarons at a sample temperature of 80 K. Since the time scale for the two experiments differs by several orders of magnitude and the low temperature experiment substantially minimizes thermal effects on recombination, a direct comparison cannot be made between these results.
The time dependence of normalized TPA signals provides information on the decay dynamics of the polarons and excitons in different samples. As shown in Fig. 4, a multi-exponential decay behavior is apparent for the characteristic absorption peaks P1, PA1, and P2 over a period of 0–500 ps. Parameters for curves fitted to the measured data are tabulated in the ESI.†Fig. 5 compares weighted average lifetimes for each sample and photoexcited species. Since the rise time for all species and all samples are the same, 200 ± 15 fs (see ESI†), the TPA behavior is dominated by recombination processes over the first 500 ps. It is evident from Fig. 4 and 5 that the lifetimes of all photoexcited states in the P3HT/ZnO bilayer are measurably lower than in the other samples. As mentioned previously, in the case of efficient exciton dissociation (followed by charge separation), a stabilized polaron population, i.e. longer lifetime, is expected to form in the P3HT/ZnO composite sample resulting from electron transfer into ZnO. For P3HT on glass, we would expect to see faster polaron recombination due to the fact that the generated negative charges remaining in P3HT are readily available to recombine with the positive polarons. Instead, we see more rapid decay, or higher recombination rates, for all three photoexcited species in the P3HT/ZnO composite. Since P3HT on ZnO is amorphous while the other two samples are crystalline, it appears that polymer morphology has the largest effect on the lifetimes. The weighted average exciton (PA1) lifetime of the two crystalline P3HT samples (on glass and C16SH modified ZnO) is approximately the same (Fig. 5), indicating that crystalline materials have fewer recombination centers. In addition, the low- and high-energy polarons (P1 and P2) exhibit a measurably longer lifetime in the C16SH modified ZnO sample than in the glass sample. Such an increase in the polaron lifetime (not the number of polarons at t = 0 s) demonstrates lower recombination rates in the C16SH modified sample, and possibly demonstrates enhanced charge separation between ZnO and P3HT.
 Fig. 4  TPA decay behavior for P3HT on glass (squares), P3HT/ZnO (circles), and P3HT/C16SH/ZnO (triangles) at the three photoinduced absorption peaks: (a) P1 (@ 0.43 eV), (b) PA1 (@ 0.92 eV), and (c) P2 (@ 1.15 eV). Fits to the data follow a triple exponential decay. To clearly display differences in lifetime, the data are normalized at t = 0 and the TPA trace is plotted for 5–500 ps. 
 Fig. 5  Average weighted time constant for each photoexcited species in P3HT on glass (grey), the P3HT/ZnO composite (white), and the P3HT/C16SH/ZnO composite (black). 
Combining these results with the unambiguous GIXD data, we conclude that the most significant impact on the recombination rate originates from differences in the polymer microstructure. Due to the amorphous nature of P3HT on ZnO, a high defect density from the disordered polymer increases the number of recombination centers and consequently increases the probability for early-stage recombination for all species. The comparatively crystalline film found within P3HT on glass and C16SH modified samples has fewer defect sites and stronger inter-chain interaction. The latter leads to an enhanced spatial extent (or delocalization) of the excited-state wavefunction which is known to reduce early-stage recombination in conjugated polymer systems.26 The reduction in early stage recombination is likely responsible for the increase in short-circuit current that is found in the alkanethiol modified devices.
One issue remains puzzling. If excitons are only dissociated in the polymer film not at the ZnO–P3HT interface, and carriers are collected due to the work function difference between ZnO and Ag, a metal electrode with a work function similar to that of ZnO should yield similar device performance. Single layer organic photovoltaic devices are capable of high open-circuit voltage (>1 V), but produce very low Jsc.27 Consequently, the highest performing devices yield a maximum EQE of ∼1% or a Jsc of ∼50 µA cm−2 for single wavelength illumination.28 The Jsc measured in ZnO/P3HT bilayer solar cells is one to two orders of magnitude larger than an equivalent device where the ZnO layer is omitted. Further research is needed to reconcile the device behavior and the ultra-fast photoinduced absorption results.
Conclusions
In summary, we show that charge recombination and the corresponding effect on photovoltaic performance is strongly dependent upon the morphology of the electron-donating polymer within the first few nanometers of the heterojunction interface. We find that the strong interaction of planar ZnO with P3HT limits the conformational mobility of the polymer backbone—essentially locking-in an amorphous polymer conformation. We show that modification of the P3HT/ZnO heterojunction with an alkanethiol monolayer, through a reduction in the surface energy of ZnO, results in the formation of a crystalline layer of P3HT at the interface of ZnO. Improving the crystallinity of the polymer within an exciton diffusion length of the heterojunction interface reduces charge recombination in the picosecond regime and is responsible for increased Jsc in photovoltaic devices. These findings identify an amorphous interfacial layer and early-stage recombination as sources of poor short-circuit current in hybrid cells and provide a method to circumvent these limiting factors.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful Y.-J. Lee for the preparation of substrates for GIXD measurements. This work was performed in part at the US Department of Energy, Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, at Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories. The work was supported by the Sandia LDRD program. Portions of this research were carried out at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, a national user facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed-Martin Company, for the U. S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC04-94AL85000.
References
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ratcliff, J. L. Jenkins, K. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, Chem Mater, 2008, 20, 5796 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, C. Zhang, C. Jiang, Q. Ling, E. Kang, D. Chan and C. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043304 CrossRef .
T. Monson, M. Lloyd, D. Olson, Y. Lee and J. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, T. Chu, C. Chen and W. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053312 CrossRef .
J. Boucle, S. Chyla, M. S. P. Shaffer, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 622 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goh, S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 114503 CrossRef .
N. Kudo, S. Honda, Y. Shimazaki, H. Ohkita, S. Ito and H. Benten, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183513 CrossRef .
R. P. Prasankumar, R. S. Attaluri, R. D. Averitt, J. Urayama, N. Weisse-Bernstein, P. Rotella, A. D. Stintz, S. Krishna and A. J. Taylor, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dicker, M. De Haas and L. Siebbeles, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 8 .
Although these data show a larger Voc for the alkanethiol device, we have not found a consistent trend in Voc with surface modification.
P. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 9999, 1 .
J. F. Smalley, S. W. Feldberg, C. E. D. Chidsey, M. R. Linford, M. D. Newton and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 13141 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. Tuladhar, S. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. Durrant, D. Bradley, M. Giles, I. Mcculloch, C. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, M. D. Mcgehee and M. F. Toney, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 222 CrossRef .
H. H. Yang, S. W. LeFevre, C. Y. Ryu and Z. N. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 172116 CrossRef .
P. A. C. Quist, W. Beek, M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10315 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1 .
C. X. Sheng, M. Tong, S. Singh and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 75, 085206 CrossRef .
R. Osterbacka, C. P. An, X. M. Jiang and Z. V. Vardeny, Science, 2000, 287, 839 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. van Hal, M. P. T. Christiaans, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4352 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ai, N. Anderson, J. C. Guo, J. Kowalik, L. M. Tolbert and T. Q. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piris, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3849 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moses, A. Dogariu and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 316, 356 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Malliaras, J. R. Salem, P. J. Brock and J. C. Scott, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 1583 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Marks, J. J. M. Halls, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, J. Phys.-Condens. Matter, 1994, 6, 1379 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/b903849c‡ Present address: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USAThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Normalized UV-Vis absorption spectra for thin films (∼6 nm) of P3HT on glass (squares), ZnO (circles), and C16SH modified ZnO (triangles). The peak absorption for P3HT deposited on bare ZnO blue-shifts by ∼50 nm, and the arrows indicate the low energy absorption shoulders that are lost for P3HT/ZnO. (b) I–V characteristics under simulated AM1.5 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (c) external quantum efficiency (EQE) for P3HT/ZnO (circles) and P3HT/C16SH/ZnO (triangles) photovoltaic devices. A blue shift and suppression of the low energy shoulders (arrows) are also apparent in the EQE spectra for P3HT/ZnO devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  In-plane GIXD for thin films of P3HT on glass (squares), P3HT deposited on ZnO (circles), and P3HT deposited on alkanethiol modified ZnO (triangles). The inset shows the GIXD geometry for X-rays collected over diffraction angle 2θ, corresponding to the in-plane scattering vector qxy.	 

 	Fig. 3  TPA signal at t = 0 (no delay between pump and probe) as a function of probe energy for P3HT on glass (squares) and a P3HT/ZnO composite (circles) using 550 nm excitation and a pump power of 18 µJ cm−2 pulse−1. To account for the small difference in the film thickness, the data are normalized by the optical density (OD) at the pump wavelength. P1 and P2 correspond to the absorption peaks for low and high energy polarons, respectively, while PA1 has been assigned to the absorption peak for excitons. Lines between data points serve as a guide to the eye. Error bars calculated after multiple TPA scans are smaller than the data markers. Inset: Energy level diagram showing the optical transitions for polarons (left) and excitons (right) as described by Sheng et al.21	 

 	Fig. 4  TPA decay behavior for P3HT on glass (squares), P3HT/ZnO (circles), and P3HT/C16SH/ZnO (triangles) at the three photoinduced absorption peaks: (a) P1 (@ 0.43 eV), (b) PA1 (@ 0.92 eV), and (c) P2 (@ 1.15 eV). Fits to the data follow a triple exponential decay. To clearly display differences in lifetime, the data are normalized at t = 0 and the TPA trace is plotted for 5–500 ps.	 

 	Fig. 5  Average weighted time constant for each photoexcited species in P3HT on glass (grey), the P3HT/ZnO composite (white), and the P3HT/C16SH/ZnO composite (black).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/b903849c
‡ Present address: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
