Electricity generation from the interaction of liquid–solid interface: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA12073A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12073A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8870-8895Electricity generation from the interaction of liquid–solid interface: a review

        
          
            Kaiqiang 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jinjin 
            Li
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Tribology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, PR China. E-mail: lijinjin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      12th December 2020
    , Accepted 5th March 2021First published on 12th March 2021AbstractHarvesting energy from water is an environmentally friendly way to ease the energy crisis, since water covers about 70% of the Earth. However, traditional hydraulic generators need to be set in some specific place to satisfy the requirements of hydrological and geological conditions. Nanogenerators based on the interaction at the liquid–solid interface can perfectly ignore these limitations, and therefore, show great potential for use in self-powered systems. In this review, the mechanism of electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface, classical designs and experiments, and application of the liquid–solid nanogenerator are reviewed. Finally, existing problems and future developments of the liquid–solid nanogenerator are discussed and summarized.
1. Introduction
Rapid developments in industrial technology have resulted in the requirement for huge energy consumption. One of the most feasible and environmentally friendly solutions to resolve this is to harvest renewable energy from water,1–4 since water covers about 70% of the Earth and the energy in water can satisfy the global electricity demand.5,6 However, existing hydropower stations that use electromagnetic generators necessitate large areas and need to be built in places where water needs to meet specific requirements with regard to velocity, level, and flow. Quincke et al. discovered the streaming potential in 1859,7–9 but underdeveloped nanotechnology limited further research and applications.
The good news is that promising breakthroughs in nanomaterials10–12 and nanotechnologies13,14 have enabled the harvesting of energy from water in different forms and it has attracted great attention from all over the world.15–21 Heyden et al. reported the influence of pressure gradient, salt concentration, and channel height on the stream current.22 Zhao et al. experimentally proved that voltage could be induced by flowing water in a single carbon nanotube.23 Dhiman et al. demonstrated that energy can be harvested from water flow over graphene.24 Wang's group invented a practical water–solid-based triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG); the consequent electricity generation can be attributed to the coupling effect between contact electrification (CE) and electrostatic induction (EI).25,26 Guo's group generated electricity by moving the boundary of liquid and gas27 or moving a droplet28 along graphene, resulting from the formation and movement of the electrical double layer (EDL). Recently, carbon black sheets were successfully used to harvest energy via water evaporation.29
In comparison to solid–solid-based nanogenerators, a liquid–solid nanogenerator can avoid surface wear, and the fluidity of the liquid enhances the contact area between the solid and liquid. Besides, the liquid (e.g., pure water,30–32 sodium chloride solutions,33 and rainwater34) used for electricity generation has a wide source and low synthesis cost. The above advantages endow the liquid–solid nanogenerator with higher efficiency, lower cost, and longer service life than a solid–solid nanogenerator. Therefore, the study of liquid–solid nanogenerators is worthwhile.
In this review, the basic mechanisms of the liquid–solid nanogenerator are first reviewed and discussed, including the charge carrier behavior at the liquid–solid interface7,35–43 and the mechanism of EI.44–46 Second, the classical designs and new progress of liquid–solid nanogenerator are revisited, particularly the mechanism and factors affecting the electricity generation performance (EGP; namely, voltage, current, current density, power, power density, and energy conversion efficiency). Third, the applications of liquid–solid nanogenerators in sensors (e.g., flow,47,48 concentration,47,49 displacement,50 and temperature26), energy collection unit, self-powered microelectromechanical system,51 and wearable equipment52,53 are presented. Finally, existing problems, the most promising applications, and future development of liquid–solid nanogenerators are discussed and summarized.
2. Basic mechanism of electricity generation at liquid–solid interface
At present, studies on electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface mainly focus on the CE, which is based on the EDL theory.28,54 The introduction of EI can enrich the designs of nanogenerators.51,53,55 In this section, the charge carrier behavior (charge carrier type and theoretical development of EDL) at the liquid–solid interface and the mechanism of EI are systematically and comprehensively discussed.
2.1. Charge carrier behavior at the liquid–solid interface
CE is a phenomenon that was discovered more than 2600 years ago.56 When two different materials (solid, liquid, and even gas) come into contact with each other, charge carriers are transferred, resulting in a potential difference. As a classic phenomenon, when a rubber rod is rubbed with fur, it gets negatively charged, while a glass rod rubbed with silk gets positively charged. The charge carrier type is one of the most important aspects in the study of CE. The mechanism of CE between metals has been successfully explained by thermodynamic equilibrium.57,58 Several mechanisms of CE between other solids have been proposed, which can explain some phenomena very well, such as electron transfer,59–63 ion transfer,64 and material transfer.65 However, the charge carrier type at the liquid–solid interface has not been well studied. Touchard et al. studied flow electrification and believed that CE at the liquid–solid interface was generated by electrochemical reaction.41 There are small amounts of impurities even in purified hydrocarbon liquids. Impurities inevitably lead to the presence of ions in the solution. Assume that there is only one weak electrolyte impurity (ALBL) in the solution. ALBL ⇌ AL+ + BL−(1)
When the solid surface is corroded, the following reaction occurs near the interface: CS ⇌ CS+ + e−(2)where CS is the atom of the solid. CS+ may react with BL−: CS+ + BL− ⇌ CSBL(3)
The combination of CS+ with BL− results in the accumulation of charges at the liquid–solid interface in the liquid. This theory predicted some experimental results to a certain extent. However, Zimmermann and coworkers suggested that CE at the liquid–polymer film interface was caused by the adsorption of ions.42 To investigate the charge carrier behavior, they measured the ζ potential and surface conductivity by using a microslit electrokinetic setup. The experimental results showed that the ζ potential and surface conductivity significantly changed with the type and concentration of ions. The preferential adsorption of ions on the surface of a nonpolar polymer is as follows: OH− > H3O+ ≫ Cl− = K+. In addition, Kitabayashi et al. measured the charges of the insulating oil over different solid materials43 and the results showed that a greater difference in the work function between the insulating oil and solid led to more charges in the insulating oil, which indicated that CE at the insulating oil–polymer interface was dominated by electron transfer.
Wang's group studied the charge carrier behavior at the aqueous solution–polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) interface in detail.66 Theoretical calculation shows that if there is only ion transfer at the interface between deionized (DI) water and PTFE, the amount of charge in water should be much lower than the experimental value. At least 90% of the charges during CE are caused by electron transfer. In addition, as the concentration increases, the amount of transferred charge eventually decreases, suggesting that there is a certain competitive relationship between the electrons and ions. When the concentration increases, the screening effect of free ions on electrons results in a decrease in the transferred charges. They attributed CE at the liquid–PTFE interface to the overlap of electron clouds, as shown in Fig. 1a. The outer shell of electrons of the oxygen atom in the water molecule form the electron cloud and the electron acceptor is the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital on the surface of PTFE. Before the water molecule contacts PTFE, electrons are trapped in the potential well because of the energy barrier (EW for the electrons of the oxygen atom in the water molecule and EP for the electrons at the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital on the surface of PTFE). When the water molecule contacts PTFE, electrons of the oxygen atom in water in the high-energy state hop to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital because of overlap among the electron clouds, following which the equilibrium state is achieved. After separation, if the thermal fluctuation of the electrons (κT) in PTFE is less than the energy barrier (EP), the previously transferred electrons are trapped in the potential well of PTFE. Thus, PTFE is negatively charged and water molecules are positively charged. However, if the thermal fluctuation of electrons is larger than the energy barrier at a higher temperature, the electrons escape from the surface of PTFE, resulting in a decrease in the amount of charge on the PTFE surface. In addition, positively charged water molecules can induce the surrounding water molecules to be polarized. As a result, the positively charged water can be more easily separated from PTFE. To further explore the role of electrons in CE processes, the surface potential of PTFE was measured by using ion-free transformer oil to contact with the PTFE film. Results show variations in the surface potential with a change in the contact area between oil and PTFE, which indicates that the CE process can occur even without ions. To sum up, electrons play a dominant role in the liquid–solid CE process (up to 90%) for this particular system, and whether this theory is applicable to other systems is worth exploring.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the basic mechanisms for electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface. (a) Schematic of electron transfer between the water molecule and PTFE molecule. Reproduced with permission from Nie et al., Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(2), e1905696. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.66 (b) Schematic of the Stern model. (c) Schematic of the “two-step” model for EDL. Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 399. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.56 (d) Diagram of charge distribution on the outer surface of metal induced by the external charge. 
Since it is believed that electricity generation originates from the distribution change of the charge carrier at the liquid–solid interface, it is crucial to investigate the EDL, which reveals the distribution of charge carriers at the interface.28,35–39 When the liquid comes into contact with the solid, the charge carrier in the liquid and solid form the EDL at the liquid–solid interface. The motion of the liquid leads to a dynamic change in the charge carrier, inducing a current. The study of the EDL has a long history and several typical models have been proposed.7,40 In 1879, the Helmholtz model was proposed, which is a quantitative theory for electrokinetic phenomena based on Quincke's idea of the EDL.67 In the Helmholtz model, the opposite charges are equally distributed on both sides of the interface, like a flat capacitor. The distance between the two layers is approximately equal to the ionic radius, and the potential linearly decreases between the two layers.67 Considering the electrostatic attraction and thermal motion, the concept of the diffusion layer was introduced in the Gouy–Chapman model.68,69 Gouy and Chapman believed that the counterions diffused into the bulk solution, which was called the diffusion layer.
In 1924, the Stern model composed of the Stern layer and diffusion layer was proposed,70 which is one of the most commonly used models at present (Fig. 1b). It is believed that ions had a certain size and van der Waals force exists between the ions and solid surface besides the electrostatic interaction. Therefore, the counterions at the interface are strongly attracted to the surface, forming the Stern layer. The charge distribution in the Stern layer is similar to that of the Helmholtz model, and the potential drops from ψ0 (the potential at distance x0) to ψs. The charge distribution in the diffusion layer is similar to that of the Gouy–Chapman model, and the potential decreases exponentially from ψs to zero. Since the Stern layer is caused by the van der Waals force, it can be described by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. (4)where θ is the fraction of the surface covered, a2 is the activity of the adsorbed ions, and b is the adsorption coefficient, which is related to the Boltzmann factor. The Boltzmann factor consists of two parts, namely, the electric potential energy zeψs in the Stern layer and the adsorption energy ϕ. Thus, b is given by eqn (5). (5)where z is the effective nuclear charge, κ is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the elementary charge. In the Stern layer, the potential drop, ψ0 − ψs, is given by eqn (6): (6)where δ is the thickness of the Stern layer, σs is the charge density of the Stern layer, and εs is the dielectric constant of the Stern layer. The Langmuir adsorption isotherm can also be given by eqn (7): (7)where σ0s is the saturated charge density. Eqn (8) can be obtained by combining eqn (4), (6) and (7). (8)
According to eqn (8), the potential in the Stern layer increases with an increase in the activity of adsorbed ions. The Stern layer and diffusion layer slide relative to each other at the slipping plane. The potential difference between the slip plane and bulk phase solution is the ζ potential. The Stern model gives the exact physical meaning of the ζ potential and provides a better understanding of the EDL.
In 1947, the Grahame model was proposed, showing that some ions or neutral solvent molecules can enter the Stern layer, and the EDL is divided into three layers: the inner Helmholtz plane, the outer Helmholtz plane, and the diffusion layer.71 In 1963, the BDM model was proposed.72,73 The Stern layer consists of the inner Helmholtz plane and the outer Helmholtz plane at the metal–electrolyte interface. Regardless of whether there is a residual charge, the water molecules will always align on the surface due to its strong polarity. The BDM model is closer to reality by considering the influence of solvent molecules.
According to the above theories, the potential difference is mainly caused by ions in the liquid. In other words, ions are the charge carriers. Recently, Wang's group proposed a two-step model to explain the formation of the EDL (Fig. 1c).56,62,66,74 In the first step, a pristine solid surface is hit by molecules and ions in the liquid, resulting in electron transfer between the water molecules and solid molecules, as well as ionization of the surface groups. Therefore, the surface of the solid is charged. In the second step, the ions adsorb due to the coulombic force, consequently forming the EDL. Their theory emphasizes the dominant role of electrons in electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface, which has been confirmed on some solid surfaces.56
Besides, numerous related studies have contributed to the development of the EDL theory. The concept of pseudocapacitance was proposed by Trasatti and Buzzanca, indicating that adions behave like a capacitor at lower bias voltages and partial adions can transfer.75 The term supercapacitor was created and the factors affecting the capacitance were analyzed.76 Furthermore, electron transfer between different substances has been studied.77–79
2.2. Mechanism of EI
EI, also called “electrostatic influence”, refers to the redistribution of an object's electric charge under the influence of an external charge.80 The most common phenomenon is that there are always certain slight objects that are attracted to the pet's body, such as pieces of paper and plastic. This is because the pet's body is electrically charged by friction, and slight objects are attracted due to EI.
In general, without the influence of an external positive charge, there is no net charge in each part of an uncharged conductor. However, when an external charge is moved close to the conductor, the charge carrier in the conductor redistributes. The portion near the external positive charge has more negative charges (electrons), and the portion far away from the external positive charge has more positive charges (nuclei left), which are called induced charges (Fig. 1d). As a result, the electric field generated by the external charge in the conductor should be offset by the electric field generated by the induced charge to ensure that there is no electric field in the conductor.45,46 Gauss' law states that the net electric flux across any closed surface is equal to the ratio of the net charge in the closed surface to the vacuum dielectric constant ε0:81 (9)where E is the electric field, da′ is the differential area of the closed surface A, Q is the net charge, and ε0 is the dielectric constant of a vacuum. According to Gauss' law, there is no net charge inside a metal conductor in electrostatic equilibrium. However, in practice, the response of the metal induced by the external charge close to the surface is more complicated due to the finite screening length in the metal and quantum variations in charge density near the surface.82 Several related works have been performed, among which the classic ones are the Thomas–Fermi approximation and random-phase approximation.82–86 Newns studied the response of a semi-infinite metal to an external point charge close to the surface using the Thomas–Fermi approximation. The obtained results showed that the perturbation in the surface layer with the thickness of a few screening lengths is severe; further, the potential is not screened in the surface plane, but decays as the inverse square of the distance from the charge over a certain range. Beck and Celli studied the linear response of the metal to an external charge using random-phase approximation.83 The results show that the classical image theorem is still valid after approximate treatment, but the position (z) of the image charge needs to be modified as follows: z = −(a + λ)(10)where a is the distance between the external charge and metal surface and λ is the screening length, which is determined by the properties of the metal. They found that the oscillatory amplitudes of the potential and field at the surface are very small, which have no discernible effect on most physical processes. In the ideal model, the induced screening charges are idealized to be distributed on the metal surface with the thickness of zero; in fact, they extend over a thickness of 2 Å.
When the charge carrier distribution at the liquid–solid interface changes, the charge carriers move directionally due to EI, thereby generating current. From the studies of EI, we can infer that the addition of EI causes a marginal decrease in the energy conversion efficiency. Meanwhile, since the induced screening charges are distributed on the metal surface with a thickness of only 2 Å, the induction layer can be made as thin as possible. Except for direct use in electricity generation, EI can also be used to charge the object. For the nanogenerator with a grounded induction layer, if positive (negative) charge carriers are emitted to the surface of the triboelectric layer, electrons flow from the ground (induction layer) to the induction layer (ground). If the connection between the induction layer and ground is broken at this time, the positive (negative) charge carriers will remain stable on the surface of the triboelectric layer, resulting in an increase in the surface charge density. During this process, the ground acts as a huge reservoir, which can provide or store electrons.
3. Electricity induced by different liquid sources
When a liquid contacts a solid, the charge carriers in the liquid get regularly adsorbed on the surface of the solid, forming the Stern layer. The motion of the liquid results in the motion of charges, which is one of the reasons for electricity generation. According to the form of water, electricity generation can be induced by droplet, waving, flowing, evaporation, and moisture. Furthermore, the introduction of EI enriches the structure and design of the liquid–solid nanogenerators. In this section, the mechanisms, recent advances, and factors affecting the EGP of different nanogenerators are reviewed.
3.1. Electricity induced by droplets
Harvesting solar energy has already been achieved, but harvesting “rain energy” needs further research, which is the goal of droplet-driven nanogenerators. Yin et al. successfully generated electricity by moving a droplet along graphene, and the maximal pulse voltage and output power were ∼30 mV and 19.2 nW, respectively.28,87 Combining density functional theory calculations and the EDL theory, they proposed the mechanism of electricity generation. When an ionic droplet is static on graphene, the EDL is established, forming pseudocapacitors (CF and CR). The charges are in equilibrium without a potential difference. However, when the droplet moves forward along graphene, this “charge equilibrium” is broken (Fig. 2a and b). At the front of the droplet, the ions are adsorbed onto the interface and a new boundary of EDL will ceaselessly form, “propelling” the pseudocapacitor (CF) and attracting electrons in graphene to charge CF. On the contrary, at the rear of the droplet, the ions are desorbed and the EDL disappears, releasing electrons into graphene. Consequently, a potential difference is caused by a dynamic change in the electrons' density. However, a later study suggested that it was the polymer substrate rather than graphene that attracted the ions in the solution, while the graphene acted as a conductive plate, which could be replaced by any conductive material with a weak shielding effect.33 Yang et al. found that the voltage and current were generated as the sequential NaCl solution droplets hit graphene/polyethylene terephthalate (PET) rather than graphene/polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA).33 The results of the sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy show that the spectral intensity changes with an increase in the NaCl solution concentration on the surface of PET or graphene/PET but not on the surface of PMMA or graphene/PMMA. The spectral intensity on the surface of PET is slightly higher than that on the surface of graphene/PET, indicating that the surface field can be built on the surface of PET and Na+ ions come to the liquid–PET interface. The attraction of PET to Na+ ions is caused by its surface dipole layer, and monolayer graphene (conductive layer) can be replaced by other conductive materials as long as the conductive layer does not completely block the surface dipole layer's attraction to ions. The induced voltage is proportional to the velocity of the droplet (Fig. 2c), consistent with the work of Park et al.88 Furthermore, the ion specificity of electricity generation was found. The induced voltage increases with a decrease in the atomic number of the solvent, which is attributed to the difference in the ability of attracting electrons in graphene (Li+ > Na+ > K+) and the screening effect (F− < Cl− < Br−). However, some studies have shown that even DI water can generate voltage. Zhong et al. generated a voltage of 0.1 V using DI water sliding on graphene with a piezoelectric substrate beneath it, because the shielding effect of water on piezoelectric charges is more hysteretic than that of graphene.89
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the drawing potential. (b) Equivalent circuit diagram of (a). (c) Dependence of voltage on droplet velocity and volume. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from Yin et al., Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(5), 378. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.28 (d) Influence of the substrate on voltage. Reproduced with permission from Aji et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104370. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.90 (e) TENG mechanism using a pre-charged droplet. (f) TENG mechanism using an uncharged droplet. (g) Relationship between the transfer charge and falling height of the droplet. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(27), 4690. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.26 (h and i) Effect of the number of top coats on voltage and stability. (j) Output voltage of the sprayed-on TENG cap. The cap can light up an LED. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from Chung et al., Micromachines, 2018, 9(11), 593. Copyright 2018 MDPI.91 (k) Comparison of the electricity generation stability of the hierarchical structure and nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from Cho et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.92 
The most effective and direct method to improve the EGP of a liquid–solid nanogenerator is to optimize the materials of the triboelectric layer and substrate. Using a sapphire substrate, MoO3, sulfur powder precursors, a polystyrene supporting film, and a polyethylene naphthalene (PEN) substrate, Aji et al. fabricated a large monolayer MoS2-film-based nanogenerator with a high voltage using chemical vapor deposition (CVD).90 Although the output power is similar to that induced by moving the NaCl droplet along graphene, the motion of the droplet along MoS2 generates a much larger voltage due to the high resistance of MoS2, which is more suitable for driving the diode rectifier circuit. Additionally, different substrates (PEN, sapphire, and SiO2/Si) cause different n-type doping characteristics and different square resistances. The nanogenerator with a PEN substrate has a higher square resistance and generates a higher voltage than that with sapphire or SiO2/Si substrate (Fig. 2d). More interestingly, using PEN as the substrate can generate a larger short-circuit current. Their explanation is that the polymer substrate facilitates the adsorption of ions on the MoS2 surface. Different from the previous study,28 as the speed increases, the voltage and current gradually reach saturation in this work. They attributed this phenomenon to the slow adsorption velocity of ions. By choosing a PTFE substrate, Kwak and his coworkers enhanced the output power of the graphene-based nanogenerator by ∼100 times, reaching 1.9 μW.28,54 In the wet transfer process, the PTFE surface is negatively charged. Hence, holes inside graphene are attracted and electrons are excluded from the top surface of graphene, facilitating the adsorption of ions in the water droplet and weakening the screening effect of counterions in the diffusion layer. The result of the Kelvin probe force microscopy shows the stable surface potential of negatively charged PTFE. More directly, Zhai et al. doped graphene with nitrogen (N) via plasma-assisted hot filament CVD, increasing the induced voltage from 50 mV to 320 mV.93 They found that N doping improved the concentration and mobility of the charge carriers, which is conducive to electron transfer in graphene. The result of the Kelvin probe force microscopy shows that N doping leads to an increase in the surface potential of graphene, which indicates an increase in the Fermi level. The higher surface potential of the N-doped graphene results in a higher induced voltage. Besides, the smaller contact angle of the N-doped graphene is one of the reasons for the increase in voltage due to an increase in the contact area. Moreover, this is inconsistent with Park's work,94 which needs to be further explored.
By introducing an induction layer, a variety of polymers can be used to generate electricity, providing more inspiration for researchers. A water-based TENG (WTENG) was fabricated by using PTFE, Cu, and PMMA.26 Electricity generation can be attributed to the coupling effect between CE and EI at the liquid–solid interface. There are two conditions to generate electricity (Fig. 2e and f). When a pre-charged droplet (generally positively charged due to friction with air or pipes) hits the PTFE, the electric equilibrium is broken, and EI forces the electrons to flow from the ground to the copper to rebuilt the charge equilibrium (Fig. 2e). After the droplet slides away, the electrons flow back to the ground. When the droplet hits the PTFE film again, the same progress happens and continuous impacts produce an alternating current. The other condition is that the droplet is pristine and uncharged (Fig. 2f). When an uncharged droplet hits the PTFE film, the surface groups of the PTFE get negatively ionized, forming the EDL. When the droplet slides away, there is no positive charge to balance the negatively ionized groups on the surface of PTFE. The electrons flow from copper to the ground due to EI. When PTFE is hit by the droplet again, the formation of EDL shields the negative charge on the PTFE surface, causing electrons to flow from the ground to copper. Then, as the droplet slides away, the electrons flow back to copper again. The experimental results show that the impact of a 30 μL droplet from a height of 90 cm can generate an alternating voltage and current of 9.3 V and 17 μA, respectively. Evidently, with an increase in the falling height of the droplet, the transfer charges (proportional to the current) increase and then saturate (Fig. 2g). Moreover, replacing the PTFE film with a nylon film leads to a decrease in the current density, which can be attributed to the liquid residue on the hydrophilic nylon surface. The WTENG with a size of 4 × 4 cm2 can generate a current density of 1.5 μA cm−2 and a peak-to-peak power density of 20 mW cm−2, which can light up 20 light-emitting diodes (LEDs), driven by tap water at a flow rate of 30 mL s−1.
Since the liquid residue on the triboelectric layer can significantly reduce the EGP, it is necessary to explore a method to reduce liquid residues. Chung et al. prepared a rough hydrophobic surface by using an aerosol spray.91 The open-circuit voltage increases with an increase in the top coats. The impact of the droplet may destroy the microstructure of the surface, causing the droplet on the surface to change from the Cassie–Baxter state to the Wenzel state, which affects electricity generation. More top coats are beneficial for withstanding the impact of droplets and protecting the microstructure, thereby improving the voltage and stability (Fig. 2h and i). They used a simple spray method to fabricate a superhydrophobic TENG on the cap brim and light up an LED, demonstrating its excellent applicability (Fig. 2j). In addition to the material, the surface structure of the triboelectric layer has a great impact on wettability. Cho and coworkers investigated the role of the hierarchical structure of heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyltrichlorosilane-coated aluminum plates on electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface.92 TENGs with hierarchically structured surfaces and nanostructured surfaces were fabricated. The obtained results show that despite the similar voltage generated by the first hit of the water droplet, the TENG with a nanostructured surface generates decreasingly lower voltage as the number of impacts increases. However, the voltage generated by TENG with a hierarchically structured surface does not vary much (Fig. 2k). High-speed camera images show that the hit of droplets involves diffusion and rebound processes. When the hit energy is greater than the surface tension energy, the droplets will break. Therefore, when the hit velocity of droplets is high, droplets split into smaller droplets. These small droplets cannot fall off the surface, which causes the voltage to decrease. When the next droplet hits, the small droplet on the hierarchically structured surface (Cassie–Baxter state) coalesces with the larger droplet and slides off the surface. However, the droplet on the nanostructured surface (Wenzel state) coalesces with the large droplet and forms a larger water film, resulting in no voltage generation. By changing the structure and wettability of the solid surfaces, a creative TENG was designed by Liu and his coworkers.95 The entire surface contains four regions with different wettability values (Fig. 3a). The contact angles of the four regions are 164.8°, 127.85°, 107.6°, and 92°. The wettability gradient of the surface causes spontaneous motion of the droplet, which makes it possible to generate electricity even without any external energy input. Besides, a higher wettability gradient makes the droplets move faster, resulting in a higher voltage. In general, the energy conversion efficiency refers to the ratio of output power to input power. The TENG driven by self-propelled droplets requires no external energy input and the motion of the droplet is determined by the inherent properties of the liquid–solid interface. Therefore, in a way, we can say that the energy conversion efficiency of this TENG is very high. The self-assembly layer of hydrophobic molecules also reduces the liquid residue. Chung and coworkers reported a perfluoropolyether-liquid-based spin-coated TENG containing a self-assembled hydrophobic layer of trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (HDFS), which could facilitate the separation of liquid and surface.96 Furthermore, HDFS and perfluoropolyether liquid have high electron affinities, which help to enhance the EGP. Using a lubricant is also a good way to reduce the liquid residue. Wang's group invented a new slippery lubricant-impregnated porous surface-based TENG (SLIPS TENG), which could work normally even in the bent state.97 The specialty of the SLIPS TENG is that a perfluorinated liquid is used as the lubricant to cover PTFE and it can generate electricity by sliding a droplet on the surface as long as the thickness of the lubricant is less than the critical value (Fig. 3b). The presence of the lubricant prevents the dripping droplets from bouncing off the TENG; further, even if the temperature is lower than the freezing point, the dripping droplets can still slide smoothly without a residual liquid.
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical image of the wettability gradient electrodes and contact angles of different regions. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al., Nanoscale, 2018, 10(48), 23164. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.95 (b) Schematic of a SLIPS TENG. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6(3), 540. Copyright 2019 Oxford University Press.97 (c) Relationship between the output and cation type. The interfacial potential varies with the type of cation, resulting in a difference in the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(8), 2091. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.98 (d) Similar variation trends of the output voltage and contact angle. (e) Relationship between the peak voltage and pH. (f) Relationship between the peak voltage and concentration. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from Park et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(4), 745. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.94 (g) Schematic and optical image of the droplet-driven TENG. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., Nature, 2020, 578(7795), 392. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.99 (h) Schematic of the reverse-electrowetting-based nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Krupenkin et al., Nat. Commun., 2011, 2(1), 448. Copyright 2011 Springer Nature.100 (i) Schematic of a “bubbler”. Reproduced with permission from Hsu et al., Sci. Rep., 2011, 5(1), 16537. Copyright 2011 Springer Nature.101 (j) Mechanism (left) and corresponding voltage curve (right) of water-droplet-driven TENG. (k) Influence of inclination angle on the voltage and current. (j and k) Reproduced with permission from Lee et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 579. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.102 
Park and his coworkers explored the relationship between the properties of the EDL and the output of a liquid–solid nanogenerator by moving a droplet along superhydrophobic perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane (FOTS).98 FOTS can prevent electron reflux and accelerate ion adsorption. Suppose that the ions are completely hydrated; then, a change in the atomic number leads to a change in the radius of the hydrated ions, confirmed by the force–distance curves. The changes above lead to a change in the potential distribution and therefore the induced voltage and current change (Fig. 3c). They also studied the effect of the property of the solid surface on the induced voltage by using a silica gel film with different ratios of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and FOTS.94 An increase in the mass ratio of the FOTS/TEOS causes an increase in the contact angle. In consideration of the relationship between the surface energy and contact angle, the adsorbed ions can be desorbed more easily from the solid surface with a higher contact angle. As a result, the output voltage and contact angle show a similar trend (Fig. 3d). The pH and concentration of the solution can influence the peak voltage (Fig. 3e and f). The relationship between pH and voltage indicates that hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions need to be in a specific concentration range to generate a large voltage (1.5 V for pH 4; 1.1 V for pH 10; Fig. 3e). Furthermore, the voltage increases first and then decreases with an increase in the solution concentration. Similar results were obtained using different salt solutions, and the optimum ion concentration is around 0.01 M (Fig. 3f). In addition, the current is positively proportional to the droplet volume, because an increase in volume leads to an increase in the EDL area and pseudocapacitance and therefore more charges get transferred per unit time.
Furthermore, optimizing the structure of liquid–solid nanogenerators is also an effective method to improve their EGP. In the work of Yun et al., the induction layer was designed to be compact and interdigital, using which the amount of triboelectric charge was doubled.103 Xu et al. used the bulk effect to generate electricity rather than the conventional interfacial effect.99 An aluminum electrode is directly connected to indium tin oxide (Fig. 3g). When the droplet is not in contact with aluminum, it is in an open-circuit state, and the droplet is treated as a resistor. An EDL capacitor C1 forms at the water–PTFE interface, and the top and bottom surfaces of PTFE form a capacitor Cp. When the droplet contacts the aluminum, an EDL capacitor C2 forms at the water–aluminum interface, and the circuit is connected. Since the PTFE is pre-charged (or gradually charged by the droplet impinging) and the thickness of PTFE is much higher than the Stern layer, the voltage induced by Cp is much higher than those of C1 and C2. Once the circuit is connected, Cp quickly charges C1 and C2, resulting in the induction of current and voltage. Besides, the voltage varies linearly with the thickness of PTFE. This droplet-driven TENG can generate the voltage and current of 143.5 V and 270.0 μA, respectively. Inspired by Xu's work,99 Wu et al. fabricated a charge-trapping-based electricity generator.104 They developed a homogeneous electrowetting-assisted charge injection method to inject charge onto the surface of the nanogenerator, increasing the surface charge density to 1.8 mC m2. After ion injection, the charge-trapping-based electricity generator could generate an instantaneous current up to 2 mA and the electricity conversion efficiency reached up to 11.8%.
Another way to improve the EGP is to interfere with the charge carrier behavior at the liquid–solid interface via reverse electrowetting. In the 1990s, Berge creatively sprayed an insulating layer on the metallic electrode to avoid the electrolysis of the conductive liquid, which is currently known as electrowetting.105,106 An external bias voltage can change the electrostatic energy at the charged droplet–insulating layer interface, resulting in changed wettability. Consequently, the conductive droplet diffuses on the insulating layer under an external bias voltage. In 2011, Krupenkin and Taylor reported an innovative method to convert mechanical energy into electricity based on reverse electrowetting.100 As shown in Fig. 3h, the electrode is connected to a voltage source, which can provide the bias voltage, and the movement of the droplet caused by the external mechanical force reduces the overlap with the dielectric-layer-coated electrode, causing a decrease in charge at the liquid–solid interface. The excess charges flow through the circuit, generating electricity. Ideally, the liquid–dielectric layer–electrode interface can be treated as a capacitor, and the current is induced by the change in capacitance. Consequently, the EGP of the nanogenerator is modulated by the bias voltage and capacitance. The average energy E per cycle and average power P can be obtained by eqn (11) and (12):100 (11) (12)where R, εd, k, A, h, ω, V, and Twd are the load impedance, vacuum permittivity, dielectric constant of the dielectric layer, maximum overlap area between the droplet and dielectric layer per wetting–dewetting cycle, thickness of the dielectric layer, capacitance oscillation frequency, bias voltage, and period of one wetting–dewetting cycle, respectively. In particular, C0 = εdkAh−1 represents the maximum capacitance of the variable capacitor. According to eqn (11) and (12), the EGP increases with an increase in the bias voltage, maximum capacitance, and capacitance oscillation frequency. In general, increasing the dielectric constant of the dielectric layer and decreasing the thickness of the dielectric constant of the dielectric layer can improve the maximal capacitance of the variable capacitor. However, an ultrathin dielectric layer with a high dielectric constant breaks down easily even when applying a low bias voltage. Besides, to facilitate charge transfer at the interface, the wetting–dewetting cycle of the droplet on the dielectric layer should be quick and “smooth”. Contact angle hysteresis and contact line pinning impede the droplet's response to bias voltage, resulting in a decrease in the EGP. Yang et al. suggested that Al2O3 is an excellent dielectric material for reverse-electrowetting-based nanogenerators, which can provide an output power density of 11 mW cm−2.107 It was found that Al2O3 obtained by different technologies has different film densities, resulting in different capacitances and leakage current densities. Sputter-coated Al2O3 as a dielectric layer possesses columnar grains, indicating the existence of detects, and these defects offer pathways for leakage currents.108–110 High-quality, ultrathin Al2O3 dielectric layer obtained by atomic layer deposition affords a high dielectric constant and low leakage current density. It is hard to break down, which is important for energy conversion. Hsu et al. increased the oscillation frequency of the liquid by a “bubbler” to increase the EGP of the reverse-electrowetting-based nanogenerator (Fig. 3i).101,111 The bubbler contains many units capable of producing bubbles. The current is generated due to a change in the contact area between the liquid and upper electrode as the bubbles grow. Since the bubbles in a liquid can grow and collapse at an ultrahigh frequency and the microarray “increases” the oscillation frequency of the liquid, the bubbler can efficiently harvest energy.
Small droplets bouncing between two triboelectric layers can also generate a considerable amount of electrical energy. Lee et al. found that a water droplet can continuously bounce between two superhydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 3j).102 A voltage of more than 16 V can be generated by adjusting the angle of a water-droplet-driven TENG (Fig. 3k). In addition, Helseth and Guo investigated the influence of area modulation and periodic contact on the generated current by using a metallized hydrophobic polymer film and water droplets.112 The maximal current increases with an increase in the droplet volume and droplet deformation due to increased contact area between the droplet and metallized hydrophobic polymer film. The change in current with time is consistent with the spread of the droplet during extrusion.
3.2. Electricity induced by waving
In 2011, Dhiman et al. discovered that graphene could generate electricity under flowing water, which could be attributed to ion hopping.24 However, Guo's group suggested that electricity generation was due to the exposed electrodes, and the voltage was not stable.113 No electricity was produced when the electrode was not in contact with the liquid. In 2014, Yin et al. found that the water wave could induce semi-immersed graphene to generate a voltage of 0.1 V, called the waving potential.27,87 When graphene is put into an aqueous solution (e.g., NaCl solution), Na+ ions adsorb onto the surface of graphene due to the positive adsorption energy, and Cl− ions are attracted by Na+ ions due to coulombic attraction (Fig. 4a). As a result, the EDL forms at the liquid–solid interface, causing the hole doping of graphene. When the water level rises, the movement of the gas–liquid boundary leads to a higher concentration of Na+ ions on the liquid–solid interface than that of Cl− ions, since the Cl− ions in the diffusion layer move slowly. The differences in the concentrations of Na+ ions and Cl− ions cause more electrons to be drawn and increase the hole concentration and potential. Consequently, the current flows to the deeper part of the solution. When the water level drops, the redistribution of holes results in a reverse current. Holes get unevenly distributed below the water level, regardless of the increase or decrease in the water level. Changes in the voltage of graphene during immersion are shown in Fig. 4b. Considering the Stern layer (consisting of Na+ ions) as the positive plate and diffusion layer (consisting of Cl− ions) as the negative plate, the equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 4c. The induced voltage can be described by eqn (13): (13)where Rsq is the square resistance of graphene, q0 is the discharging charge per unit area of Cn, v is the immersion velocity, and d is the immersed length. As the graphene layer increases, Rsq decreases, resulting in a decrease in voltage (Fig. 4d). The linear relationship between voltage and immersed depth is in good agreement with the experiment results; when the whole graphene is immersed, the peak voltage is obtained. Based on the above analysis, the peak voltage should be proportional to the immersion velocity; however, the linear relationship is phased. The change rate in the peak voltage with the immersion velocity decreases when the velocity exceeds 5.5 cm s−1 (Fig. 4e), which is believed to originate from the limit of the wetting velocity. The voltage increases with a decrease in concentration, and the optimal concentration is ∼0.01 M (Fig. 4f). Furthermore, almost inserting graphene into DI water does not generate electricity. An inverse voltage is generated when inserting graphene into HCl solution, because Cl− ions instead of cations are adsorbed onto the surface of graphene by H2O+.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the change in ions in the Stern layer, potential difference, and hole concentration during the process of inserting and pulling. (b) Voltage at different positions of the graphene sheet during the process of inserting. (c) Equivalent circuit of (a). (d) Relationship between the number of graphene layers and voltage. (e) Relationship between the peak voltage and immersion velocity. The change rate in peak voltage with the immersion velocity decreases when the velocity exceeds 5.5 cm s−1. (f) Response of the induced voltage with respect to the concentration. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from Yin et al., Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3582. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.27 (g) Schematic of the flow of electrons. (h) Relationship between the peak voltage and velocity. As the velocity increases, the peak voltage gradually reaches saturation. The pulling process generates a higher voltage than the inserting process. Pulling graphene out of the liquid level generates a much higher voltage than pulling graphene to the liquid level. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Fei et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 656. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.114 (i) Mechanism of the freestanding-mode TENG. (j) Relationship between the short-circuit current and aspect ratio. (i and j) Reproduced with permission from Zhu et al., ACS Nano, 2014, 8(6), 6031. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.115 
Fei et al. explored the potential difference in the solution.114 Two graphene sheets (“GrL” for the left one and “GrR” for the other) are connected with the metal wire. Inserting one graphene sheet into NaCl solution or pulling it can generate a current and inserting another one generates an inverse current. Different from the single graphene discussed earlier, the voltage originates from ions moving in the NaCl solution, while the other graphene acts as a reference electrode. Inserting graphene into the NaCl solution will make Na+ ions adsorb on it to form the EDL, resulting in a higher potential at the interface than the bulk solution and causing electrons to flow in the circuit (static graphene → resistance → moving graphene; Fig. 4g). Pulling graphene leads to the desorption of Na+ ions, resulting in the inverse current. The results show that if graphene is replaced with other conductive materials (such as a copper or gold film), the voltage is considerably reduced. They attributed the high voltage of graphene to its low carrier density and better adsorption/desorption of ions. An interesting phenomenon is that pulling graphene out of the liquid level generates a much higher voltage than pulling graphene to the liquid level (Fig. 4h), which makes it possible to generate an ultrahigh voltage. It is found that an increase in the load resistance leads to a decrease in the current but an increase in voltage. The maximum voltage and maximum power density generated by pulling graphene are 1 V and 1.6 mW m−2, respectively. The maximum voltage is about 10 times that obtained in Yin's work.27
Materials and structures have a great influence on the performance of nanogenerators. Zhu and coworkers fabricated a nanogenerator composed of fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) and two metal electrodes.115 Electricity generation relies on the difference in EI in two metal plates (Fig. 4i). In the initial state, the negative charges are evenly distributed on the FEP surface, and there is no potential difference between the two metal plates. When water comes into contact with FEP on the left, water gets positively charged due to CE. Consequently, the charges on the left of FEP are screened by the positive charges in water, resulting in electron flow from the right metal plate to the left to maintain charge equilibrium. The same shielding effect occurs when water continues to move to the right metal plate, causing the electrons to flow back to the right plate. As water gradually moves to the left, the shielding effect of charges in the water on the right metal plate is weakened, while the shielding effect on the left metal plate is enhanced, resulting in electrons flowing back to the left metal plate again. The current can be affected by the aspect ratio of the TENG (Fig. 4j). This is because as the aspect ratio gets narrower, the interaction distance gets larger, resulting in a higher current. Lin and his coworkers invented a waving-driven nanogenerator composed of a PMMA substrate, a copper film, and a patterned polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film to harvest wave energy, as shown in Fig. 5a.25 The contact between water and PDMS leads to the ionization of PDMS surface groups, resulting in negatively charged PDMS and positively charged water. After that, changing the gap between water and PDMS layer can be used to control the current direction. An increasing gap causes electrons to flow from the bottom copper film to the top copper film, and a decreasing gap causes electrons to flow from the top to the bottom. The current density and charge density vary with the type of liquid; DI water offers the best performance (Fig. 5b and c). This is because after separation, the liquid residue is unavoidable on the PDMS surface and the residual liquid with more free ions can weaken EI in the copper film, resulting in a decrease in the EGP. In addition, adding ethanol to water decreases the current density, probably because the addition of ethanol leads to a decrease in the dielectric constant and polarity.116 Temperature can also change the polarity and dielectric constant of water.117 Experiments have shown that the current density decreases with an increase in temperature (Fig. 5d). These two results indicate that this device can be used as a sensor to detect factors affecting the water dielectric constant and polarity.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a waving-driven nanogenerator. (b) Effect of contact frequency and solution on the current density. (c) Effect of contact frequency and solution on the charge density. (d) Effect of temperature on the current density. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(48), 12545. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.25 (e) Mechanism of LM TENG. (f) Influence of liquid metal (mercury and gallium) on charge and charge density. (g) Residue of gallium. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from Tang et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(24), 3718. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.55 (h) Contact angles of different surface structures. (i) Experimental value (dots) and calculated value (colored rectangles) of the current. (j) Experimental value (dots) and calculated value (colored rectangles) of the voltage. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from Lee et al., Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 315. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.30 (k) Schematic of NI TENG. Reproduced with permission from Zhao et al., ACS Nano, 2018, 12(5), 4280. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.118 (l) Schematic of capillary pressure and optical image of water penetration under different gaps. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 1126. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.119 
To further investigate the effect of liquids on EGP, a liquid-metal-based TENG (LM TENG) was reported by Tang et al. with an extremely outstanding instantaneous energy conversion efficiency of 70.6%.55 The LM TENG is composed of a liquid metal electrode, triboelectric layer, and induction electrode (Fig. 5e). When the triboelectric layer is immersed in liquid metal, the surface of the triboelectric layer is negatively charged and the liquid metal at the interface is positively charged. As the triboelectric layer is gradually pulled out from the liquid metal, electrons flow from the induction electrode to the liquid metal. When the triboelectric layer is gradually immersed in liquid metal again, electrons flow from the liquid metal to the induction electrode. Results show that the material of the liquid metal affects the output. Compared with mercury, gallium is easy to oxidize; further, it adheres to the surface of the triboelectric layer, reducing charge and charge density (Fig. 5f and g). Further, the triboelectric layer can be any insulating material as long as its electronegativity is different from that of the liquid metal. Furthermore, a thicker triboelectric layer can weaken EI in the induction layer, causing a lower output, while the patterned triboelectric layer can increase the contact area and the optimized patterned surface leads to a higher output. LM TENG can generate an open-circuit voltage of 679 V, short-circuit current of 9 μA, and output power of 10 mW.

Via experiments and theoretical calculations, Lee and Hwang studied the roughness (surface structure) effect on the output current and voltage of a WTENG.30 TENGs with three different surface structures (nanohole-fluorinated (NHF), nanoflake-fluorinated (NFF), and micro-/nano-fluorinated (MNF)) were fabricated and the contact angles followed the order of MNF > NFF > NHF (Fig. 5h). The effects of contact area fraction, relative interfacial velocity, and air-gap layer are taken into account in calculating the output. The current (I) and voltage (V) of WTENG can be expressed as (14) (15)where σf is the surface charge density under full contact; w is the width of the WTENG; l is the immersed depth of the WTENG; θ* is the apparent contact angle; θ is the contact angle at the flat surface; tf is the friction time; x is the separation distance; d is the effective dielectric thickness; εr1 and εr2 are the relative dielectric constants of the dielectric layer and air, respectively; D is the thickness of the liquid film; ηair is the viscosity of air; ηe is the apparent viscosity measured under the fully wet condition; and ηa is the apparent viscosity. According to eqn (14) and (15), within a certain range, the voltage and current increase with an increase in the contact area fraction; in other words, they decrease with an increase in the contact angle. This is in good agreement with the experimental results (Fig. 5i and j), indicating that the contact area fraction (contact angle) plays a major role in determining the EGP.
In addition to the optimization of the liquid–solid TENG itself, the study of integrated liquid–solid TENG networks through series and parallel connections is of great significance for future large generating sets. Zhao et al. proposed a network-integrated TENG (NI TENG) to harvest water-wave energy.118 The functional units are covered with nanowires and connected by rectifying chips (Fig. 5k). Via network integration, the output can be considerably improved. The current and voltage of NI TENG are several times higher than that discussed in Zhu's work115 and NI TENG can be used to drive wireless transmitters. Park et al. explored the optimal parallel spacing.119 In general, the triboelectric layer material is superhydrophobic, which can facilitate the separation of solid and liquid. When the gap between the two TENGs is too small, capillary pressure prevents the liquid from entering the gap (Fig. 5l), resulting in a reduction in the voltage and current. It is found that the voltage and current increase with an increase in the gap and reach saturation at 3 mm. Furthermore, for a given space of 1 cm, different numbers of TENGs can be integrated with different gaps. Evidently, the voltage and current are the highest when the gap is 2 mm and the number of TENGs is four. This suggests that a reasonable degree of integration can reduce costs and increase the voltage and current, which guides large-scale integration of liquid–solid TENGs.
3.3. Electricity induced by flowing
When a channel or porous plug with charged walls is filled with an ionic solution, an EDL forms at the channel's inner surface, which usually results in the overlap of the counterions due to the small size of the channel.8,120–122 During the solution flow driven by the pressure gradient, a current is generated due to the directional migration of counterions, which is called the streaming current (Fig. 6a). Different surface properties generate different voltages. For example, the silica surface with negative charges generates a positive streaming current, while a polylysine-coated surface with positive charges generates a negative streaming current. The result clearly shows that there is a proportional relationship between the streaming current and pressure (Fig. 6b). To improve the EGP of the streaming-potential-based nanogenerator, great efforts have been made. Malekidelarestaqi et al. suggested that a longer slip length can lead to an increase in the slip velocity, and therefore, more counterions flow along the microchannel (Fig. 6c), resulting in a higher streaming potential and current.123 The enhancement in the slip length from 0 to 144 nm results in an increase in the streaming potential and current by 2.55 and 2.44 times, respectively. Meanwhile, the streaming potential can also be regulated by viscosity, density, conductivity, and dielectric constant of oil, when the ionic solution moves along the oil-filled surface (Fig. 6d).31,124 For example, a surface filled with Dupont Krytox GPL 104 (a general-purpose lubricant whose base oil is perfluoropolyether) can improve the streaming potential, while castor oil inhibits it (Fig. 6e). The influence of surface properties on the streaming potential may be attributed to the differences in interfacial energy, surface charge density, local disturbance, and shear rate. According to the mechanism of streaming potential, Saha et al. packed silica spheres tightly together to make a portable nanogenerator that could generate electricity via flowing water (Fig. 6f).125 By optimizing the parameters of silica spheres, the EGP could be improved. Li et al. used the capillary effect of three-dimensional (3D) graphene membranes to generate electricity and successfully powered an LED.126 The contact between 3D graphene membranes and capillary-driven NaCl solution leads to the formation of EDL. Then, Na+ ions absorb into the 3D graphene membranes, and Cl− ions are repelled. Thus, the flowing NaCl solution generates a streaming potential.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the device for measuring the streaming potential. (b) Relationship between the streaming current and pressure. Streaming current increases with an increase in pressure. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from Heyden et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95(11), 116104. Copyright 2005 American Physical Society.22 (c) Schematic of the slip velocity and slip length. Reproduced with permission from Malekidelarestaqi et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 703, 72. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.123 (d) Schematic of the charge distribution of an oil-filled surface. (e) Effect of different filling oils on the voltage. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from Fan et al., Langmuir, 2019, 35(18), 6203. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.31 (f) Schematic of a portable nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Saha et al., ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(9), 5850. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.125 (g) Structure of a hybridized TENG. (h) Mechanism of the hybridized TENG. (i) Effect of water-flow rate on the current and voltage. (g–i) Reproduced with permission from Cheng et al., ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1932. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.127 
Converting flowing energy into rotational energy of the device to realize contact and separation between the liquid and nanogenerator can be used to generate electricity.128 To improve the output, Cheng et al. designed a hybridized TENG composed of a solid–solid-disk-based TENG and WTENG (Fig. 6g), which could harvest water energy through liquid–solid interaction and solid–solid interaction at the same time.127 The CE of the WTENG originates from the interaction between water and PTFE on the rotating blade surface. Rotating blades of the WTENG lead to the changing distribution of electrons in copper, resulting in electron transfer between copper and the ground (Fig. 6h (left)). The contact and separation of copper on the front disk and PTFE on the back disk lead to electron transfer. When the overlap area between the front and back disk increases, electrons flow from the front disk to the back disk. When the overlap area between the front and back disk decreases, electrons flow from the back disk to the front disk (Fig. 6h (right)). A higher flow rate causes the blades and the front disk to rotate faster, resulting in an increase in current (Fig. 6i). This is because the amount of triboelectric charge per unit time increases as the flow rate increases. Compared with a single-disk TENG or WTENG, the output voltage of the hybridized TENG is higher, suggesting a higher energy conversion efficiency.
3.4. Electricity induced by evaporation
Water evaporation is a widespread and important phenomenon and has shown great potential toward generating electricity. Interestingly, carbon nanoparticles modified by four different polymer molecules can successfully modulate the voltage from −3 V to 3 V.129 Voltage modulation can be attributed to the difference in the surface charge caused by different functional groups. When the liquid passes through nanochannels between the carbon nanoparticles, channels with different surface charges allow only ions with a specific charge to pass through, thereby generating different voltages. Sun et al. reported a liquid–solid nanogenerator that comprised a PET substrate, two carbon nanotube electrodes, and a Ni–Al layered double hydroxide (LDH) (Fig. 7a).130 The nanogenerator is placed in a closed box and the LDH part is semi-immersed in water. When the humidity in the box reaches saturation, water evaporation drives the nanogenerator to generate a continuous current and voltage after opening the box. The formation of the EDL with a Debye length of 0.96 μm can positively charge the layered LDH flakes. As a result, the nanochannels between the LDH flakes allow only anions (OH−) and water molecules (H2O) to pass through and cations (H3O+) remain at the bottom of the LDH. Consequently, there is a potential difference between the top (negative electrode polarity) and the bottom (positive electrode polarity) of the LDH. The hydrophilic property and high surface charge density of the LDH facilitate evaporation and enhance the voltage and current. Since a high wind velocity can promote the evaporation of water, there is a positive correlation between the open-circuit voltage and wind velocity (Fig. 7b). A flexible structure can improve the mechanical properties, and the output of the nanogenerator does not decrease even under the bending state. Zhou et al. reported that electricity can also be collected from water evaporation using natural wood.131 Driven by evaporation, water flows through the microchannel and the hydroxyl on the wood microchannel can be hydrolyzed (Fig. 7c). Consequently, the inner wall is negatively charged, absorbing positive ions in water. Therefore, a potential difference can be established along the direction of water flow. The current and voltage of different wood types have been studied; evidently, beech wood is better due to its optimal microchannel size (Fig. 7d). Based on the streaming potential and capillary pressure equations, the microchannel of beech wood is further selected and optimized. After modification with citric acid, five beech wood nanogenerators connected in a series can be used to power a calculator, proving its application value and optimum design based on the mechanisms of electricity generation provides a good example for the development of nanogenerators.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the Ni–Al LDH nanogenerator. (b) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the periodic change in wind velocity between 0 and 0.28 m s−1. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from Sun et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 269. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.130 (c) Electricity generation induced by a piece of wood. (d) Response of the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current toward different wood species. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Zhou et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11232. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.131 
3.5. Electricity induced by moisture
Moisture is one of the ubiquitous forms of water and it has been proven that electric energy can be collected from moisture using nanomaterials with functional groups.132,133 In general, water molecules in moisture are attracted to the surface of the nanomaterial and make the surface functional groups dissociate, resulting in the creation of positive and negative ions.134 Positive and negative ions generally cannot move together for two following reasons: (i) the volume of positive and negative ions is different, and the size of the channel prevents positive or negative ions from passing through; (ii) positive or negative ions can bind to the surface of the nanomaterial.135 Since positive (negative) ions are immovable, free negative (positive) ions will move in a certain direction due to the gradient of concentration (Fig. 8a), resulting in the induction of a current and voltage.136 According to the mechanism, ions should move in a certain direction to generate electricity.21 Therefore, the EGP of nanogenerators can be regulated by controlling the above processes. In this section, several classic nanogenerators using different materials have been reviewed.
 Fig. 8  (a) Basic mechanism of a moisture-induced nanogenerator. (b) Schematic and mechanism of the nanogenerator consisting of a graphene oxide layer and a moisture-insulation substrate. Reproduced with permission from Liang et al., Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1730. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.138 (c) Mechanism of electricity generation induced by the asymmetric ionic aerogel of biological nanofibrils. (d) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the thickness ratio. (e) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the aerogel porosity. (f) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the aerogel thickness. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from Yang et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104610. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.139 
Since graphene oxide is rich in hydrophilic functional groups, which accelerate the absorption of water molecules, it is an ideal material used in nanogenerators induced by moisture. A nanogenerator assembled from graphene oxide nanoribbon has been reported.137 Asymmetric electrochemical oxidation/reduction of the two ends leads to a gradient in the functional groups. As a result, the exposure to moisture creates a difference in ion concentration between the two ends, resulting in a potential difference. Since moisture-induced voltage is accurately repeatable, this kind of nanogenerator can be used as a memory. By matching the asymmetric electrochemical oxidation/reduction of two ends with certain information, the nanogenerator can be used to realize information storage. Liang et al. fabricated a simple nanogenerator consisting of a graphene oxide layer and a moisture-insulation substrate to realize the directional movement of ions (Fig. 8b).138 In their work, when the nanogenerator is exposed to moisture, water molecules are absorbed by the graphene oxide layer that subsequently move spontaneously to the side of the moisture-insulation substrate, driving free ions (H+) to move directionally.
Luo et al. reported a moisture-induced self-charging device, which mainly consists of three parts: carbon nanotube electrode that absorbs water molecules, CaCl2 that provides the charge carriers, and electrolyte gel composed of hydrochloric acid/polyvinyl alcohol for ion separation.140 When the carbon nanotube electrode absorbs sufficient amount of water molecules from moisture, CaCl2 dissolves, forming a CaCl2 solution and providing free Ca2+ ions and Cl− ions. Different mobilities of Ca2+ and Cl− ions in the hydrochloric acid/polyvinyl alcohol matrix lead to their natural separation.
Biological nanomaterials are rich in functional groups, which can be chemically modified. Yang et al. fabricated a kind of asymmetric ionic aerogel of biologic nanofibrils (NFs) with a bilayer structure to collect electric energy by using 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-oxidized cellulosic NFs and quaternized cellulosic NFs through a facile freeze-casting method.139 In 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-oxidized cellulosic NF layer, free positive ions are mainly produced, and free negative ions are mainly produced in the quaternized cellulosic NF layer (Fig. 8c). Due to the gradient of ion concentration, net charges move in a certain direction, resulting in a current. Voltage can be modulated by the thickness ratio of the two layers. The free charge carriers of the two layers are almost equal in unit volume; the optimal open-circuit voltage can be maintained when the thickness ratio of the two layers is ∼1:1 (Fig. 8d). Besides, to ensure moisture and ion transport, the optimal porosity is ∼99.3% (Fig. 8e) and the optimal thickness of the nanogenerator is ∼6 mm (Fig. 8f). This kind of environment-friendly biomaterial has good biocompatibility, which is worthwhile for further exploring its application in the medical field.
4. Application
An electric signal can be generated by the liquid–solid nanogenerator via the interaction of the liquid and the solid. In this section, the applications of liquid–solid nanogenerators in sensors, energy collection units, self-powered microelectromechanical systems, and wearable equipment are reviewed.
4.1. Sensors
It is a hassle to provide a separate power supply for sensors. Consequently, self-powered sensors based on the liquid–solid nanogenerator have great advantages, such as simplistic structure, maintenance-free nature, energy saving, and so on. As early as 2012, Newaz et al. reported an ion concentration sensor based on the sensitivity change in the streaming potential of a graphene field-effect transistor to the ion concentration (Fig. 9a), which could detect a concentration change of 40 nM.47 Jiang et al. reported a liquid–solid TENG and examined the CE process at the oil–water–solid multiphase interfaces (Fig. 9b).141 Evidently, when the TENG is inserted into the “oil–water” interface, two unique signals are generated: one from CE and EI between the liquid and PTFE film of TENG (VTENG and ITENG) and the other from the EI in copper due to the charge at the oil–water interface (ΔVinterface and Iinterface). Interestingly, after coating a layer of polydopamine on the PTFE and glass surfaces, two signals show opposite trends. VTENG and ITENG decrease, while ΔVinterface and Iinterface increase (Fig. 9c and d). Both ITENG and Iinterface have a good linear relationship with the natural logarithm of the concentration of dopamine. Using this linear relationship, TENG can be used as a dual signal sensor for the accurate detection of dopamine concentration. The specific adsorption of Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions on a self-assembled monolayer with a PDMS substrate can induce a much higher voltage than those by other ions.142 Using this property, Yoon et al. fabricated liquid–solid TENG that can be used to detect Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions in water (Fig. 9e); in fact, Cu2+ ions can be repeatedly detected after the device is cleaned by HCl solution (Fig. 9f).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the graphene field-effect transistor. Reproduced with permission from Newaz et al., Nano Lett., 2012, 12(6), 2931. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.47 (b) Schematic of the liquid–solid TENG. (c) Relationship between Iinterface and dopamine concentration. (d) Relationship between ITENG and dopamine concentration. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from Jiang et al., Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(39), 1902793. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.141 (e) Schematic diagram of an ion-detection device. (f) Repair effect of HCl solution on the device. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from Yoon et al., Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 1806268. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.142 (g) Schematic of the MAT nanogenerator. (h) Response of the EGP (voltage and current) to the motion amplitude of the liquid column (left) and frequency of rotary cylinder (right). (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Vo et al., International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 2019, 6(4), 741. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.143 (i) Linear relationship between the voltage and water temperature. Reproduced with permission from Xiong et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 584. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.144 (j) Schematic of the liquid (left) and gas (right) sensors. (k) Effect of the capillary tube diameter and flow rate on the voltage. (j and k) Reproduced with permission from Chen et al., ACS Nano, 2016, 10(8), 8104. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.48 
In addition to substance concentration, liquid–solid-nanogenerator-based sensors can also be used to detect displacement, temperature, and flow. Vo et al. reported a mechanically active transducing-element-based nanogenerator (MAT nanogenerator) (Fig. 9g).143 Evidently, the induced voltage as well as current have an extremely good linear relationship with the frequency of the rotary cylinder and motion amplitude of the liquid column (Fig. 9h). This good linearity ensures that the MAT nanogenerator is a simple, low-cost speed sensor, which can be further modified to act as a displacement sensor. Hot water can help pre-deformed microspheres (MSs) to regain their shape, resulting in different outputs of the liquid–solid nanogenerator induced by water with different temperatures.144 Therefore, a single-electrode-mode liquid–solid nanogenerator with pre-deformed MS mat was fabricated to detect the water temperature. The linear relationship between water temperature and voltage makes it a self-powered water-temperature sensor (Fig. 9i). Chen et al. reported a microfluidic sensor that was used to detect gas or liquid flow (Fig. 9j).48 The detection range and sensitivity can be easily changed by changing the diameter of the capillary tube, and the microfluidic sensor has an important application in a self-powered micro total analysis system (Fig. 9k).
4.2. Energy collection unit
Flowing water can be used to drive the motion elements in solid–solid nanogenerators to generate electricity,145–151 but the electricity of these solid–solid nanogenerators is generated by solid–solid interactions, which are less efficient. Therefore, it is worthwhile to develop a liquid–solid nanogenerator as a more efficient and durable energy collection unit to collect energy from water.
Combining solar energy with the drawing potential, Tang et al. fabricated an all-weather working nanogenerator (Fig. 10a),152 which could effectively generate electricity on sunny and rainy days. Yoo et al. found that previous electricity generation devices combining solar cells and liquid–solid nanogenerators often used nanogenerators as shells.153 However, the low transmittance of nanogenerators results in a decrease in the energy conversion efficiency of solar cells. Inspired by moth's eye with superior specular transmittance, a moth's-eye-mimicking TENG (MM TENG) was fabricated (Fig. 10b), which has better conversion efficiency. This moth's-eye-mimicking structure can also provide the self-cleaning property, which ensures the long-term performance of the MM TENG. Dao et al. fabricated a Limnobium laevigatum-inspired nanogenerator (LLN) motivated by water evaporation, which could float on water for energy supply all day.154 As shown in Fig. 10c, polystyrene foam is used to provide buoyancy as well as block heat transfer between the LLN and cold water, thereby improving the evaporation efficiency. The voltage and current density induced by LLN can reach 1 V and 1650 mA m−2, respectively. Because the evaporation is a continuous process, LLN can generate electricity even if there is no light at all (Fig. 10d), which provides a strategy for all-weather generating sets. Ahn et al. fabricated a liquid–solid TENG to convert an unsteady flow of energy into electricity.155 The core of this TENG is the “cell”, which is a tube with two serially connected hydrophobic film tubes. The cell with polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and silicon is called an sP cell and the cell with a biaxially oriented polypropylene and silicon is called an sB cell (Fig. 10e). When the TENG works in the single-electrode mode, the charge density varies in different areas of the sP cell after the pipe is supplied with water due to the different electron affinities between PVDF and silicon (Fig. 10f). The axial force generated by the liquid flow leads to the axial movement of ions adsorbed on the inner surface of the sP cell, resulting in a changing number of ions on the inner surface of PVDF. EI in the copper electrode generates the current. The same goes for the freestanding mode, and the surface charge of biaxially oriented polypropylene must be the opposite to that of PVDF so that the current generated by the sP cell and sB cell is superimposed, increasing the EGP. Evidently, the unsteady streaming flow can generate a higher current than that of the steady flow, which is consistent with the work of Cheedarala et al.156 Further, Wang et al. added the liquid to a ring-shaped sealed pipe (liquid does not fill the pipe) to fabricate a liquid–solid nanogenerator, out of which the Cu electrode was designed into a ring structure, with two electric brushes bilaterally anchored.157 When the pipe rotates, the liquid flows, generating a direct current. In this way, a voltage of several hundred volts can be generated. These experiments demonstrate the potential of tubular liquid–solid nanogenerators for energy harvesting.
 Fig. 10  (a) Mechanism of an all-weather working nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Tang et al., Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 818. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.152 (b) Schematic and switching circuit of the MM TENG. Reproduced with permission from Yoo et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 424. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.153 (c) Schematic of the LLN. (d) EGP of LLN under different conditions. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Dao et al., J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227388. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.154 (e) Schematic of the unsteady flow system. (f) Mechanism of the sP Cell. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from Ahn et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104269. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.155 (g) Schematic of LS nanogenerator. (h) SOS system powered by an LS nanogenerator. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Li et al., Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(21), 1800705. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.51 (i) Air quality monitoring device based on water-evaporation-driven nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Zhong et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 52. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.158 
4.3. Self-powered microelectromechanical system
Li et al. reported a liquid–solid interface contact nanogenerator (LS nanogenerator) to harvest blue energy.51 The structure and electricity generation mechanism of the LS nanogenerator is shown in Fig. 10g. Integrated LS nanogenerators can be a new energy supply strategy for offshore electronic equipment, such as a wireless SOS system (Fig. 10h). Zhong et al. designed a water-evaporation-driven nanogenerator.158 The results show that the voltage is related to the composition of the ambient gas. It is sensitive to the gas type, alcohol, and oxygen concentrations. As a result, multiple nanogenerators can form a distributed cluster of self-powered sensors to detect air quality (Fig. 10i).
4.4. Wearable equipment
Wearable equipment based on solid–solid nanogenerators have been developed since a long time.159,160 However, research on liquid–solid nanogenerator is still in its infancy. Xiong et al. successfully combined a water-based nanogenerator (WTEG) with a cotton glove to power dozens of LEDs under the impact of water flow (Fig. 11a).161 Yang et al. reported a liquid-metal-based nanogenerator (LM nanogenerator) that could be encapsulated in a shoe sole or bracelet to collect energy from human movement (Fig. 11b).52 Zhang et al. fabricated a self-cleaning raincoat consisting of a hydraulic nanogenerator and a capacitor (Fig. 11c).34 This raincoat can generate electricity and store it. After 100 s in the rain, it can continuously light an LED for 300 s (Fig. 11d). Li et al. fabricated a biocompatible and biodegradable nanogenerator with inherently hydrophilic pre-charged NFs.162 The biological nanogenerator made from the quaternary ammonium cellulose NFs shows an antimicrobial property, which can be used to make masks to provide better protection for doctors and nurses (Fig. 11e). Gong et al. reported a highly stretchable single-electrode triboelectric yarn (SETEY); SETEY can light up a liquid crystal display under water (Fig. 11f).163 SETEY makes it possible to commercialize wearable power generation devices.
 Fig. 11  (a) Optical image of a cotton glove combined with a WTEG to power LEDs. Reproduced with permission from Xiong et al., Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(21), 1701243. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.161 (b) Optical image of LM-nanogenerator-based shoes and bracelets. Reproduced with permission from Yang et al., ACS Nano, 2018, 12(2), 2027. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.52 (c) Circuit diagram of a self-cleaning raincoat. (d) Optical image of the self-cleaning raincoat powering a liquid crystal display for ∼300 s. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(35), 1803117. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.34 (e) Biological-nanogenerator-based antimicrobial mask. Reproduced with permission from Li et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(32), 1901798. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.162 (f) Optical image of SETEY powering an LCD under water. Reproduced with permission from Gong et al., Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 868. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.163 
5. Discussion
Electricity generation by the liquid–solid nanogenerator originates from the directional movement of the charge carrier at the liquid–solid interface. Since the contact area between the liquid and solid is larger, and the liquid is usually readily available, the liquid–solid nanogenerator offers better efficiency, better durability, and lower cost than solid–solid nanogenerators. Water energy is a renewable energy source and takes many forms, such as tide, water droplet, wave, flow, moisture, and even waterfall.164 Therefore, using a liquid–solid nanogenerator to obtain energy from water is of considerable research, environmental protection, and commercial value. Over the recent years, considerable efforts have been devoted toward improving the EGP of liquid–solid nanogenerators, including novel materials,165 optimizations of the triboelectric layer surface,166 theoretical analysis,167,168 and so on. Table 1 summarizes the progress of liquid–solid nanogenerators. The EGP of the liquid–solid nanogenerator varies with the material of the triboelectric layer, liquid source, structure, and solution type. Different nanogenerators have their own pros and cons. In terms of structure, the nanogenerators based on EDL nanogenerators can be divided into those with and without an induction layer. Nanogenerators without an induction layer usually use conductive 2D materials and their derivatives as the triboelectric layer, which have high cost, poor durability, and unstable output, but they have a simplistic structure. It is very convenient to modify 2D materials, which can modulate the output of the nanogenerator. Nanogenerators with an induction layer usually use polymer materials (such as PTFE, PMMA, and nylon) as the triboelectric layer, which are cheaper, more durable, and more stable. The introduction of EI makes the structure of the nanogenerators more complex, which leads to a variety of structures. Different structures are suitable for different occasions, which is beneficial to promote the development of nanogenerators. In terms of the liquid source, the fabrication of nanogenerators driven by the droplet, waving, and flowing are simple, and all of them can generate voltages ranging from tens to even hundreds of volts. However, droplet-driven nanogenerators with an instantaneous output are severely constrained practically by the weather, while waving-driven nanogenerators and flowing-driven nanogenerators placed in oceans and rivers can work continuously, and they are not restricted by the weather. Nanogenerators driven by evaporation or moisture need to regulate the functional groups to cause a gradient in the charge carrier, which is complex to fabricate. They can only generate a voltage with a few volts at the moment, but these two kinds of nanogenerators can generate a constant direct voltage and current, which are better for powering electronic devices.
Table 1 Summary and comparison of liquid–solid nanogeneratorsa




Liquid source
Triboelectric layer
Voltage (mV)
Current (μA)
Power density (mW m−2)
Solution type
Mechanism
Ref.





a In the “Mechanism” column, “Dynamic EDL” means that the nanogenerator has no induction layer and there is no EI in the electricity generation process. “Coupling effect” means that electricity generation is caused by the coupling effect between CE and EI.





Droplet
SLIPS
1.2 × 103
0.02
2
DI water
Coupling effect

97



Droplet
PTFE/ZnO
16 × 103
10
76
DI water
Coupling effect

102



Droplet
HDFS coating layer
151 × 103
—
—
DI water
Coupling effect

92



Droplet
Hydrophobic spray
13.4 × 103
2.1
2.8
DI water
Coupling effect

91



Droplet
Amphiphobic layered PTFE
100 × 103
200
245.2
Simulated rainwater
Coupling effect

34



Droplet
PTFE
143.5 × 103
270
50.1 × 103
Tap water (3.1 mM)
Coupling effect

99



Droplet
SiO2(silanization)/nano silicon pillar
64.7
0.0935
0.546
DI water
Coupling effect

95



Droplet
Perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane
190
0.21
0.373 μW g−1
0.01 M NaCl
Coupling effect

88



Droplet
Graphene
450
4.8
0.78
0.6 M NaCl
Dynamic EDL

54



Droplet
MOS2
5 × 103
—
—
1 M NaCl
Dynamic EDL

90



Droplet
Ta2O5 coated with cytop
—
—
1 × 106
Hg
Reverse electrowetting

100



Droplet
Cytop/Al2O3
—
—
110 × 103
Hg
Reverse electrowetting

107



Evaporation
Three-dimensional graphene
∼ 280
∼ 62
∼ 9 × 106 mW m−3
0.1 M NaCl
Dynamic EDL

126



Evaporation
Ni–Al layered double hydroxides
700
1.3 × 103
16.1 × 103 mW m−3
DI water
Evaporation

130



Evaporation
Surface functional carbon nanoparticles
3 × 103
1.5
9
DI water
Evaporation

129



Flowing
1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane modified PVDF
20 × 103
20
4
DI water
Coupling effect

49



Flowing
PVDF/biaxially oriented polypropylene
29.7 × 103
2.4
—
Tap water
Coupling effect

155



Flowing
Porous PVDF
20.93 × 103
1.67
12.53
Tap water
Coupling effect

156



Flowing
PTFE
—
—
200 × 103
Tap water
Coupling effect

26



Flowing
Silica nanoparticles
2.3 × 103
2.6
151
DI water
Dynamic EDL

125



Moisture
Graphene oxide
2 × 103
0.22
270
Water
Moisture

138



Moisture
Graphene oxide
260
—
10 × 103
Water
Moisture

133



Moisture
Porous carbon film
68
0.003
—
Water
Moisture

11



Moisture
Graphene oxide
30
—
4.2
Water
Moisture

132



Waving
PTFE
2.6 × 103
3
1.15 × 103
DI water
Coupling effect

119



Waving
Etched PTFE
—
13.5
147.14
DI water
Coupling effect

118



Waving
Kapton
679 × 103
9
6.7 × 103
Mercury
Coupling effect

55



Waving
PDMS pyramid array
52 × 103
—
130
Tap water/0.6 M NaCl
Coupling effect

25



Waving
Graphene
1 × 103
—
1.6
0.01 M NaCl
Dynamic EDL

114



Waving
Graphene
100
11
0.55
0.6 M NaCl
Dynamic EDL

27





There are still several problems that need to be resolved for liquid–solid nanogenerators, and some of the important issues are summarized and discussed as follows:
First, the current of the liquid–solid nanogenerator is mostly concentrated in the range of 0.1 μA to 1 mA, which cannot drive most electronic devices, such as micro-motors. A higher current can considerably expand the applicability of liquid–solid nanogenerators. In some studies, with an increase in the resistance of the circuit, the voltage of the liquid–solid nanogenerator gradually increases. However, this method accordingly reduces the current. At present, there are several methods that can be used to increase the current of the liquid–solid nanogenerators: (i) increasing the surface charge density of the triboelectric layer, such as using materials with high electron affinity, ion injection,169,170 and surface functional group modification;125 (ii) optimizing the structure of the liquid–solid nanogenerator;167 (iii) increasing the hydrophobicity of the triboelectric layer, including etching a micro-hierarchical structure and using more hydrophobic materials. For the method described in (i) above, the material used is one of the most important factors that affects the surface charge density, which is related to the tendency of the material to gain or lose electrons, known as the triboelectric series. In order to improve the surface charge density, materials—which are “far” from the liquid in the triboelectric series—should be selected as the triboelectric layer. For example, most 2D materials are near the negative side and MoS2 shows the most negative charging characteristic, which can be widely used to generate electricity.171 A series of studies on the triboelectric series have been done, showing that the triboelectric series is affected by temperature, gas environment, roughness of the material, and type of counter material.56,172,173 Hence, the existing triboelectric series can only provide qualitative guidance. However, polymer materials are an exception, and the position of polymer materials in the different triboelectric series is almost identical. Therefore, nanogenerators that use polymer materials as the dielectric layer are more stable. Besides, our previous work has shown that less than 5% of the surface charge is involved in electricity generation due to the screening effect of ions in the diffusion layer.174 Hence, how to make all the surface charges “participate” in the electricity generation process and improve the coefficient is also a problem that needs to be resolved. For the method described in (ii) above, since electricity generation is attributed to the coupling effect between CE and EI, it is important to study the effect of the nanogenerator structure on the coupling effect. Wang et al. introduced the ferroelectric material to the structure of the nanogenerator to increase the coupling effect. The hysteretic dielectric polarization of the ferroelectric material can enhance EI, resulting in an increase in the induced charge.175 Several works have suggested that the introduction of a capacitor into the structure of the nanogenerator can increase the output current.176–178 In the working cycle of the nanogenerator, charges can be transferred between the capacitor and nanogenerator, which can considerably increase the coupling efficiency of CE and EI. In addition, some studies have shown that the thinner triboelectric layers have higher efficiency of EI.170,179 Wang's work has shown that the water droplet can bridge the originally disconnected components into a closed-loop electrical system, which can generate a voltage of up to 143.5 V and a current of up to 270 μA.99 This is because the CE and EI are “perfectly” coupled at the moment the droplet hits it, causing rapid changes in the distribution of charge on the surface of the device. In addition, a larger contact area of the triboelectric layer can increase the output of the nanogenerator.175,179 Since the liquid can be in full contact with the solid, we can texture the surface to increase the surface area. For the method described in (iii) above, etching a micro-hierarchical structure to increase the hydrophobicity of the materials can prevent liquid residue on the surface of the triboelectric layer and promote the rapid spread of liquid, which is conducive to the rapid change in the charge distribution in the EDL.
Second, the liquid–solid nanogenerator usually generates an unstable alternating current, which is hard to store and directly use. Since small electronic devices use a direct current, it makes sense to store the generated energy and release energy in the form of direct current. The rectifier circuit is considered to be a good way to convert an alternating current into a direct current.32,180 Zhang et al. used a kind of liquid–solid nanogenerator to charge the capacitor through a rectifier circuit and the charged capacitor could power an LED for more than 300 s.34 However, capacitor discharge is not a stable process, and the voltage decreases gradually during the discharge process of the capacitor, which is not conducive to the normal working of electronic devices. Since the battery can achieve continuous and stable power output, it is worth trying to use the liquid–solid nanogenerator to charge the battery. Existing studies on the liquid–solid nanogenerator are focused on increasing the voltage, current, and durability, but there is little research on the charging technology of liquid–solid nanogenerators. We believe that the use of a liquid–solid nanogenerator to charge batteries stably and efficiently will be a hot topic.
Third, the stability of the triboelectric layer is an important factor to ensure the durability of the liquid–solid nanogenerator. Triboelectric layers made of 2D materials or etched materials are not stable. Our previous verification experiment based on Guo's work28 showed that not all graphene could generate a voltage, which indicated that a graphene-based triboelectric layer was unstable. The movement of liquid on the solid surface can cause damage to the surface structure of the triboelectric layer.12,166 In addition, to improve the EGP of the liquid–solid nanogenerator, the triboelectric layer is usually very thin, which can be easily damaged by an external force in practice. Although it has been claimed that a self-repairable triboelectric layer has been realized,49 the repair of the nanogenerator requires heating, which would incur additional costs in future commercialization. Therefore, improving the mechanical strength of the triboelectric layer seems like a better strategy. Recently, Wang et al. obtained a surface with a stable superhydrophobic property by dressing superhydrophobic nanostructures in armor.181 Even after abrasion by sandpaper or by a steel blade, the superhydrophobic property of the surface is retained, which promotes the development of liquid–solid nanogenerators. Searching and designing the triboelectric layer with high hydrophobicity, high wear resistance, high mechanical strength, and high electron affinity is the focus of future studies.
Finally, most of the existing studies are in the small-scale and high-cost laboratory stage. It is expensive and inefficient to manually build a large-scale liquid–solid-nanogenerator-based generating set. Automatic production lines can cheaply produce materials used as the triboelectric layer as well as efficiently fabricate commercial liquid–solid nanogenerators, which can significantly reduce the cost per unit. Therefore, the industrialization of commercial nanogenerators (including materials and production mode) is of great significance. However, the industrialization of a liquid–solid nanogenerator is a complex and systematic project that necessitates cooperation among various fields.
6. Conclusion and prospect
In summary, liquid–solid nanogenerators are based on the charge carrier behavior at the liquid–solid interface. According to the form of water, nanogenerators can harvest energy from droplets, waving, flowing, evaporation, and moisture. Various liquid–solid nanogenerators have shown great potential in sensors, energy collection units, self-powered microelectromechanical systems, and wearable equipment. However, there are still certain problems in liquid–solid nanogenerators, such as low current, difficulty in using and storing electricity, and difficulty in industrialization. After resolving existing problems, the application prospect of liquid–solid nanogenerators would be limitless and amazing. For example, in modern oil drilling, sensors at the bit are often powered by lithium batteries. However, the lifespan of the lithium battery is considerably shortened due to the high temperature and pressure at the bit. If the liquid–solid nanogenerator can be installed inside the bit, the high-pressure drilling fluid can drive the nanogenerator that would eventually power the sensors. In fishery, flowing-induced nanogenerators can be attached to the outside of the boat. As the boat moves, the flowing water can drive the nanogenerators to generate electricity. In terms of daily life, with the development of the Internet of Things, smart homes will be rapidly popularized within 20 years. A combination of liquid–solid nanogenerators and solar cells installed on the roof as an all-weather power source would be a great way to power electronics in smart homes. Evaporation-induced nanogenerators can estimate the amount of sunlight in a room based on the current (stronger sunlight promotes evaporation) and automatically control lighting or curtains in the room. With regard to health management, wearable devices based on a liquid–solid nanogenerator can be used for the detection of vital signs. For example, the device can automatically notify the hospital and family when the current pulse caused by the heartbeat is abnormal, which can facilitate the timely treatment of patients. Furthermore, the sensitivity of the liquid–solid nanogenerator toward fluids makes it possible to be widely used in the field of microfluidic control, and a large-scale series and parallel generating set based on liquid–solid nanogenerators can collect ocean blue energy and reduce carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels, which can better protect our home—the Earth.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFA0711003), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant numbers 51775295 and 51527901).
References
H. Wang, Q. Zhu, Z. Ding, Z. Li, H. Zheng, J. Fu, C. Diao, X. Zhang, J. Tian and Y. Zi, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 616 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tan, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, J. Duan, Y. Wang and Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5373–5380 RSC .
F. Wenli, Chin. J. Power Sources, 2008, 32, 636–639 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2017, 542, 159–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Khan, A. Kalair, N. Abas and A. Haider, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 72, 590–604 CrossRef .
W. Tang, B. D. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901069 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wall, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 15, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Hunter, Zeta potential in colloid science: principles and applications, Academic Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
G. Quincke, Ann. Phys., 1861, 189, 513–598 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, P. Yang, S. Li, J. Li, T. Ding, G. Xue, Q. Chen, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8003–8007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Chen, J. Xu and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18357–18377 RSC .

          H. O. Pierson, Handbook of chemical vapor deposition: principles, technology and applications, William Andrew,  1999 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 829 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Shen, Q. Wang, C. M. Luk, B. Li, J. Yin, S. P. Lau and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and K. Liu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 487–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Gao, W. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, M. Wang, M. Deng, H. Guo, W. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Xi, X. Li, C. Hu and Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, H. Guo, W. Ding, Y.-C. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2349–2356 CAS .
Y. Han, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, FlatChem, 2019, 14, 100090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23083–23091 RSC .
F. H. van der Heyden, D. Stein and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 116104 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Song, K. Deng, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Wang, H. Yang, A. Jin and Q. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1772 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, L. Lin, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12545–12549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, S. Lee, K. C. Pradel and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. Chen and W. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Li, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan and L. Gong, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee and W. Hwang, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan and P. R. Bandaru, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 6203–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ankanahalli Shankaregowda, R. F. Sagade Muktar Ahmed, C. B. Nanjegowda, J. Wang, S. Guan, M. Puttaswamy, A. Amini, Y. Zhang, D. Kong, K. Sannathammegowda, F. Wang and C. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Su, Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, M. B. Raschke, M. Ren, Y. Chen, J. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Ron Shen and C. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13746–13752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Q. Liang, Q. Liao, M. Ma, F. Gao, X. Zhao, Y. Song, L. Song, X. Xun and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803117 CrossRef .
D. Fuerstenau, Adsorption and electrical double layer phenomena at mineral–water interfaces, AIP Conf. Proc., 1984, 107, 209–223 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Verwey, Chem. Rev., 1935, 16, 363–415 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsumura, T. Watanabe, K. Furusawa, S. Inokuma and T. Kuwamura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1987, 60, 2747–2750 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterji and M. Kawamura, Cem. Concr. Res., 1992, 22, 774–782 CrossRef CAS .
E. Uesugi, H. Goto, R. Eguchi, A. Fujiwara and Y. Kubozono, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1595 CrossRef PubMed .
B. B. Damaskin and O. A. Petrii, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1317–1334 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Touchard, T. W. Patzek and C. J. Radke, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 1996, 32, 1051–1057 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zimmermann, S. Dukhin and C. Werner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8544–8549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitabayashi, K. Tsuji and K. Itoh, J. Electrost., 2005, 63, 735–741 CrossRef CAS .

Encyclopædia
britannica, Encyclopaedia Britannica, Incorporated,  1957 Search PubMed.

          E. M. Purcell and D. J. Morin, Electricity and magnetism, Cambridge University Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          W. M. Saslow, Electricity, magnetism, and light, Elsevier,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. K. Newaz, D. A. Markov, D. Prasai and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2931–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Guo, J. Zheng, Y. Huang, G. Liu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8104–8112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, T. Li, D. Wang and F. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 454–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Jing, Y. S. Zhou, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7342–7351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Tao, X. Wang, J. Zhu, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800705 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, N. Sun, Z. Wen, P. Cheng, H. Zheng, H. Shao, Y. Xia, C. Chen, H. Lan, X. Xie, C. Zhou, J. Zhong, X. Sun and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2027–2034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, X. Wen, G. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Chen, P. Bai, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang and Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 186–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kwak, S. Lin, J. H. Lee, H. Ryu, T. Y. Kim, H. Zhong, H. Chen and S. W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7297–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, T. Jiang, F. R. Fan, A. F. Yu, C. Zhang, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3718 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, L. Xu, A. Chi Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lowell and A. C. Rose-Innes, Adv. Phys., 1980, 29, 947–1023 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lowell, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1975, 8, 53–63 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Gibson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 3832–3833 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sakaguchi, M. Makino, T. Ohura and T. Iwata, J. Electrost., 2014, 72, 412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, L. Xu, C. Xu, X. Chen, A. C. Wang, B. Zhang, P. Lin, Y. Yang, H. Zhao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808197 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Zi, A. C. Wang, H. Zou, Y. Dai, X. He, P. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, P. Feng, D. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706790 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, L. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901418 CrossRef PubMed .
L. S. McCarty and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sutka, K. Malnieks, L. Lapcinskis, P. Kaufelde, A. Linarts, A. Berzina, R. Zabels, V. Jurkans, I. Gornevs and J. Blums, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2417–2421 RSC .
J. Nie, Z. Ren, L. Xu, S. Lin, F. Zhan, X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Helmholtz, Ann. Phys., 1879, 243, 337–382 CrossRef .
M. Gouy, J. Phys. Theor. Appl., 1910, 9, 457–468 CrossRef .
D. L. Chapman, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1913, 25, 475–481 CrossRef .
O. Stern, Z. Elektrochem. Angew. Phys. Chem., 1924, 30, 508–516 CAS .
D. C. Grahame, Chem. Rev., 1947, 41, 441–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. JO'M, M. Devanathan and K. Muller, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 274, 55–79 Search PubMed .

          J. O. M. Bockris, M. A. V. Devanathan and K. MÜLler, in Electrochemistry, ed. J. A. Friend and F. Gutmann, Pergamon,  1965, pp. 832–863 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and A. C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti and G. Buzzanca, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 29, A1–A5 CrossRef .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical supercapacitors: scientific fundamentals and technological applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Bioenerg., 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1964, 15, 155–196 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43, 679–701 CrossRef CAS .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online, Britannica Online,  2004 Search PubMed.
D. J. Griffiths, Am. J. Phys., 2005, 73, 574 CrossRef .
D. M. Newns, J. Chem. Phys., 1969, 50, 4572–4575 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Beck and V. Celli, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 2, 2955–2960 CrossRef .
N. D. Lang and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1973, 7, 3541–3550 CrossRef CAS .
R. Davies, Surf. Sci., 1968, 11, 419–429 CrossRef .
N. D. Lang and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 3, 1215–1223 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yin, Y. Xu, W. Fei, M. Xue, Q. Wang, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1109–1119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, S. Song, Y. Yang, S.-H. Kwon, E. Sim and Y. S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10968–10971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, J. Xia, F. Wang, H. Chen, H. Wu and S. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604226 CrossRef .
A. S. Aji, R. Nishi, H. Ago and Y. Ohno, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chung, D. Heo, B. Kim and S. Lee, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 593 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cho, J. Chung, G. Shin, J.-Y. Sim, D. S. Kim, S. Lee and W. Hwang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhai, H. Shen, J. Chen, X. Li and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12038–12049 RSC .
J. Park, Y. Yang, S. H. Kwon and Y. S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 745 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Zhuang, J. Wei, J. Li, L. Dong, D. Yan, A. Hu, X. Zhou and Z. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 23164–23169 RSC .
J. Chung, H. Cho, H. Yong, D. Heo, Y. S. Rim and S. Lee, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2020, 21, 139–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Zhou, C. Hao, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Yang, M. Leung, X. C. Zeng and R. X. Xu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 540–550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, S. Song, C. Shin, Y. Yang, S. A. L. Weber, E. Sim and Y. S. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2091–2095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Deng, M. Leung, Z. Yang, R. X. Xu, Z. L. Wang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Wang, Nature, 2020, 578, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Krupenkin and J. A. Taylor, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 448 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-H. Hsu, S. Manakasettharn, J. A. Taylor and T. Krupenkin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, S. Kim, T. Y. Kim, U. Khan and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 579–584 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kil Yun, H. Soo Kim, Y. Joon Ko, G. Murillo and J. Hoon Jung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 233–240 CrossRef .
H. Wu, N. Mendel, S. van der Ham, L. Shui, G. Zhou and F. Mugele, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Berge, C. R. Seances Acad. Sci., Ser. 2, 1993, 317, 157–163 CAS .
F. Mugele and J.-C. Baret, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, R705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, S. Hong, B. Koo, D. Lee and Y.-B. Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 450–455 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Thornton, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1986, 4, 3059–3065 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhattacharya, K.-h. Park and Y. Nishioka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 33, 5231 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhattacharya, T. Komeda, K.-h. Park and Y. Nishioka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 32, 4103 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Hsu, J. A. Taylor and T. N. Krupenkin, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 199, 377–392 RSC .
L. E. Helseth and X. D. Guo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 3269–3276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1736–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fei, C. Shen, S. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Li and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 656–660 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, Y. Su, P. Bai, J. Chen, Q. Jing, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6031–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Akerlof, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1932, 54, 4125–4139 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Owen, R. C. Miller, C. E. Milner and H. L. Cogan, J. Phys. Chem., 1961, 65, 2065–2070 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zhao, S. Y. Kuang, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4280–4285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Park, J.-W. Lee, D. S. Kim, J.-Y. Sim, I. Song and W. Hwang, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daiguji, P. Yang, A. J. Szeri and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
W. Olthuis, B. Schippers, J. Eijkel and A. van den Berg, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 111–112, 385–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, F. Lu, L. W. Kostiuk and D. Y. Kwok, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2003, 13, 963 CrossRef CAS .
M. Malekidelarestaqi, A. Mansouri and S. F. Chini, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 703, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, A. Bhattacharya and P. R. Bandaru, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saha, J. Deka and K. Raidongia, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5850–5856 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Tian, L. Liang, S. Yin and P. K. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4922–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cheng, Z.-H. Lin, Z.-l. Du and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1932–1939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, F. Guo, M. Xu, J. Cai, S. Cong, M. Jia, G. Chen and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 842–851 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Liu, T. Ding, P. Yang, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 797–802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, P. Li, J. Qu, X. Lu, Y. Xie, F. Gao, Y. Li, M. Gang, Q. Feng, H. Liang, X. Xia, C. Li, S. Xu and J. Bian, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Tan, J. Guo, Z. Sun and X. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11232–11239 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Liang, H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 912–916 RSC .
C. Yang, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805705 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, F. Zhao, J. Xue, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9529–9535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38170–38175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Qu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604972 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, F. Zhao, Z. Cheng, Y. Deng, Y. Xiao, H. Cheng, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Shao and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1730–1735 RSC .
W. Yang, X. Li, X. Han, W. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Ma, M. Li and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104610 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, C. Liu and S. Fan, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Guo, C. Chen, C. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902793 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Yoon, Y. Yang, H. Jin, W. H. Lee, A. Sohn, S. W. Kim, J. Park and Y. S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806268 CrossRef PubMed .
C. P. Vo, M. Shahriar, C. D. Le and K. K. Ahn, International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 2019, 6, 741–749 CrossRef .
J. Xiong, H. Luo, D. Gao, X. Zhou, P. Cui, G. Thangavel, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 584–593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, H. Zhao, Y. Guo, P. Rui, S. Shi, W. Zhang, Y. Liao, P. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900741 CrossRef .
M. Xu, T. Zhao, C. Wang, S. L. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Pan and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1932–1939 CAS .
M. Yin, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Lu, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2019, 33, 100576 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Chang, F. Chen, H. Wang, G. Gu, H. Zheng, G. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6396–6403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, H. Yang, M. Lai, Y. Xi, Y. Guan, W. Liu, Q. Zeng, J. Lu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800278 CrossRef .
C. Hao, J. He, C. Zhai, W. Jia, L. Song, J. Cho, X. Chou and C. Xue, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 147–157 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xi, Y. Pang, G. Liu, S. Wang, W. Li, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Zhang, B. He and P. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoo, S.-C. Park, S. Lee, J.-Y. Sim, I. Song, D. Choi, H. Lim and D. S. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Dao, N. H. Vu and H. S. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227388 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ahn, J. Y. Hwang, C. G. Kim, G. H. Nam and K. K. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104269 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Cheedarala, M. Shahriar, J. H. Ahn, J. Y. Hwang and K. K. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Wu, L. Pan, R. Gao, B. Zhang, L. Yang, H. Guo, R. Liao and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2587–2598 CAS .
T. Zhong, H. Guan, Y. Dai, H. He, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and X. Xue, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Xu, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang and Y. Nie, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902549 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiong, M.-F. Lin, J. Wang, S. L. Gaw, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701243 CrossRef .
M. Li, L. Zong, W. Yang, X. Li, J. You, X. Wu, Z. Li and C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901798 CrossRef .
W. Gong, C. Hou, J. Zhou, Y. Guo, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 868 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jiang, M. Xu, M. Dong, F. Guo, X. Liu, G. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 115, 109366 CrossRef .
J. Pei, J. Huang, Z. Huang and K. Liu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 599–610 RSC .
Z. Zhen, Z. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Zhong, M. Huang and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. Zhou, P. Cheng, X. Yin, D. Liu, X. Li, H. Guo, Z. L. Wang and J. Wang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 18, 100496 CrossRef .
A. Z. Stetten, D. S. Golovko, S. A. Weber and H.-J. Butt, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 8667–8679 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin, C. Liu, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6720–6728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, L. Zhang, F. Xue, W. Tang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1442–1451 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seol, S. Kim, Y. Cho, K. E. Byun, H. Kim, J. Kim, S. K. Kim, S. W. Kim, H. J. Shin and S. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801210 CrossRef PubMed .
P. E. Shaw, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1917, 94, 16–33 Search PubMed .
T. A. Burgo, F. Galembeck and G. H. Pollack, J. Electrost., 2016, 80, 30–33 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Li and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12735 RSC .
J. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Dai, Z. Zhao, A. Wang, T. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 88 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cheng, Q. Xu, Y. Zheng, X. Jia and Y. Qin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Xu, Y. Bai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Xu, T. Z. Bu, X. D. Yang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 625–633 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Wang, W. He, Q. Tang, Y. Xi, X. Wang, H. Guo and C. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CAS .
X. J. Zhao, G. Zhu, Y. J. Fan, H. Y. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7671–7677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Q. Sun, M. J. Hokkanen, C. Zhang, F.-Y. Lin, Q. Liu, S.-P. Zhu, T. Zhou, Q. Chang, B. He, Q. Zhou, L. Chen, Z. Wang, R. H. A. Ras and X. Deng, Nature, 2020, 582, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
ALBL ⇌ AL+ + BL−	(1)
CS ⇌ CS+ + e−	(2)
CS+ + BL− ⇌ CSBL	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the basic mechanisms for electricity generation at the liquid–solid interface. (a) Schematic of electron transfer between the water molecule and PTFE molecule. Reproduced with permission from Nie et al., Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(2), e1905696. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.66 (b) Schematic of the Stern model. (c) Schematic of the “two-step” model for EDL. Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 399. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.56 (d) Diagram of charge distribution on the outer surface of metal induced by the external charge.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
z = −(a + λ)	(10)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the drawing potential. (b) Equivalent circuit diagram of (a). (c) Dependence of voltage on droplet velocity and volume. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from Yin et al., Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(5), 378. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.28 (d) Influence of the substrate on voltage. Reproduced with permission from Aji et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104370. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.90 (e) TENG mechanism using a pre-charged droplet. (f) TENG mechanism using an uncharged droplet. (g) Relationship between the transfer charge and falling height of the droplet. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(27), 4690. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.26 (h and i) Effect of the number of top coats on voltage and stability. (j) Output voltage of the sprayed-on TENG cap. The cap can light up an LED. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from Chung et al., Micromachines, 2018, 9(11), 593. Copyright 2018 MDPI.91 (k) Comparison of the electricity generation stability of the hierarchical structure and nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from Cho et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.92	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical image of the wettability gradient electrodes and contact angles of different regions. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al., Nanoscale, 2018, 10(48), 23164. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.95 (b) Schematic of a SLIPS TENG. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6(3), 540. Copyright 2019 Oxford University Press.97 (c) Relationship between the output and cation type. The interfacial potential varies with the type of cation, resulting in a difference in the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(8), 2091. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.98 (d) Similar variation trends of the output voltage and contact angle. (e) Relationship between the peak voltage and pH. (f) Relationship between the peak voltage and concentration. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from Park et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(4), 745. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.94 (g) Schematic and optical image of the droplet-driven TENG. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., Nature, 2020, 578(7795), 392. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.99 (h) Schematic of the reverse-electrowetting-based nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Krupenkin et al., Nat. Commun., 2011, 2(1), 448. Copyright 2011 Springer Nature.100 (i) Schematic of a “bubbler”. Reproduced with permission from Hsu et al., Sci. Rep., 2011, 5(1), 16537. Copyright 2011 Springer Nature.101 (j) Mechanism (left) and corresponding voltage curve (right) of water-droplet-driven TENG. (k) Influence of inclination angle on the voltage and current. (j and k) Reproduced with permission from Lee et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 579. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.102	 
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the change in ions in the Stern layer, potential difference, and hole concentration during the process of inserting and pulling. (b) Voltage at different positions of the graphene sheet during the process of inserting. (c) Equivalent circuit of (a). (d) Relationship between the number of graphene layers and voltage. (e) Relationship between the peak voltage and immersion velocity. The change rate in peak voltage with the immersion velocity decreases when the velocity exceeds 5.5 cm s−1. (f) Response of the induced voltage with respect to the concentration. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from Yin et al., Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3582. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.27 (g) Schematic of the flow of electrons. (h) Relationship between the peak voltage and velocity. As the velocity increases, the peak voltage gradually reaches saturation. The pulling process generates a higher voltage than the inserting process. Pulling graphene out of the liquid level generates a much higher voltage than pulling graphene to the liquid level. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Fei et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 656. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.114 (i) Mechanism of the freestanding-mode TENG. (j) Relationship between the short-circuit current and aspect ratio. (i and j) Reproduced with permission from Zhu et al., ACS Nano, 2014, 8(6), 6031. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.115	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a waving-driven nanogenerator. (b) Effect of contact frequency and solution on the current density. (c) Effect of contact frequency and solution on the charge density. (d) Effect of temperature on the current density. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from Lin et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(48), 12545. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.25 (e) Mechanism of LM TENG. (f) Influence of liquid metal (mercury and gallium) on charge and charge density. (g) Residue of gallium. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from Tang et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(24), 3718. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.55 (h) Contact angles of different surface structures. (i) Experimental value (dots) and calculated value (colored rectangles) of the current. (j) Experimental value (dots) and calculated value (colored rectangles) of the voltage. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from Lee et al., Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 315. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.30 (k) Schematic of NI TENG. Reproduced with permission from Zhao et al., ACS Nano, 2018, 12(5), 4280. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.118 (l) Schematic of capillary pressure and optical image of water penetration under different gaps. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 1126. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.119	 
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the device for measuring the streaming potential. (b) Relationship between the streaming current and pressure. Streaming current increases with an increase in pressure. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from Heyden et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95(11), 116104. Copyright 2005 American Physical Society.22 (c) Schematic of the slip velocity and slip length. Reproduced with permission from Malekidelarestaqi et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 703, 72. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.123 (d) Schematic of the charge distribution of an oil-filled surface. (e) Effect of different filling oils on the voltage. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from Fan et al., Langmuir, 2019, 35(18), 6203. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.31 (f) Schematic of a portable nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Saha et al., ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(9), 5850. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.125 (g) Structure of a hybridized TENG. (h) Mechanism of the hybridized TENG. (i) Effect of water-flow rate on the current and voltage. (g–i) Reproduced with permission from Cheng et al., ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1932. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.127	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the Ni–Al LDH nanogenerator. (b) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the periodic change in wind velocity between 0 and 0.28 m s−1. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from Sun et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 269. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.130 (c) Electricity generation induced by a piece of wood. (d) Response of the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current toward different wood species. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Zhou et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11232. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.131	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Basic mechanism of a moisture-induced nanogenerator. (b) Schematic and mechanism of the nanogenerator consisting of a graphene oxide layer and a moisture-insulation substrate. Reproduced with permission from Liang et al., Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1730. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.138 (c) Mechanism of electricity generation induced by the asymmetric ionic aerogel of biological nanofibrils. (d) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the thickness ratio. (e) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the aerogel porosity. (f) Response of the open-circuit voltage to the aerogel thickness. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from Yang et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104610. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.139	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the graphene field-effect transistor. Reproduced with permission from Newaz et al., Nano Lett., 2012, 12(6), 2931. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.47 (b) Schematic of the liquid–solid TENG. (c) Relationship between Iinterface and dopamine concentration. (d) Relationship between ITENG and dopamine concentration. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from Jiang et al., Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(39), 1902793. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.141 (e) Schematic diagram of an ion-detection device. (f) Repair effect of HCl solution on the device. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from Yoon et al., Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 1806268. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.142 (g) Schematic of the MAT nanogenerator. (h) Response of the EGP (voltage and current) to the motion amplitude of the liquid column (left) and frequency of rotary cylinder (right). (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Vo et al., International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 2019, 6(4), 741. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.143 (i) Linear relationship between the voltage and water temperature. Reproduced with permission from Xiong et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 584. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.144 (j) Schematic of the liquid (left) and gas (right) sensors. (k) Effect of the capillary tube diameter and flow rate on the voltage. (j and k) Reproduced with permission from Chen et al., ACS Nano, 2016, 10(8), 8104. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.48	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Mechanism of an all-weather working nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Tang et al., Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 818. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.152 (b) Schematic and switching circuit of the MM TENG. Reproduced with permission from Yoo et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 424. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.153 (c) Schematic of the LLN. (d) EGP of LLN under different conditions. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Dao et al., J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227388. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.154 (e) Schematic of the unsteady flow system. (f) Mechanism of the sP Cell. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from Ahn et al., Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104269. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.155 (g) Schematic of LS nanogenerator. (h) SOS system powered by an LS nanogenerator. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from Li et al., Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(21), 1800705. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.51 (i) Air quality monitoring device based on water-evaporation-driven nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission from Zhong et al., Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 52. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.158	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Optical image of a cotton glove combined with a WTEG to power LEDs. Reproduced with permission from Xiong et al., Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(21), 1701243. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.161 (b) Optical image of LM-nanogenerator-based shoes and bracelets. Reproduced with permission from Yang et al., ACS Nano, 2018, 12(2), 2027. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.52 (c) Circuit diagram of a self-cleaning raincoat. (d) Optical image of the self-cleaning raincoat powering a liquid crystal display for ∼300 s. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(35), 1803117. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.34 (e) Biological-nanogenerator-based antimicrobial mask. Reproduced with permission from Li et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(32), 1901798. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.162 (f) Optical image of SETEY powering an LCD under water. Reproduced with permission from Gong et al., Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 868. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.163	 


Droplet	SLIPS	1.2 × 103	0.02	2	DI water	Coupling effect	
97

Droplet	PTFE/ZnO	16 × 103	10	76	DI water	Coupling effect	
102

Droplet	HDFS coating layer	151 × 103	—	—	DI water	Coupling effect	
92

Droplet	Hydrophobic spray	13.4 × 103	2.1	2.8	DI water	Coupling effect	
91

Droplet	Amphiphobic layered PTFE	100 × 103	200	245.2	Simulated rainwater	Coupling effect	
34

Droplet	PTFE	143.5 × 103	270	50.1 × 103	Tap water (3.1 mM)	Coupling effect	
99

Droplet	SiO2(silanization)/nano silicon pillar	64.7	0.0935	0.546	DI water	Coupling effect	
95

Droplet	Perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane	190	0.21	0.373 μW g−1	0.01 M NaCl	Coupling effect	
88

Droplet	Graphene	450	4.8	0.78	0.6 M NaCl	Dynamic EDL	
54

Droplet	MOS2	5 × 103	—	—	1 M NaCl	Dynamic EDL	
90

Droplet	Ta2O5 coated with cytop	—	—	1 × 106	Hg	Reverse electrowetting	
100

Droplet	Cytop/Al2O3	—	—	110 × 103	Hg	Reverse electrowetting	
107

Evaporation	Three-dimensional graphene	∼ 280	∼ 62	∼ 9 × 106 mW m−3	0.1 M NaCl	Dynamic EDL	
126

Evaporation	Ni–Al layered double hydroxides	700	1.3 × 103	16.1 × 103 mW m−3	DI water	Evaporation	
130

Evaporation	Surface functional carbon nanoparticles	3 × 103	1.5	9	DI water	Evaporation	
129

Flowing	1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane modified PVDF	20 × 103	20	4	DI water	Coupling effect	
49

Flowing	PVDF/biaxially oriented polypropylene	29.7 × 103	2.4	—	Tap water	Coupling effect	
155

Flowing	Porous PVDF	20.93 × 103	1.67	12.53	Tap water	Coupling effect	
156

Flowing	PTFE	—	—	200 × 103	Tap water	Coupling effect	
26

Flowing	Silica nanoparticles	2.3 × 103	2.6	151	DI water	Dynamic EDL	
125

Moisture	Graphene oxide	2 × 103	0.22	270	Water	Moisture	
138

Moisture	Graphene oxide	260	—	10 × 103	Water	Moisture	
133

Moisture	Porous carbon film	68	0.003	—	Water	Moisture	
11

Moisture	Graphene oxide	30	—	4.2	Water	Moisture	
132

Waving	PTFE	2.6 × 103	3	1.15 × 103	DI water	Coupling effect	
119

Waving	Etched PTFE	—	13.5	147.14	DI water	Coupling effect	
118

Waving	Kapton	679 × 103	9	6.7 × 103	Mercury	Coupling effect	
55

Waving	PDMS pyramid array	52 × 103	—	130	Tap water/0.6 M NaCl	Coupling effect	
25

Waving	Graphene	1 × 103	—	1.6	0.01 M NaCl	Dynamic EDL	
114

Waving	Graphene	100	11	0.55	0.6 M NaCl	Dynamic EDL	
27


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
