Improved efficiency of photovoltaics based on CdSe nanorods and poly(3-hexylthiophene) nanofibers  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B604734N View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B604734N
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557-3560Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsImproved efficiency of photovoltaics based on CdSe nanorods and poly(3-hexylthiophene) nanofibers

        
          
            Baoquan 
            Sun
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Neil C. 
            Greenham
          
        
      *
      Cavendish Laboratory, Madingley Road, Cambridge, UK CB3 0HE. E-mail: ncg11@cam.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 1223 764515;   Tel: +44 1223 766301
Received 
       (in CAMBS) 
      31st March 2006
    , Accepted 17th May 2006First published on 30th May 2006AbstractWe present photovoltaic devices based on a blend of the conjugated polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with cadmium selenide nanorods, where the solvent for film deposition has been carefully chosen to optimize the film morphology. Using 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB), which has a high boiling point, as solvent for P3HT it is possible to obtain a fibrilar morphology, providing extended pathways for hole transport. Blend devices fabricated using this solvent gave solar power conversion efficiencies of 2.6%. This indicates that efficient transport of electrons and holes is achieved in these films, allowing them to operate effectively at solar illumination intensities.
Introduction
Thin-film photovoltaic devices based on solution-processable composites of donor and acceptor materials have recently achieved significant improvements in efficiency.1 The challenge in these devices is to achieve a large area of interface between the donor and acceptor materials in order to dissociate excitons efficiently, whilst simultaneously providing connected pathways by which electrons and holes can be transported to the electrodes within the acceptor and donor materials, respectively. Composite materials comprising a conjugated polymer as the electron donor and solution-processable inorganic nanoparticles as the electron acceptor are attractive for photovoltaic systems since efficient electron transfer occurs at the organic/inorganic interface.2 The ability to control the shape of the nanoparticles allows electron transport to be optimized, for example using nanorods instead of spherical nanoparticles in order to reduce the number of inter-particle hops required for electron extraction.3 Recently, CdSe tetrapods have been used to give further improvement in the transport of electrons perpendicular to the plane of the film.4,5 The device performance depends not only on the shape of the nanoparticles, but also on the arrangement of the nanoparticles within the film. Careful control of the film morphology is therefore required, for example by choice of solvent and deposition conditions.5,6
Although recent attention has focused on optimizing electron transport in polymer/nanoparticle devices, the efficient transport of holes is also important to avoid carrier recombination within the device. This requires a polymer with a reasonably high hole mobility, and a morphology which provides connected pathways to the hole-collecting electrode. One hole-transporting polymer which has been used in polymer/nanoparticle devices is regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). P3HT exhibits strong π–π stacking, and can show high hole mobilities (up to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1), but its mobility is highly dependent on its crystallinity, on the orientation of the microcrystallites with respect to the transport direction,7 and on its molecular weight.8 Under certain processing conditions, P3HT can form fibrils of width approximately 15 nm, with thicknesses of a few nanometers and lengths of several microns.9 The polymer chains lie parallel to the width of the fibrils, giving good π–π stacking along the length of the fibril. Individual fibrils have been shown to exhibit high hole mobilities along their length.10 A fibrilar morphology can also be obtained in dense films by spin-coating from a slow-evaporating solvent, giving field-effect transistors with mobilities as high as 0.12 cm2 V−1 s−1.11 The presence of P3HT fibrils has been shown to give improved performance in photovoltaic devices using a solution-processable C60 derivative as the electron acceptor.12 In this paper we show that by careful choice of the solvent used for spin-coating we can obtain films comprising CdSe nanorods and P3HT nanofibers. These films provide percolation pathways for both electrons and holes, leading to good efficiency in photovoltaic devices.
Experimental
The polymer used was poly(3-hexylthiophene) with a molecular weight Mw = 37 kD and a regioregularity of approximately 98% (Merck). To test the effects of processing conditions, the polymer was dissolved in chloroform, thiophene, or 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB). CdSe nanorods were synthesized by the method of Peng and Peng.13 The typical length and diameter of the rods were 65 and 5 nm, respectively. The rods were treated with pyridine to exchange the surface ligands, as described previously.4 The nanorod solution in chloroform/pyridine was combined with the polymer solutions to give the appropriate ratio of polymer to CdSe. Films for transmission electron microscope (TEM) measurements were formed by drop-casting of pristine polymer or blend solutions onto carbon-coated copper grids. Films for AFM and optical measurements were formed by spin-coating onto quartz substrates, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 30 min under nitrogen atmosphere.
Photovoltaic devices were fabricated using indium tin oxide-coated glass substrates covered by a layer of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) doped with polystyrenesulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS). The active layer was deposited by spin-coating and annealed at 150 °C for 30 min, followed by thermal evaporation of an aluminum electrode. Short-circuit external quantum efficiency action spectra were measured under a vacuum of 10−5 mbar. Power efficiency measurements under approximately AM1.5G conditions were performed using a solar simulator (Oriel Instruments). The device was encapsulated in epoxy resin for these measurements. Power efficiencies were corrected for spectral mismatch using the measured spectrum of the solar simulator and the action spectra of the device and the reference silicon cell. The uncorrected data overestimated the true AM1.5G efficiencies by approximately 10%. Finally, the intensity dependence of the quantum efficiency was measured using an argon ion laser at 514 nm.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows TEM images of polymer films drop-cast from 0.2 mg ml−1 solutions of P3HT in TCB, thiophene, and chloroform, along with AFM images of films fabricated by spin-coating from 10 mg ml−1 solutions. TCB has a much higher boiling point (219 °C) than chloroform (61 °C), and therefore evaporates more slowly. Thiophene is a better solvent for P3HT than chloroform or TCB, but has a boiling point (84 °C) slightly higher than that of chloroform. The films spin-coated from TCB show clear evidence for the formation of a fibrilar structure, with individual fibrils extending over several microns. The films deposited from thiophene have a rather coarser morphology than films spin-coated from chloroform, but do not show evidence for fibril formation. The structures seen in the AFM images are consistent with those previously reported.11Fig. 2a shows a TEM image of the CdSe nanorods used in this work.
 Fig. 1  Tapping-mode AFM images showing the surface topography of P3HT films deposited from (a) TCB, (b) thiophene, and (c) chloroform. The image size is 10 × 10 μm, and the height scale is 8 nm. TEM images of P3HT films deposited from (d) TCB, (e) thiophene, and (f) chloroform, as described in the text. 
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of CdSe nanorods. (b) TEM image of a P3HT/CdSe nanorod blend film, with a CdSe concentration of 10% by weight. 
It is difficult to image any P3HT fibrils which may be present in the spin-coated films with high nanoparticle concentrations which are used for devices. The surfaces measured by AFM (Fig. 3) are too rough, and the highly scattering CdSe makes it impossible to resolve features in the polymer in TEM. We have therefore made TEM measurements on films drop-cast from dilute solution with 10% nanoparticle concentration by weight, as shown in Fig. 2b. These films clearly show fibrilar structures in the P3HT, which demonstrates that it is still possible to achieve self-ordering of the P3HT in the presence of pyridine and nanoparticles. The AFM images of films with high nanoparticle concentrations (Fig. 3) do not show any gross changes in the structure of phase separation between the nanoparticles and the polymer when the spin-coating solvent is changed. There is, however, an increase in the surface roughness with the boiling point of the solvent, with root mean squared roughness of 4.5, 5.4 and 7.3 nm for chloroform, thipohene and TCB, respectively. This is consistent with the increased drying time allowing the formation of larger-scale structures.
 Fig. 3  Tapping mode AFM topography images of P3HT/CdSe nanorod blend films with a CdSe concentration of 90% by weight. The films were deposited from (a) TCB, (b) thiophene and (c) chloroform. The image size is 10 × 10 μm, and the height scale is 40 nm. 

Fig. 4a shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) action spectra for devices fabricated using TCB, thiophene and chloroform. The device fabricated using TCB had a maximum EQE of 70% at 480 nm, a factor of 1.8 larger than the peak EQE of the device fabricated using chloroform (39% at 515 nm). The slight differences in shape of the action spectra between the devices could be due to a variation in the vertical structure of the blend.5Fig. 4b shows the current density as a function of voltage under simulated solar illumination for P3HT/CdSe devices using different solvents. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) of these devices are shown in Table 1. Although the device fabricated using chloroform has a slightly larger Voc, the increase in Jsc and fill factor in the device fabricated using TCB leads to a significantly improved power conversion efficiency of 2.9%. Correcting for spectral mismatch between our solar simulator and the true AM1.5G spectrum gives an AM1.5G power conversion efficiency of 2.6%.
 Fig. 4  (a) Short-circuit EQE action spectra of photovoltaic devices fabricated from a blend of 90% (w/w) CdSe nanorods and P3HT using different solvents: chloroform (solid line), thiophene (dashed line) and TCB (dotted line). (b) Current density versus voltage for the same devices under simulated AM1.5G illumination at an intensity of 92 mW cm−2. 
Table 1 The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill-factor (FF) and solar power conversion efficiency (η) for photovoltaic devices under simulated AM1.5G light conditions (not corrected for spectral mismatch). The illumination intensity was 92 mW cm−2




Solvent

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

FF


η





Chloroform
0.66
−6.12
0.41
1.8%


Thiophene
0.60
−8.44
0.45
2.4%


TCB
0.62
−8.79
0.50
2.9%





Fig. 5 shows the EQE as a function of incident light intensity for devices fabricated from different solvents. This type of device typically shows a lower quantum efficiency under solar illumination intensities than at low intensities, which can limit solar power conversion efficiencies.14 The EQE of the device fabricated using chloroform shows a steady fall-off with intensity above 0.1 mW cm−2, whereas the device fabricated using TCB retains a high efficiency at intensities up to 100 mW cm−2. The device fabricated using thiophene shows only a modest fall-off in efficiency at high intensities. Its power conversion efficiency under AM1.5G illumination is smaller than that of the device fabricated using TCB, predominantly due to the poorer fill factor. The fall-off of efficiency at high intensities is a signature of poor charge carrier transport within the device, leading to high carrier densities. High charge densities can either lead to enhanced bimolecular recombination, or can redistribute the electric field within the device so as to suppress the field-assisted separation of the charge pairs generated by photoinduced charge transfer. The good high-intensity performance of the device fabricated using TCB is consistent with good hole transport in the P3HT component within the film.
 Fig. 5  Short circuit external quantum efficiency as a function of incident light intensity for devices deposited using TCB (circles), thiophene (triangles) and chloroform (squares). Excitation was from an argon ion laser at 514 nm. 
Conclusions
We have shown that the efficiency of photovoltaic devices based on P3HT and CdSe nanorods can be improved by using a high boiling point solvent for film deposition. Using 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as the solvent, we attain a solar power conversion efficiency of 2.6% under AM1.5G conditions. The increased drying time allows larger-scale self-organized features to form in the P3HT, improving hole transport within the device.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Juifeng Chang for valuable discussions and to Merck KGaA for kindly supplying the poly(3-hexylthiophene). This work was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, UK.
References
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 17628 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whiting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveldvoss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. Seleeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2175 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Ihn, J. Moulton and P. Smith, J. Polym. Sci., Part B, 1993, 31, 735 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Polym. Sci., Part B, 2003, 41, 2674 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Chang, B. Q. Sun, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, T. I. Solling, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4772 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3343 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, N. Teclemariam, D. J. Milliron, A. P. Alivisatos and K. W. Barnham, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 115326 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2006
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Tapping-mode AFM images showing the surface topography of P3HT films deposited from (a) TCB, (b) thiophene, and (c) chloroform. The image size is 10 × 10 μm, and the height scale is 8 nm. TEM images of P3HT films deposited from (d) TCB, (e) thiophene, and (f) chloroform, as described in the text.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of CdSe nanorods. (b) TEM image of a P3HT/CdSe nanorod blend film, with a CdSe concentration of 10% by weight.	 

 	Fig. 3  Tapping mode AFM topography images of P3HT/CdSe nanorod blend films with a CdSe concentration of 90% by weight. The films were deposited from (a) TCB, (b) thiophene and (c) chloroform. The image size is 10 × 10 μm, and the height scale is 40 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Short-circuit EQE action spectra of photovoltaic devices fabricated from a blend of 90% (w/w) CdSe nanorods and P3HT using different solvents: chloroform (solid line), thiophene (dashed line) and TCB (dotted line). (b) Current density versus voltage for the same devices under simulated AM1.5G illumination at an intensity of 92 mW cm−2.	 

Chloroform	0.66	−6.12	0.41	1.8%
Thiophene	0.60	−8.44	0.45	2.4%
TCB	0.62	−8.79	0.50	2.9%

 	Fig. 5  Short circuit external quantum efficiency as a function of incident light intensity for devices deposited using TCB (circles), thiophene (triangles) and chloroform (squares). Excitation was from an argon ion laser at 514 nm.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2006
