Graphene aerogels for efficient energy storage and conversion  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE03031B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE03031B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 772-799Graphene aerogels for efficient energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Jiajun 
            Mao†
a, 
      
        
          
            James 
            Iocozzia†
b, 
      
        
          
            Jianying 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Meng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuekun 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zhiqun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *b
aNational Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, College of Textile and Clothing Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: yklai@suda.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA. E-mail: zhiqun.lin@mse.gatech.edu
Received 
      22nd October 2017
    , Accepted 22nd December 2017First published on 8th January 2018AbstractConcerns over air quality reduction resulting from burning fossil fuels have driven the development of clean and renewable energy sources. Supercapacitors, batteries and solar cells serve as eco-friendly energy storage and conversion systems vitally important for the sustainable development of human society. However, many diverse elements influence the performance of energy storage and conversion systems. The overall efficiency of systems depends on the specific structure and properties of incorporated functional materials. Carbon materials, such as graphene, are especially promising for materials development in the energy storage and conversion fields. Graphene, a two-dimensional (2D) carbon material only a single atom thick, has massless Dirac fermions (electron transport is governed by Dirac's equation), displays outstanding electrical conductivity, superior thermal conductivity and excellent mechanical properties. 2D free-standing graphene films and powders have paved the way for promising energy applications. Recently, much effort has been spent trying to improve the number of active sites in electrode materials within 3D network/aerogel structures derived from graphene. This is because graphene aerogels are promising materials for energy systems due to their porous hierarchical structure which affords rapid electron/ion transport, superior chemical and physical stability, and good cycle performance. This review aims to summarize the synthetic methods, mechanistic aspects, and energy storage and conversion applications of novel 3D network graphene, graphene derivatives and graphene-based materials. Areas of application include supercapacitors, Li-batteries, H2 and thermal energy storage, fuel cells and solar cells.
Jiajun Mao
Jiajun Mao is a postgraduate student co-supervised by Prof. Lai and Prof. Meng at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University since 2015. His current scientific interests are devoted to the fabrication of multifunctional porous aerogels for energy and environmental applications. He is a recipient of the 2017 National Scholarship for Postgraduate Students.
James Iocozzia
James Iocozzia is a graduate student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his Bachelor of Science in Polymer and Fiber Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 2012. His research interests include liquid crystals, nanocomposites and block copolymers. He is a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellow, a Graduate Student Presidential Fellow, an NSF EAPSI Fellow and a BIONIC Scholar.
Jianying Huang
Jianying Huang received her PhD degree in 2007 from the Department of Materials, Xiamen University. From 2007–2011, she worked as an Assistant Professor at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. After that, she moved to Muenster University as a visiting scholar. She is currently an Associate Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2013. Her research interests focus on the bio-inspired intelligent textile surfaces with special wettability, ATRP, click-chemistry, and energy & environmental materials.
Kai Meng
Kai Meng received his PhD degree from the College of Textiles, Donghua University in 2009. Thereafter, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University. He is currently an Associate Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2011. His research interests focus on the multifunctional fibers and fabrics, numerical simulation of fluid mechanics, flexible energy storage and conversion devices.
Yuekun Lai
Yuekun Lai received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. From 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. After that, he moved to Muenster University with Prof. Harald Fuchs and Prof. Lifeng Chi under the support of the Humboldt Foundation Scholarship of Germany. He is currently a Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2013. His research interests focus on bio-inspired intelligent surfaces with special wettability, and energy and environmental materials.
Zhiqun Lin
Zhiqun Lin is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his PhD in Polymer Science and Engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2002. His research interests include perovskite solar cells, polymer solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, hydrogen generation, lithium ion batteries, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, quantum dots (rods), conjugated polymers, block copolymers, polymer blends, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, surface and interfacial properties, multifunctional nanocrystals, and Janus nanostructures.

Broader context
Environmental pollution caused by the rapid consumption of fossil fuels has prompted investigation into alternative sources of efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable energy systems. Traditionally, noble metals and transition-metal oxides are the most wildly used electrode materials. However, their high price and associated toxicity hinder further development. The combination of the chemical properties and 3D network morphology which ensure excellent electron transport performance make graphene aerogels (GAs) ideal candidates for various future energy storage and conversion systems, e.g., supercapacitors, Li-batteries, fuel cells and solar cells. Moreover, the ultralow density and flexibility of 3D aerogels are beneficial for portable equipment and roll-to-roll processing. This review will briefly outline and compare various fabrication methods of GAs and detail the roles of GAs in energy systems. In addition, we will look into some critical engineering strategies that give rise to the electrochemical properties of 3D GAs such as enlarged surface area, tailored porosity, efficient separation of carriers, and chemical/physical modification. The creative points and trends detailed in this review will offer promising development directions for aerogels and other porous network structures as well as metal-free materials in energy storage and conversion systems.

1. Introduction
The environmental pollution caused by the rapid consumption of fossil fuels in many developing countries has prompted necessary investigation into alternative sources of energy. The rapid consumption of fossil fuels produces large amounts of toxic SOx, NOx, and other volatile organic compounds resulting in dangerous levels of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) as well as large amounts of greenhouse gases such as CO2, CH4, and chlorofluorocarbons.1–3 In conjunction with their non-renewable nature and increasingly limited easy availability, several estimates have concluded that our reserves may be depleted in as few as 100 years based on current consumption trends. Therefore the development of clean, low-cost, and sustainable energy sources cannot be more urgent.4–9 Supercapacitors, Li-batteries, fuel cells and solar cells are several green and renewable energy systems which have received various degrees of industrial success while also satisfying the energy requirements of modern life.10–14 However, there are many factors that influence the efficiency of these energy systems (i.e. the amount of electricity generated for a given amount of incident energy input). Maximizing the efficiency is one of the most important challenges dictating the success of any renewable energy technology and it is largely dependent on the structure and properties of candidate materials.
Nanotechnology takes advantage of the significant relationship between properties and structure size that occurs on the nanoscale in materials from 0D to 3D complexity. In addition the properties of nanostructured materials are often vastly different from familiar bulk counterparts. Possessing a single carbon atom thickness and massless Dirac fermions, sheet-like (2D) graphene derivatives have attracted great interest for energy applications due to their outstanding photoelectrochemical performance. With these in mind, the rational assembly of nano-sheets into macroscopic structures which afford large internal reactive areas and directed molecular transport are vital factors to realize the rapid development of energy storage and conversion. In contrast to 2D films, 3D network aerogel morphologies are a framework containing interconnected micro-/nanosheets while also possessing hierarchical pores on micro, meso, and macro scales. The micro and mesopores structures contribute to the high specific surface area and the macropores provide accessibility to the active surfaces. At the same time, the ultralow density and flexibility of 3D aerogels are beneficial for portable electronics affording excellent mechanical stability and high flexural strength. In addition to structure and morphology, the electronic and chemical properties are important in all applications. For example, graphene has a high specific surface area (∼2800 m2 g−1), superior electrical conductivity (∼106 S cm−1), excellent thermal conductivity (∼6000 W m−1 K−1), and ultra-low optical absorption (2.3%). When combined with other nano and micron materials, the resulting composites can combine desirable bulk properties and processability with the unique nanoscale properties described above.
Owing to their numerous conductive interconnections between 2D sheets, graphene aerogels and their composites are promising for various energy systems. Among energy storage devices, supercapacitors typically have high power densities and low energy densities (i.e. a small water jug with a large spout). In contrast, batteries typically have high energy densities but low power densities (i.e. a large water jug with a small spout). Ideal storage devices should possess high power and energy densities as well as quick charging/recharging, and long cycle life. Superior conductivity and specific graphene aerogel morphologies contribute to a qualitative leap in performance and applicability because the hierarchical porosity and high contact area satisfy the requirement for a large number of stored charges as well as the rapid transport of ions/electrons during the reversible charge/discharge processes. The robust graphene aerogel 3D network provides physical and chemical stability during repeated ion intercalation and deintercalation enabling long cycle lifetimes for graphene aerogel-based devices. For fuel cells or metal–air batteries, water splitting, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) are crucial half-electrochemical processes that occur. Noble metals (Pd, Au, and Pt) and transition-metal oxides (TiO2, and RuO2) are the most wildly used catalysts. However they are not ideal due to high costs as well as toxicity both of which greatly hinder their development. Owing to the large number of active sites, high conductivity and metal-free composition (i.e. low cost), graphene aerogel-based materials are attractive for electro-catalytic applications. In dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), graphene aerogels can serve as a counter electrode, a modifier for TiO2 inverse opal electrodes, and a solid state electrolyte possessing improved power conversion efficiencies due to its quick charge transfer capabilities.
This review will provide an in-depth understanding of graphene aerogel-based materials as they apply to energy systems (supercapacitors, Li-batteries, fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and solar cells). This work will briefly outline and compare various fabrication methods of graphene aerogels and detail the various advantages of graphene aerogels as they apply to each specific device area. In addition, we will look into some critical engineering strategies that give rise to the excellent properties of 3D graphene aerogels such as enlarged surface area, tailored porosity and efficient separation of carriers. Graphene aerogels represent a high performance, low-cost material for near future energy technologies.
2. Fabrication of graphene aerogels
The realization of high performance graphene materials immediately necessitates the nanoscale exfoliation of neighboring sheets into individual layers prior to incorporation into any macrostructure. This section details significant reports dealing with the improvement in the quantity and quality of graphene layers. Many techniques including mechanical stripping,15 oxidation–reduction method,16 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD),17 have been proposed to construct carbon-based nanomaterials. The latter two are the most widely used techniques. The oxidation–reduction method first converts graphite into graphite/graphene oxide through the well-known Hummers’ method. After intermediate exfoliation or ultrasonication to produce graphene oxide (GO), it is then reduced by hydrazine hydrate, vitamin C, isocyanic acid or thermally to yield graphene. CVD harnesses a different carbon source to grow graphene on a variety of substrates such as metallic (Cu, Ni, Co, Fe) or planar nonmetallic surfaces (SiO2, Si3N4, SrTiO3, NaCl). During a typical CVD treatment, hydrocarbon precursors are pyrolyzed to carbon radicals when they pass through the hot zone and then deposited on the surface where self-limited growth occurs to form a single-layer or few-layer graphene on substrates. Compared to the oxidation–reduction technique, CVD growth has several including an ordered structure, and excellent electronic properties of the resulting graphene nanostructures. However, it requires an extra transfer process to put the graphene layer onto other desired substrates, often accompanied with lower yields and reduced quality.
2D materials manufactured using freestanding graphene nanosheets and modified graphene can be used in sensors, electro chemistry, photocatalysis and filtration. These materials have attracted great interest in recent years.18–21 However, there are few reviews related to graphene aerogels which have stable 3D networks and high pore volumes in contrast to conventional graphene films. Monte and coworkers summarized the synthesis and application of carbon nanotubes and graphene aerogels.22 Chen and coworkers investigated the synthesis, properties and application of 3D graphene networks.23 Building on this previous work, we summarize multiple fabrication techniques for the rational construction of 3D graphene aerogels. Self-assembly strategies are a common “bottom-up” approach. Graphene nanosheets serve as the building blocks for self-assembly to obtain 3D porous networks. Shi et al. successfully fabricated mechanically strong, electrically conductive and thermally stable graphene aerogels by a hydrothermal process (Fig. 1a). This is a convenient one-step method.24 However, hydrothermal processes typically occur in a Teflon-lined autoclave requiring high pressures. This hinders large scale synthesis as it is a batch rather than continuous process. Yan et al. prepared graphene aerogels by the mild chemical reduction of GO with various reducing agents under atmospheric pressure in an open system. The resulting graphene aerogels showed good mechanical strength, low density and high electrical conductivity facilitating large scale fabrication (Fig. 1c).25 Self-assembly is possible because of the abundance of oxygen-containing functional groups on graphene oxide which enable interaction between various sheets. These groups enhance the presence of π–π stacking among the graphene layers and make the graphene nanosheets hydrophobic. Yu et al. reported graphene aerogels induced by Fe(II) ions at different pH values to obtain free-standing graphene/R-FeOOH and magnetic graphene/Fe3O4 aerogels with different functionalities for different applications (Fig. 1b).26 3D graphene aerogels with embedded nanoparticles (NPs) endow additional functionalities in graphene aerogels. Feng et al. hydrothermally assembled GO dispersions and iron acetate to enable the nucleation and growth of Fe3O4 nanoparticles on the graphene surface to yield high surface area Fe3O4/graphene aerogel composites (Fig. 1d).27 Similarly, other materials have been decorated internally and externally onto graphene aerogels such as hierarchical porous MOFs@GA.28
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the various techniques employed for the construction of graphene aerogels with corresponding SEM images: (a) hydrothermal reduction self-assembly;24 (b) metal ion-induced self-assembly.26 (c) Direct chemical reduction self-assembly;25 (d) hydrothermal self-assembly of Fe3O4-containing graphene aerogels.27 
Self-assembly strategies offer a convenient and scalable process to manufacture graphene aerogels with good electrical conductivity, and thermal stability. Cross-linkers can also be used to link the graphene layers to form 3D aerogels via electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, and covalent bonding. Cross-linkers provide a more convenient route than direct cryodesiccation from the aqueous state. Gao et al. constructed 3D graphene frameworks with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) using sol cryodesiccation and carbonization. The aerogel had very low density, excellent thermal stability and high absorption (Fig. 2a).29 Biopolymers coated with graphene are also beneficial due to their elasticity and fatigue resistance in resulting aerogels. Yu et al. synthesized lamellar chitosan–graphene oxide scaffolds (CS–GO) from a homogeneous mixture via bidirectional freezing and annealing. The resulting composite showed high compressibility, super-elasticity, and low density (Fig. 2b).30 Other cross-linkers, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate,31 cellulose,32 and resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF),33 have also been reported.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of the various fabrication processes and SEM images of the resulting graphene aerogel morphologies. Synthesis can include (a) carbon nanotube cross-linkers,29 (b) chitosan cross-linkers,30 (c) CVD-growth with Ni foam,34 (d) substrate-free CVD growth,35 and (e) 3D printing.36 
Normally, graphene aerogels prepared by self-assembly and cross-linking start with the reduction of graphene oxide. This typically leads to a large number of surface defects and unreduced oxygen-containing groups. CVD-growth is an alternative method that can produce more pristine graphene materials. Zhang et al. obtained high-quality 3D graphene networks using Ni foam templates by the ethanol-CVD method (Fig. 2c).34 Templated CVD-growth produces a decent interconnectivity, but the mechanical strength is poor because of the soft pristine graphene framework. Bando et al. developed a template-free strategy for producing 3D graphene aerogel. The frameworks are tightly connected and supported by robust graphitic microstructures (Fig. 2d).35 In both the templated and template-free strategies, it is possible to ensure that the carbon source converts into 3D graphene aerogel network structures. However, the process is difficult to scale-up. Recently, a 3D printing technique also known as direct ink writing has been applied in the construction of 3D cellular architectures. Worsley et al. constructed graphene aerogels by a graphene-based direct ink writing process. The as-prepared aerogels were lightweight, highly conductive and highly compressible (Fig. 2e).36
3. Mechanisms and roles of graphene aerogels in energy storage
Energy storage technology is especially important for mobile applications. For example, cell phone batteries require high energy densities and quick-charging times. Remote controlled drones and electric vehicles also require high gravimetric energy densities and have developed significantly due to their shrinking costs and improved safety. Both supercapacitors and batteries are essential electrochemical energy storage devices that have attracted great attention due to the significant potential improvements that remain. Graphene aerogels and their derivatives functionalized with metal oxides and conductive polymers have been widely used in supercapacitors and batteries.
3.1 Supercapacitors
A supercapacitor is one kind of energy storage device filling the gap between batteries and conventional capacitors possessing higher energy densities than conventional capacitors and higher power densities than batteries. Early capacitor designs were composed of a glass insulating medium covered with foil. More recently, mica, ceramic and polystyrene have largely replaced glass as an insulating medium. Double-layer capacitors appeared in 1957 when General Electric filed the first patent followed by a SOHIO patent about fundamental varieties of supercapacitors in 1962. NEC fabricated market-oriented capacitors in the 1970s and Panasonic manufactured two different supercapacitors including button type and spiral type around the same time. ELIT packaged the first asymmetric capacitors with nickel–metal hydride as the cathode, KOH as the electrolyte, and activated carbon as the anode. Subsequently, multiple supercapacitor types have been optimized for highly specific capacitance and output voltages. Electrochemical adsorption/desorption and redox reactions contribute to the energy storage in supercapacitors. The two storage approaches are highly reversible even at high numbers of charge–discharge cycles on the order of hundreds of millions. They have higher power densities on the order of 300–5000 kW kg−1 which are 5–10 times that of Li-ion batteries. Supercapacitors also have superior cycling stability with lifetimes 10–100 times that of batteries. To date, supercapacitors have been widely used in portable electronic devices, electric vehicles, aerospace, and national defense fields for their excellent cycle stability, safety, and rapid charge–discharge performance.

3.1.1 Double-layer capacitors. 
Double-layer capacitors (DLCs) are energy storage devices with a double electric layer interface formed between the electrode-active materials and electrolyte for charge storage.37,38 While an external electric field is applied, the positive and negative electrodes, which have stored the corresponding positive and negative charges, gather the opposite ions from the electrolyte to balance the electric field. The potential difference resulting from the migration of ions is the mechanism for energy storage. This is a classical physical model of supercapacitors. They are attractive because they possess excellent stability and circulation. The charging process of double-layer capacitors is described by the following equations and Scheme 1:Cathode: Cs + A− → Cs‖A− + eAnode: Cs + B+ + e → B+‖CsCs + Cs + A−B+ → Cs‖A− + B+‖Cswhere Cs is the surface of the electrodes, “‖” is the double-layer cell between the electrodes and electrolyte, and A− and B+ represent the anion and cation.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of typical double layer capacitors (DLC). 
The primary theoretical model was put forward by Helmholtz with the capacitance dictated by the following equation:  where ε0 is the internal dielectric constant, εr is the vacuum dielectric constant, A is the surface area of the electrode, and d is the effective diameter of the cell. This capacitance model was further perfected by dividing the interface of the electrode active materials and electrolyte into a close layer (Cc) which is the layer occurring on polarization at the electrode–electrolyte interface and diffusion layer (Cdiff) which is the layer forming from the accumulation of ions close to the electrode surface. In this framework, a double-layer capacitor is essentially equal to a series connection of a close layer capacitor and diffusion layer capacitor as follows:  The cell votage (V) plays a significant role both in the specific energy and the power of supercapacitors because the stored energy (E) and power (P) are related to the voltage by the following:  Despite the fact that aqueous alkaline and acid solutions possess high ionic conductivity and low cost, organic electrolytes are still widely utilized because they can endure higher operation voltages and thus store more energy and have larger power (alkaline or acid electrolytes ∼1.23 V, organic electrolytes ∼2.7 V).
Electrode interfacial contact, electrode active material type, and their Brunauer–Emmett–Teller specific surface (BET) are key properties in capacitor research.39,40 Graphene is a promising electrode material due to its high BET and conductivity.41–44 Ruoff et al. developed symmetrical double-layer capacitors with modified hydrazine hydrate-reduced graphene. The graphene BET reached 705 m2 g−1 with a capacitance of 135 F g−1. Such high performance measures are a testament to graphene's applicability in supercapacitors.37
However, graphene powders and films have a tendency to aggregate, often leading to lower BET values. Graphene aerogel, with its high pore volume, enhances the contact area between the network and electrolyte. Shi et al. synthesized graphene hydrogels via a hydrothermal method. Capacitance values reached as high as 160 F g−1 and were attributed to the macroporous 3D network structure of the graphene.24 Subsequently, the hydrogel was further reduced by hydrazine leading to an increased capacitance of 222 F g−1.45 The performance enhancement is attributed to the reduction of oxygen-containing groups which enhance the conductivity from 0.005 S cm−1 to 0.032 S cm−1. A higher conductivity represents a higher electronic mobility and higher output power potential. Similarly, Luand et al. developed graphene aerogels with ethylenediamine (EDA) cross-links which when reduced achieved conductivities of 13.51 S cm−1 and specific capacitances of 231 F g−1.46 In addition, recent work has shown that thermal treatment under inert gasses can yield highly-conductive graphene aerogels analogous to chemical reduction.47–49 Doping graphene with one or several elements such as S, N, B, and P can restructure the graphene crystal lattice and locally manipulate the electronic structures resulting in beneficial chemical and physical changes that can improve the performance of graphene.50–53 To date, nitrogen is the most popular dopant due to its abundance and ease of incorporation. There are a variety of nitrogen units that can form when graphene is treated with nitrogen plasma including pyridine, pyrrole and nitrogen-substituted graphene. Yu et al. used organic amine as the nitrogen source to produce nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (N-GA) by hydrothermal synthesis. Resulting devices had a high power density of 205.0 kW kg−1 at 185.0 A g−1 (Fig. 3d–h).54 Liu et al. prepared hierarchical porous nitrogen-doped GA by carbonizing in the presence of chitosan (nitrogen-containing biopolymer derivative). The resulting supercapacitors had a specific capacitance of 197 F g−1.55 Kang et al. employed nitrogen plasma treatment to dope the graphene basal planes to yield capacitances of 280 F g−1 (Fig. 3a–c) with excellent cycle life (>200000 cycles).51
 Fig. 3  Plasma treatment to produce N-doped graphene:51 (a) schematic illustration of N-doped moieties that can be found in graphene when treated with nitrogen plasma. (b) Gravimetric capacitances as a function of current density with inset photograph of an LED powered by a capacitor. (c) Comparison of specific capacitances between pristine and N-doped graphene (synthesized by hydrothermal method). (d) Schematic illustration of N-doped graphene synthesis by a hydrothermal method. (e) CV curves as a function of scan rates. (f) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves. (g) Specific capacitance as a function of current density. (h) Nyquist plots showing real and imaginary components of resistance.54 
High specific surface area can increase the effective contact area between the electrode materials and electrolyte to reduce the transfer distance for the electron charge and enhance the power density.56,57 When increasing the BET, activation of graphene aerogel was a great way to increase the porous structure. Since KOH has a strong etching effect on carbon materials, Ruffo et al. activated graphene with KOH to increase the porosity. The BET of etched graphene reached 3100 m2 g−1, which exceed the theoretical BET of graphene (2800 m2 g−1). When incorporated into a modified graphene supercapacitor, energy densities as high as 70 W h kg−1 were observed.58 Lei et al. reported the activation of graphene aerogel with phosphoric acid to realize a specific capacitance of 204 F g−1 (Fig. 4).59 CVD-growth could produce few-layer graphene with no cracks or collapses. This contributed to higher BETs and conductivities than aerogels prepared by the oxidation–reduction method.17,60 Zhang et al. deposited graphene aerogel on Ni foam with a BET of 463 m2 g−1 and conductivity of 71.4 S m−1 affording a specific capacitance of 366 F at 2 A g−1.61 Bando et al. reported the preparation of high-power/high-energy GA-based supercapacitors through a substrate-free sugar blowing process to significantly increase the BET of the electrode.35
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for synthesis and acid activation of GA and (b) SEM of actived GA. (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm. (d) Charge–discharge curves showing high stability up to 10000 cycles. (e) Cycling performance of various graphene aerogel-based supercapacitors. (f) Specific capacitance of activated GA supercapacitors using different concentrations of H3PO4.59 
In addition to having a high BET, the size and distribution of pores in graphene aerogels are also key factors dictating overall performance. Pores in graphene aerogels are divided into three categories: macropores (greater than 50 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm), and micropores (less than 2 nm). Each pore size plays specific roles within the cycling supercapacitor device. Macropores store electrolyte ions, mesopores offer electrolyte ion transport, and micropores enable charge accommodation.62,63 During activation, macropores are formed by the corrugations of the closely packed graphene layers, while micro and mesopores are directly formed by activation (i.e., etching). Song et al. prepared well-developed porous structures by chemical activation using K2CO3 with excellent capacitance properties (300 F g−1).64 Park et al. used CO2 to activate graphene aerogels creating hierarchical trimodal porous graphene aerogels with a capacitance of 278.5 F g−1 and good cycle stability.65 Feng et al. described another way to produce macro and mesopores by adding tetraethoxysilane silica source (TEOS) and annealing at 800 °C. The resulting 3D graphene aerogel–SiO2 had large capacitances (226 F g−1), high charging rates, and good cycle stability (Fig. 5 a–d).66 Recently, Li et al. combined graphene oxide (GO) and graphene nanoplatelets in an ink for 3D printing of periodic macroporous graphene aerogels for supercapacitor applications. The supercapacitors using these GAs delivered a maximum power density of 4079.9 W kg−1 at 0.26 W h kg−1 (Fig. 5e–i).67
 Fig. 5  Macro and mesoporous graphene aerogels.66 (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis process and hierarchical pore structure formation (TEOS method). (b) CV curves collected in 1 M H2SO4 over different scan rates. (c) Specific capacitance for GA–mesoporous carbon (MC), GAs, MC, mixed GA–MC, 2D graphene mesoporous carbon, and graphene powder electrodes. (d) Cycling stability at 2 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte with inset showing periodic macroporous graphene aerogels. (e) Schematic illustration of fabrication approach. (f) CVs measured for different scan rates in 3 M KOH. (g) Charge–discharge profiles. (h) Gravimetric capacitance and capacitance retention. (i) Cycling performance at a scanning rate of 200 mV s−1.67 


3.1.2 Pseudo-capacitors. 
Although double-layer capacitors have excellent stability due to a largely physical process dominating the charge/discharge processes, their capacitance remains relatively low. Pseudo-capacitors rely on highly reversible electrochemical adsorption/desorption processes or oxidation–reduction reactions for storing energy. These reactions lead to deposition of materials onto the various surfaces and sub-surfaces.68,69 Pseudo-capacitors are usually asymmetric supercapacitors whose cathodes are typically carbon materials and anodes are metal oxides (MOs) or conducting polymers. The supercapacitor energy storage type can be classified into three groups: highly reversible chemical adsorption–desorption (such as oxygen adsorption onto Pt or Au), fast reversible redox reactions (such as transition metal oxides or hydroxides), and reversible electrochemical doping and de-doping (such as polyaniline or polypyrrole). The energy storage mechanism in metal oxide-based pseudo-capacitors in acidic (Scheme 2) or alkaline solution can be considered a rapid and reversible electron transfer process accompanied by an adsorption of protons onto the metal oxide surfaces according to the following equations:Acidic: MOx + H+ + e ↔ MOx−1(OH)Alkaline: MOx + OH− − e ↔ MOx(OH)When organic electrolytes are used to increase the operating voltage window, the charge storage mechanism is based on electrolyte cations C+ (K+, Na+) and proton incorporation on the surface.
 Scheme 2  Schematic diagram of pseudocapacitors, displaying the pseudo-capacitive behaviour of RuO2 in acidic solution where oxidation states of Ru range from (II) to (IV). 
GAs composed of hexagonally bonded sp2 C atoms have complementary electrochemical windows, a 3D network structure with high surface area, and large pores that prevent the aggregation of graphene layers while also facilitating ion diffusion for enhanced rate performance.70 Duan et al. successfully fabricated pseudo-capacitors with 3D graphene aerogel as the anode and aligned MnO2 on nickel foam as the cathode. The device exhibited a broad potential window of 0–2.0 V and a high energy density of 23.2 W h kg−1 with 83.4% retention after 5000 cycles (Fig. 6).71 Li et al. also manufactured high energy density pseudo-capacitors with a nickel oxide cathode and a reduced graphene aerogel anode.72 The device had a capacitance of 248 mF cm−2 and a high energy density of 39.9 W h kg−1 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. These electrodes directly grew on metals (or metal oxides) without the need for polymer binders. This likely contributed to the good electrochemical performance because most polymer binders are electrochemically inactive.
 Fig. 6  Pseudo-capacitor with graphene aerogel cathode and MnO2–nickel foam anode:71 (a) illustration of the layered construction of an asymmetric supercapacitor. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at different current densities. (c) Capacitance retention ratio as a function of discharge current densities. 
Transitional metal oxides or hydroxides have intriguing electronic, electrochemical, and electrocatalytic properties which can be applied in pseudo-capacitor reversible redox reactions to enable higher theoretical specific capacitances. However, high costs, limited stock, low electrical conductivity and cycle stability restrict the development of metal oxide supercapacitors. Incorporating metal oxides and hydroxides into conductive graphene aerogel networks can enhance the electrical conductivity, charge transfer, and structure stability.73–76 Chen et al. synthesized graphene aerogels via CVD growth and then incorporated cobalt oxide nanowires to form a composite for supercapacitors. The calculated specific capacitances were found to be 768, 618, 552, and 456 F g−1 at 10, 15, 20, and 30 A g−1, respectively.77 Jun et al. fabricated graphene/Co(OH)2 aerogels to improve the specific capacitances (∼1139 F g−1) and deliver higher energy densities (∼13.9 W h kg−1) and power densities (∼18 kW kg−1) (Fig. 7a–e).78 Binary metal oxide electrodes perform better than single-component electrodes due to their more accessible oxidation states and higher electrical conductivity.79 Xu et al. combined CoMoO4 and 3D graphene networks to produce super long-life pseudo-capacitors providing a high specific capacitance of 2098 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 (Fig. 7f–j).80 The nano-honeycomb structure possesses a close-packed geometry that compliments light weight and elastic materials.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a symmetric device. (b) CV curves at different scan rates. (c) Specific capacitance under different current densities. Charge–discharge curves using (d) Co(OH)2/graphene foam (GF) and (e) Co(OH)2/stainless steel (SS) electrodes.78 (f) Synthesis procedure for honeycomb structure. (g) Schematic illustration of layered configuration. (h) Cartoon showing two supercapacitors that can light up an LED indicator. (i) Charge–discharge voltage profiles. (j) Specific capacitances with a GA/CoMoO4 electrode.80 
Conducting polymers are important active materials for supercapacitors due to their synthetic flexibility and variety, low cost, stability and high redox pseudocapacitance.42,81–83 However, they also have several disadvantages such as mediocre conductivity and poor cycling stability due to swelling and shrinkage during the doping–dedoping process. Qu et al. fabricated polypyrrole/graphene aerogel composites to overcome these shortcomings. These highly compression-tolerant devices showed volumetric capacitances of 14 F cm−3 for uncompressed polypyrrole/GA which doubled to 28 F cm−3 when compressed by 50% (Fig. 8).84 This indicated no performance loss as a function of compression. These devices display high specific capacitances without obvious variation while compressive loads are applied and removed. The development of strain-tolerant polymer/GA network composites for supercapacitors such as these will enable the development of next generation advanced supercapacitors that are tough. Polyaniline hybrids are an alternative storage material amenable to large energy capture. Xiao et al. produced GA/polyaniline flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor hybrids that provided fast ionic conducting channels with a gravimetric energy density of 24.02 W h kg−1 at a power density of 400.33 W kg−1.85 The protonated nitrogen atoms of polyaniline could bind to metal ions forming binary metal oxide/polymer complexes. These binary nano-hybrid structures have good electrochemical properties that can effectively increase the total capacitance.75,86 Lu et al. fabricated GA/polyaniline/Co3O4 composites by hydrothermal synthesis. These ternary composites possessed large specific capacitances of 1247 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and high cycle stability.87 The specific capacitance, cycling, and voltage window of several GA compounds used in supercapacitors are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 8  Characterization of strain-tolerant polypyrrole/GA network composites for supercapacitor applications: (a) photograph and SEM image of polypyrrole/GA network composite. (b) Schematic illustration of polypyrrole/GA based supercapacitor device, (c) CVs of different compression states for one cycle, (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves, and (e) cycling performance under 0% and 50% compression of GA/polypyrrole based supercapacitors devices.84 
Table 1 Performance characteristics of graphene aerogel composite materials for supercapacitors




Materials
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Cycle retention
Voltage window (V)
Current load or scan rate (A g−1)
Ref.




Macro-/mesoporous GA
226
100% after 5000 cycles
0–0.8
N.A.

66



N-doped GA
113.8
91% after 4000 cycles
0–1.0
185

54



GA/carbon bulk
231
99% after 5000 cycles
0–3.5
1.0

248



GA anode & MnO2–Ni cathode
157.7
83% after 5000 cycles
0–2.0
1.0

71



GA anode & NiO cathode
210
95% after 3000 cycles
−1.2 to 0.5
3.1

72



GA/Co3O4
768
143% after 500 cycles
0–0.5
10

77



GA/NiO
745
100% after 2000 cycles
0–0.5
1.4

34



GA/MnO2
175
81% after 5000 cycles
0–1.0
N.A.

249



GA/Ni(OH)2
119
63.2% after 10000 cycles
0–0.5
1.0

250



GA/CoMoO4
2741
96.36% after 10000 cycles
0–0.9
1.43

80



GA/TiO2
206.7
96.4% after 150 cycles
–0.2 to 0.8
0.5

251



GA/ZnO
316
99% after 1000 cycles
0–0.5
6.7

252



N-GA/CNTs
180
96% after 3000 cycles
–1.0 to 0
0.5

253



GA/MWNT
286
99.34% after 85000 cycles
N.A.
N.A.

254



GA/Ag nanowire/carbon
213
>90% after 10000 cycles
0–1.0
N.A.

255



GA/polyaniline
463
90.6% after 500 cycles
0–0.4
1.0

85



GA/Co(OH)2
1139
N.A.
0–1.2
10

77



GA/polyaniline/Co3O4
1247
80% after 6000 cycles
0–0.4
1.0

87



GA/polypyrrole
350
N.A.
0–1.0
1.5

84






3.2 Lithium batteries
Batteries are an essential energy storage technology which has seen a significant increase in energy density requirements as more powerful mobile devices and electric cars have developed. In contrast to other battery types (Ni–Cd, lead–acid, Ni–MH), lithium ion batteries possess high energy densities, long cycle life, no memory effect, and no self-discharge. Studies of lithium ion batteries began in the 1960s when the lithium anode was being developed. However, lithium ion batteries generated dendritic arms which can lead to shorts over time. To address this major safety concern, Armond et al. fabricated “rocking-chair batteries” that employed lithium-ion intercalated compounds, LixAyBz, as the anode and octahedral TiS2 as the cathode in 1980. Next, SONY introduced commercial Li-batteries with carbonaceous anode materials and LiCoO2 as the cathode. Lithium batteries have since found widespread use in phones, laptops, cameras, and electric vehicles due to their high power and energy densities. They are generally composed of a cathode, anode and electrolyte. Differing from pseudo-capacitors whose faradaic reaction occurs on the surface, the lithium ions in batteries can insert and diffuse into the solid phase of the electrode contributing to higher energy densities. Specifically, the lithium ions reversibly embed into and out of the positive and negative electrodes during charging and discharging. Lithium ions migrate out of the cathode lattice material and embed in the anode material forming lithium compounds. The lithium ions migrate from one electrode to the other through an electrolyte (lithium salt dissolved in an organic solvent). Consider a battery setup with a graphite anode, LiCoO2 cathode, and LiPF6 (1.0 mol L−1) dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC), ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC), and diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1:1:1 volume ratio) electrolyte (Scheme 3):Arrangement: (−) Cn|LiPF6–EC + EMC + DEC|LiCoO2 (+)Cathode reaction: LiCoO2 ↔ Li1−xCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−Anode reaction: Cn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixCnBattery reaction: LiCoO2 + Cn ↔ Li1−xCoO2 + LixCnWhen charging, lithium ions are removed (deintercalated) from the crystal lattice of LiCoO2 together with a change in Li oxidation state. The deintercalated lithium ions are transported by the non-aqueous electrolyte to the negative electrode (graphite) with electron capture and transfer to the external circuit through the anode. Lastly, the lithium ions are reduced to metallic lithium and held in between the graphite layers. The process is reversed during the discharge process.
 Scheme 3  Structure and schematic diagram of Li-ion batteries (graphite anode, LiCoO2 cathode, and LiPF6 dissolved in EC:EMC:DEC as the electrolyte). 

3.2.1 Graphene aerogel-modified cathodes in lithium ion batteries. 
Cathode materials are an essential component contributing to the energy storage capacity of lithium ion batteries. There are several common cathode materials. The first group consists of layered oxide structures. First, layered oxides of the form LiMO2 (M = Co, Ni, Mn) are composed of MO2 layers with octahedral MO6 edge lines providing 2D diffusion paths for lithium ions. Another typical layered oxide has the form Li–Ni–Co–Mn–O (such as LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2). These ternary layered structures combine the rate capability of LiCoO2, the high power capacity of LiNiO2, and the structural stability of Mn4+.88 Another example is xLiMnO3(1 − x)·LiMnO2. This lithium-rich layered oxide has two different metal oxide structures: LiMO2 (R3m) and Li2MO3 (C2/m). The residual lithium ions occupy transition metal layers with higher power capacity at initial charge.89 The second group consists of spinel oxide structures. LiMn2O4 has a 3D framework for lithium ions to easily diffuse in and out of the structure. This material also has better safety performance. LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 is a Ni-doped spinel structure with Ni partially replacing Mn. This material has a higher rate capability and cycle stability than LiMn2O4.90 The third group consists of poly-anionic compounds. LiFePO4 (LFP) has a periodic structure that is thermodynamically stable, environmentally friendly and inexpensive. The strong covalent O–P and O–Fe bonds afford a highly stable and safe battery material.91
LFP has attracted increasing interest as a cathode material due to its several attractive properties including relatively high capacity, good stability, low cost, and environmental friendliness.92,93 However, poor electrical conductivity and low Li-ion diffusivity have plagued its development. Designing 3D porous networks for the electrode material is an efficient way to create ion pathways throughout the electrode and improve electrical conductivity.94 Zhao et al. combined N-doped graphene aerogels with LFP. This shortens the lithium ion diffusion length in LFP crystals and provides new and rapid pathways for lithium ion transport (Fig. 9a–c). A cathode composed of LFP modified by 3D graphene displayed high rate capabilities (78 mA h g−1 at 100 °C) and excellent cycle stability.95 Due to a theoretical storage 5–10 times that of lithium ion batteries, lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries are another promising lithium battery technology relying on porous carbon materials covered with gaseous O2 as the cathode and lithium metal as the anode.96,97 However, O2 can easily oxidize Li+ to form insoluble Li2O or Li2O2 during the charge–discharge process. This can lead to blocked oxygen pathways and reduced performance.98 The large pore volume of the added graphene aerogel is key to reducing the formation of pathway-blocking insoluble lithium peroxide and lithium oxide thus enabling prolonged battery life.99 Zhang et al. prepared porous graphene aerogel/O2 cathodes for Li–O2 batteries. The batteries reached capacities of 11060 mA h g−1 at 0.2 mA cm−2 (280 mA g−1) and 2020 mA h g−1 at 2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 9d).100 Owing to their multi-electron chemical reactions, lithium–sulphur (Li–S) based batteries have attracted much attention due to theoretical specific capacities five times larger and energy densities two to three times larger than that of commercial lithium ion batteries.101,102 However, the applicability of Li–S batteries remains limited due to poor conductivity and structural damage incurred during the charge–discharge process.103,104 Capitalizing on the conductivity and porosity of the graphene aerogel 3D network, Ren et al. constructed Li–S batteries with high sulphur loading (14.36 mg cm−2 and total sulphur content of 89.4 wt%) on GA. The device had a capacitance of 1000 mA h g−1 (Fig. 9e).105 Selenium, another chalcogen element, has also been considered for use in lithium ion batteries, but it is limited by low conductivity and high volume expansion.106,107 He et al. fabricated tellurium nanowire/3D rGO for free-standing and binder-free Li–Te battery cathodes that showed a high initial capacitance of 2611 mA h cm−3 with 88% retention after 200 cycles.108
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of LFP cathode structure showing the lithium ion diffusion pathways and synthesis approach. (b) Rate-dependent and (c) stability cycling performance of a lithium ion battery with N-GA/LiFePO4 cathode.95 (d) Schematic illustration of a porous graphene oxide cathode for a Li–O2 battery enabling oxygen diffusion deep into the structure.100 (e) Schematic illustration of a nitrogen and sulphur codoped graphene aerogel cathode for use in a Li–S battery.109 


3.2.2 Modified anodes. 
Despite the varied work in cathode materials design, more effort has been devoted to designing anode materials with large reversible specific capacities. There are several promising anode materials currently being investigated. The first is carbon-based anode materials with graphite being the most popular due to its low potential, long cycle stability, high conductivity and low cost.110,111 The second group is transition metal oxides grouped based on how lithium is incorporated into their structure. The first group includes MoO2, WO2, Fe2O3, TiO2 and Nb2O5. In these metal oxides the lithium ion directly embeds within the structure. Another group of metal oxides have the form MxOy (M = Co, Ni, Cu, Fe). In these structures, Li2O is produced when the ions are incorporated.112–114 The third group is metal alloy anode materials. Representative materials include Si, Ge, and Sn which undergo alloying and dealloying with lithium during charging and discharging.115,116
Nanoscopic metal oxides (nano-MOs) are ideal anode materials for lithium ion batteries due to several advantages.117 However, most nano-MOs are semiconductors with inherently poor electric conductivity restricting their performance in lithium ion storage.118 One approach to address the limitations of nanoscale metal oxides is to wrap them with conducting graphene sheets to produce a 3D network material with improved overall conductivity and improved accommodation to volume changes during charging and discharging.119–121 Feng et al. fabricated an interconnected macroporous 3D Fe3O2/graphene aerogel. The device showed a high reversible capacity of 372 mA h g−1 at a rate of 5000 mA g−1 and 995 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1.122 Similarly, a TiO2/graphene aerogel displayed an excellent capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at 0.59C after 50 cycles and a capacity of 99 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA g−1 (Fig. 11a–e).123 Lastly a wrapped Bi2O3/graphene aerogel produced a large capacitance of 417 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1 and 273 mA h g−1 at 10000 mA g−1.124
Other MOs (MxOy; M = Co, Ni, Cu, Fe) have also been incorporated into graphene aerogels for anode applications. Kim et al. demonstrated enhanced electron and ion transport for improved cycle stability in a Co3O4/graphene aerogel anode showing corresponding specific capacities of 1001, 900 and 798 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 0.5 and 1.0 A g−1 (Fig. 11f).125 Fe3O4/GA fabricated by Müllen et al. exhibited a capacity of 63 mA h g−1 at 4800 mA g−1 and cycling performance of 1059 mA h g−1 over 150 cycles at 93 mA g−1.126
The range of performance values for batteries are also being pushed to higher levels. In general, lithium ion batteries tend to have high energy densities and low power densities. Recently, Duan et al. designed a 3D holey-graphene oxide/Nb2O5 anode (Fig. 10) with both a high energy density and power density at higher mass loadings.127 They systematically tailored the graphene aerogel porosity to facilitate rapid ion transport and minimize diffusion limitations throughout the structure.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the two-step fabrication of holey graphene oxide HGO/Nb2O5. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a free-standing composite of HGO/Nb2O5 with inset showing bulk appearance. (c) Comparison of the rate performance of the open network (with ion channels) Nb2O5/HGO and dense (without ion channels) Nb2O5/G electrodes at different mass loadings.127 
Earth abundant alloys of Si, Sn, Ge and relevant oxides possess high reversible capacities ranging from 783 mA h g−1 (SnO2) to 4200 mA h g−1 (Si) have attracted much attention for use in lithium ion batteries.128–130 Researchers have investigated the working mechanism of such materials for anode applications. For example, it was found that lithium ions can break Si–Si bonds to form isolated Si clusters. The lithium ions then embed in the clusters to locally form Li–Si alloys (Li15Si4).131 However, the migration of a large number of lithium ions into and out of the structure leads to large volume changes and subsequent pulverization of the anode material ultimately shortening the battery lifetime.132,133 Graphene, owing to its excellent electrical conductivity, flexibility and high BET, makes it a suitable reinforcement material for enhancing the coulombic efficiency and rate capability of various incorporated alloys.134 Similarly, 3D networks maintain structural stability and transport electrons and ions between the GA walls and alloy.135,136 Zheng et al. synthesized amorphous SiO2/graphene aerogel anodes that showed reversible capacities of 300 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 and stable cycling performance.137 He et al. prepared Sn/3D network graphene which showed a capacitance of 1022 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, and 459 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA h g−1 with 96.3% performance retention after 1000 cycles (Fig. 11g).138 The role, cyclability, and rate capability of various GA compound materials for lithium batteries are listed in Table 2.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction path taken by lithium ions during charging and discharging with TEM image of the TiO2/graphene aerogel composite. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the electrode. (c) Cycling performance with different current densities from 0.1 to 5.0 A g−1. (d) Cycling performance at different current densities. (e) Nyquist plots of TiO2/GA;123 (f) Rate performance and synthesis process for CoCO3/GA and Co3O4/GA;125 (g) schematic illustration of structure and cycle performance of Sn@graphene.138 
Table 2 Performance characteristics of graphene aerogel composite materials for lithium-based batteries




Materials
Type
Capacity
Cycling
Ref.




LiFePO4/GA
Cathode of Li-ion battery
78 mA h g−1@100C
89% after 1000 cycles@10C

95



O2/GA
Cathode of Li–O2 battery
11060 mA h g−1@280 mA g−1
N.A.

100



S/GA
Cathode of Li–S battery
10.3 mA h cm−2@0.2C
63.8% after 350 cycles

105



Te/GA
Cathode of Li–Te battery
2611 mA h cm−2@0.2C
88% after 250 cycles

108



Fe3O4/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1060 mA h g−1@93 mA g−1
1059 mA h g−1 after 150 cycle

126



TiO2/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
605 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1
80% after 50 cycles

123



Fe2O3/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
995 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1
995 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles

122



Co3O4/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1012 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1
1012 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

125



CuO/GA/CNTs
Anode of Li-ion battery
753 mA h g−1@0.1C
639 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles

256



Bi2O3/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
273 mA h g−1@10000 mA g−1
417 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle @200C

124



C/MoS2/N-GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1600 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1
900 mA h g−1 after 500 cycle

257



ZnO/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
415 mA h g−1@1000 mA g−1
490 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle@100C

258



MoS2/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1235 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1
85.8% after 60 cycle@80C

259



Si/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
963 mA h g−1@1.5 mg cm−2
370 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle

260



SiO2
Anode of Li-ion battery
300 mA h g−1@500 mA g−1



137



Sn/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1022 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1
96.3% after 1000 cycles

138



SnO2/GA
Anode of Li-ion battery
1299 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1
148% after 450 cycle

261







3.2.3 Other batteries. 
Lithium ion batteries have been successfully commercialized into a global portable energy storage system over the past several decades. However, the increasing demand for lithium ion batteries is met with increasingly scarce natural availability of lithium sources and consequently higher costs ($5000 per ton of lithium). In anticipation of limited supply and increasing costs of lithium-based energy storage, the development of other battery types based on sodium, aluminium, and magnesium have attracted more attention due to their natural abundance and significantly lower costs.139–141 Specifically, Na, Mg and Al based materials have been developed for use in cathodes. Whereas carbon materials, with chemical stability, low environmental impact, low cost, and high conductivity, are promising anode materials. The porous morphology and pore diameter of carbon-based anodes accounts for the high electrochemical performance and large ion storage potential. Dai et al. prepared 3D N-GA with a high nitrogen (6.8 at%) content and capacitance of 1057.1 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 and 244.7 mA h g−1 at 4000 mA g−1 (Fig. 12a–f).142 3D porous carbon networks and defects induced by heteroatom-doping were promising for anode materials. Yao et al. synthesized V2O5/GA for magnesium battery cathodes showing a 330 mA h g−1 (1000 mA g−1) capacity over a wide working temperature range from −30.1 °C to 55 °C with long-cycle-life (80% retention after 200 cycles, Fig. 12g–k).143
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image, (b) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and pore size distribution curve, (c) initial charge–discharge curves at 0.2C, (d) rate performance from 0.2C to 10C, (e) capacity retention, and (f) cycling performance of N-doped 3D graphene foam anode in a Na-ion battery.142 (g) Schematic illustration of the V2O5–nH2O/GA fabrication process, (h) rate performance, (i) charge–discharge profiles, (j) cycling performance of samples annealed at different temperatures, and (k) the effect of crystal water content on the capacity of GA/V2O5·nH2O.143 
Hydrogen has been investigated as an alternative fuel source due to its low environmental impact, high efficiency, and abundance.144,145 Compared to other hydrogen storage materials like metal alloys, COFs and MOFs, graphene-based materials can function over a wide range of conditions with excellent structural stability.146–148 Froudakis et al. fabricated new 3D network pillar graphene with tunable pore sizes. They utilized a multiscale theoretical approach to measure the H2 storage (41 g L−1) under ambient conditions (Fig. 13a and b).149 Jhi et al. developed a porous 3D graphene with dispersed Ca atoms anchored to the carbon centers of graphene forming chain-like structures. The total hydrogen storage capacity of this 3D Ca–graphene composite reached 5–6 wt% and hydrogen adsorption at the vertices of Ca chains exhibits the multipole Coulomb and Kubas interactions.150 In particular, high specific surface area and pores with diameters around 0.7 nm possess higher hydrogen adsorption. Zhu et al. synthesized graphene aerogels with acetone and trifluoroacetic acid to carbonize multifunctional aerogels to produce a high specific surface area and small pore diameters. Such structures with pore sizes of 0.72 nm showed unexpectedly high hydrogen adsorption.151
 Fig. 13  (a) Snapshot from Monte Carlo simulations of Li-doped graphene pillar structures for hydrogen storage. (b) Comparison of graphene, carbon nanotube, pillared graphene and Li-doped pillared graphene volumetric hydrogen uptake.149 (c) Schematic illustration of the formation process of modified hydrothermal-graphene/paraffin (MH-GPn). (d) The measured latent heats and images of different core–shell graphene aerogel composite formulations at different temperatures.158 
Thermal management has been a significant concern dictating progress in the electronics industry. Phase change materials (PCMs) have been widely applied in thermal management and energy storage for transition-edge sensors (TES).152–154 In addition to its superior electrical conductivity, graphene also possesses excellent thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m−1 K−1) which makes it especially appropriate for thermal storage.155,156 Thus 3D interconnected graphene aerogel networks can greatly reduce or eliminate thermal resistance in energy capture/storage devices.157 Huang et al. combined graphene sheets and octadecanoic acid (OA) into a GA/OA hybrid material. The thermal energy generated (181.8 J g−1) was stored in the GA/OA hybrid.158 They further deposited porous graphene by CVD growth onto aluminium oxide with ceramic which has a latent heat of 186 J g−1.159 Feng et al. constructed core–shell GA for shape-stable PCMs showing a high encapsulation ratio of paraffin, excellent cycling performance and a latent heat of 213 J g−1 (Fig. 13c and d).160

4. Mechanisms and roles of graphene aerogels in energy conversion
Fuel cells and solar cells that directly convert chemical or solar energy into electrical power are a significant technology for harnessing renewable energy. The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) are three electrochemical processes (Scheme 4b) that take place in metal–air batteries, regenerative fuel cells, and water splitting cells respectively.161
 Scheme 4  (a) Schematic diagram of a fuel cell. (b) The polarization curves of key energy-related electrochemical reactions in fuel cells and their overall reaction equations.161 
Fuel cells offer a convenient way to generate electricity with high efficiency, stability, and longevity; all three of which are essential for applications in portable electronic devices and electric cars.162,163 Fuel cell systems directly transform chemical energy from fuel gas (such as hydrogen or methane) into electrical energy. Fuel cells can be classified into five different types according to the electrolyte used with each having specific ranges of operating temperature. The types include: (1) proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC, 50–100 °C), solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC, 500–1000 °C), molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFC, 650–800 °C), phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFC, 160–210 °C), and alkaline fuel cells (AFC, 60–100 °C).164–167 The simplified mechanism behind proton exchange membrane fuel cells is highlighted in Scheme 4a. First, gaseous H2 is broken into two protons (H+) by the anode catalyst. After passing through the proton exchange membrane the protons react with oxygen at the cathode to produce water. When an acidic electrolyte is utilized; the anode, cathode and overall reaction can be written as follows:Anode: 2H2 → 4H+ + 4e−;Cathode: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O;Overall reaction: 2H2 + O2 = 2H2O
4.1 The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
In the ORR oxygen reacts with both electrons and protons to form H2O (4 electrons absorbed) or H2O2 (2 electrons absorbed). This reactions is essentially what occurs at the cathode of fuel cells and metal–air batteries. It is in many ways the biggest advantage of PEMFC as the only by-product is water. Platinum (Pt) and its alloys remain the most popular ORR catalysts. However, due to its scarcity and oftentimes prohibitive cost, the use of Pt has contributed to hindered large-scale development and commercialization of fuel cell systems.168,169 Consequently, low-cost alternative catalysts such as earth-abundant metals (Fe, Co, etc.), metal oxides (Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Co3O4, MnO2, etc.), and metal-free carbon-based materials have attracted much interest.170–173 Graphene aerogels or 3D network graphene have high BETs, fast electron-transfer kinetics, excellent mechanical strength, and porous structures providing sufficient contact and high stability for the ORR. Carbon materials doped by N, B, and P have shown improved ORR performance.174,175 Chen et al. prepared N-doped graphene metal-free catalysts with an ORR peak centred at −0.31 V with a current density of −2.9 mA cm−2 and H2O2 yield below 14.7%,176 while He et al. fabricated N and B-doped graphene which had a current density of 6.2 mA cm−2 and H2O2 yield less than 10% (Fig. 14i and j).177 Chen et al. created holey surface structures on N-GA to create more exposed active edge sites to further improve the catalytic performance of the metal-free catalyst for ORR.178 Yi et al. incorporated carbon nanotubes (CNT) into a CNT/N-GA composite with a nano leaf-like network, and N-doped CNT containing 85% graphene aerogel (N-CNT@GNRs85-A) as a metal-free catalyst for ORR had a current density of 31.8 mA cm−2 and H2O2 yield below 5.5%.179 Bagheri et al. developed a Co/N-doped GA glassy carbon electrode (Fig. 14a–d) that showed excellent catalytic activity and stability for ORR in acid.180 Müllen et al. prepared N-GA/Fe3O4 by a hydrothermal self-assembly process. This material displayed a more positive onset potential (−0.19 V) for ORR and a high current density (−2.56 mA cm−2). Linear sweep voltammagrams (LSV) measured at 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH showed a direct four-electron transfer pathway from −0.19 to −1.2 V for producing OH− ions and an 11% H2O2 yield at a potential of −0.4 V.27 In addition, various metals and metal chalcogenide particles have been incorporated into 3D porous graphene including Pt/GA, CdS-P25/GA, Co/N-GA, and Fe-nitride/N-GA (Fig. 14e–h).181–184 As always, the graphene aerogel provides a high surface area and porosity while the nanoparticles offer more active sites for considerably enhanced ORR activity.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of ORR in graphene network composites. (b) SEM image of a metal and nonmetal co-doped graphene aerogel. (c) Rotating disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves, (d) electron-transfer number and H2O2 yield of Co–N-GA for ORR.180 (e) and (f) CV curves for various Fe–N co-doped graphene aerogel composites. (g) Current density curves and power density curves. (h) Electron impedance spectroscopy curves of FexN/N-GA, FexN + N-GA mixture, N-GA, FexN, and Pt/C.176 (i) EDS chemical mapping of various composites. (j) Linear sweep voltammagram (LSV) curves of N, B-doped GA for ORR.177 Current–time chronoamperometric responses for OER (k) and ORR (l) of CoFe2O4@N,S-GA.189 
Fuel cells and metal–air batteries systems are both attractive energy storage technologies. The former requires optimization of the ORR whereas the latter requires an understanding of both OER and ORR which occur during charging and discharging respectively.185–187 Similar to the costs and scarcity of Pt catalysts for ORR, effective OER catalysts, such as RuO2 and IrO2, are relatively scarce and expensive.188 Designing and synthesizing alternative catalysts with high activity, stability, and low-costs remains a challenge for both ORR and OER and thus a challenge in the commercialization of fuel cells and metal–air batteries. Considering that the two processes are essentially opposites, it is not surprising that the OER is associated with high potentials whereas the ORR is associated with low potentials. Yang et al. developed N/S-doped rGO 3D networks containing CoFe2O4 (Fig. 14k and l). This material exhibited a positive onset potential, peak potential (0.13 V and 0.28 V) and current density (3.79 mA cm−2) for ORR and higher onset potential of 0.51 V and current density of 22.94 mA cm−2 for OER.189 Chen et al. fabricated 3D hollow crumpled graphene–cobalt oxide that served as a high-performance bi-functional electrocatalyst with an OER lower overpotential of 0.34 V and ORR onset potential of (0.90 V) exhibiting a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with little attenuation (12%).190 Most carbon catalysts reported are combined with noble metals (such as Pt) and metal oxides for OER and ORR. The incorporation of polymers into such catalysts was relatively new and unexplored until recently. Dai et al. designed a N,P co-doped polyaniline aerogel with graphene edges for bifunctional electrocatalysis (Fig. 15a).191 Simulations showed that N,P co-doping, graphene edge effects and the highly porous network contributed to a strong activity in both OER and ORR. Liu et al. further synthesized N-doped graphene with an interconnected 3D architecture (denoted by N-GRW).192 This interesting structure demonstrated a site-specific catalytic contribution to both OER and ORR. It was found that the electron-withdrawing pyridinic N section of N-GRW was responsible for catalyzing the OER, and the electron-donating quaternary N sites largely catalyzed the ORR (Fig. 15b–f). Consequently, N-GRW served as an air cathode in Zn–air batteries exhibiting an open-circuit voltage of 1.46 V and a specific capacity of 873 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of metal-free polyaniline aerogel/graphene edge electrocatalyst for OER and ORR.191 (b) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) collected under He 1α (21.2 eV) radiation. Carbon (c) and nitrogen (d) K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra. (b–f) Schematic diagram of ORR and OER taking place at the n- and p-type domains of the 3D N-graphene network.192 (f) Schematic illustration of a zinc-air battery under charging and discharging conditions. 
4.2 The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and CO2 reduction
Hydrogen is considered an ideal clean energy alternative to replace fossil fuels. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), in which hydrogen is generated from water splitting in fuel cells, is one of the most important methods for making hydrogen.161,193,194 Noble metal platinum is the most effective HER catalysts owing to the high current densities possible. Again, due to the relative scarcity and high cost of such noble metals, it is of great importance that new and inexpensive catalysts are developed for electrocatalytic HER. Owing to their high electrical conductivity, versatility, and stability, graphene aerogels are promising for HER catalysis.195 Qu et al. assembled graphene sheets containing graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanoribbons into a 3D graphene aerogel (Fig. 16a–d) resulting in superior HER activity with 54 mV decade−1 for a Tafel slope, a lower onset overpotential of 80 mV and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a 207 mV overpotential (Fig. 16b).196 The graphene analogue MoS2 has also emerged as a promising electrocatalyst due to its large BET and high electrical conductivity.197,198 Zhou and Wang et al. concurrently researched GA/MoS2 network composites and found that the material demonstrated excellent electrocatalysis in HER with a lower overpotential, higher catalytic current density, and improved stability.199,200 Zhang et al. further functionalized GA/O-MWCNT with p-phenylenediamine-supported MoS2 which has also shown excellent catalytic performance and stability.201 Transition-metal phosphides (TMPs), such as CoP and Ni2P, have attracted much attention as non-noble-metal catalysts for HER with high activity. Dong et al. prepared CoP/GA showing an overpotential of 121 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and an exchange current density of 0.105 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16e–h).202 Interested in expanding the understanding of the effects of pH on electrocatalysis, Du et al. designed a material composed of crystalline nickel phosphide embedded within a graphene/nickel foam. In extremely acidic environments (pH = 0), there was a 30 mV overpotential (Fig. 16j). Whereas in extremely basic environments (pH = 14), there was a 7 mV overpotential (Fig. 16l).203
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM image and photograph of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G, (b) Tafel plots, and (c) HER polarization curves using various catalysts. (d) The current density versus RHE of g-C3N4/GO,196 (e) polarization curves for various samples, (f) Tafel plots for different samples, (g) capacitive current at 0.15 V, (h) Nyquist plots collected at a −200 mV bias voltage of GA/CoP,202 (i) SEM image of nickel phosphide embedded within a graphene/nickel foam, polarization curves of nickel phosphide graphene/nickel foam in (j) 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH = 0), (k) 1 M KPi (pH = 7), and (l) 1 M KOH (pH = 14) of graphene/Ni foam.203 
The future of alternative fuel sources can take on several forms. In the case of HER, one is generating a high energy fuel (H2) and using it to generate electricity through fuel cells and metal–air batteries. In contrast, one can also take an abundant waste product and convert it into useful products as is the case in CO2 reduction. Electrolytic preparation of fuel from CO2 reduction is a carbon-neutral energy cycle.204–206 Noble metals generally have good selectivity for CO2 reduction. However, they have poor durability and are more scarce thus limiting their application.207 It remains a challenge to directly convert CO2 into multi-carbon hydrocarbons or oxygenates due to the absence of powerful, low cost catalysts.208 Graphene aerogels are a natural catalytic candidate for CO2 reduction due to their 3D network structure, ease of fabrication, and high BET which enhances the interfacial contact with the electrolyte and adsorbed CO2. Further doping with nitrogen generates active sites with a low overpotential, good selectivity, and high durability toward CO2 catalysis. Ajayan et al. manufactured N-GAs with an onset overpotential of −0.19 V for CO production, and at a lower overpotential (−0.47 V) than Au with a similar maximum Faradaic efficiency of CO formation (∼85%) and higher stability (Fig. 17).209
 Fig. 17  (a) CO2 reduction pathway, (b) CO2 reduction and CO production versus time and Faradaic efficiency, (c) CO versus potential, (d) HCOO−versus potential by DFT modelling of 3D graphene.209 
4.3 Alcohol and microbial fuel cells
Electro-oxidation of alcohol has also attracted interest due to the high energy conversion rate, low work temperature, easy storage and handling, low pollutant emission, and cost. Typically, Pt and Pd are the most commonly used catalysts in alcohol oxidation because of their excellent electrocatalytic performance.210–212 Zhang et al. synthesized graphene oxide aerogel-supported Pt which facilitates reaction and avoids the detrimental effect of reduced platinum active surface area. Furthermore, it was found that the electro-catalytic properties of GA/Pt were five times that of Pt/rGO (reduced graphene oxide) and 40% higher than that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 13).213 Hui et al. prepared binder-free Pd/graphene aerogel/Ni foam (Pd/GA/NF) electrodes that exhibited good electrocatalytic activity and an outstanding stability for alcohol electro-oxidation.214 Fuel cells for direct alcohol conversion (such as ethanol, methanol, propanol, and butanol) have garnered much attention due to their operational safety, excellent energy density, low toxicity, and large-scale production potential.215,216 However, the absence of appropriate anode materials, easy catalyst deactivation, and sluggish oxidation kinetics have greatly hindered their development. Liu et al. developed N-doped GA decorated with PtRu nanoparticles as a freestanding anode. The resulting power density and current density were 93 mW cm−2 and 426 mA cm−2 respectively (Fig. 18).217 This device indeed performs well, but the cost of intermetallic PtRu nanoparticles remains high. Hui et al. developed a similar 3D free-standing anode material composed of graphene aerogel decorated with nickel. Their devices recorded a lower current density of 6 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M ethanol and 0.1 M NaOH solution.218 Clearly there remains an immense performance disparity between the noble metal and non-noble metal systems.
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of free standing electrodes and their incorporation into direct methanol fuel cells, (b) CV curves of various samples, (c) chronoamperometric curves of different samples, (d) electrochemical performance of direct methanol fuel cells constructed with various catalysts.217 
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are another type of fuel cell that relies on certain bacteria to convert organic waste into hydrogen for electricity generation.219,220 From a theoretical standpoint, microbial fuel cells are ideal as they are using waste to generate electricity. However, poor energy conversion efficiency and low power densities limit their practical application. The key component that is missing from microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) is a cost-effective catalyst for hydrogen production and bacterial adhesion.221,222 Graphene is already being applied in conventional fuel cells due to its chemical inertness, excellent electrical conductivity and biocompatibility.223 The 3D network structure of graphene aerogels provides a large BET for bacterial adsorption and directed pathways for extracellular electron transfer and proton diffusion. Chen et al. prepared 3D MoS2/N-GAs as a microbial electro-catalyst in which organic waste was oxidized by bacteria with generated electrons transferred to the cathode to reduce protons and generate hydrogen (Fig. 19a–d), which achieved a high hydrogen production rate of 0.19 m3 H2 m−3 d−1.224 Chen et al. developed a polyaniline/graphene 3D network hybrid as a MFC anode. The cell had a power density of 190 mW m−2 at 24 h with a maximum power density of 768 mW m−2.225 Qiao et al. synthesized a graphene aerogel by direct reduction of cysteine for a microbial fuel cell anode. The biocompatible, porous, and 3D structure of the graphene aerogel afforded a maximum power density to 679.7 mW m−2 and increased the loading of bacterial cells on the GA.217 The large open pore structure and good biocompatibility are ideal for the effective immobilization, growth and cultivation of living microorganisms. The excellent conductivity promotes efficient current collection. When coupled with the high stability, these graphene aerogels may contribute to improved longevity toward the practical application of MFCs. Liu et al. reported 3D graphene aerogels homogenously decorated with Pt nanoparticles for an MFC anode (Fig. 19e–h). The MFC generated a maximum power density of 1460 mW m−2; enough to successfully power a kitchen timer (Fig. 19h).226
 Fig. 19  (a) Polarization curves, (b) Tafel plots, (c) EIS Nyquist plots of different samples, and (d) cathodic current density of 3D MoS2/N-GA anodes for hydrogen evolution in microbial electrolysis cells.224 (e) Photograph of a graphene aerogel/Pt hybrid demonstrating high mechanical strength and shape control, (f) confocal microscope image of living bacteria inside the MFC after 3 days, (g) performance of MFCs with various electrode materials, and (h) photograph of an MFC driving a timer.226 
4.4 Photocatalytic water splitting
In addition to bacterial-mediated generation of hydrogen, an obvious source of abundant hydrogen is water. Sunlight-driven photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting can produce hydrogen and oxygen in an environmentally friendly fashion.225,227 Due to the large energy requirements to electrochemically split water, it is essential to develop novel and efficient photocatalysts with low-cost and high-stability.228 The key requirements for effective photoanodes include efficient light-trapping, excellent separation, fast OER kinetics, and fast transportation of photogenerated charge carriers.229,230 For these reasons, 3D network graphene materials are an ideal candidate for photoanode research. Chen et al. reported a graphene aerogel-based hybrid containing N-deficient g-C3N4/N-GA/Ni–Fe layered double hydroxide (DPCN/N-GA/Ni–Fe-LDH). This photoanode lead to effective separation and transport of photogenerated charge carriers with electrons/holes moving between the g-C3N4 and NiFe layers.
The device showed photocurrent densities of 162.3 μA cm−2 at 1.4 V with an incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of 2.5% at 350 nm during photo-electrocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 20).231
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the water oxidation pathway in graphene aerogel/g-C3N4/N-GA/NiFe cell, (b) transient photocurrent density versus time, (c) transient photocurrent responses of various samples, (d) Mott–Schottky plots, (e) IPCE spectra at 1.22 V under AM 1.5G irradiation of g-C3N4/N-doped GA/NiFe.231 
4.5 Dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells
The direct conversion of solar energy into electricity is another promising area for renewable energy generation.232,233 There are several different solar cell types being developed along these lines. An established type is the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). DSSCs are composed of a working electrode, electrolyte, and counter electrode. DSSCs offer several advantages including large material availability and low cost.234,235 The first solar cell was actually manufactured by Fritts in 1883 by making use of the photovoltaic effect. Bell Labs fabricated the first monocrystalline silicon solar cells in 1954 promoting the development of a variety of solar cells. Over the past 30 years, dye-sensitized solar cells have been development with efficiencies up to 12% and excellent stability. The general operating mechanism of DSSCs is as follows: first, the adsorbed dye in the anode absorbs photons to generate electrons which are transported to the counter electrode leaving the dye in an oxidized state Second, a redox couple reduces the oxidized dye with an electron thus refreshing the dye and leaving an oxidized redox couple. Lastly, the redox couple migrates to the counter electrode where it is reduced.236 The theory of dye-sensitized solar cells is shown in Scheme 5.
 Scheme 5  Schematic diagram of DSSCs showing the sensitizer dye and iodide–triiodide redox couple. 
The counter electrode (cathode) performs a crucial role in the DSSC system by catalyzing the reduction of the redox couple (typically an iodide–triiodide system) which serves as a mediator for refreshing the sensitizer dye. To improve the electrochemical performance of DSSCs, an ideal counter electrode must quickly transfer charges while also possessing high reducing strength. 3D graphene aerogel networks are a natural material for counter electrode development. Hu et al. developed a 3D honeycomb graphene structure by reaction between Li2O and CO. The resulting 3D graphene aerogel counter electrode exhibited an energy conversion efficiency of 7.8%.237 Dai, Jang et al. fabricated N-doped graphene aerogel (Fig. 21a and b) and P-doped graphene aerogel as metal-free counter electrodes for DSSCs with a power conversion efficiency up to 7.07% and 8.46%, respectively.238,239 Conventional DSSCs use TiO2 photoanodes in which trap states and random pathways often hinder electron transport and reduce efficiency. Moon et al. prepared a TiO2-embedded graphene photoanode with a 3D porous structure that achieved a photon-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 7.5%, a 55% increase over systems without graphene incorporation (Fig. 21c).240 Conventional DSSCs typically use a liquid electrolyte with a power conversion efficiency around 12.3%.241 The leakage of liquid electrolyte and evaporation of the organic solvent often limits the lifetime and can lead to reduced performance over time. For these reasons, solid electrolytes have also been investigated. Polymer gels are one class of solid electrolytes, but they suffer from relatively low charge transfer. To address this issue, researchers have begun doping solid electrolytes with conductive materials. Tang et al. modified poly(acrylic acid)–cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (PAA–CTAB) gel electrolytes with graphene to create a quasi-solid-state DSSCs (Fig. 21e–i, right panel). This technique combines the stability of the solid electrolytes with the rapid charge transfer of graphene to yield a high power conversion efficiency of 7.06% as compared to 6.07% for pure PAA–CTAB.242
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for graphene, (b) configuration of a DSSC and triiodide redox couple;239 (c) scheme for the fabrication of G-TiO2 inverse opal electrodes: (1) colloidal PS spheres serve as templates, (2) graphene oxide is incorporated around spheres and reduced, (3) the PS spheres are dissolved away to yield a highly porous GO structure;240 (d) schematic illustration of a DSSC with a quasi-solid electrolyte composed of a PAA–CTAB gel and graphene, (e) SEM of porous structure, (f) Nyquist plots, (g) Tafel polarization curves, (h) Arrhenius plots, and (i) J–V characteristics of graphene gel on quasi-solid-state DSSCs.242 
Perovskites are a recent rediscovery in the photovoltaics community that has attracted frenzied attention for solar cell applications due to their low cost, sizable absorption across the visible spectrum, narrow and widely tunable photoluminescence, and high photostability. As a result of these properties, theoretical conversion efficiencies as high as 28% may be possible.243–246 Organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials are suitable alternatives to conventional solar cells due to their high light absorption capability and long diffusion lengths. The development of graded bandgap materials is a promising approach to further increase solar spectrum utilization. Despite the considerable enhancement in electron–hole collection efficiency, satisfactory open-circuit output voltage and superior output current proved elusive. This is likely due to excessive cation mixing, which eliminates the graded bandgap. Many strategies have been implemented such as replacing the metal cations, varying the composition of halide ions, and altering the moisture content. Zettl et al. fabricated double perovskite layers (layer 1: CH3NH3SnI3 and layer 2: CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx) incorporating GaN, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and graphene aerogel (Fig. 22).247 The cells reliably produce very high current densities up to 45 mA cm−2 with average power conversion efficiencies of 18.41%. The graphene aerogel also serves as a barrier to moisture penetration and improves the perovskite film morphology (continuous films rather than perovskite islands).
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of a graded bandgap perovskite solar cell (i.e. two perovskite layers), (b) photoluminescence spectra of cells with (W/) and without (W/O) monolayer h-BN or GA components, (c) current density versus voltage of cells with and without h-BN or GA components.247 
5. Conclusions and outlook
A number of nanomaterials have been investigated for extensive applications in energy capture and energy storage. However, there are few nanomaterials that exhibit the performance, processability and abundance of graphene. Graphene has rapidly developed over the previous decade into a diverse assortment of types, composites and mixtures for countless applications. With the ever-present threat associated with depleted resources and environmental pollution, much attention has centred on developing various 3D nano-porous materials possessing large internal spaces, and high surface area. It is only natural then that combining 2D graphene with 3D porous networks as well as the direct formation of 3D graphene aerogels has attracted much attention. With endless material recipes currently being investigated, it is important to organize them into useful groups based on their different end uses.
In this review, we summarized the recent developments in the synthesis of 3D graphene networks and graphene aerogel compounds, and elaborated on their applications in energy capture, storage, and conversion. Graphene aerogels are especially attractive due to the large number of synthesis techniques including self-assembly (reducing, hydrothermal, metal ions), cross-linkers (organic and inorganic), CVD-growth (with or without template), and 3D printing. In double-layer capacitors, graphene aerogels can be directly substituted for or incorporated with other carbon materials (CNTs, porous carbon, carbon bulk) as electrode materials to enable high power densities and large cycle lifetimes. The electrochemical performance of graphene aerogel electrodes could also be enhanced by increasing the specific surface area, increasing the electrical conductivity, increasing the porosity, and doping/co-doping with various non-metals including N, P, S, and B. In pseudocapacitors, graphene aerogel was employed as an anode. Subsequent modification with metal compounds (single/binary metal oxides, metal hydroxides), and conducting polymers (polypyrrole, polyaniline) lead to enhanced energy density compared to double layer capacitors. Unlike ion migration in pseudo-capacitors in which reactions largely occur on the surface of the electrodes, in graphene aerogel electrodes ions can insert and diffuse into the solid phase of the electrode leading to higher energy densities. For fuel cells, GAs can serve as catalysts for electrolysis cells promoting the generation of fuel from water (HER), organic waste (MFCs), and alcohol. GAs can also function as a cathode for fuel cell systems (hydrogen, alcohol, microbial fuel cells) by catalyzing reduction reactions. For solar cells, GAs can be used as a counter electrode, a component in electrolyte gels for quasi-solid-state DSSCs, as a moisture barrier, and scaffold material for HTMs in perovskite solar cells to improve performance and stability.
It is clear that graphene aerogels and graphene aerogel-modified materials show much promise and application in energy capture, storage, and conversion technologies. Despite this, there remain some developmental hurdles to be overcome in transitioning from the lab to real world applications. First, synthetic methods and post-treatments need to be optimized to improve the surface area of graphene aerogels and increase the porosity. Fortunately, the material cost of graphene-based materials is substantially lower than that of traditional noble metal catalysts. It is the development and/or repurposing of new and existing industrial scale technology that will limit the time it takes to see graphene-based materials make the jump into energy capture, conversion and storage technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21501127 and 51502185), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (BK20140400). We also acknowledge the funds from the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), and the Jiangsu Scientific and Technological Innovation Team (2013).
References
W. Geng, Z. Ming, P. Lilin, L. Ximei, L. Bo and D. Jinhui, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 885–896 CrossRef .
M. Brauer, G. Freedman, J. Frostad, A. van Donkelaar, R. V. Martin, F. Dentener, R. van Dingenen, K. Estep, H. Amini, J. S. Apte, K. Balakrishnan, L. Barregard, D. Broday, V. Feigin, S. Ghosh, P. K. Hopke, L. D. Knibbs, Y. Kokubo, Y. Liu, S. Ma, L. Morawska, J. L. Sangrador, G. Shaddick, H. R. Anderson, T. Vos, M. H. Forouzanfar, R. T. Burnett and A. Cohen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 79–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rao, Z. Klimont, S. J. Smith, R. Van Dingenen, F. Dentener, L. Bouwman, K. Riahi, M. Amann, B. L. Bodirsky and D. P. van Vuuren, Global Environ. Change, 2017, 42, 346–358 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 57–69 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Bredas, E. H. Sargent and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 35–44 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green and S. P. Bremner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 23–34 CrossRef PubMed .
C. P. Grey and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 45–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. B. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Y. Zhang and C. W. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
Y. F. Ma and Y. S. Chen, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 40–53 CrossRef .
Y. X. Xu, K. X. Sheng, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, M. Ge, J. Huang, Y. Lai, C. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Meng and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11873–11881 CAS .
H. Y. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Gao, Y. B. Zhu, L. B. Mao, F. C. Wang, X. S. Luo, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Lu, Z. Pan, J. Ge, W. Shen, Y. R. Zheng, L. Xu, L. J. Wang, W. H. Xu, H. A. Wu and S. H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, A. Zhou, Z. Huang, J. Wu, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22687–22694 CAS .
K. Z. Gao, Z. Q. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Q. Peng, W. J. Wang and F. J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 63–67 CAS .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2905 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, T. Y. J. Han, E. B. Duoss, A. M. Golobic, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini and M. A. Worsley, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J. H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. W. Zhu, X. D. Wu, Q. F. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Y. Liang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. K. Lai, M. Z. Ge, Y. X. Zheng, K. Q. Zhang and Z. Q. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12761–12768 CAS .
L. Zhang and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .
V. H. Luan, H. N. Tien, L. T. Hoa, T. M. H. Nguyen, E. S. Oh, J. Chung, E. J. Kim, W. M. Choi, B. S. Kong and S. H. Hur, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 208–211 CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Li, M. Wang, Y. He, L. Chai, J. Huang, H. Wang, X. Wu and Y. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34638–34647 CAS .
C. D. Wang, D. B. Liu, S. M. Chen, Y. Sang, Y. A. Haleem, C. Q. Wu, W. Y. Xu, Q. Fang, M. Habib, J. Cao, Z. Q. Niu, P. M. Ajayan and L. Song, Small, 2016, 12, 5684–5691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Qian, I. M. Ismail and A. Stein, Carbon, 2014, 68, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, F. Suarez-Garcia, J. M. D. Tascon and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Jeong, J. W. Lee, W. H. Shin, Y. J. Choi, H. J. Shin, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2472–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wen, X. C. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. M. Cui, G. H. Lu, X. L. Feng and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hao, Z. Zhao, Y. Leng, J. Tian, Y. Sang, R. I. Boughton, C. P. Wong, H. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C.-J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dinca, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Hou, C. B. Cao, F. Idrees and X. L. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, P. Cheng, H. Wang, H. Xu, L. Dang, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, Carbon, 2015, 92, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, J. Feng and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7122–7129 CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. I. Kim, J. C. Yoon and J. H. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6047–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Lee, G.-P. Kim, Y. Bang, J. Yi, J. G. Seo and I. K. Song, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, S. O. Kang, S. Park and H. S. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5296–5302 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, T. Y. Han, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, Y. Q. Zhang, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu, X. B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Li, M. H. Yu, F. X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, C. X. Wang, Y. X. Tong and G. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 7 Search PubMed .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2801–2810 CAS .
F. Luan, G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, H. Wang, Y. Tong, X. X. Liu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7984–7990 RSC .
G. H. Yu, L. B. Hu, N. A. Liu, H. L. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. A. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. Huang, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2012, 6, 65–76 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Y. Li and J. P. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lu, J. T. Zhang, Y. Q. Wang, J. Z. Ma, B. Song and H. Y. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 821–827 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. Patil, S. C. Lee, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 334–342 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mai, F. Yang, Y. L. Zhao, X. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Z. Luo, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 381 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Fan and J. Maier, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 937–940 CrossRef CAS .
H. Moon, H. Lee, J. Kwon, Y. D. Suh, D. K. Kim, I. Ha, J. Yeo, S. Hong and S. H. Ko, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chi, Z. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Huang, F. Xiao, S. Wang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16312–16319 CAS .
L. Wang, H. Yang, X. Liu, R. Zeng, M. Li, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1105–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Q. Huang, J. Wang, J. Jiang, F. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Wang, D. Lu and S. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 444–451 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Yan, J. M. Zheng, M. Gu, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang and C. M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, I. Belharouak, J. M. Zheng, H. M. Wu, J. Xiao, A. Genc, K. Amine, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J. G. Zhang, N. D. Browning, J. Liu and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 760–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuppan, Y. Xu, Y. Liu and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Yuan, Z. H. Wang, W. X. Zhang, X. L. Hu, J. T. Chen, Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269–284 CAS .
H. Liu, F. C. Strobridge, O. J. Borkiewicz, K. M. Wiaderek, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas and C. P. Grey, Science, 2014, 344, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, W. Al Abdulla, D. Wang and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 869–875 CAS .
Z. Q. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. H. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. J. Lee, X. Y. Luo, K. C. Lau, M. Asadi, H. H. Wang, S. Brombosz, J. G. Wen, D. Y. Zhai, Z. H. Chen, D. J. Miller, Y. S. Jeong, J. B. Park, Z. Z. Fang, B. Kumar, A. Salehi-Khojin, Y. K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nature, 2016, 529, 377–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. H. Mei, X. L. Li, W. Xu, D. Y. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. M. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Younesi, S. Urbonaite, F. Bjorefors and K. Edstrom, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9835–9838 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, H. J. Peng, T. Z. Hou, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, D. W. Wang, X. B. Cheng, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 519–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, S. Misra, Y. Yang, A. Jackson, Y. J. Liu, H. L. Wang, H. J. Dai, J. C. Andrews, Y. Cui and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6337–6343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, W. Y. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P. C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hu, C. Xu, Z. Sun, S. Wang, H. M. Cheng, F. Li and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1603–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Yang, S. Xin, Y. X. Yin, H. Ye, J. Zhang and Y. G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8363–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ding, S. F. Chen, D. S. Geng, S. W. Chien, T. An, T. S. A. Hor, Z. L. Liu, S. H. Yu and Y. Zong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401999 CrossRef .
J. He, Y. Chen, W. Lv, K. Wen, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Qin and W. He, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8837–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, W. C. Ren, L. Wen, L. B. Gao, J. P. Zhao, Z. P. Chen, G. M. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. A. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. L. Zhang, N. Li, Z. S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Liu, N. Zhang, L. F. Jiao, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu, X. T. Huang, C. Z. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
G. X. Wang, X. P. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, W. C. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stollers and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, D. Wu, S. Han, Y. Huang, S. Li, M. He, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3764–3769 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fang, N. Zhang, L. Fan and K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Garakani, S. Abouali, B. Zhang, C. A. Takagi, Z. L. Xu, J. Q. Huang, J. Huang and J. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18971–18980 CAS .
W. Wei, S. Yang, H. Zhou, I. Lieberwirth, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2909–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, L. Mei, J. Liang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, H. Fei, M. Ding, J. Lau, M. Li and C. Wang, Science, 2017, 356, 599–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Lang, B. Ding, T. Zhu, H. X. Su, H. Luo, L. H. Qi, K. Liu, K. Wang, N. Hussain, C. S. Zhao, X. Y. Li, H. J. Gao and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10236–10243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kasavajjula, C. S. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. L. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. B. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 309–314 Search PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025–2027 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Ding, H. Wang, K. Cui, T. Stephenson, D. Karpuzov and D. Mitlin, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 369–378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, J. Zhang, Y. J. Zhang, Q. Q. Xiong, Y. Y. Tong, Y. Li, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Y. Cao, Y. Suo, Y. Liu, J. Zhang and X. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, C. N. He, N. Q. Zhao, Z. Y. Wang, C. S. Shi, E. Z. Liu and J. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1728–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lin, M. Gong, B. G. Lu, Y. P. Wu, D. Y. Wang, M. Y. Guan, M. Angell, C. X. Chen, J. Yang, B. J. Hwang and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 325–328 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. An, Y. Li, H. Deog Yoo, S. Chen, Q. Ru, L. Mai and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Murray, M. Dinca and J. R. Long, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1294–1314 RSC .
S. Gadipelli and Z. X. Guo, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 69, 1–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patchkovskii, J. S. Tse, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine and G. Seifert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10439–10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis and G. E. Froudakis, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3166–3170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim and S. H. Jhi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20499–20503 CAS .
J. Zhu, X. Yang, Z. Fu, J. He, C. Wang, W. Wu and L. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2515–2524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Cabeza, A. Castell, C. Barreneche, A. de Gracia and A. I. Fernandez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1675–1695 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pop, V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1273–1281 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, G. X. Liu, J. M. Khan and A. A. Balandin, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 8 Search PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, E. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Qu and Z.-Z. Yu, Carbon, 2016, 98, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, M. Zhou, F. Huang, T. Lin and D. Wan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 113, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, T. Lin, F. Huang, Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Bi, D. Wan and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2263–2269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, Q. Zhang, D. Hu and J. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4018–4025 CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. T. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Z. Zhang, H. Yin and Y. L. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15–32 CAS .
A. Chandan, M. Hattenberger, A. El-Kharouf, S. F. Du, A. Dhir, V. Self, B. G. Pollet, A. Ingram and W. Bujalski, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 264–278 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. G. Nie, X. Chen, X. H. Chen and S. M. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 236, 238–249 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Li, H. Q. Yu and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 911–924 CAS .
Y. J. Wang, J. L. Qiao, R. Baker and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5768–5787 RSC .
C. H. Cui, L. Gan, M. Heggen, S. Rudi and P. Strasser, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Wu and H. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1878–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Dai, Y. H. Xue, L. T. Qu, H. J. Choi and J. B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823–4892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Silva, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7823–7826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Hou, D. Shi, D. Wexler, S. D. Poynton, R. C. Slade, W. Zhang, H. Liu and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7066–7072 CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Su, D. Liu and X. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 25440–25448 RSC .
D. Yu, L. Wei, W. Jiang, H. Wang, B. Sun, Q. Zhang, K. Goh, R. Si and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3457–3464 RSC .
L. Chen, C. Y. Xu, R. Du, Y. Y. Mao, C. Xue, L. M. Chen, L. T. Qu, J. Zhang and T. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5617–5627 CAS .
X. Fu, J. Y. Choi, P. Zamani, G. Jiang, M. A. Hoque, F. M. Hassan and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6488–6495 CAS .
H. Yin, C. Zhang, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2930–2937 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, F. Tao, L. Zou, T. Yuan, Z. Zou, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and H. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, C. Tan, X. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Cao, B. Li, Y. Zong, L. Huang, X. Huang, L. Wang, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5920–5926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, L. Ren, L. Gong, X. Qi, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Wei and J. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, X. Cao, J. Tian, C. Jin, K. Ke and R. Yang, Carbon, 2016, 99, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, T. Huang, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 609–616 CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 Search PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. C. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jin, J. Wang, D. F. Su, Z. Z. Wei, Z. F. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13934–13939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
W. Zhou, K. Zhou, D. Hou, X. Liu, G. Li, Y. Sang, H. Liu, L. Li and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21534–21540 CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Xie, J. Zhang, H. Liu, H. J. Ahn, K. Sun and G. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15908–15913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Dai, K. Du, Y. Ma, M. Liu, H. Sun, X. Ma and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1478–1487 CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Han, L. Huang and S. Dong, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3049–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Han, S. Jin, H. Chen, H. Ji, Z. Sun and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1941–1946 CAS .
J. G. Yu, J. X. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, H. Matsunaga, T. Nakashima, K. Wada, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5159–5170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marino, C. Descorme and D. Duprez, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 58, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. He, L. H. Zhang, B. T. Teng and M. H. Fan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 649–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X. D. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Zhai, M. S. Zhu, F. Z. Pang, D. Bin, C. Lu, M. C. Goh, P. Yang and Y. K. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5972–5980 CAS .
M. E. Scofield, C. Koenigsmann, L. Wang, H. Q. Liu and S. S. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 350–363 CAS .
S. P. S. Badwal, S. Giddey, A. Kulkarni, J. Goel and S. Basu, Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 80–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, X. Zhang, W. Yuan, H. Chen, S. Jiang, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Chang, Z. Sun and J. Du, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 76–79 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. A. Tsang, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui and L. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17986–17993 CAS .
G. H. Yang, Y. Z. Zhou, H. B. Pan, C. Z. Zhu, S. F. Fu, C. M. Wai, D. Du, J. J. Zhu and Y. H. Lin, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 28, 192–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Liu, C. J. Song, L. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, H. J. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 95–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, H. Yin, L. Du, G. Yin, Z. Tang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3719 CAS .
L. Ren, K. S. Hui and K. N. Hui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5689 CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. A. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Tang, S. C. Cai, S. L. Xie, Z. B. Wang, Y. X. Tong, M. Pan and X. H. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 8 Search PubMed .
R. Burkitt, T. R. Whiffen and E. H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. You, X. B. Gong, W. Wang, D. P. Qi, X. H. Wang, X. D. Chen and N. Q. Ren, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501497 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Zhang, G. Q. Mo, X. W. Li, W. D. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang, J. S. Ye, X. D. Huang and C. Z. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, B. Zhang, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo, Z. He and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13795–13800 CAS .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Yin, Z. Liu, E. Luan, F. Zhao, Z. Tang and S. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500372 Search PubMed .
J. S. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. X. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Z. Wang, Z. H. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. B. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Zhang, Z. A. Lan, L. H. Lin, S. Lin and X. C. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062–3066 RSC .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 456–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Feng and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268–2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, K. K. Sakimoto, D. C. Hong and P. D. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3259–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. D. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J. Fujisawab and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
J. H. Wu, Z. Lan, J. M. Lin, M. L. Huang, Y. F. Huang, L. Q. Fan and G. G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, K. Sun, F. Tao, D. J. Stacchiola and Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9210–9214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Ahn, I. H. Kim, J.
C. Yoon, S. I. Kim and J. H. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2412–2415 RSC .
Y. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, D. Li, J. Qu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Kim, H. Yoo and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4200–4204 RSC .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, Q. Tang, B. He and Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. S. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. K. Long, Y. P. Wu, T. F. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, A. Yu and Y. S. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. He, W. J. Chen, X. D. Li, Z. X. Zhang, J. C. Fu, C. H. Zhao and E. Q. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. X. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. B. Fan, F. B. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, F. Xiao, Y. L. Guo, S. Wang and Y. Q. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2227–2233 CAS .
X. C. Dong, Y. F. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364–4369 RSC .
B. You, L. L. Wang, L. Yao and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5016–5018 RSC .
W. Wang, S. R. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhi, W. Zhao, X. Y. Liu, A. R. Chen, Z. Q. Liu and F. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Y. Cai and W. D. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2016, 172, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xie, W. J. Tang, X. H. Xia, D. H. Wang, D. Zhou, F. Shi, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 392–399 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Yu, A. J. Wang, Y. S. Wang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11419–11424 RSC .
J. Wang, J. L. Liu, D. L. Chao, J. X. Yan, J. Y. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7162–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, H. Ji, L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Ding, H. L. Wang, K. Cui, T. Stephenson, D. Karpuzov and D. Mitlin, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 369–378 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Jiajun Mao, James Iocozzia and Jianying Huang co-equally contribute to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Jiajun Mao
	Jiajun Mao is a postgraduate student co-supervised by Prof. Lai and Prof. Meng at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University since 2015. His current scientific interests are devoted to the fabrication of multifunctional porous aerogels for energy and environmental applications. He is a recipient of the 2017 National Scholarship for Postgraduate Students.

James Iocozzia
	James Iocozzia is a graduate student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his Bachelor of Science in Polymer and Fiber Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 2012. His research interests include liquid crystals, nanocomposites and block copolymers. He is a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellow, a Graduate Student Presidential Fellow, an NSF EAPSI Fellow and a BIONIC Scholar.

Jianying Huang
	Jianying Huang received her PhD degree in 2007 from the Department of Materials, Xiamen University. From 2007–2011, she worked as an Assistant Professor at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. After that, she moved to Muenster University as a visiting scholar. She is currently an Associate Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2013. Her research interests focus on the bio-inspired intelligent textile surfaces with special wettability, ATRP, click-chemistry, and energy & environmental materials.

Kai Meng
	Kai Meng received his PhD degree from the College of Textiles, Donghua University in 2009. Thereafter, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University. He is currently an Associate Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2011. His research interests focus on the multifunctional fibers and fabrics, numerical simulation of fluid mechanics, flexible energy storage and conversion devices.

Yuekun Lai
	Yuekun Lai received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. From 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. After that, he moved to Muenster University with Prof. Harald Fuchs and Prof. Lifeng Chi under the support of the Humboldt Foundation Scholarship of Germany. He is currently a Professor at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at the Soochow University since 2013. His research interests focus on bio-inspired intelligent surfaces with special wettability, and energy and environmental materials.

Zhiqun Lin
	Zhiqun Lin is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his PhD in Polymer Science and Engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2002. His research interests include perovskite solar cells, polymer solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, hydrogen generation, lithium ion batteries, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, quantum dots (rods), conjugated polymers, block copolymers, polymer blends, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, surface and interfacial properties, multifunctional nanocrystals, and Janus nanostructures.

Broader context
Environmental pollution caused by the rapid consumption of fossil fuels has prompted investigation into alternative sources of efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable energy systems. Traditionally, noble metals and transition-metal oxides are the most wildly used electrode materials. However, their high price and associated toxicity hinder further development. The combination of the chemical properties and 3D network morphology which ensure excellent electron transport performance make graphene aerogels (GAs) ideal candidates for various future energy storage and conversion systems, e.g., supercapacitors, Li-batteries, fuel cells and solar cells. Moreover, the ultralow density and flexibility of 3D aerogels are beneficial for portable equipment and roll-to-roll processing. This review will briefly outline and compare various fabrication methods of GAs and detail the roles of GAs in energy systems. In addition, we will look into some critical engineering strategies that give rise to the electrochemical properties of 3D GAs such as enlarged surface area, tailored porosity, efficient separation of carriers, and chemical/physical modification. The creative points and trends detailed in this review will offer promising development directions for aerogels and other porous network structures as well as metal-free materials in energy storage and conversion systems.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the various techniques employed for the construction of graphene aerogels with corresponding SEM images: (a) hydrothermal reduction self-assembly;24 (b) metal ion-induced self-assembly.26 (c) Direct chemical reduction self-assembly;25 (d) hydrothermal self-assembly of Fe3O4-containing graphene aerogels.27	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of the various fabrication processes and SEM images of the resulting graphene aerogel morphologies. Synthesis can include (a) carbon nanotube cross-linkers,29 (b) chitosan cross-linkers,30 (c) CVD-growth with Ni foam,34 (d) substrate-free CVD growth,35 and (e) 3D printing.36	 
Cathode: Cs + A− → Cs‖A− + e
Anode: Cs + B+ + e → B+‖Cs
Cs + Cs + A−B+ → Cs‖A− + B+‖Cs

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of typical double layer capacitors (DLC).	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Plasma treatment to produce N-doped graphene:51 (a) schematic illustration of N-doped moieties that can be found in graphene when treated with nitrogen plasma. (b) Gravimetric capacitances as a function of current density with inset photograph of an LED powered by a capacitor. (c) Comparison of specific capacitances between pristine and N-doped graphene (synthesized by hydrothermal method). (d) Schematic illustration of N-doped graphene synthesis by a hydrothermal method. (e) CV curves as a function of scan rates. (f) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves. (g) Specific capacitance as a function of current density. (h) Nyquist plots showing real and imaginary components of resistance.54	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for synthesis and acid activation of GA and (b) SEM of actived GA. (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm. (d) Charge–discharge curves showing high stability up to 10000 cycles. (e) Cycling performance of various graphene aerogel-based supercapacitors. (f) Specific capacitance of activated GA supercapacitors using different concentrations of H3PO4.59	 

 	Fig. 5  Macro and mesoporous graphene aerogels.66 (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis process and hierarchical pore structure formation (TEOS method). (b) CV curves collected in 1 M H2SO4 over different scan rates. (c) Specific capacitance for GA–mesoporous carbon (MC), GAs, MC, mixed GA–MC, 2D graphene mesoporous carbon, and graphene powder electrodes. (d) Cycling stability at 2 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte with inset showing periodic macroporous graphene aerogels. (e) Schematic illustration of fabrication approach. (f) CVs measured for different scan rates in 3 M KOH. (g) Charge–discharge profiles. (h) Gravimetric capacitance and capacitance retention. (i) Cycling performance at a scanning rate of 200 mV s−1.67	 
Acidic: MOx + H+ + e ↔ MOx−1(OH)
Alkaline: MOx + OH− − e ↔ MOx(OH)

 	Scheme 2  Schematic diagram of pseudocapacitors, displaying the pseudo-capacitive behaviour of RuO2 in acidic solution where oxidation states of Ru range from (II) to (IV).	 

 	Fig. 6  Pseudo-capacitor with graphene aerogel cathode and MnO2–nickel foam anode:71 (a) illustration of the layered construction of an asymmetric supercapacitor. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at different current densities. (c) Capacitance retention ratio as a function of discharge current densities.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a symmetric device. (b) CV curves at different scan rates. (c) Specific capacitance under different current densities. Charge–discharge curves using (d) Co(OH)2/graphene foam (GF) and (e) Co(OH)2/stainless steel (SS) electrodes.78 (f) Synthesis procedure for honeycomb structure. (g) Schematic illustration of layered configuration. (h) Cartoon showing two supercapacitors that can light up an LED indicator. (i) Charge–discharge voltage profiles. (j) Specific capacitances with a GA/CoMoO4 electrode.80	 

 	Fig. 8  Characterization of strain-tolerant polypyrrole/GA network composites for supercapacitor applications: (a) photograph and SEM image of polypyrrole/GA network composite. (b) Schematic illustration of polypyrrole/GA based supercapacitor device, (c) CVs of different compression states for one cycle, (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves, and (e) cycling performance under 0% and 50% compression of GA/polypyrrole based supercapacitors devices.84	 

Macro-/mesoporous GA	226	100% after 5000 cycles	0–0.8	N.A.	
66

N-doped GA	113.8	91% after 4000 cycles	0–1.0	185	
54

GA/carbon bulk	231	99% after 5000 cycles	0–3.5	1.0	
248

GA anode & MnO2–Ni cathode	157.7	83% after 5000 cycles	0–2.0	1.0	
71

GA anode & NiO cathode	210	95% after 3000 cycles	−1.2 to 0.5	3.1	
72

GA/Co3O4	768	143% after 500 cycles	0–0.5	10	
77

GA/NiO	745	100% after 2000 cycles	0–0.5	1.4	
34

GA/MnO2	175	81% after 5000 cycles	0–1.0	N.A.	
249

GA/Ni(OH)2	119	63.2% after 10000 cycles	0–0.5	1.0	
250

GA/CoMoO4	2741	96.36% after 10000 cycles	0–0.9	1.43	
80

GA/TiO2	206.7	96.4% after 150 cycles	–0.2 to 0.8	0.5	
251

GA/ZnO	316	99% after 1000 cycles	0–0.5	6.7	
252

N-GA/CNTs	180	96% after 3000 cycles	–1.0 to 0	0.5	
253

GA/MWNT	286	99.34% after 85000 cycles	N.A.	N.A.	
254

GA/Ag nanowire/carbon	213	>90% after 10000 cycles	0–1.0	N.A.	
255

GA/polyaniline	463	90.6% after 500 cycles	0–0.4	1.0	
85

GA/Co(OH)2	1139	N.A.	0–1.2	10	
77

GA/polyaniline/Co3O4	1247	80% after 6000 cycles	0–0.4	1.0	
87

GA/polypyrrole	350	N.A.	0–1.0	1.5	
84

Arrangement: (−) Cn|LiPF6–EC + EMC + DEC|LiCoO2 (+)
Cathode reaction: LiCoO2 ↔ Li1−xCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−
Anode reaction: Cn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixCn
Battery reaction: LiCoO2 + Cn ↔ Li1−xCoO2 + LixCn

 	Scheme 3  Structure and schematic diagram of Li-ion batteries (graphite anode, LiCoO2 cathode, and LiPF6 dissolved in EC:EMC:DEC as the electrolyte).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of LFP cathode structure showing the lithium ion diffusion pathways and synthesis approach. (b) Rate-dependent and (c) stability cycling performance of a lithium ion battery with N-GA/LiFePO4 cathode.95 (d) Schematic illustration of a porous graphene oxide cathode for a Li–O2 battery enabling oxygen diffusion deep into the structure.100 (e) Schematic illustration of a nitrogen and sulphur codoped graphene aerogel cathode for use in a Li–S battery.109	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the two-step fabrication of holey graphene oxide HGO/Nb2O5. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a free-standing composite of HGO/Nb2O5 with inset showing bulk appearance. (c) Comparison of the rate performance of the open network (with ion channels) Nb2O5/HGO and dense (without ion channels) Nb2O5/G electrodes at different mass loadings.127	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction path taken by lithium ions during charging and discharging with TEM image of the TiO2/graphene aerogel composite. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the electrode. (c) Cycling performance with different current densities from 0.1 to 5.0 A g−1. (d) Cycling performance at different current densities. (e) Nyquist plots of TiO2/GA;123 (f) Rate performance and synthesis process for CoCO3/GA and Co3O4/GA;125 (g) schematic illustration of structure and cycle performance of Sn@graphene.138	 

LiFePO4/GA	Cathode of Li-ion battery	78 mA h g−1@100C	89% after 1000 cycles@10C	
95

O2/GA	Cathode of Li–O2 battery	11060 mA h g−1@280 mA g−1	N.A.	
100

S/GA	Cathode of Li–S battery	10.3 mA h cm−2@0.2C	63.8% after 350 cycles	
105

Te/GA	Cathode of Li–Te battery	2611 mA h cm−2@0.2C	88% after 250 cycles	
108

Fe3O4/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1060 mA h g−1@93 mA g−1	1059 mA h g−1 after 150 cycle	
126

TiO2/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	605 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1	80% after 50 cycles	
123

Fe2O3/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	995 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1	995 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles	
122

Co3O4/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1012 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1	1012 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
125

CuO/GA/CNTs	Anode of Li-ion battery	753 mA h g−1@0.1C	639 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles	
256

Bi2O3/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	273 mA h g−1@10000 mA g−1	417 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle @200C	
124

C/MoS2/N-GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1600 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1	900 mA h g−1 after 500 cycle	
257

ZnO/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	415 mA h g−1@1000 mA g−1	490 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle@100C	
258

MoS2/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1235 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1	85.8% after 60 cycle@80C	
259

Si/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	963 mA h g−1@1.5 mg cm−2	370 mA h g−1 after 100 cycle	
260

SiO2	Anode of Li-ion battery	300 mA h g−1@500 mA g−1	
	
137

Sn/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1022 mA h g−1@200 mA g−1	96.3% after 1000 cycles	
138

SnO2/GA	Anode of Li-ion battery	1299 mA h g−1@100 mA g−1	148% after 450 cycle	
261


 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image, (b) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and pore size distribution curve, (c) initial charge–discharge curves at 0.2C, (d) rate performance from 0.2C to 10C, (e) capacity retention, and (f) cycling performance of N-doped 3D graphene foam anode in a Na-ion battery.142 (g) Schematic illustration of the V2O5–nH2O/GA fabrication process, (h) rate performance, (i) charge–discharge profiles, (j) cycling performance of samples annealed at different temperatures, and (k) the effect of crystal water content on the capacity of GA/V2O5·nH2O.143	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Snapshot from Monte Carlo simulations of Li-doped graphene pillar structures for hydrogen storage. (b) Comparison of graphene, carbon nanotube, pillared graphene and Li-doped pillared graphene volumetric hydrogen uptake.149 (c) Schematic illustration of the formation process of modified hydrothermal-graphene/paraffin (MH-GPn). (d) The measured latent heats and images of different core–shell graphene aerogel composite formulations at different temperatures.158	 

 	Scheme 4  (a) Schematic diagram of a fuel cell. (b) The polarization curves of key energy-related electrochemical reactions in fuel cells and their overall reaction equations.161	 
Anode: 2H2 → 4H+ + 4e−;
Cathode: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O;
Overall reaction: 2H2 + O2 = 2H2O

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of ORR in graphene network composites. (b) SEM image of a metal and nonmetal co-doped graphene aerogel. (c) Rotating disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves, (d) electron-transfer number and H2O2 yield of Co–N-GA for ORR.180 (e) and (f) CV curves for various Fe–N co-doped graphene aerogel composites. (g) Current density curves and power density curves. (h) Electron impedance spectroscopy curves of FexN/N-GA, FexN + N-GA mixture, N-GA, FexN, and Pt/C.176 (i) EDS chemical mapping of various composites. (j) Linear sweep voltammagram (LSV) curves of N, B-doped GA for ORR.177 Current–time chronoamperometric responses for OER (k) and ORR (l) of CoFe2O4@N,S-GA.189	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of metal-free polyaniline aerogel/graphene edge electrocatalyst for OER and ORR.191 (b) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) collected under He 1α (21.2 eV) radiation. Carbon (c) and nitrogen (d) K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra. (b–f) Schematic diagram of ORR and OER taking place at the n- and p-type domains of the 3D N-graphene network.192 (f) Schematic illustration of a zinc-air battery under charging and discharging conditions.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM image and photograph of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G, (b) Tafel plots, and (c) HER polarization curves using various catalysts. (d) The current density versus RHE of g-C3N4/GO,196 (e) polarization curves for various samples, (f) Tafel plots for different samples, (g) capacitive current at 0.15 V, (h) Nyquist plots collected at a −200 mV bias voltage of GA/CoP,202 (i) SEM image of nickel phosphide embedded within a graphene/nickel foam, polarization curves of nickel phosphide graphene/nickel foam in (j) 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH = 0), (k) 1 M KPi (pH = 7), and (l) 1 M KOH (pH = 14) of graphene/Ni foam.203	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) CO2 reduction pathway, (b) CO2 reduction and CO production versus time and Faradaic efficiency, (c) CO versus potential, (d) HCOO−versus potential by DFT modelling of 3D graphene.209	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of free standing electrodes and their incorporation into direct methanol fuel cells, (b) CV curves of various samples, (c) chronoamperometric curves of different samples, (d) electrochemical performance of direct methanol fuel cells constructed with various catalysts.217	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Polarization curves, (b) Tafel plots, (c) EIS Nyquist plots of different samples, and (d) cathodic current density of 3D MoS2/N-GA anodes for hydrogen evolution in microbial electrolysis cells.224 (e) Photograph of a graphene aerogel/Pt hybrid demonstrating high mechanical strength and shape control, (f) confocal microscope image of living bacteria inside the MFC after 3 days, (g) performance of MFCs with various electrode materials, and (h) photograph of an MFC driving a timer.226	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the water oxidation pathway in graphene aerogel/g-C3N4/N-GA/NiFe cell, (b) transient photocurrent density versus time, (c) transient photocurrent responses of various samples, (d) Mott–Schottky plots, (e) IPCE spectra at 1.22 V under AM 1.5G irradiation of g-C3N4/N-doped GA/NiFe.231	 

 	Scheme 5  Schematic diagram of DSSCs showing the sensitizer dye and iodide–triiodide redox couple.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for graphene, (b) configuration of a DSSC and triiodide redox couple;239 (c) scheme for the fabrication of G-TiO2 inverse opal electrodes: (1) colloidal PS spheres serve as templates, (2) graphene oxide is incorporated around spheres and reduced, (3) the PS spheres are dissolved away to yield a highly porous GO structure;240 (d) schematic illustration of a DSSC with a quasi-solid electrolyte composed of a PAA–CTAB gel and graphene, (e) SEM of porous structure, (f) Nyquist plots, (g) Tafel polarization curves, (h) Arrhenius plots, and (i) J–V characteristics of graphene gel on quasi-solid-state DSSCs.242	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of a graded bandgap perovskite solar cell (i.e. two perovskite layers), (b) photoluminescence spectra of cells with (W/) and without (W/O) monolayer h-BN or GA components, (c) current density versus voltage of cells with and without h-BN or GA components.247	 
Footnote
† Jiajun Mao, James Iocozzia and Jianying Huang co-equally contribute to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
