Molecular and supramolecular sensitization of nanocrystalline wide band-gap semiconductors with mononuclear and polynuclear metal complexes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/A803991G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/A803991G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 87-96Molecular and supramolecular sensitization of 
nanocrystalline wide band-gap semiconductors with mononuclear and 
polynuclear metal complexesCarlo A. Bignozzi, Roberto Argazzi and Cornelis J. KleverlaanDipartimento di Chimica, Università di Ferrara, Via L. Borsari N. 46, 44100, Ferrara, ItalyReceived 28th September 1999First published on UnassignedUnassigned6th March 2000AbstractSome strategies for the design of mononuclear sensitizers and 
of artificial supramolecular systems useful in the sensitization of wide 
band-gap semiconductors, and featuring functions such as photoinduced 
charge separation and the antenna effect for their use in sensitization of 
semiconductors are reviewed. Such functions depend on the choice of 
specific molecular components which may control the kinetics of the 
interfacial and intercomponent electron transfer processes. Examples of 
molecular devices, which may prevent interfacial charge recombination in 
sensitized semiconductor cells, and examples of polynuclear complexes, 
supporting efficient intramolecular energy transfer to sensitizer units, 
are discussed.Carlo A. BignozziCarlo Alberto Bignozzi has been Associate Professor of 
Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Ferrara since 1985. He has 
lectured at several European, Japanese, and North American Universities, 
and has been a Visiting Scientist at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, N.C., USA (1989, 1990) and at the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, Los Alamos, N.M., USA (1995). He is presently a member of the 
International Organizing Committee of the Solar Energy Conference. His 
research work deals with the chemistry of polynuclear transition metal 
complexes, intramolecular energy- and electron transfer processes, and 
photochemical and photoelectrochemical energy conversion. He is the author 
of over 100 papers and review articles in these fields.Roberto ArgazziRoberto Argazzi was born in 1964 and received his PhD 
in Chemistry in 1995 at the University of Ferrara. Since he was an 
undergraduate student he has been working with Professor Bignozzi in the 
field of Supramolecular Photochemistry, mainly studying photoinduced energy 
and electron transfer in polynuclear metal complexes. His research 
interests range from the design of photochemical molecular devices to 
photoelectrochemical and photoelectrochromic systems. He is currently 
researcher from the National Research Council (C.N.R.).Cornelis J. KleverlaanCornelis J. Kleverlaan obtained his PhD degree in 1998 
from the University of Amsterdam with Professor A. Oskam and Professor D. 
J. Stufkens in the Department of Inorganic Chemistry. He is currently a 
post-doctoral research associate in the TMR Network 
″Hetero-supramolecular Chemistry″ with Professor F. Scandola at 
the University of Ferrara.1 IntroductionThe use of solid-state materials for conversion of solar energy into 
electricity is a topic of much interest to scientists. Colloids and 
nanocrystalline films of several semiconductor systems have been employed 
in the direct conversion of solar energy into chemical or electrical 
energy.1,2 In the 1950s the 
improvements in silicon purity and solid-state junctions created a 
revolution in the development of solar cells. Silicon solar cell 
efficiencies improved by an order of magnitude in the 1950s onwards to 
reach 24% in 1995.3 In the 1990s a major 
photoelectrochemical solar cell development was obtained with the 
introduction of thin film dye sensitized solar cells devised by 
Grätzel.4 For the first time a solar 
energy device operating on a molecular level showed the stability and the 
efficiency required for potential practical applications.4–6Although the general principles of dye sensitization of wide band-gap 
semiconductors were already well established in the 1970s,7 progress in the application of such techniques to 
light energy conversion has been initially very slow due to the limited 
light absorption shown by monolayers of dyes on electrodes of low surface 
roughness. Substantial advances in conversion efficiencies, obtained with 
sensitized semiconductor electrodes, started with the development of high 
surface area nanocrystalline semiconductors4 
and of suitable molecular sensitizers.4–6,8Most of the nanocrystalline semiconductors studied up to now have been 
metal oxides or chalcogenides, such as TiO2, ZnO, 
SnO2, Nb2O5, WO3, 
SrTiO3, Ta2O5 or CdS. Films based on these 
materials constitute a network of mesoscopic particles which are in close 
contact with each other and allow for efficient electronic migration. 
Because of their high roughness factor and relatively good conductivity, 
these materials are ideal candidates for a number of interesting 
applications such as photoelectrochemical solar cells, sensors, electro- 
and photochromic materials, and photocatalytic devices.9 Wide band-gap n-type semiconductors such as 
TiO2 and ZnO are materials that do not undergo 
decomposition upon irradiation or heating and are therefore generally 
utilized in dye sensitized photoelectrochemical solar cells.2,10 The development of these materials and of 
efficient molecular sensitizers has caused a sharp acceleration in the 
field, and active research on several aspects of this technology is now 
being performed in many laboratories.Over the last ten years, our group has been working in the field of 
supramolecular photochemistry. In particular, we have been interested in 
the design, synthesis and characterization of inorganic photochemical 
molecular devices, i.e. supramolecular systems based on inorganic 
building blocks with suitable built-in light-induced functions.10The aim of this contribution is to use representative experimental 
results, mainly taken from the work of our group, to exemplify a 
supramolecular approach to the sensitization of semiconductors. At first 
the article deals with some background material on sensitization of wide 
band-gap semiconductors and factors affecting conversion efficiencies in 
photoelectrochemical cells. In following sections, it discusses 
experimental results concerning mononuclear and polynuclear complexes as 
molecular sensitizers, and polynuclear complexes as supramolecular 
charge-separating sensitizers. The nature of this review precludes a full 
bibliographic survey; hence the context of such studies and additional 
literature are best obtained from the reference cited.2 Sensitization of wide band-gap 
semiconductorsDye sensitization, i.e. charge injection from an electronically 
excited adsorbed dye, is a well established technique that allows 
photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic processes on wide band-gap 
semiconductors using sub band-gap excitation. The energy gradient initially 
stored in the interfacial charge separated pair 
TiO2(e−)/D+ can be utilized to drive 
chemical reactions as well as to convert visible light into 
electricity.9,10An accepted model for dye sensitization in regenerative 
photoelectrochemical cells is shown in Fig. 
1. The cell consists of a molecular sensitizer anchored to the 
semiconductor surface, a solution containing a relay electrolyte, and a 
counter electrode. Light excitation promotes the sensitizer to upper lying 
electronic excited-states that convert very rapidly and efficiently to the 
lowest-lying electronic excited-state. The excited dye injects an electron 
into the conduction band of the semiconductor from a normal distribution of 
donor levels at a rate k2, and becomes oxidized. The 
oxidized dye is then reduced by an electron donor (I−) 
acting as relay electrolyte, at a rate k4. The electron 
flows (k5) through an external circuit to perform 
useful work. Reduction of the oxidized donor 
(I3−) occurs at the counter electrode 
(k7) and the solar cell is therefore regenerative. 
Radiative decay, nonradiative decay (k1) of the excited 
dye molecule, and recombination of the photoinjected electron with the 
oxidized dye (k3), represent loss mechanisms. 
Additional loss mechanisms, such as recombination of the conduction band 
electrons with the oxidized electron donor, are represented by the rate 
constant k6. Other loss mechanisms, such as chemical 
reactions taking place from the oxidized or excited dye sensitizer, are not 
shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the elementary steps involved in a 
regenerative photoelectrochemical cell for light conversion based on dye 
sensitization of semiconductors. The performance of the cell can be quantified on a macroscopic level 
with parameters such as incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE), open 
circuit photovoltage (Voc), and the overall efficiency 
of the photovoltaic cell, ηcell.2.1 Incident photon to current efficiency 
(IPCE)The parameter measuring directly how efficiently incident photons are 
converted into electrons is the incident photon to current conversion 
efficiency (IPCE).4,6,8 The 
wavelength dependent IPCE term can be expressed as a product of the quantum 
yield for charge injection (Φ), the efficiency of collecting electrons 
in the external circuit (η), and the fraction of radiant power absorbed 
by the material or ‘light harvesting efficiency’ (LHE), eqn. (1). IPCE(λ) 
= LHE(λ) Φ
η
        (1)
      While Φ and η can be rationalized on the basis of 
kinetic parameters, LHE depends on the active surface area of the 
semiconductor and on the cross section for light absorption of the 
molecular sensitizer.10 In practice the 
IPCE measurements are performed with monochromatic light and calculated 
according eqn. (2). 
        (2)
      2.2 Open circuit photovoltage 
(Voc)The maximum open-circuit photovoltage attainable in the dye sensitized 
solar cell is the difference between the Fermi level of the solid under 
illumination and the Nernst potential of the redox couple in the 
electrolyte. However, for these devices this limitation has not been 
realized and Voc is in general much smaller. It appears 
that Voc is kinetically limited and for an n-type 
semiconductor in a regenerative cell the diode eqn. 
(3) can be applied,11 
        (3)
      where Iinj is the electron 
injection flux, n is the concentration of electrons in 
TiO2, and the summation is for all electron transfer rates to 
acceptors Ai. One successful strategy for increasing 
Voc has been to add pyridine derivatives to the 
electrolyte.6 Pyridine is thought to adsorb 
on the TiO2 surface and to inhibit recombination of injected 
electrons with I3− (k6). An 
alternative approach, which will be discussed in section 4, involves the 
use of supramolecular systems containing a sensitizer unit covalently bound 
to a suitable electron donor unit that allows translation of the positive 
charge from the oxidized form of the sensitizer.2.3 Overall efficiency of the photovoltaic cell 
(ηcell)The overall efficiency of the photovoltaic cell, ηcell, 
is given by eqn. (4), 
        (4)
      where iph is the integrated photocurrent 
density, ff the cell fill factor, and Is the intensity 
of the incident light. The integrated photocurrent density represents the 
overlap between the solar emission and the monochromatic current 
yield.2 The maximum overall efficiencies 
reported so far are in the 7–11% range, depending on the fill factor 
of the cells. Under optimal current collection geometry, minimizing ohmic 
losses due to the resistance of the conductive glass, and under reduced 
solar irradiance, fill factors of 0.8 have been obtained.123 Molecular sensitizersPhotosensitization of TiO2 with transition metal complexes, 
chlorophyll derivatives, and related natural porphyrins has been 
reported.10 Besides these studies, a 
different approach involving coupling of two semiconductor particles with 
different energy levels, such as CdS–ZnO and 
CdSe–TiO2, has been proposed by Kamat.13In order to be useful in a photoregenerative cell, the molecular 
sensitizer should fulfil several requirements, including: (a) the 
ability to adsorb firmly on the semiconductor; (b) efficient 
light absorption in the visible region; (c) an excited-state 
redox potential negative enough for electron injection into the conduction 
band; (d) a ground-state redox potential as positive as possible, 
compatible with (b) and (c); (e) small reorganizational energy 
for excited- and ground-state redox processes, so as to minimize free 
energy losses in primary and secondary electron transfer steps.It should be noticed that the photoregenerative device described in the 
previous section (see Fig. 1) has the 
peculiarity of operating with molecular sensitizers having short lived 
excited-states, and with sensitizers showing photochemical instability or 
irreversible ground-state redox behaviour. This peculiarity is satisfied 
when charge injection processes to the semiconductor are very fast and 
competitive with deactivation or chemical reactivity of the excited 
sensitizer. A fast reduction of the sensitizer oxidized form can be 
obtained by increasing the concentration of iodide in the electrolytic 
solution.The most successful sensitizers used so far are based on polypyridine 
complexes of d6 metal ions, such as Ru(II), 
Os(II), and Re(I) showing intense metal to ligand 
charge transfer transitions in the visible region, leading to MLCT states. 
The energies of these states can be varied systematically by changing the 
substituents at the chromophoric ligands (electron-withdrawing substituents 
tend to decrease the energy of the π* orbitals of the polypyridine 
ligand, while the opposite effect is observed with electron donating 
substituents) as well as by changing the non-chromophoric ligands. For 
bis-chelate complexes of the type 
cis-[RuII(bpy)2(X)2], as well as 
for the analogous OsII complexes, MLCT absorption bands shift to 
higher energy changing X from π donating ligands to π accepting 
ligands. The main effect, in this case, is a direct perturbation of the 
electronic density at the metal centre.10In the series of complexes of the type 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(X)2] 
(dcbH2 = 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine; X = 
Cl−, Br−, I−, 
NCS− and CN−), MLCT absorption and 
emission maxima were found to shift towards longer wavelength by decreasing 
the ligand field strength of the ligand X, with 
E1
/2 
RuIII/II decreasing in the expected order, CN > NCS > 
halides. These complexes were generally found to act as efficient 
sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO2. In particular, the 
performances of the NCS complex in photoelectrochemical solar cells were 
found to be outstanding and unmatched by any other sensitizer.6,8 The complex showed a photoaction spectrum 
(IPCE vs. λ) dominating almost the entire visible region, 
with IPCE of the order of 90% between 500–600 nm. Short-circuit 
photocurrents exceeding 17 mA cm−2 in simulated A.M. 1.5 
sunlight and open-circuit photovoltages of the order of 0.7 V, were 
obtained by using iodide as redox electrolyte. For the first time a 
photoelectrochemical device was found to give an overall conversion 
efficiency of 10%.6 These performances, in 
part expected for the high reducing ability of the 3MLCT state 
(ca.
−1 eV vs. SCE) and the positive ground-state 
oxidation potential (+0.85 eV vs. SCE), contrast with the lower 
IPCE observed for other sensitizers having comparable ground and 
excited-state properties.14 This fact suggests that a peculiar 
molecular level property of the 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2] 
complex affects one of the key processes of the cell mechanism. This view 
is consistent with the results of photoelectron spectroscopy and INDO/S 
calculations, indicating that the dπ Ru orbitals interact 
strongly with the π orbitals of NCS, resulting in MO orbitals of mixed 
nature.15 In particular, the calculations 
show that the sulfur 3p orbitals give a considerable contribution to the 
outermost orbitals of the complex. Hole delocalization across the NCS 
ligands can thus be responsible for an increased electronic matrix element 
for the electron transfer reaction involving 
TiO2/RuIIINCS and I−. This would 
lead to an increase in the rate constant of the reductive process 
(k4 in Fig. 1), and as a 
consequence in IPCE.16In an attempt to extend the spectral sensitivity of mononuclear dyes 
towards the red, new 
cis-[Ru(5,5′-dcbH2)2(X)2] 
complexes based on the ligand 5,5′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine (X 
= Cl−, NCS−, CN−) were 
synthesized.8 The change of the carboxylic 
function position from 4,4′ to 5,5′ causes a lowering of the 
energy of the π* accepting orbitals. The absorption spectra of these 
species, which are dominated in the visible by 
dπ–π*(5,5′-dcbH2) transitions, are 
thus red shifted with respect to those of the corresponding 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(X)2] complexes, 
pointing towards a possible improvement in the photoelectrochemical 
performances of these dyes due to an increased spectral matching with the 
solar spectrum. To better understand the effects of this change, the 
electrochemical, spectroscopic and photoelectrochemical properties of these 
complexes were compared to those of the analogous species based on the 
dcbH2 ligand. As expected, no differences were found in the 
RuII/III oxidation potential for the corresponding species, 
suggesting that no significant perturbation of the dπ orbital 
energy of the metal occurs upon changes in the substituent position at the 
chromophoric ligand. On the contrary, a substantial decrease in the 
reduction potential of the chromophoric ligand was observed for the complex 
[Ru(5,5′-dcbH2)(NCS)2] with respect to 
[Ru(4,4′-dcbH2)(NCS)2], in agreement with the 
lower π* energy for the former dye. The absorption spectra of the 
[Ru(5,5′-dcbH2)2(X)2] 
complexes in DMF showed MLCT bands remarkably red shifted with respect to 
the corresponding 
[Ru(4,4′-dcbH2)2(X)2] species. A 
sustained conversion of light to electricity was demonstrated with this new 
family of molecular devices achieving the goal of extending the 
photoelectrochemical cell responsivity to longer wavelengths.Another strategy found in the literature to improve the light harvesting 
efficiency and sensitivity at longer wavelengths of mononuclear 
sensitizers, is the introduction of phenyl groups in the chromophoric 
ligands.17 Kohle et al. reported 
the synthesis and properties of several Ru(II) complexes with 
4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine (dcbH2) as anchoring 
ligand and containing 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine (dmbip) or 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)-4-phenylpyridine (ph-dmbip), (Fig. 2), and monodentate ligands 
(X− = Cl−, I−, 
NCS−, NCSe−, CN−). Fig. 2  Structural formulae of the ligands 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine (dmbip) and 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)-4-phenylpyridine (ph-dmbip). The introduction of phenyl groups in suitable positions of polypyridine 
ligands was known to determine an increase in the absorption coefficients 
of MLCT transitions. Moreover, a heavy atom ancillary ligand such as 
I− was thought to increase the spin-orbit coupling 
constant of the complex leading to an enhancement of the spin-forbidden, 
low energy, singlet–triplet MLCT transitions. All the complexes were 
found to be less efficient sensitizers when compared to 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2]. In 
particular, the halide complexes Na[Ru(dmbip)(dcb)X] (X = 
Cl−, I−) gave a strongly reduced IPCE 
with respect to the corresponding thiocyanate dye. The thiocyanate group is 
a weaker σ donor compared to halide ions and determines a lower 
destabilization of the Ru(dπ) orbitals. This could increase 
the driving force for the reductive quenching of the oxidized dye by 
I− ions (k4) in the cell. However, the 
small difference observed in the oxidation potentials of the thiocyanate 
and iodo complexes did not explain the remarkable difference in IPCE. An 
interesting observation was the chemical and photochemical lability of the 
metal–halide bond in the presence of water. The aquo complex was 
found to inject electrons into TiO2 more efficiently than the 
halide one. Despite the higher extinction coefficient and the similarity of 
ground-state redox properties, the phenylated complex 
[Ru(ph-dmbip)(dcbH)(NCS)] exhibited a lower IPCE with respect to 
[Ru(dmbip)(dcbH)(NCS)]. The observed IPCE was, however, quite high (60% at 
520 nm).As a complementary strategy to polypyridyl substitution, several 
attempts have been made to find suitable ancillary ligands for complexes of 
the type 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2X2] in 
order to have better mononuclear ruthenium sensitizers. The complexes 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(isq)2] (isq = 
isoquinoline),18cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(ppy)2] and 
cis-[Ru(dcbH2)2(H2O)(ppy)]19 (ppy = 4-phenylpyridine) have shown good 
photoelectrochemical properties, despite their photochemical instability in 
solution, with IPCE values ranging from 40% for the isoquinoline and 
bis(4-phenylpyridine) complexes to 50% for 
[Ru(dcbH2)2- (H2O)(ppy)]. In another 
study, dithiocarbamate ligands14 were 
considered to be good candidates to extend the spectral sensitivity of 
mononuclear Ru sensitizers towards red. New violet dyes of general formula 
[Ru(dcbH)(dcbH2)(L)], where L is diethyl dithiocarbamate, 
dibenzyl dithiocarbamate or pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, have been 
synthesized, characterized and tested on TiO2-based 
photoelectrochemical regenerative cells using 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2] as a reference 
compound. These dyes showed intense dπ–π* MLCT 
transitions in the visible with the lower energy band slightly red shifted 
with respect to the thiocyanate complex. Contrary to what was observed for 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2], the cyclic voltammetry 
of the dithiocarbamate complexes gave reversible waves both in the 
protonated and anionic forms testifying to a greater stability of the 
oxidized species towards ligand loss or substitution, as expected from the 
chelating nature of these ancillary ligands. The photoelectrochemical 
behaviour of regenerative cells with LiI 0.5 M/I2 0.05 M in 
acetonitrile gave IPCE values for the violet dyes consistently lower than 
the reference complex, being, on average, around 50%. In order to 
rationalize this different behaviour, the kinetics of the primary processes 
of charge injection (k2) and recombination 
(k3 and k4) were explored by 
nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. Absorption difference spectra 
recorded after 532 nm excitation of the complexes bound to TiO2 
in argon saturated 1 M LiClO4–CH3CN solutions, 
showed mainly the bleaching and recovery of the MLCT absorption of the 
dyes. In all cases the formation of the oxidized sensitizer occurred within 
the instrument response function (k2 > 
108 s−1) and the recombination rate 
(k3) was found to be approximately the same for the 
dithiocarbamate complexes and the reference compound. The kinetics of 
reduction of the oxidized sensitizer by iodide ions 
(k4) was examined with the same technique at different 
I− concentrations. Stern–Volmer analysis of the 
integrated area under the absorption transients gave 
KSV = 100 M−1 for 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2] and 
KSV = 30 M−1 for the three 
dithiocarbamate sensitizers. The slower reduction rate of the oxidized 
dithiocarbamate species by I− is thought to be consistent 
with the observed trend in IPCE values by virtue of a reduced charge 
collection efficiency η.16A third possible way to design molecular sensitizers for 
photoelectrochemical applications is to extend the flexibility of MLCT and 
redox tuning of the complex properties by using mixed chromophoric ligands 
with well optimized π* energies, together with an appropriate choice of 
non chromophoric ancillary ligands. Examples found in the literature are 
complexes of the type [Ru(dmbip)(dcbH)X], [Ru(dmbip)(dcbiqH)X] and 
[Ru(dhbip)(dcbH)X] where dmbip = 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine, dhbip = 2,6-bis(1-hexa- 
decylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine, dcbH2 = 
4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine, dcbiqH2 = 
4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-biquinoline (Fig. 
3) and X = Cl−, 
NCS−, CN− or 
H2O.20 Fig. 3  Structural formulae of the ligands 
2,6-bis(1-hexadecylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine (dhbip) and 
4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-biquinoline (dcbiqH2). The planar tridentate dmbip ligand behaves both as a strong σ 
donor (benzimidazole unit) and π-acceptor (pyridine rings) offering the 
choice of changing the substituents on the imidazole nitrogen to accomplish 
a fine tuning of ground- and excited-state properties, as required. The low 
energy MLCT band is red shifted from 500 to 580 nm on changing the acceptor 
ligand from dcb to dcbiq. Resonance Raman spectroscopy experiments carried 
out on these compounds have identified the lowest energy MLCT state on the 
ligands bearing the carboxylic functionality (dcb or dcbiq). The cyclic 
voltammograms showed that the reductions are localized on the same ligands. 
Since these ligands are directly coupled to the semiconductor, a very 
efficient interfacial electron transfer is ensured. The 
photoelectrochemical properties measured by the IPCE efficiency appear to 
increase with increasing the excited-state reducing power, being maximum 
for [Ru(dmbip)(dcb)(H2O)] (IPCE = 85%; 
E[Ru(III)/Ru*] = −0.85 V) and minimum for 
[Ru(dmbip)(dcbiqH)(NCS)] (IPCE ≤ 10%; E[Ru(III)/Ru*] 
= −0.23 V). This and other evidence clearly demonstrates that the 
excited-state oxidation potential plays an important role in the electron 
transfer process.The development of general synthetic procedures for the preparation of 
molecular sensitizers is of major importance for practical applications as 
well as for fundamental studies, and several efforts have been made to 
accomplish this task. An example is offered by the step by step synthesis 
of tris-heteroleptic Ru(II) of the type [Ru(dcbH)(dmb)(ddtc)] 
and [Ru(dcbH2)(dmb)(NCS)2], where the ligands 
(dcbH2 = 4,4′- dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine, dmb = 
4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine and ddtc = diethyl 
dithiocarbamate) are introduced sequentially.21 The IPCE values were found in the range 
30–50%, in agreement with our results obtained with similar 
compounds.14 A considerable increase in 
photocurrent conversion efficiency has been observed with 
[Ru(dcbH)(dmb)(ddtc)] in the presence of chenodeoxycholic acid as 
coadsorbant. This effect is interpreted in terms of the formation of 
aggregates of sensitizer molecules due to hydrogen bonding of the carboxy 
group and the nitrogen of the ddtc ligand or the stacking of bipyridine 
rings, in the absence of deoxycholic acid.21The outstanding photoelectrochemical performances given by the 
mononuclear complex [Ru(dcbH2)2(NCS)2] 
have been recently surpassed by an analogous species based on the 
terpyridine ligand.22 TiO2 
electrodes covered with the complex [Ru(L)(NCS)3] (L = 
4,4′,4″-tricarboxy-2,2′∶6′,2″-terpyrid
ine) displayed very efficient panchromatic sensitization covering the whole 
visible spectrum and extending the spectral response in the near IR region 
up to 920 nm, with maximum IPCE values comparable to that obtained with the 
dithiocyanate complex. Another species based on a substituted terpyridine 
is the mixed ligand complex [Ru(HP-terpy)(dmb)(NCS)] where P-terpy = 
4-phosphonato-2,2′∶6,2″-terpyridine and dmb = 
4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine.23 A quantitative study of dye adsorption on 
TiO2 has shown that complexes containing the phosphonated 
terpyridine ligand adsorb more efficiently and strongly, giving an 
adsorption constant about 80 times larger than that for the dicarboxy 
bipyridine compounds. Since one of the problems encountered with the 
carboxy polypyridine class of sensitizers is the slow desorption from the 
semiconductor surface in the presence of water, a search for a new 
anchoring group is advisable. Along this line of research, we have recently 
prepared complexes based on the derivatization of 2,2′-bipyridine 
with a phenylboronic functionality.24 The 
photoaction spectra of TiO2 electrodes sensitized with the 
[Ru(4-phenylboronic-2,2′-bipyridine)2(CN)2] 
complex showed IPCE values comparable to those observed for 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(CN)2],8 indicating that the new type of linkage 
does not reduce the electronic coupling between sensitizer and 
semiconductor.4 Supramolecular sensitizersStudies on sensitization of nanocrystalline TiO2 with 
supramolecular species may provide fundamental insights into interfacial 
electron transfer processes that would not be gained with simple molecular 
compounds. A supramolecular species possesses in general the following 
attributes: (i) the intrinsic properties of the molecular components are 
not significantly perturbed, and (ii) the properties of the supramolecular 
system are not simply the superposition of the properties of the molecular 
components, but there is a supramolecular function. Upon substitution of 
one of the molecular components by a condensed phase, i.e. a 
nanocrystalline semiconductor, a heterosupramolecular system is formed. Two 
simple supramolecular dyad systems, containing a chromophoric molecular 
component (photosensitizer, P) and a covalently linked acceptor (A) or 
donor (D) component on a semiconductor surface, are shown schematically in 
Fig. 4. Fig. 4  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
involving dyad systems adsorbed on a semiconductor. Since one of the components is a condensed phase, this system can be 
considered as a “heterotriad”. In order to give the 
heterosupramolecular systems the functions depicted in Fig. 4, several 
non-trivial problems must be solved. Apart from various important issues 
related to molecular architecture (choice of the appropriate molecular 
components so that each step is thermodynamically allowed, assembling of 
the components via suitable connectors in the right sequence, 
binding of the supramolecular system to the semiconductor surface in the 
appropriate orientation, etc.), delicate problems of a kinetic 
nature must be addressed. As a matter of fact, the kinetics of each of the 
electron transfer steps must be optimized, so as to bring about 100% 
efficient charge separation. In particular, the key to the problem is 
likely to be the competition between the secondary electron transfer step 
(2 in Fig. 4a) and the primary charge 
recombination process (4 in Fig. 4a). It is 
evident that a good deal of control of the factors (driving force, 
reorganizational barriers, electronic factors) that govern electron 
transfer rates must be reached before a successful supramolecular device of 
this kind is developed. Both systems in Fig. 
4 are designed to translate the electron-hole away from the 
surface and reduce the rate of electron-hole recombination 
(k3 in Fig. 1), and thus 
increase the overall cell efficiency. In principle, an extension from dyads 
to larger systems can be envisioned keeping in mind that each additional 
charge separation step will reduce the driving force which can be stored in 
the interfacial charge separated state.In the following section a series of heterotriad systems based on 
TiO2 nanocrystals, chromophoric unit, and a covalently bound 
electron donor or acceptor moiety, will be discussed. Besides these 
systems, we also studied several polynuclear complexes in which the 
sensitizer unit is connected to chromophoric moieties acting as antenna 
units. In this type of heterosupramolecular system we have observed remote 
charge injection, stepwise electron transfer, and an enhancement of the 
interfacial charge separation.4.1 Ru(II)–Rh(III) 
polypyridine systemsA first attempt to model a charge separating sensitizer of the type 
sketched in Fig. 4a is represented by the 
dyad and heterotriad shown in Fig. 5.25 The dyad is hereafter indicated as Rh–Ru, 
where Ru represents the 
(4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine)bis(4,7-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthr
oline)ruthenium(II) moiety and Rh represents the 
tris(4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine)rhodium(III) 
moiety. For the heterotriad we used the following systems: 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmb)2 and 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmp)2, where 
Ru(dmp)2 represents 
bis(4,7-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(II), 
Ru(dmb)2 
bis(4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium(II), and 
Rh′ represents the 
tris(4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine)rhodium(III) 
moiety. Fig. 5  Schematic structure of the complexes (a) Rh–Ru and (b) 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmp)2. Both in the dyad and heterotriads the Ru unit was designed to play the 
role of P and the Rh unit that of A in Fig. 4a. Upon excitation of the Ru 
unit in the dyad, (eqn. (5)), the typical 
MLCT emission of this unit is strongly quenched with respect to that of a 
free Ru model, indicating the occurrence of efficient excited-state 
electron transfer (eqn. (6)). Ru(II)–Rh(III) + 
hν
→ *Ru(II)–Rh(III)
        (5)
       *Ru(II)–Rh(III) → 
Ru(III)–Rh(II)
        (6)
       Ru(III)–Rh(II) → 
Ru(II)–Rh(III)
        (7)
      An approximate value for the rate constant of this process 
(≡1–2 × 108 s−1 in methanol) 
can be measured from the emission decay. Laser flash photolysis at 440 nm, 
corresponding to excitation of the Ru chromophore, did not show any 
transient accumulation of the electron transfer product. Therefore the back 
electron transfer process (eqn. (7), process 
(4), Fig. 4a) is faster than the forward 
reaction.25Upon laser excitation at 298 nm, corresponding to excitation of the 
Rhchromophore, a transient absorption difference spectrum of the 
electron transfer product is observed. This experiment shows that electron 
transfer from Ru to excited Rh (eqn. (9)), 
can also take place in this system (k = 3 × 1010 
s−1), and most usefully, yields a charge separated state 
with measurable lifetime (τ = 140 ps), unobtainable by excitation of 
the Ru moiety. Ru(II)–Rh(III) + hν
→ Ru(II)–*Rh(III)
        (8)
       Ru(II)–*Rh(III) → 
Ru(III)–Rh(II)
        (9)
      The kinetics of the three electron transfer steps can be qualitatively 
rationalized by standard electron transfer theory on the basis of the 
energetics of the system (Fig. 6). Fig. 6  Excited-state electron-transfer quenching processes in the Rh–Ru 
sensitizer. The forward electron transfer following Rh excitation is much faster 
than that following Ru excitation, as both processes lie in the 
“normal” free energy region, and the former is much more 
exergonic than the latter. The fact that the back electron transfer 
process, which has a very large driving force, appears relatively slow 
(e.g., slower than the forward process arising from the Rh 
localized excited-state) is most probably a result of the Marcus 
“inverted region” effect. The kinetics of the electron transfer 
process, involving the excited Ru chromophore and the covalently bound 
Rh(III) moiety (eqn. (6)), has 
also been studied for the systems Rh′–Ru(dmb)2 and 
Rh′-Ru(dmp)2 in solution. The observed rate constants of 
these processes were: k = 3.3 × 107 
s−1 for Rh′–Ru(dmb)2 and k 
= 2 × 108s−1forRh′–Ru(dmp)2. Also in these complexes the 
forward electron transfer (eqn. (5)) was 
slower than the recombination step (eqn. 
(7)), as shown by the lack of accumulation of the 
Ru(II)–Rh′(III) electron transfer 
product.The photophysical behaviour of the heterosupramolecular systems 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmb)2 and 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmp)2 are shown 
schematically in Fig. 7. Besides the 
electron transfer processes (1) and (4), which can occur in the dyad, at 
least three new processes can be added, e.g. a stepwise charge 
injection to TiO2 (1, 2), remote injection from the Ru moiety 
(3), and back electron transfer to a remote group (5). Fig. 7  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
in the TiO2–Rh–Ru system. A preliminary study showed that the Rh′–Ru dyads anchored to 
TiO2 could be used as efficient sensitizers, giving rise to 
maximum IPCE values of the order of 40–50%. A detailed laser flash 
photolysis study showed that after excitation of the Ru-chromophore, the 
charge separated state 
TiO2(e−)–Rh′–Ru(III
) was formed.26 Since the lifetimes 
of the residual emission from the Ru* moieties on TiO2 were 
similar to those observed for the binuclear 
Rh′–Ru(dmb)2* and 
Rh′–Ru(dmp)2* species in solution, it was concluded 
that the charge injection process was mediated by the Rh centre, as shown 
in Fig. 7, processes (1) and (2). The 
lifetime of the charge separated state, 
TiO2–Rh′(II)–Ru(III), 
was ca. 200 ps. Within this lifetime, charge injection from the 
Rh′ centre to TiO2 occurs, resulting in the interfacial 
TiO2(e−)–Rh′–Ru(III
) charge separated state. This fast electron injection is in 
agreement with injection rates from mononuclear dye molecules (k = 
1012–1013 s−1).27 The translation of the electron-hole, away from 
the surface, is expected to lead to an extended lifetime for the 
interfacial charge separated state as was indeed observed for the charge 
separated state 
TiO2(e−)–Rh–Ru(III) with 
respect to that of the model system 
TiO2(e−)–Ru(III).264.2 Ru(II) 
polypyridine–phenothiazine systemThe alternative approach to vectorially translating the electron-hole 
away from the surface is by using a system of the type depicted in Fig. 4b. The dyad system, Ru–PTZ, which was 
prepared to model this function, is shown in Fig. 
8. The chromophoric unit is represented by the Ru(II) 
moiety (with two dcbH and one dmb ligands), while the covalently bound 
phenothiazine (PTZ) acts as the electron donor.28 Fig. 8  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
in the TiO2–Ru–PTZ system. Irradiation with visible light in solution results in the population of 
the Ru(III)(dcbH−) 3MLCT 
excited-state, which is followed by reductive quenching of the 
excited-state by the PTZ moiety. The reductive quenching of the 
excited-state (Fig. 9) is moderately 
exergonic (by ca. 0.25 eV) and has a rate constant of ca. 
2.5 × 108 s−1 in methanol, as measured 
from the lifetime of the residual *Ru(II) emission. Fig. 9  Excited-state electron-transfer quenching processes in the Ru–PTZ 
sensitizer. The corresponding charge recombination step, presumably faster than the 
forward one, leads the system back to the ground-state without appreciable 
transient accumulation of the electron transfer product.When the dyad system is attached to TiO2, excitation of the 
Ru chromophore can result in a new charge separated state, 
TiO2(e−)–Ru–PTZ+. In 
principle there are two possible pathways available to reach this charge 
separation. In pathway (1) (Fig. 10), 
charge injection is followed by the charge shift to the donor, while in 
pathway (2), reductive quenching by the PTZ moiety is followed by charge 
injection. Fig. 10  Possible sequences of intramolecular and interfacial electron-transfer 
processes for the heteromolecular TiO2–Ru–PTZ 
system. A laser flash photolysis study of the heterotriad showed that visible 
light excitation results in the Ru-based MLCT excited-state which rapidly 
injects an electron into the semiconductor. The injection process is then 
followed by electron transfer from PTZ to the oxidized Ru centre 
(−ΔG ca. 0.36 eV), resulting in the charge separated 
state 
TiO2(e−)–Ru(II)–PTZ
+. The recombination of this state to the ground-state occurs 
with a rate of 3.6 × 103 s−1. Excitation 
of the model compound [Ru(dmb)(dcbH)2] gives rise to the 
formation of the charge separated state 
TiO2(e−)–Ru(III), whose 
recombination kinetics are complex and can be analysed by a distribution 
model, with an average rate constant of k3 = 3.9 
× 106 s−1. Translating the hole from the 
Ru centre to the pendant PTZ moiety produces a delay in recombination rates 
(k3) by three orders of magnitude.28The dyad and model molecules were also tested in regenerative solar 
cells, with iodide as an electron donor. While the observed IPCE was of the 
order of 45% for both systems, the open circuit photovoltage was observed 
to be higher for the dyad by 100 mV. The effect was more pronounced in the 
absence of iodide with Voc 180 mV larger over 5 decades 
of irradiation. Applying the measured interfacial electron transfer rates 
to the diode equation (eqn. (3)) gave the 
predicted increase of Voc of 200 mV, which was in 
agreement with the obtained value (180 mV).28 It is therefore encouraging that an increase of 
the lifetime of the interfacial charge separated state 
TiO2(e−)–Ru(III)–PTZ
+ has a direct influence on the overall efficiency of the 
cell.4.3 Re(I)–Ru(II) 
polypyridine systemAs discussed before, the binding to the semiconductor surface is an 
important factor for solar cells, in terms of stability and electronic 
coupling. Ligands with linkage groups containing 
(CH2)n spacers, such as those depicted in 
Fig. 11, were used in molecular 
dyes.29 Surprisingly, the reduced 
electronic coupling between the excited sensitizer, and the conduction band 
of TiO2 did not affect the performance of the solar cell. This 
suggested that intimate linkage between the chromophoric unit and the 
semiconductor surface is not a strict requirement for the design of a 
molecular sensitizer, and that remote charge injection processes can be 
profitably used to achieve efficient dye sensitization. Fig. 11  Schematic structure of the ligand bpy-acac. A supramolecular approach for designing a molecular sensitizer, which 
can control the orientation of the component units on the semiconductor 
surface, is shown in Fig. 12. The binuclear 
compound is based on the 
–Re(I)(dcbH2)2 and 
–Ru(II)(bpy)2 moieties, undergoing ultra-fast 
and efficient photoinduced Re* → Ru energy transfer.30 Due to the facial geometry of the surface-bound 
Re-moiety, the –Ru(bpy)2 unit is forced to be close to the 
surface. Fig. 12  Schematic structure of the TiO2–Re–Ru system. Visible excitation of TiO2 photoanodes, loaded with the 
binuclear sensitizer, resulted in an efficient photon-to-current 
conversion. The photoaction spectrum showed that the Ru–polypyridine 
moiety absorbs most of the visible light with uncorrected maximum IPCE 
values of the order of 70%. The transient absorption difference spectra for 
the sensitizers bound to TiO2 showed a broad bleach in the 
region from 400 to 600 nm, typical for the 
TiO2(e−)/Re(I)–Ru(III
) state. The formation of this state is promptly observed after the 
laser pulse. This indicates that either remote electron injection into 
TiO2, or intraligand (bpy˙−
→ dcbH2) electron hopping from 
Ru(III)(bpy˙−) to 
Re(I)(dcbH2), occurs within the laser pulse (k 
> 5 × 107 s−1). In conclusion, a 
rapid and efficient injection process is observed from a chromophoric group 
which is not directly coupled to the semiconductor surface. These data 
indicate that direct covalent attachment is not strictly necessary for 
designing efficient molecular sensitizers.The occurrence of remote interfacial electron transfer processes has 
been further confirmed by studying the photophysics of the binuclear 
complex 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(Cl)–BPA–Os(bpy)2C
l]2+ (BPA = 1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethane) on transparent 
TiO2 films.31 At 
monolayer coverages the binuclear complex gives rise to ca.1
/2 molecular adsorption 
with respect to the model complex 
[Ru(dcbH2)2(Cl)(py)]+, indicating that the 
binuclear complex lies on the nanocrystals of TiO2 in a more or 
less extended conformation, as shown in Fig. 
13a,c. Fig. 13  Different orientations of the TiO2–Ru–Os 
system. Transient absorbance difference spectra following 532 nm laser 
excitation, where both Ru and Os chromophores absorb, reveal the typical 
bleaching of the spin-forbidden MLCT transition localized on the 
Os(II) moiety. Spectral and kinetic analysis of the transient 
signals are consistent with the formation of the charge separated state 
TiO2(e−)–Ru(II)–Os(
III). This state can either be formed through charge injection 
from the excited Ru chromophore followed by intramolecular 
Os(II) → Ru(III) electron transfer, or 
via remote electron transfer from the 3MLCT 
excited-state localized on the OsII(bpy)2 unit.The occurrence of the latter process is confirmed by time resolved 
experiments in which selective laser excitation of the Os chromophore (at 
683 nm) was obtained.4.4 Antenna effectAs far as the antenna effect is concerned, different schemes can be 
conceived in order to increase the light harvesting efficiency on a 
semiconductor surface. Two simple prototypes, following the 
“branched” or “one-dimensional” design are shown 
schematically in Fig. 14. Fig. 14  Possible sequences of intramolecular and interfacial electron-transfer 
in linear and branched antenna systems adsorbed on a semiconductor. Extension of the two types of design to larger antenna systems is 
intuitive. The obvious requisites for the supramolecular species to be used 
in such systems are: (i) an efficient antenna effect, leading the absorbed 
energy towards the molecular component; (ii) the capability for the 
molecular component bound to the semiconductor surface, once excited, to 
inject electrons into the conduction band. For a supramolecular system 
considered as an independent photochemical molecular device, an obvious 
expectation is that “the larger the antenna system, the larger the 
light harvesting efficiency”. The same is not necessarily true for 
light-to-energy conversion on a semiconductor. A highly branched 
supramolecular system projects a much larger area than a simple molecular 
sensitizer onto the semiconductor surface. At saturation coverage, this 
would strongly reduce the gain represented by the antenna effect. From this 
point of view, the one-dimensional design would look superior to the 
branched one, as one could think of increasing the nuclearity of the 
supramolecular system without substantially increasing the occupied area. 
The idea of using sensitizer–antenna molecular devices in the 
sensitization of semiconductors stems from the observed inefficiency of 
multilayers of adsorbed mononuclear sensitizers.10 In a first attempt to investigate the 
feasibility of such an approach, the 
[(NC)Ru(bpy)2(CN)Ru(dcbH2)2(NC)Ru(bpy)
2 (CN)]2+ trinuclear complex has been 
developed.10Efficient energy funneling from the peripheral chromophores to the 
central –Ru(dcb)2– unit in this trinuclear complex 
was demonstrated by conventional photophysical experiments and by 
time-resolved resonance Raman.32 In 
experiments carried out using TiO2 coated electrodes in aqueous 
solution at pH 3.5, photocurrents were obtained upon irradiation with 
visible light. The photoaction spectrum was observed to reproduce the 
absorption spectrum of the complex, indicating that the efficiency of 
absorbed light conversion is constant throughout the spectrum, regardless 
of whether the incident light is absorbed by the central unit or by the 
terminal ones. Subsequent experiments on this complex adsorbed on 
polycrystalline TiO2 gave an overall conversion efficiency of 
ca. 7% with turnover numbers of at least five million without 
decomposition. Considerable efficiencies were also observed with related 
compounds containing [Ru(4,4′-X2bpy)Ru(CN)2] (X 
= COOH, CH3, C6H5) and 
phenanthroline-containing analogues, as lateral units.33The antenna effect is expected to be of relevance for applications 
requiring very thin TiO2 layers. This is exemplified by the 
comparison between the photoaction spectra of the mononuclear 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)4]2− and of the 
trinuclear species 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)3(CN)Ru(bpy)2(CN)Ru(bpy)
2(CN)] shown in Fig. 15. Fig. 15  Comparison between the photoaction spectra of 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)4]2− 
(—■—) and 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)3(CN)Ru(bpy)2(CN)Ru(bpy)
2(CN)] (—●—). Time resolved resonance Raman and emission spectroscopy show that energy 
transfer processes, from MLCT excited-states localized on the 
Ru(bpy)2(CN) chromophoric units to MLCT states localized on the 
Ru(dcbH2)(CN)3– moiety, occur with unitary 
efficiency.34Fig. 
15 shows the photoaction spectra of monolayers of the two 
molecular species on 2 μm thick TiO2 photoanodes and the 
corresponding absorption spectra. It appears evident that the polynuclear 
sensitizer gives rise to higher photocurrents than the mononuclear species, 
as expected on the basis of the increased LHE term. Analogous observations 
were previously made by comparing the photoaction spectra of the 
mononuclear [Ru(5,5′-dcbH2)2(CN)2] 
and of the trinuclear 
[(NC)Ru(bpy)2(CN)Ru(5,5′-dcbH)2(NC)Ru(bpy)
2(CN)]2+ sensitizers.32 These results confirm that 
antenna–sensitizer complexes can be profitably used to increase the 
light harvesting efficiency of sensitized semiconductor materials.5 ConclusionsSimple strategies for the design of mononuclear sensitizers and of 
artificial supramolecular systems, featuring functions such as photoinduced 
charge separation and the antenna effect for their use in sensitization of 
semiconductors, have been discussed. These functions depend on the choice 
of specific molecular components which may control the kinetics of the 
interfacial and intercomponent processes. On the basis of the knowledge 
gained in this field, molecular devices with pre-determined built-in 
functions can now be rationally designed and synthesized.Upon functionalization in appropriate positions, molecular devices can 
be grafted onto the semiconductor surface and profitably used in the 
sensitization process. Studies on model systems suggest the possibility of 
preventing interfacial charge recombination in sensitized semiconductor 
cells, by taking advantage of photoinduced charge separation within the 
photosensitizer; they additionally indicate that intramolecular energy 
transfer processes in polynuclear complexes can be used to improve the 
overall cross-section for light absorption of a sensitizer.6  AcknowledgementWe thank the EU for financial support under the Joule III program, 
Contract N. JOR3-CT98-7040 and the TMR grant N. CT96-0076.ReferencesA. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 172 CrossRef CAS .A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Wenham and M. A. Green, Prog. Photovolt., 1996, 4, 3 Search PubMed .B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .G. Smestad, C. A. Bignozzi and R. Argazzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 32, 259 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, L. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .H. Gerisher, Photochem. Photobiol., 1972, 16, 243 Search PubMed .R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 5741 CrossRef CAS .T. Gerfin, 
M. Grätzel and 
L. Walder, in 
Molecular Level Artificial Photosynthetic Materials, Prog. Inorg. 
Chem., 1997, 44, 
345. Search PubMed .C. A. Bignozzi, 
J. R. Schoonover and 
F. Scandola, in 
Molecular Level Artificial Photosynthetic Materials, Progr. Inorg. 
Chem., 1997, 44, 
1. Search PubMed .A. Kumar, P. G. Santangelo and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1992, 96, 834 CrossRef CAS .M. Grätzel, in 
Semiconductor Nanoclusters, Studies in Surface Science and 
Catalysis, P. V. Kamat and D. Meisel (eds.), Elsevier 
ScienceB.V.,  1996, 
vol. 103, p. 353. Search PubMed .
  (a) S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 6834 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Liu and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1076 .R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, G. M. Hasselmann and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 4533 CrossRef CAS .H. Rensmo, 
“Dye-Sensitized Nanostructured Metal Oxide Electrodes. 
Photoelectrochemical, Quantum Chemical and Electron Spectroscopic 
Studies”, Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the 
Faculty of Science and Technology, Uppsala, 
 1998, p. 372.  Search PubMed .A. C. Lees, B. Evrard,  T. E. Keyes, J. G. Vos, C. J. Kleverlaan, M. Alebbi and C. A. Bignozzi, Eur. J. Chem.,, 1999, 2309 Search PubMed .O. Kohle, S. Ruile and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 4779 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Garcia, N. Y. Murakami Iha, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 1998, 9, 13 Search PubMed .C. G. Garcia, N. Y. Murakami Iha, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., 1998, 115, 239 Search PubMed .Md. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Muller, R. Humphry-Baker, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1997, 4571 RSC .S. M. Zakeeruddin, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel and V. Shklover, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 5251 CrossRef CAS .Md. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy and M. Grätzel, Chem Commun., 1997, 1705 RSC .S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, F. P. Rotzinger, R. Humphry-Baker, K. Kalyanasundaram, M. Grätzel, V. Shklover and T. Haibach, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 5937 CrossRef CAS .R. Argazzi, 
S. Bui, 
C. A. Bignozzi, 
L. De Cola and 
B. Schlicke, 
manuscript in preparation. .M. T. Indelli, C. A. Bignozzi, A. Harriman, J. R. Schoonover and F. Scandola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3768 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Kleverlaan, 
M. T. Indelli, 
C. A. Bignozzi, 
F. Scandola and 
G. J. Meyer, J. 
Am. Chem. Soc., submitted. Search PubMed .Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1996, 100, 20056 CrossRef CAS .R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer., J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2591 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Heimer, S. T. D’Arcangelis, F. Fazard, J. M. Stipkala and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 5319 CrossRef CAS .R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 2 CrossRef CAS .M. Alebbi, 
C. Kleverlaan, 
C. A. Bignozzi, 
G. M. Hasselmann and 
 G. J. Meyer, 
Inorg. Chem., submitted. Search PubMed .C. A. Bignozzi, R. Argazzi, J. R. Schoonover, G. J. Meyer and F. Scandola, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 187 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, J. Moser, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1990, 73, 1788 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Bignozzi, R. Argazzi, M. T. Indelli, F. Scandola, J. R. Schoonover and G. J. Meyer, Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Chem. Sci.), 1997, 109, 397 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:
Carlo A. Bignozzi	Carlo Alberto Bignozzi has been Associate Professor of 
Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Ferrara since 1985. He has 
lectured at several European, Japanese, and North American Universities, 
and has been a Visiting Scientist at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, N.C., USA (1989, 1990) and at the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, Los Alamos, N.M., USA (1995). He is presently a member of the 
International Organizing Committee of the Solar Energy Conference. His 
research work deals with the chemistry of polynuclear transition metal 
complexes, intramolecular energy- and electron transfer processes, and 
photochemical and photoelectrochemical energy conversion. He is the author 
of over 100 papers and review articles in these fields.
Roberto Argazzi	Roberto Argazzi was born in 1964 and received his PhD 
in Chemistry in 1995 at the University of Ferrara. Since he was an 
undergraduate student he has been working with Professor Bignozzi in the 
field of Supramolecular Photochemistry, mainly studying photoinduced energy 
and electron transfer in polynuclear metal complexes. His research 
interests range from the design of photochemical molecular devices to 
photoelectrochemical and photoelectrochromic systems. He is currently 
researcher from the National Research Council (C.N.R.).
Cornelis J. Kleverlaan	Cornelis J. Kleverlaan obtained his PhD degree in 1998 
from the University of Amsterdam with Professor A. Oskam and Professor D. 
J. Stufkens in the Department of Inorganic Chemistry. He is currently a 
post-doctoral research associate in the TMR Network 
″Hetero-supramolecular Chemistry″ with Professor F. Scandola at 
the University of Ferrara.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the elementary steps involved in a 
regenerative photoelectrochemical cell for light conversion based on dye 
sensitization of semiconductors.	 
IPCE(λ) 
= LHE(λ) Φ
η	
        (1)
      
	
        (2)
      
	
        (3)
      
	
        (4)
      

 	Fig. 2  Structural formulae of the ligands 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine (dmbip) and 
2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)-4-phenylpyridine (ph-dmbip).	 

 	Fig. 3  Structural formulae of the ligands 
2,6-bis(1-hexadecylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine (dhbip) and 
4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-biquinoline (dcbiqH2).	 

 	Fig. 4  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
involving dyad systems adsorbed on a semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic structure of the complexes (a) Rh–Ru and (b) 
TiO2–Rh′–Ru(dmp)2.	 
Ru(II)–Rh(III) + 
hν
→ *Ru(II)–Rh(III)	
        (5)
      
*Ru(II)–Rh(III) → 
Ru(III)–Rh(II)	
        (6)
      
Ru(III)–Rh(II) → 
Ru(II)–Rh(III)	
        (7)
      
Ru(II)–Rh(III) + hν
→ Ru(II)–*Rh(III)	
        (8)
      
Ru(II)–*Rh(III) → 
Ru(III)–Rh(II)	
        (9)
      

 	Fig. 6  Excited-state electron-transfer quenching processes in the Rh–Ru 
sensitizer.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
in the TiO2–Rh–Ru system.	 

 	Fig. 8  Sequence of intramolecular and interfacial electron transfer processes 
in the TiO2–Ru–PTZ system.	 

 	Fig. 9  Excited-state electron-transfer quenching processes in the Ru–PTZ 
sensitizer.	 

 	Fig. 10  Possible sequences of intramolecular and interfacial electron-transfer 
processes for the heteromolecular TiO2–Ru–PTZ 
system.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic structure of the ligand bpy-acac.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic structure of the TiO2–Re–Ru system.	 

 	Fig. 13  Different orientations of the TiO2–Ru–Os 
system.	 

 	Fig. 14  Possible sequences of intramolecular and interfacial electron-transfer 
in linear and branched antenna systems adsorbed on a semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison between the photoaction spectra of 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)4]2− 
(—■—) and 
[Ru(dcbH2)(CN)3(CN)Ru(bpy)2(CN)Ru(bpy)
2(CN)] (—●—).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
