Atomically dispersed metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction: synthesis, characterization, reaction mechanisms and electrochemical energy ap ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE01722D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE01722D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890-2923Atomically dispersed metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction: synthesis, characterization, reaction mechanisms and electrochemical energy applications

        
          
            Minmin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Linlin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kangning 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shanshan 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinsi 
            Shao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xueliang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Yufeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China. E-mail: liumm@shu.edu.cn; yufengzhao@shu.edu.cn; jiujun.zhang@shu.edu.cn
bEnergy, Mining & Environment, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, V6T 1W5, Canada
cSchool of Materials and Mechanic Engineering, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada
Received 
      29th May 2019
    , Accepted 15th July 2019First published on 16th July 2019AbstractIn recent years, atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) with well-defined structures have attracted great interest from researchers for electrocatalytic applications due to their maximum atom utilization efficiency (100%), distinct active sites and high catalytic activity, stability and selectivity. Based on this, this review will comprehensively discuss the recent developments in advanced single-atom and dual-atom ADMCs for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), including synthesis and characterization, reaction mechanisms and energy applications such as in fuel cells and metal–air batteries. In addition, challenges will be summarized and analyzed, including the rational design and fabrication of ADMCs and a deeper understanding of their geometric configuration, electronic structure and reaction dynamics towards the ORR. Furthermore, to facilitate further development, future research directions are proposed to overcome associated challenges, such as (1) the exploration of new/advanced materials including metal precursors and supporting substrates for the fabrication of ADMCs; (2) the optimization of rational design and synthesis techniques for single- and dual-atom catalysts to significantly enhance catalytic ORR activity and stability based on modern characterization techniques; (3) a deeper understanding of ADMC structures, reactive active sites, interactions between metal atoms and support surfaces and corresponding electrocatalytic ORR mechanisms at the atomic level using a combination of density functional theory (DFT) calculations and advanced experimental techniques; (4) the optimization of ADMC-based catalyst layers and membrane electrode assemblies to achieve high performance fuel cells and metal–air batteries using advanced electrochemical testing strategies.
Minmin Liu
Dr Minmin Liu received her PhD in Analytic Chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), under the direction of Professor Wei Chen in 2016. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2018. She is a lecturer at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the design and application of carbon based nanomaterial electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
Linlin Wang
Dr Linlin Wang received her PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the direction of Prof. Kai-bin Tang and Prof. Yi-tai Qian in 2013. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2014. She is currently a full associate professor at Shanghai University. Her current research is focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, including electrodes in Li/Na/K-based batteries, Li/Na/K ion batteries, and electrocatalysis in fuel cells.
Kangning Zhao
Dr Kangning Zhao received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology under the direction of Prof. Liang Zhou and Prof. Liqiang Mai in 2019. He is currently a research associate at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. His current research interest is focused on the defect engineering and electrode/electrolyte interface modulation of electrocatalysis for fuel cells.
Lei Zhang
Lei Zhang is a Senior Research Officer at the National Research Council Canada (NRC) and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). Lei received her first Master's degree in Materials Chemistry (1993) from Wuhan University (China) and her second Master's degree in Physical Chemistry (2000) from Simon Fraser University (Canada). Lei's main research interests include advanced materials and electrochemical energy technologies in the areas of PEM fuel cell electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, metal–air batteries and Li-ion batteries. She has co-authored more than 200 publications (∼16500 citations).
Xueliang Sun
Dr Xueliang Sun is a Canada Research Chair in Development of Nanomaterials for Clean Energy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and Canadian Academy of Engineering and Full Professor at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Sun received his PhD in Materials chemistry in 1999 from the University of Manchester, UK, which he followed up by working as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of British Columbia, Canada.
Jiujun Zhang
Dr Jiujun Zhang is a Professor at Shanghai University, Adjunct Professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo, and former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada Energy (NRC). Dr Zhang received his BS and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and PhD in electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 35 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
In this review, the most recent developments in advanced atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) with single-metal and dual-metal active sites on support materials in the application field of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are comprehensively discussed, including their synthesis/characterization, reaction mechanisms and application in electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries. To facilitate the future development of high-performance ADMCs, several technical challenges are summarized and analyzed and possible research directions are proposed to overcome these challenges. The challenges mainly include the rational and scale-up design and fabrication of ADMCs and a deeper understanding of their geometric configuration, electronic structure and reaction dynamics towards the ORR. In addition, mechanisms of the ORR catalyzed by ADMCs and structure–activity relationships can be further investigated by combining advanced physicochemical characterization techniques and theoretical calculations. And applications of ADMCs as the catalyst layer of fuel cells and metal–air batteries as well as corresponding electrochemical performances are thoroughly reviewed and discussed. This review also focuses on further design and optimization of ADMC catalyst layers and membrane electrode assemblies for fuel cells and metal–air batteries.

1. Introduction
Global concerns over the increase in fossil fuel usage and associated pollution have made the search for sustainable and renewable environmentally-friendly energy sources such as solar, wind, and so on one of the top priorities in the coming decades.1,2 However, converted electricity from these weather-dependent and unstable energy sources must be stored for smooth output to grid usage. Therefore, nanotechnology has become an important bridge to solve these problems. For example, electrochemical technologies3–5 such as various batteries,6,7 fuel cells,8 supercapacitors9 and H2O and CO2 electrolysis systems10–14 have been recognized as the most practical options to meet this demand for energy storage and conversion. And among the various electrochemical technologies, fuel cells and metal–air batteries are two important types of devices that require air (oxygen) as the oxidant in one (positive electrode) of their two necessary electrode reactions. This reaction is called the Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR).15 For example, low-temperature hydrogen–air (oxygen) fuel cells using proton exchange membranes (PEM) as the electrolyte are highly efficient and environmentally-friendly (zero emission) energy conversion devices that can be particularly applied in electric vehicles, as shown in Scheme 1(a). And because of their theoretically high energy/power densities and energy efficiencies, fuel cell technologies are potentially an eternal substitute for internal combustion engines in the fields of transportation and decentralized power.16,17 And unlike batteries such as lithium-ion batteries, lead–acid batteries, nickel–metal hydride batteries, metal–air batteries, redox flow batteries and alkaline dry batteries, etc., fuel cells are not energy storage devices, but rather, are power generation devices that can directly convert chemical energy (such as H2) into electrical energy18,19 with an external chemical fuel source. Furthermore, reactant fuel (H2) and oxidants (O2) can be continuously supplied into fuel cells to anodic and cathodic electrodes respectively to produce clean products (H2O) and continuously output electrical energy and heat energy.20 Regarding metal–air batteries (Scheme 1b) such as lithium–air and zinc–air, they are considered to be next generation batteries due to their extremely high energy densities.21–24 In particular, rechargeable metal–air batteries possess great potential due to long-term stabilities and environmental benignity25,26 and can possibly be used as alternatives to current energy density-limited lithium-ion batteries.
 Scheme 1  Scheme of (a) proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and (b) metal–air batteries. 
1.1 Importance of the oxygen reduction reaction in electrochemical energy devices
Although there are many advantages to proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and metal–air batteries, large-scale implementation and commercialization still face several challenges with major challenges involving the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode electrode. This is because the ORR greatly impacts the performance of PEMFCs due to sluggish kinetics, and although many electrocatalysts have been developed, current ORR activities are still unacceptable.27,28 The ORR is currently one of the most extensively studied electrocatalytic reactions in energy conversion and storage devices and particularly in PEMFCs and metal–air batteries.23,29–33 For PEMFCs, ORR catalysts are used in acidic media.34–36 Unfortunately, due to the corrosive environment and sluggish kinetics,37–39 ORR catalysts face greater challenges in the acidic and oxidizing environment of a PEMFC.40 Pt-based catalysts are still the current benchmark catalysts for the ORR.41–43 There is still a lot of room for improving the activity of non-Pt catalysts in acidic media.
For fuel cells, the ORR occurs on the cathode and proceeds through (i) a direct four-electron pathway by electro-reducing dioxygen to water as the end product (O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O UΘ = 1.229 V, or O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−UΘ = 0.401 V),44 or (ii) a less efficient two-step, two-electron electroreduction pathway, involving the formation of hydrogen peroxide ions as an intermediate (O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HOOH UΘ = 0.670 V, HOOH + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O UΘ = 1.77 V, or O2 + H2O + 2e− → HOO− + OH−UΘ = −0.065 V, HOO− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−UΘ = 0.867 V).20,44,45 In general, electrocatalytic ORR mainly includes species adsorption, electron transfer, proton transfer, bond breaking and formation and species desorption, and an oxygen molecule first reaches and absorbs on the catalyst surface of the electrode to form an O2*, followed by a decomposition process. The possible principal ORR mechanism is represented in Scheme 2. There are three pathways to reduce the O2*, distinguished by when the O–O bond cleavage can happen. (A) Dissociation pathway: O2* molecule can first dissociate into two O* (eqn (1.1)), then the O* continuously reacts with a hydrogen and an electron to form OH* (eqn (1.2)) and further to a water molecule (eqn (1.3)). This pathway is relatively simple. (B) Associative pathway: the O2* reacts with a hydrogen and an electron to form OOH* (eqn (2.1)) which will dissociate into O* and OH* (eqn (2.2)). Then, O* will react with hydrogen and an electron to form OH*. Finally, OH* can further react with hydrogen and an electron once again to form H2O*. (C) 2nd associative (peroxo) pathway (eqn (2.1′)–(2.3′)): OOH* and HOOH* are successively formed from O2* and then they are reduced to OH* (the cleavage of O–O bond) and further to water.46,47
 Scheme 2  Schematic depiction of possible principal ORR mechanisms. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
(A) Dissociation pathway: O2* → O* + O*,(1.1) O* + H+ + e− → OH*,(1.2) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*;(1.3)
(B) Associative pathway: O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*,(2.1) OOH* → O* + OH*,(2.2) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(2.3) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*;(2.4)Or
(C) 2nd associative (peroxo) pathway: O2* → HOOH*,(2.1′) HOOH* → OH* + OH*(2.2′) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*.(2.3′)
Subsequently, a multi-electron reduction reaction occurs involving a number of elementary steps and different reaction intermediates.48 Currently, the most practical electrocatalysts are platinum (Pt)-based and can catalyze 4e− ORR to produce water.49,50  
In the process of ORR, oxygen molecules can be electrochemically reduced to either H2O or H2O2. Through a direct 4e− pathway with a rate constant of k1, O2 is directly reduced to water (or OH−) without the formation of adsorbed H2O2 (or HO2−) intermediates. Alternatively, O2 can also be reduced through an indirect 2e− pathway in which adsorbed oxygen molecules are first reduced to adsorbed H2O2 (or HO2−) with a rate constant of k2, followed by the electrochemical reduction of the adsorbed intermediates to H2O (or OH−) with a rate constant of k3, along with catalytical decomposition (k4) or desorption (k5).49,51,52
As for rechargeable metal–air batteries, the ORR occurs during the discharge process whereas the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) occurs during the charge process.53 As the reverse reaction of the ORR, the OER is more studied under basic conditions because of the harsh conditions and large energy barrier in acidic solutions during the charge–discharge reaction processes: 4OH− ⇌ O2 + 2H2O + 4e−. As for the testing and investigation of ORR catalysts and reaction kinetics, the cyclic voltammetry and linear scanning voltammetry techniques, thin-film rotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) techniques are normally used by researchers to obtain catalyst ORR activities and quantify electrode kinetics/mass transfer rates.54–60
1.2 Importance of electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction
Electrocatalysts are one of the most important cathode components in PEMFCs and metal–air batteries and play a critical role in obtaining the high performance of both devices.61,62 Normally, the ORR on cathodes requires high overpotentials (>0.3 V, dependent on the electrode material) in the absence of electrocatalysts as a result of the sluggish reaction kinetics and hysteresis of ORR rates.63 Therefore, to overcome this major electrochemical voltage loss, ORR electrocatalysts are generally required to speed up the process. Currently, the most effective catalysts for PEMFCs and metal–air batteries are platinum (Pt)-based materials with a typical loading of 0.1–0.5 mg cm−2,59 and numerous advanced nanomaterials with unique structures have been explored with excellent ORR performances,64,65 such as Pt5M (M = lanthanide or alkaline earth metal) electrocatalysts,66 Pt3Ni nanoframes,67 ‘structurally ordered’ and ‘structurally disordered’ PtNi catalysts,68 ultrafine jagged platinum nanowires (J-PtNW),69 and hollow Pt3Ni nanoframes.70 Among noble metal-based materials, Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, Ir etc. have been extensively used as state-of-the-art ORR catalysts. However, the scarcity and high-cost of these noble metal materials are significant barriers in the large-scale commercialization of PEMFCs.15,19,20,71–73 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop inexpensive and non-noble metal catalysts that can demonstrate similar efficiencies and durability to Pt-based catalysts.74–76 The researchers have reported that non-precious and earth-abundant transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni, etc.)-based catalysts are a class of effective ORR catalysts with proven activities and stabilities similar to commercial Pt/C catalysts,37,77–79 and that among them, Fe–Nx–C materials are the most promising substitutes for precious metal catalysts in terms of electrocatalytic ORR activity.80 Based on this, Fe–Nx–C catalysts have been intensively investigated in the past few decades and great progress has been made.19,81,82 However, these non-precious transition metal catalysts are unstable, especially in acidic environments, which originates from severe leaching and larger over-potentials (40–400 mV) than commercial Pt/C catalysts.83 Therefore, the development of non-precious metal electrocatalysts with both high ORR stability and activity comparable to commercial Pt/C catalysts is still a hot research area.
The fundamental understanding of intrinsic ORR mechanisms is another aspect in the development of high-performance electrocatalysts, particularly the elucidation of catalyst active sites for O2 activation and catalyst–support interactions. The design of effective ORR catalysts requires oxygen-favorable reactive sites for O–O bond cleavage, optimized spatial structures for oxygen diffusion and water management and stable active sites for long term performance retention.83 In addition, electrocatalytic reactions occur at the three-boundary zone of solid–liquid electrolyte–gas at the catalyst layer for cathodic ORR and the mechanisms of this process are complex and primarily dependent on the surface properties of the catalyst.5,84 Therefore, theoretical studies of electrocatalytic ORR reactions and validation through experiments are the most important aspects in the development of ORR electrocatalysts. And nowadays, researchers can investigate electrocatalysts at the molecule/atom/electron level due to extraordinary developments in the accessibility of powerful computing and advanced modern characterization techniques.5,84–86 For example, researchers can use density functional theory (DFT) calculations to study ORR kinetic processes, including electrocatalytic mechanisms, transition states and activation energies for each elementary step, rate determining steps and catalytic activities of different catalysts. Besides the work by Norskov and coworkers, some other researchers have also worked in the field of computational ORR electrocatalysis, including Timo Jacob et al.,87 Rossmeisl et al.,88–90 Greeley et al.,91 Koper et al.,92,93 and Calle-Vallejo and Sautet et al.67,94
The performance of catalysts is strongly associated with active site exposure and larger exposed surface areas can provide more active sites. Therefore, the fabrication of electrocatalysts with well-developed nanostructures and large surface areas is important5 in which both theoretical and experimental studies have confirmed that the downsizing of particles or clusters to uniformly distributed single atoms is an effective method to obtain more active sites and better catalytic activities.74,95–99
1.3 Atomically dispersed catalysts (ADC)

1.3.1 Atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs). 
To increase the utilization of metal catalysts and boost ORR activity, catalyst particle sizes must be significantly reduced. This is because the downsizing of catalyst particles to the atomic scale can allow for atomic dispersion, resulting in single metal atoms anchored onto supports to maximize metal catalyst utilization and metal atom utilization efficiency (100%).100 With decreasing metal size from bulk to nanoparticles, and then to the monoatomic level, the specific activity per metal atom usually increases, accompanied by an increase of surface free energy,101,102 as shown in Scheme 3. In the past decade, after a proposed concept of “single-atom catalyst” of Pt1/FeOx was reported in 2011,103 atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) have attracted extensive attention and have become a new frontier in the catalysis field. Up to now, most ADMCs for heterogeneous catalysis have been decorated on metal oxides (e.g., TiO2, CeO2, FeOx, CoO, Al2O3, etc.) to avoid atom aggregation;100,103–108 however, these catalysts are unsuitable in electrocatalytic applications due to low electrical conductivity and/or poor stability in strong acid or base liquid electrolytes.109,110 Based on this, this review will summarize the recent advances in the preparation, characterization and catalytical ORR performance of ADMCs, along with a theoretical understanding of the corresponding structures and catalytic ORR mechanisms. In addition, challenges faced by ADMCs as well as possible research directions are provided to guide future research.
 Scheme 3  Scheme of atomically dispersed metal catalysts or single-atom catalysts, and the relationship between surface free energy and metal size. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


1.3.2 Dual atom catalysts. 
Due to the small contact areas and relatively weak interactions between single atoms and supporting materials, metal loading densities of ADMCs are usually below 1%.105,111,112 To increase the number of single-atom active sites, dual atom catalysts and even multi-site atom catalysts can be designed. And as successfully demonstrated using model catalysts, metal clusters containing only a few atoms possess discrete band structures in which the alteration of one atom in the ultrafine cluster can significantly change the electronic structure of the whole cluster along with its catalytic performance.112 Furthermore, studies have shown that dual-metal M1, M2–Nx–C sites in macrocycle compounds are more active than single center sites113,114 and theoretical and experimental studies have revealed that synergistic effects between M1 and M2 in bimetallic catalysts can significantly improve ORR performance,115 suggesting that novel dual-atom catalysts can enhance the activation of oxygen through the effective cleavage of OO bonds, which is vital for the 4e− pathway ORR process.55,83,116–119 As an example, Zn–Co dual atomic pairs coordinated with doped nitrogen in a carbon support (Zn/CoN–C) was recently reported to be capable of enhancing binding abilities for O2, significantly elongating the O–O length from 1.23 Å to 1.42 Å and thus facilitating the cleavage of O–O bonds.118

1.4 Importance of atomically dispersed catalysts
Different from conventional catalysts (supported metal nanoparticles), ADMCs consist of isolated metal single atoms uniformly dispersed on supporting materials with distinct active sites and unique chemical properties.120–123 As a result, ADMCs are a good platform to understand structure–reactivity relationships at the atomic scale due to high dispersions and fully exposed active sites.124,125 Furthermore, ADMCs possess uniform single-atom dispersions and well-defined configurations and can provide a great platform to optimize high selectivity and activity. Currently, an important aspect of ADMCs is to rationally design and synthesize materials at the atomic level, allowing for increased metal loading and active sites along with improved intrinsic activity for each active site toward the ORR.54,126 Here, the precise synthesis of ADMCs can be challenging due to the lack of a conclusive correlation between structure and electrocatalytic performance. In addition, it is also difficult to balance metal loading and the dispersal state of ADMCs because decreased particle sizes can lead to increased surface free energies and increased chemical interactions between adsorbates and metal sites on supports,101 leading to ADMC agglomerations due to the high free energy of metal atoms during material sintering and increasing metal loading processes.127–130 Furthermore, more accessible metal active sites during catalytic processes can lead to the easier formation of larger clusters or nanoparticles from isolated single metal atom species.131
Finally, a deeper understanding of the ORR catalytic mechanism of ADMCs is needed, including the identification of active sites at the atomic level and the interactions between ADMCs and support materials,132–134 as well as the optimization of ADMC catalytic activities through the tuning of single metal atom coordination environments.54 Theoretical calculations can be used to help in the understanding of the nature of active centers, metal atom–support interactions, and evaluations of catalytic activity. This in turn will guide the rational design of efficient ADMCs with ideal nanostructures and high ORR activities.
2. Synthesis strategies
Controlled synthesis strategies play a fundamental role in the preparation of uniformly dispersed single metal atoms on appropriate supports and can facilitate synergistic interactions between catalyst atoms and supports, leading to high-performance ORR catalysts. And based on the integration mode of components, ADMC fabrication approaches can be categorized into bottom-up and top-down strategies, in which currently, the majority of ADMCs are produced through the bottom-up strategy, including atomic layer deposition, high-energy bottom-up ball milling, photochemical strategies, mass-selected soft-landing methods, etc. In general, bottom-up precursors are adsorbed/anchored, reduced and confined by defects on oxides or carbon supports with plenty of N or O defects or vacancies.61,101,135 Alternatively, top-down approaches involve the disbanding of well-organized nanostructures into smaller pieces with desired properties mainly through high-temperature pyrolysis and high-temperature gas-phase migration.135,136
In practice however, the fabrication of ADMCs is challenging due to their mobility and their tendency to aggregate resulting from high surface energies.137 Therefore, inhibition strategies for agglomeration or surface uncapped sites play a significant role in the stabilization of single metal atom catalysts. Here, an effective method to increase the stability of ADMCs is to strongly anchor metal single atoms onto substrates with high surface areas, such as carbon, oxide, nitrides, sulfide, etc., to lower free energies and form highly stable and reactive catalytic active centers for desired catalytic reactions.120,138 Commonly used strategies for the preparation of ADMCs are summarized in Table 1, and more detailed discussions concerning Table 1 are as follows.
Table 1 Strategies for the preparation of ADMCs along with the corresponding materials, catalyst loadings, and comparisons of the advantages and disadvantages of each method




Synthesis method
Materials
Application
Loading
Ref.
Notes




NRR: nitrogen reduction reaction. DDSC: dye-sensitized solar cells. CO2RR: carbon dioxide reduction reaction. AB hydrolysis: ammonia–borane hydrolysis.




Wet chemistry strategy
FeCo-ISAs/CN
ORR
Fe 0.964 wt%, Co 0.218 wt%

139

Advantage: no need for specialized equipment, easy operation and possible large-scale production.


Pt/TiN
ORR
0.35 wt%

140

Disadvantage: metals might become buried and the easy formation of nanoparticles or clusters.


Pt1/TiC; Pt1/TiN
ORR
0.2 wt%; 0.2 wt%

141





H2O2 reduction




Au1/C3N4
NRR
0.15%

142





Rh1/VO2
AB hydrolysis
0.5 wt%

123





A-Co/r-GO
ORR
3.6 wt%

143





Pt1@Fe–N–C
ORR/HER/OER
2.1 wt% Pt

144





Pt–CN
Photocatalytic H2 evolution
0.075 wt%, 0.11 wt%, 0.16 wt%

145





Zn–N–C
ORR
9.33 wt% (2.06 atom%)

146





Pt1/hNCNC
HER
0.75 to 1.48, 2.92, and 5.68 wt%

147





High-temperature pyrolysis of MOFs
Fe-ISA/NC
ORR
0.947 wt%

148

Advantage: precise control over the size of MOF-derived carbon supports and interconnected 3D molecular-scale cages offering abundant mass transfer channels and active nitrogen sites.


Fe-ISAs/CN
ORR
2.16 wt%

149

Disadvantage: low carbonization ratios, tedious procedures and extreme difficulty in the modification of the molecular structure and surface properties of resulting ADMCs at such high temperatures.


S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT
OER/ORR
—

23





Co-SAs/N–C-900
ORR
4 wt%

99





Co-SAs/N–C-800
ORR








Fe50-N–C-900
ORR
0.1 mg cm−2

31





0.3 mg cm−2


NC-Co SA
ORR
1.84 wt%

150





Co2NxC
ORR
—

55





Fe,Co/N–C
ORR
—

83





Ni SAs/N–C
CO2RR
1.53%

151





CoN4/GN
DSSCs
—

152





CoPc/CNT
CO2RR
6%

153





Ni–N
CO2RR
4 wt%

14





Ni–S


2.5 wt%






Pd1/TiO2
Hydrogenation of CC bonds
1.5%

105





Pt/FeOx SAC
DSSC
0.08–2.40%

154





Co-NG
HER
0.57 at%

98





Ru SAs/N–C
Hydrogenation of quinoline
0.30 wt%

155





FeSA–N–C
ORR
1.76 wt%

156





Fe SAs–N/C-20
ORR
0.20 wt%

157





A-PtCo-NC
ORR
Co: 1.72 wt%; Pt: 0.16 wt%

158





Co-SAs@NC
ORR
1.70 wt%

159





20Co-NC-1100
ORR 0.80 V, 0.5 M H2SO4
0.34 at%

160





High-temperature pyrolysis of metal-containing complexes or mixtures of specific precursors
(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
ORR
0.2 at%

161

Advantages: top-down approach to synthesize ADMCs through the thermal decomposition of select precursors at appropriate pyrolysis temperatures.


SA–Fe/CN
Benzene conversion
0.9 wt%

162

Disadvantage: low carbonization ratios, tedious procedures, and extreme difficulty in the modification of the molecular structure and surface properties of the resulting ADMCs at such high temperatures.


CoNC700
ORR
0.73 at%

163





CoSAs@CNTs
ORR
0.14 at%

164





ZnNx/BP
ORR
0.3 wt%

165





Zn/CoN–C
ORR
Zn 0.33 wt%; Co 0.14 wt%

118





(Zn,Co)/NSC
ORR
—

119





FeSAs/PTF-600
ORR
8.3 wt%

166





Fe-NGM
ORR
0.21 at%

167





Fe-NGM/C–Fe


0.53 at%






SA–Fe/NHPC
ORR
2.3 wt%

168





Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres
ORR
0.42 wt%

169





NGM-Co
ORR
0.18 at%

170





Template-assisted pyrolysis approach
Fe–N-SCCFs
ORR
0.8 at%

125

Advantage: structural integrity in large-scale production with controlled morphology.


BET 1180 m2 g−1


Single-atom Ni-doped graphene
HER
4–8 at%

171

Disadvantage: tedious operation processes, structure destroyed during the hard template removal process along with the introduction of impurities, strong acid/base or organic solvents used in the removal of templates are not environmentally-friendly.


FeN2/NOMC-3
ORR FeN2
0.35 at%

172





Fe–NCCs
ORR
0.26 at%

173





Fe–N-CNTAs-5-900
ORR
0.09 at%

174





Surfactant-assisted pyrolysis process
SA–Fe/NG
ORR
2.0 mg cm−2

175

Advantage: effective and facile method that can be easily extended to the synthesis of other ADMCs, relatively easy to remove the soft template.


CoN4/NG
ORR
11.4 mF cm−2

176

Disadvantage: worse stability of the soft template due to weak intermolecular or intramolecular interactions.


Pd/meso-Al2O3
Selective aerobic oxidation of allylic alcohols
0.03 wt%

108





Atomic layer deposition (ALD) method
Nb-in-C complex
ORR
60 μg cm−2

177

Advantage: bottom-up precise synthesis of ADMCs with accurate control of atom layers with extremely uniform thicknesses, excellent uniformity and shape retention.


Pd1/graphene
Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene
0.25 wt%

158

Disadvantage: expensive, slow deposition rates and low yields limit large-scale production.


ALD25Pt/NGNs
HER
0.19 wt%

122





ALD TiO2 stabilized Pd1 catalysts
Methanol decomposition
0.5 wt%

178





ALDPt/GNS
MOR
—

179





Pt1/graphene
AB hydrolysis
—

112





Pt2/graphene










Nanoparticle transforming method
Cu-SAs/N–C
ORR
0.54 wt%

180

Advantage: great potential for large-scale production and readily scalable at industrial levels.


Cu-SAs/N–G


1.26 wt%


Disadvantage: presence of agglomeration and atomization competition in the dynamic transformation process of NP-to-SA.


Pt/La-Al2O3
CO oxidation
1 wt%

104





Pd-SAs
Acetylene conversion
—

181





SE-Ni SAs@PNC
CO2RR
—

182





Pt SAs/DG
HER
2.1 wt%

183





High-energy ball milling synthesis
Fe©SiO2
Conversion of methane
0.5 wt%

184

Advantage: high efficiency in the breaking and reconstructing of material chemical bonds, favorable for large-scale preparation.


CoN4/GN
DDSC
—

152

Disadvantage: low powder yields, raw material wastage and long-time consumption.


FeN4/GN
Oxidation of benzene
1.5%

185







2.1 Wet-chemistry approach
With advantages such as ease of operation and possible large scale production, wet-chemistry approaches can be routinely carried out in any wet chemistry lab without specialized equipment. In addition, wet-chemical approaches are currently the most promising and successful methods to synthesize ADMCs.61,135 The common procedure of the wet-chemistry approach for preparing desired ADMCs includes precursor adsorption onto substrates with (or within) N sources (urea, NH3, melamine, cyanamide, etc.), followed by drying, calcination and reduction or activation processes. Here, N sources such as melamine and NH3 can be introduced during the post-treatment step and in the initial step, metal complexes or precursors (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, or Pt) are anchored onto carbon supports (e.g., graphene, glucose, chitosan, or MN4C4 moiety) through coordination effects arising from co-precipitation,127,186 impregnation/ion-exchange135,140,187 and/or deposition precipitation methods.131 For example, Wei et al.188 used the co-precipitation method to prepare a series of Pt/FeOx catalysts at 50 °C with chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6·6H2O) and ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3·9H2O) as metal precursors and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) as the precipitating agent. The as-prepared catalysts were used for chemo-selective hydrogenation of 3-nitrostyrene with a yield of ∼1500 h−1, which is 20-fold higher than the optimal results reported in the literature at that time.
Although wet chemistry approaches are operationally easy and applicable to large-scale production without special equipment, disadvantages include the possible burial of metals either in the interfacial region or within the support bulk during co-precipitation. In addition, co-precipitation results in the easy formation of ADMCs on metal oxide supports and these metal oxide supports are not appropriate for electrochemical testing because of their low conductivity and weak stability under acidic conditions.65 Furthermore, strong affinity between support surfaces and metal complexes or single metal atoms allows for the easy formation of nanoparticles or clusters in solutions or on supports, especially with increased metal loading.131,135
2.2 High-temperature pyrolysis method
High-temperature pyrolysis is a top-down approach to synthesize ADMCs through the thermal decomposition of select precursors at appropriate pyrolysis temperatures (e.g., 600–1000 °C) in which the selection of temperature is vital to obtain high-performance ORR ADMCs.135 As for the preparation process, specific precursors containing metal (M = Co, Fe, Ni, etc.), N (and/or S) and C elements are treated under a protective atmosphere (e.g., N2, Ar, H2, or NH3) and the precursors can be summarized as follows:

(1) Metal-containing complexes or mixtures of specific precursors. 
As alternatives to precious Pt, transition metal-containing complexes such as iron or cobalt organic macrocycles and covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) have been widely used as precursors to prepare ORR catalysts189–191 and in recent years, numerous transition metal M–Nx–C (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Mn, Cu, etc.) species have been reported as promising ORR electrocatalysts with unexpected reactivity and outstanding durability.38,39,74 In addition, electrochemical results have shown that they can also provide high selectivity towards the ORR and methanol tolerance in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs).64 And of these M–Nx–C nanostructures, Fe–Nx species possess superior ORR electrocatalytic activity due to strong interactions between Fe and N species in carbon matrixes23 whereas Co–Nx–C catalysts are more stable.55


(2) Metal organic frameworks (MOFs). 
As prospective precursors in the design of novel porous nanocarbon-based electrocatalysts, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and MOF-derived materials have attracted intense attention in recent years. This is because MOFs possess a 3D ordered crystal framework structure and can be modularly constructed using bridging metal ions/clusters as nodes and functionalized organic ligands as struts192,193 in which the ORR primarily occurs at the triple-phase boundary with the active material electrode (solid) being in intimate contact with oxygen molecules (gas) and the ion-conducting electrolyte (liquid).194,195 The coupling of ADMCs with porous nanostructured electrodes can simultaneously increase the number of active sites and improve their reactivity.54 Furthermore, MOF-derived electrocatalysts possess a highly ordered porous structure with uniform pore diameter distribution ratios, plentiful permanent open channels and nanoscale cavities, offering congenial situations for small molecules to access.196 In particular, MOFs possess high surface areas, well-defined porosities, large pore volumes, diverse structures and adjustable functionalities as well as flexible tunability in compositions and a readily self-sacrificial nature.192,197–199 In addition, MOF-based catalysts with high surface areas and uniformly distributed active sites can be formed without the addition of carbon supports or pore forming agents and the large surface area is conducive to the dispersion of active components and sites for electrocatalytic ORR.
Among the various MOF materials, zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) and derivatives such as ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 are the most common precursors used due to their easy preparation and high ORR performances. And during the pyrolysis of these MOF materials, doped metal precursors can transform into single atoms with Zn species being removed under Ar flow due to their low boiling point at ∼907°, resulting in isolated metal ions that are closely confined in the MOF-derived support through N-coordination, thus avoiding aggregation during high-temperature pyrolysis.23,200,201 For example, Zhang et al.202 synthesized well-dispersed atomic Fe sites anchored onto porous carbon by directly bonding Fe ions onto imidazolate ligands within a 3D framework in which no aggregation was observed. The researchers explained the active site formation process by associating the measured ORR activity with the chemical bond change during the thermal activation procedure and found the formation of new Fe species with a reduced oxidation state (from Fe3+ to Fe2+) as active sites at a critical temperature of 800 °C.
Thus, a series of MOF-derived single atom catalysts through high-temperature pyrolysis have been reported in the literature.83,99,148,149,181,203 For example, Wang et al.83 recently reported a high-performance single atom ORR catalyst on N-doped porous carbon with Fe–Co dual sites ((Fe,Co)/N–C) in which a Zn/Co bimetallic MOF (BMOF) with Co2+ and Zn2+ nodes in the metal–organic framework (ZIF-8 structure) acted as the host and adsorbed Fe ions acted as the guest (Fig. 1). The researchers reported several associated conversions occurring during the pyrolysis process and that Zn species can be removed under Ar flow due to a low boiling point at ∼1173 K. Furthermore, the researchers reported that Fe3+ moieties can be reduced by as-generated carbon and in turn modulate the geometric structure of the carbon support to form N-doped graphene and that these Fe species can not only accelerate the decomposition of metal–imidazolate–metal links and drive the generation of voids inside the MOFs, but also bond with neighboring Co atoms to form Fe, Co-dual atomic sites. In addition, successive decomposition and graphitization in the process reportedly led to inner cavities and size enlargements through the Kirkendall effect.
 Fig. 1  Synthetic procedure of (Fe,Co)/N–C. Co nodes in the metal–organic framework acted as the host and adsorbed Fe ions as the guest. Continuous decomposition and graphitization can result in interior cavities and size enlargements through the Kirkendall effect. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In another example, Chen et al.149 prepared isolated Fe atoms anchored onto N-doped porous carbon (Fe-ISAs/CN) by encapsulating Fe(acac)3 precursors into molecular cages with a zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) structure. In this case, the ZIF-8 structure (cavity diameter (dc): 11.6 Å, pore diameter (dp): 3.4 Å) can act as molecular-scale cages to encapsulate and separate Fe(acac)3 precursors (molecular diameter, ca. 9.7 Å) in which one Fe(acac)3 molecule can be trapped in one molecular-scale cage originating from the assembly of Zn2+ and 2-methylimidazole (denoted as Fe(acac)3@ZIF-8). And upon subsequent pyrolysis at 900 °C for 3 hours under flowing argon, ZIF-8 frameworks can be transformed into N-doped porous carbon (CN) whereas Fe(acac)3 trapped in the cage can be reduced by carbonized organic linkers to form isolated single Fe atoms anchored onto N-doped porous carbon (Fe-ISAs/CN). And by using this method, the researchers reported that the Fe loading of the isolated Fe-ISAs/CN can reach 2.16 wt% and provide superior ORR performances as compared with Pt/C catalysts in alkaline solution. Furthermore, Xiao et al.55 synthesized novel atomic-scale binuclear Co2N5 sites through the pyrolysis of a bimetal–organic framework (ZnCo-ZIF) and reported that the metal atoms can be effectively spatially confined in the MOF precursors to suppress their agglomeration during pyrolysis. The researchers further conducted theoretical analysis of the obtained material and reported that the Co–Co distance was 2.21 Å, which was assigned to the Co2N5 structure. The intrinsic activity of Co2N5 can reach 3734 mA mgCo−1, which is ∼12 times higher than that of single atomic CoN4 sites. The binuclear site (Co2N5) structure with a Co–Co distance of 2.21 Å showed much higher ORR activities, which was attributed to significantly reduced thermodynamic barriers due to the formation of the binuclear site structure. Here, the term “thermodynamic barrier” is related to the largest of the endothermic steps. A low thermodynamic barrier corresponds to a situation in which only a low overpotential is necessary for the onset of the reaction. In another study, Yang et al.175 synthesized a single-atom iron catalyst supported on g-C3N4 substrates (SA–Fe/NG) through a surfactant-assisted pyrolysis process. As reported, Fe precursors were first doped into surfactant F127 sheets and subsequently tightly anchored onto g-C3N4 substrates. During the pyrolysis process, Fe can easily coordinate with nitrogen and form Fe@pyrrolic N(C) active sites for the ORR.
Based on systematic investigations of the relationship between precursor structures and catalyst activity, metal–ligand compositions can be rationally designed with a wide selection of metal–linker combinations.204 In addition, surface areas and pore sizes of MOF-derived carbon catalysts can be tuned by controlling organic linker lengths which are converted to carbon during the thermal activation process. However, high-temperature pyrolysis also often generates complex species such as M(0), MOx, M–Nx and corresponding mixtures that are tens of nanometers in size.121,124 In addition, direct pyrolysis strategies require improvements due to the agglomeration of metal ions/atoms into nanoparticles during the drastically reactive process at high temperatures.


(3) Template-assisted pyrolysis approach. 
The creation of carbon-based nanomaterials with 3D porous structures is another strategy to enhance ORR performance. This is because 3D porous structures can provide high surface areas with abundant exposed active sites, faster mass transport/diffusion and more effective electron-transfer pathways.174,205,206 Furthermore, the template-sacrificial method is an efficient approach to create 3D porous carbon-based M–N–C nanocatalysts with high ORR performance in which the high-temperature pyrolysis of MOFs can be classified into hard and soft template approaches.
Hard template. 
The hard template approach employs metal hydroxides or oxides (e.g., silica nanoparticles, SBA, α-FeOOH nanorods, Mg(OH)2, zeolite, Te nanowires) as sacrificial templates and small organic molecules, metal complexes or polymers (e.g., CCl4, glucosamine, dopamine, metalloporphyrins) as carbon precursors.54,111,162,172,174,203,207,208 For example, Zhu et al.54 recently developed a bimodal template-based synthesis strategy to produce hierarchically porous M–N–C (M = Fe or Co) single atom electrocatalysts with robust MN2 active sites in which a mixture of silica sol suspension, metal precursor (FeCl3 or CoCl2), ZnCl2 and glucosamine was subjected to freeze drying (Fig. 2a) followed by pyrolysis at 900 °C for 2 hours under flowing nitrogen and template removal using hydrofluoric acid to obtain hierarchically porous Fe or Co–N–C single-atom electrocatalysts. The researchers reported that cobalt/iron salts and small glucosamine molecules acted as precursors and silica nanoparticles and zinc chloride acted as porosity-inducing templates, and that the addition of zinc chloride was essential to create more porous nanostructures. In another example, Shen et al.172 designed a new template casting procedure to prepare atomically dispersed FeN2 moieties on N-doped ordered mesoporous carbon (FeN2/NOMC) through a hard template approach (Fig. 2b) involving iron ion deposition onto the surface of SBA-15 through impregnation to ensure the uniform dispersion and availability of Fe on the surface of the support, polymerization by refluxing the mixture of iron ethylenediamine (EDA) and CCl4 at 90 °C for 6 hours to obtain a dark-brown solid mixture and subsequent carbonization at 900 °C for 3 hours and HF etching to obtain the final product composed of atomic Fe elements anchored along the surface/edges of the carbon support. The researchers reported that this anchoring effect of iron on the template can prevent diffusion in the carbon skeleton during the carbonation process. Furthermore, Han et al.209 reported a series of isolated single metal atom electrocatalysts supported on N-doped carbon spheres through a hard template-assisted pyrolysis approach in which isolated Co, Fe, or Cu-ADMCs dispersed on hollow N-doped carbon spheres (ISAS-M/HNCS) were prepared by using SiO2 as the template and metalloporphyrins (M-TIPP, M = Co, Fe, Cu, etc.) as the monomers (Fig. 2c). SiO2 nanoparticles were first prepared and dispersed into a M-TIPP/TIPP solution to obtain a SiO2@M-TIPP/TIPP polymer followed by thermal treatment at 800 °C for 3 hours under flowing H2/Ar. The SiO2 template is subsequently removed with etching agents (sodium hydroxide) to yield the final ISAS-M/HNCS. And, the researchers reported that the ISAS-Co/HNCS demonstrated high ORR catalytic activity. This was attributed to the single Co sites which can significantly improve the transfer of protons and charges onto adsorbed *OH species. Using a similar hard template approach, Chen et al. also prepared a Mo ADMC with sodium molybdate and chitosan as precursors and reported that in the catalyst, Mo atoms were confirmed to be anchored to one nitrogen atom and two carbon atoms (Mo1N1C2).203 Furthermore, Zhang et al.162 also developed a series of different metal single atoms dispersed on hollow nitrogen-doped carbon (CN) supports (SA-M/CN, M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, etc.). For example, a SA–Fe/CN catalyst was obtained using α-FeOOH nanorods as the template and metal precursor and polydopamine as the precursor for the CN shell. α-FeOOH nanorods were first prepared through a hydrothermal method followed by polydopamine (PDA) coating through a self-polymerization process to form FeOOH/PDA. This material was subsequently subjected to a thermal carbonization procedure to convert the PDA layer of the FeOOH/PDA into the support and reduce the α-FeOOH to iron atoms, enabling strong interactions between Fe atoms and CN. Finally, acid leaching was carried out to etch and remove unstable species, resulting in iron single atoms on the inner wall of CN shells. The researchers reported that by changing the metal precursors (Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) or polymer monomers (dopamine, aniline, pyrrole, etc.), SA-M/CN with dual sites of FeNi, FeCo can be successfully synthesized, suggesting the universality of this synthetic method. Through a similar template-sacrificial approach using Mg(OH)2 or nano-MgO support as the hard template, Liu et al.207,210 in their studies synthesized a series of self-supporting catalysts of single-atom dispersed Co, or Fe–N–C in which Co(phen)2(OAc)2 or Fe(phen)x complexes were supported on Mg(OH)2 or nano-MgO supports and subjected to pyrolysis followed by acid leaching to remove the MgO support. As a result, the researchers reported that the introduction of Mg(OH)2 can effectively prevent cobalt or iron atom aggregation.174,206,207,209,210
 Fig. 2  Schematics of the synthetic procedures for single-atom electrocatalysts using the hard template process: (a) hierarchically porous M–N–C (M = Co and Fe) ADMCs; reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) FeN2/NOMC; reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (c) ISAS-Co/HNCS. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Zeolite-templated carbon (ZTC) with a unique carbon structure of highly curved 3D graphene nanoribbon networks is another potential support for ADMCs with a relatively high metal loading. For example, Choi et al.111 synthesized a single Pt atom catalyst with relatively high loading (5 wt%) on a high sulfur-doped ZTC support (Pt/HSC) and reported that the unique carbon structure with the highly doped sulfur enabled the high loading of atomically dispersed Pt and characterization results confirmed that single Pt atoms existed in the form of Pt2+ species which was linked to approximately four S-moieties.
Soft template. 
Surfactant-assisted pyrolysis is an effective and facile synthetic strategy to prepare ADMCs. For example, Yang et al.175,176 developed a series of Fe- and Co-based ADMCs using water-soluble surfactant F127 (polyoxyethylene–polyoxypropylene–polyoxyethylene (PEO–PPO–PEO)) through surfactant-assisted pyrolysis. In their experiment, the precursors of g-C3N4, metal salt and F127 complex were uniformly mixed using sonication in which metal-adsorbed surfactant F127 moieties can penetrate g-C3N4 substrate interlayers. Following this, the homogeneous system was carbonized at 550 °C for 2 hours and pyrolyzed at 800 °C for another 2 hours in a N2 atmosphere. The researchers reported that the negatively charged F127 surfactant can play a critical role in the strong attraction of positive metal ions (Fe3+, Co2+) and was vital for the uniform dispersion of single metal atoms in g-C3N4 layers. In another study, Zhang et al.107 employed a self-assembly method with modified sol–gel solvent vaporization to synthesize thermally stable single atom Pt/m-Al2O3. In this synthesis process, after ethanol evaporation at 60 °C, an ethanolic mixture of triblock copolymer P123, aluminum isopropoxide (C9H21AlO3) and H2PtCl6 self-assembled into a highly-ordered hexagonally-arranged mesoporous gel structure with the encapsulation of Pt precursors. This as-obtained gel matrix was subsequently calcined in air to decompose the P123 template and allowed for the transformation of the aluminum isopropoxide into a rigid and well-aligned mesoporous Al2O3 framework. Finally, a reducing step in 5% H2/N2 at 400 °C was carried out to obtain isolated Pt SAs stabilized by unsaturated pentahedral Al3+ centers.
In general, hard templates possess high stability and well-defined structures in which the structural integrity of the template is retained, even in large-scale preparation. However, disadvantages include tedious operation processes, structural deformation during synthesis and the introduction of impurities. In addition, the removal of used templates under harsh conditions using strong acids/bases or organic solvents is not environmentally-friendly.211,212 As for the soft template method, used templates are relatively easier to remove; however, soft templates often possess worse stability due to weak intermolecular or intramolecular interactions.

2.3 Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a sequential film growth process based on the self-terminating surface reaction between gas phase metallic precursors and solid substrates. Through the alternative sequential exposure of solid surfaces (growing films) to pulsing vapors of metallic precursor molecules, sequential deposition of sub-monolayers or monolayer(s) can be obtained.213,214 Deposition is based on chemisorption which only occurs on reactive surface sites and can lead to self-limited coordination and area-selective ALD.215 Therefore, as a method for synthesizing precise-controlled nanoparticles and clusters, ALD is a promising and powerful technique to synthesize ADMCs with precise-controlled stability. In addition, ALD is also useful in the exploration of structure–performance relationships in ADMCs.122,158,178 For example, Sun et al.179 anchored isolated Pt atoms onto graphene nanosheets using an ALD technique with oxygen and (methylcyclopentadienyl)-trimethyl platinum (MeCpPtMe3) as precursors. The researchers reported that through the use of ALD the Pt content of the catalyst can be varied from isolated single atoms to sub-nanometer sized clusters up to nanoscale particles and that the as-synthesized ADMCs exhibited better electrocatalytic activity than the commercial Pt/C catalysts. In another example, Zhang et al.177 incorporated single niobium atoms into graphitic layers (Nb-in-C) as ORR catalysts using ALD and reported, through a combination of experimental testing and theoretical simulation, that the Nb-in-C complex could undergo a rearrangement of d-band electrons, which was thought to be favorable for the adsorption and dissociation of oxygen molecules. The researchers in this study also reported that the strategy of incorporating single niobium atoms can enhance the overall conductivity and accelerate the exchange of ions and electrons, as well as suppress the chemical/thermal coarsening of active particles. Furthermore, Yan et al.112 fabricated a Pt2 dimer through a bottom-up strategy by depositing Pt onto a graphene support using ALD in which the resulting material was obtained through a surface self-limiting reaction between MeCpPtMe3 and graphene nanosheets. The isolated nucleation sites (anchor sites) of phenols or phenol–carbonyl pairs were controllably generated through both acid oxidation and high-temperature thermal reduction and the first cycle of Pt ALD on the nucleation sites was carried out through alternating exposure to MeCpPtMe3 and molecular O2 at 250 °C, with the second cycle involving the selective deposition of secondary Pt atoms onto Pt1/graphene at 150 °C (Fig. 3). The researchers claimed that Pt precursors, temperature and post-treatment atmospheres all played crucial roles in this diatomic catalyst preparation process.
 Fig. 3  Schematic for the preparation of dimeric Pt2/graphene catalysts through a bottom-up ALD approach. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group (NPG). 
In general, ALD with sequential surface saturated reactions and self-limited surface chemical reactions can guarantee accurate control of atom layers and step coverage, affording promising prospects for the homogeneous deposition of ADMCs onto large-scale 3D porous structures with high aspect ratios.213,215 Therefore, ALD nanocavities can form the basis for the large-scale construction of highly efficient and stable single-atom catalysts at the atomic scale through the accurate control of the structure and composition of related supports.178 However, disadvantages such as high costs and slow deposition rates need to be addressed.
2.4 Gas migration strategies (nanoparticle transforming method: NP-to-SA)
Presently, although researchers have developed numerous preparation methods for ADMCs, most of these methods involve complex processes and large-scale approaches are still not available. However, researchers reported, in 2016, thermally stable single platinum atoms supported on ceria104 and demonstrated that metal nanoparticle transformation is an effective approach to prepare thermally stable single atoms (NP-to-SA). In that study, Jones et al.104 found that Pt nanoparticles supported on alumina can be transferred onto ceria supports in air at 800 °C and that high temperatures can guarantee that only the most stable binding sites are occupied, yielding thermally stable and sinter-resistant single atoms. In addition, these researchers also found that polyhedral- and nanorod-ceria were more effective at anchoring Pt than cube-ceria. In a subsequent study, Wei et al.181 directly observed the dynamic transformation process of noble metal (Pd, Pt, and Au) nanoparticles to thermally stable single atoms using in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM). In addition, the researchers reported that they also clearly observed and recorded the competing process between sintering and atomization during NP-to-SA conversion. DFT calculations were carried out which further confirmed that NP-to-SA conversions at high temperatures were motivated by the formation of more thermodynamically stable M–N4 structures (M = Pd, Pt, Au, etc.) as mobile M atoms were trapped in the defects of the carbon support. Furthermore, Yang et al.182 prepared thermally stable Ni single atoms transformed from Ni metal nanoparticles supported on N-doped carbon with abundant defects. A mechanistic study showed that when exposed to N-doped carbon, Ni nanoparticles can break surface C–C bonds and drill into the carbon skeleton and that Ni atoms can be separated from Ni NPs due to the strong coordination and stabilization in the carbon substrate.
Recently, Qu et al.180 reported a simple gas migration strategy to directly convert bulk metals into single atomic catalysts (Fig. 4) which resulted in outstanding ORR performance. In their preparation process, copper foam and ZIF-8 were separately placed into two porcelain boats before treatment in which ZIF-8 was first pyrolyzed under an argon atmosphere at 1173 K to form N-doped carbon supports (N–C) with empty zinc nodes and numerous defect sites. Following this, copper foam was exposed to an ammonia atmosphere to form volatile Cu(NH3)x species through strong Lewis acid–base interactions between ammonia molecules and surface copper atoms and were hauled out of the copper foam. Subsequently, these Cu(NH3)x species were captured by the defects in the N-rich carbon support to produce isolated Cu-SAs/N–C catalysts with the actual loading of Cu calculated to be 0.54% using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Furthermore, the researchers also found that isolated copper single atoms can be homogeneously dispersed onto graphene sheets (Cu-SAs/N–G) by using graphene oxide as the defect-rich support in which ICP-AES analysis showed that the Cu loading of Cu-SAs/N–G can reach 1.26 wt%. Moreover, the researchers claimed that this gas-migration method can be used to access a series of M-SAs/N–C (M = Co or Ni) catalysts, indicating its generality in the preparation of various functional ADMCs.180 Electrochemical testing was also conducted in this study and suggested that Cu-SAs/N–C takes a near-4e− ORR pathway with a large kinetic current density (jk) at 0.9 V and a low Tafel slope of 63 mV dec−1, further demonstrating its outstanding ORR performance. And more importantly, no clear current density degeneration at E1/2 was observed after 5000 continuous potential cycles, demonstrating the robust stability of this Cu-SAs/N–C catalyst.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the preparation of copper single atoms supported on nitrogen-doped carbon (Cu-SAs/N–C) and (b) its proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission,180 Copyright 2018, Nature publishing group (NPG). 
In general, the atomization conversion from bulk metal materials such as nanoparticles, nanocrystals and metal foam is a convenient top-down means to prepare single-atom catalysts and provides a novel universal method for the development of precious metal single atomic catalysts with high thermal stability. This method may even be applicable for the reactivation and reuse of sintered industrial metal nanocatalysts (especially noble nanocrystals), providing valuable insights into the large-scale preparation of high-performance thermally stable electrocatalysts.180
2.5 Other potential synthesis methods

2.5.1 Photochemical method. 
The photochemical reduction method involving photon absorption and electronically excited states has been widely applied to synthesize metal nanocrystals. For example, Liu et al.105 successfully fabricated a stable atomically dispersed palladium catalyst stabilized on ultrathin titanium oxide nanosheets (Pd1/TiO2) through a one-step photochemical route at room-temperature. In this study, two-atom-thick ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets were first prepared by reacting TiCl4 with ethylene glycolate (EG) followed by a solvothermal process at 150 °C for 4 hours. Subsequently, the mixture of TiO2 and H2PdCl4 was subjected to ultraviolet (UV) light at 365 nm to obtain Pd1/TiO2 in one step. The researchers reported that the UV-induced formation of EG radicals on the TiO2 nanosheets was quite stable and was also critical in the preparation of Pd1/TiO2 due to the promotion of Cl− removal. In addition, the researchers also reported that after UV irradiation, Pd loading can be increased up to 1.5% and that the obtained Pd1/TiO2 demonstrated superior catalytic performances with no activity decay after 20 cycles. Similarly, Wei et al.216 employed UV irradiation on frozen chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) aqueous solutions to successfully synthesize atomically dispersed Pt catalysts on various substrates, including graphene, carbon nanotubes, mesoporous carbon, zinc oxide nanowires and titanium dioxide nanoparticles. The researchers in this study suggested that the photochemical reduction reaction occurring in the frozen precursor solution can balance the nucleation and growth of nanocatalysts, in which because ice lattices can naturally confine dispersed reagents and restrict photochemical reduction products, nucleation can be prevented. As a result, the aggregation of atoms can be effectively prevented and single atoms can be further successfully stabilized, demonstrating that this photochemical reduction strategy can be extended to the synthesis of other metal (Au, Ag, etc.) single atom catalysts.


2.5.2 High-energy ball milling method. 
High-energy ball milling has been verified to be a powerful bottom-up method due to its high efficiency at breaking and reconstructing chemical bonds of materials and is recognized as a potential pathway for synthesizing ADMCs.135,185 For example, Cui et al.152 and Deng et al.185 both used high-energy ball milling to prepare and study a series of coordinatively unsaturated single iron catalysts confined in different matrixes such as silica and graphene. In these studies, lattice-confined single iron sites embedded in a silica matrix were obtained through the ball milling of a mixture of commercial SiO2 and Fe2SiO4 under argon and fusing in air, and DFT calculations revealed that the most stable structure of the single iron atom was the one in which the single iron atom was bonded to one Si and two C atoms within the silica matrix.184 Furthermore, a series of different metal single catalysts (Fe, Co, Mn, Ni, and Cu) embedded in graphene matrixes were also synthesized in large quantities using ball milling152,185 in which embedded Fe loading in graphene could reach 4.0 wt%.185 In addition, these confined and unsaturated single Fe sites demonstrated high catalytic performances in the direct non-oxidative conversion of methane184 and in the catalytic oxidation of benzene.185 Moreover, the researchers reported that the prepared CoN4/GN possessed superior electrochemical properties for the interconversion of the redox couple I−/I3−, which was attributed to the good balance between the adsorption and desorption processes originating from the appropriate adsorption energy of iodine on confined Co sites.152 In another study, Zhang et al.217 successfully synthesized uniformly distributed isolated metal catalysts supported on ordered mesoporous carbon using a solid-state ball milling method and reported that the coordination polymerization between metal ions and polyphenols was completed during the solvent-free ball milling process. Meanwhile, the metal-salt linkers became stable metal nanoparticles in situ within the pores of the ordered mesoporous carbons (OMCs). And as a result, the formed catalysts supported on activated carbon and post-impregnated OMC were composed of either micropores or mesopores blocked by large metal nanoparticles, demonstrating that this ball milling method can largely reduce assembly times in solid-state routes as compared with the solution route and lead to large-scale fabrication of isolated metal atomic catalysts.


2.5.3 Mass-selected soft-landing method. 
The mass-selected soft-landing method is a powerful technique for the synthesis of metal clusters and is a potential technique for the synthesis of atomic catalysts. Furthermore, this technique is particularly effective in the preparation of small nanoclusters 0.5–2 nm (<200 atoms) in size. And as a physical deposition method, it can be applied to obtain any metal clusters consisting of precisely controlled numbers of atoms that “soft-land” onto the surface of flat supports131 in which the number of atoms can be accurately controlled by using high-energy atom beams through vacuum surface procedures.218–221 In addition, this precise control over cluster size is strongly dependent on the rapid evolution of atomic and electronic structures and generally, both gas-phase ion sources (cations/anions) and a mass-select spectrometer are required for downstream deposition onto substrates.222 And as a result, this mass-selected soft-landing technique has great potential to prepare ADMCs. However, practical applications of this method are limited due to high costs, low-yields and difficulty in finding suitable precursors that are stable in solutions and can be electro-sprayed.137 Furthermore, this mass-selected soft-landing method is also not suitable for high surface-area supports or mesoporous support materials, and hence is not favorable for practical industrial applications.131


2.5.4 Electrodeposition. 
As reported by Zhou et al.,223 the electrochemical control of catalyst particle size can be achieved through electrodeposition methods in which the use of bismuth ultramicroelectrodes (UME) can allow for the electrodeposition of isolated Pt atoms or small clusters of up to 9 atoms. In this study, the researchers used femtomolar concentrations of PtCl62− ions to control the mass transfer of precursors to Bi-UME substrate surfaces and limit the number of Pt atoms coated on the electrode. A bismuth UME was immersed in a PtCl62− solution with a desired molar concentration and an electrochemical plating pulse of suitable duration was applied. The researchers reported that the pulse duration can determine the number of platinum atoms electrodeposited on the UME through the reduction of PtCl62− to Pt0. And in order to obtain Pt clusters, UME could be further moved into a solution with a higher proton concentration. Lastly, the researchers reported that the deposited single Pt atoms or clusters were detected through the electrocatalytic voltammetry of HER.


2.5.5 Microwave-assisted rapid synthesis. 
Microwave heating is an effective method to synthesize nanomaterials because it can greatly reduce reaction times and suppress side reactions, dramatically improving efficiency. For example, Fei et al.224 developed a convenient and rapid microwave-assisted synthesis method for G-SAMs involving the 2 second heating of a mixture of metal salts and amine-functionalized graphene oxide using a microwave. This method also possesses universality for the exploration of N-doped graphene supported monodispersed atomic transition metals (e.g., Co, Ni, and Cu).
In summary, to fully express the synthesis methods, Scheme 4 summarizes the entire synthesis methods discussed in the whole Section 2. In general, ADMC synthesis can be achieved through several synthesis methods. Here, the adsorption method with subsequent calcination can achieve atomic metal enriched surfaces, which might decrease catalytic mass transfer obstacles.139 In addition, single Pt atom catalysts with relatively high loading (5 wt%) can be obtained through combining several synthesis methods. For example, zeolite-templated carbon (ZTC) supports can be first obtained through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and atomically dispersed Pt can be selectively synthesized by a simple wet-impregnation method on the ZTC support.111 Furthermore, well-dispersed Fe atoms supported on 3D simple-cubic carbon frameworks (Fe–N-SCCFs) with high stability can be derived from Fe3O4 nanocubes through a template method. In this case, Fe3O4 nanocubes can be first self-assembled into Fe3O4 superlattices, followed by in situ ligand carbonization, acid etching and NH3 activation. Next, surface-coating oleic acid ligands on the surface of the Fe3O4 superlattices can be carbonized without affecting the ordering of the nanocubes through a high-temperature pyrolysis process, and finally, the target sample can be obtained through acid washing to remove the Fe3O4 nanocube template.125 Overall, through the combination of synthesis methods, a variety of preparation procedures can be used to develop different types of ADMCs.
 Scheme 4  The integrated figure of advanced synthesis methods for ADMCs. 

3. Characterization of atomically dispersed metal catalysts
3.1 Structural characterization
The development of atomic resolution characterization techniques for atomic level resolution studies of catalyst materials has led to the comprehensive understanding of the structural and fundamental mechanisms of ADMCs in catalysis processes. And recently, rapid developments in advanced characterization technologies have allowed for the confirmation of ADMC systems. Along with advanced theoretical modeling and simulation techniques in computational chemistry,225 ADMC structures and catalytic properties can be thoroughly investigated and predicted at the molecular level.74,133,226,227 The technologies used for characterizing ADMCs mainly include in situ/ex situ X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), in situ/ex situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM and ETEM), aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (ac-STEM) (accompanied by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and high-angle annular dark field (HAADF)) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) (includes X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and complementary extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy). In addition, useful characterization techniques such as in situ/ex situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), in situ/ex situ Raman spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) can provide complementary data on the local structural information of ADMCs, which is in favor of understanding the mutual interactions between isolated metals and supports.215 And although many existing techniques can be used to characterize materials structures, morphologies and composition, the tiny amounts and extremely small atomic size of ADMCs on substrates require instrument resolution capabilities to be extremely high and at atomic levels to provide useful information on structure, morphology and composition as well as electron interactions between atoms and between atoms and substrates. Therefore, the following subsection will only review several highly sensitive techniques.

3.1.1 Aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (ac-STEM). 
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) is a straightforward morphology characterization technique to characterize material structures on the micro- and nanoscale. However, the resolution of STEM is limited by parasitic lens aberration. And therefore, major advancements in STEM involving the use of correctors for parasitic lens aberrations have been made to further increase resolutions to Å levels. The correctors used can produce electron beams with spot sizes of well below 1 Å and can adequately characterize atomic scale catalysts,228,229 with the resulting STEM technique referred to as aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (ac-STEM). And as a result, this technique has become a standard tool in the characterization of atomic-scale catalysts and can provide precise and direct observations of the location of individual single metal atoms on supporting materials.101,230 And in addition to spatial distribution, ac-STEM can also be used to evaluate crystallographic relationship in regard to the surface structure of supports. Furthermore, a combination of ac-STEM and HAADF can result in a technique called ac-HAADF-STEM which is useful for the characterization and understanding of the structure/morphology and fundamental mechanisms of single-atom catalysts as well as for further optimization of catalyst synthesis procedures. For example, Qu et al.180 used TEM with corresponding EELS along with ac-HAADF-STEM on Cu single atoms decorated on N-doped porous carbon (Cu-SAs/CN) to obtain elemental mapping images of Cu-SAs/N–C, which revealed uniformly distributed Cu, C, and N elements over the entire architecture (Fig. 5a and b). In addition, the researchers reported that the number of bright spots tagged by red circles in the obtained ac-HAADF-STEM images represented single Cu atoms in which the contrast of the Cu single atoms depended on the location and stability (under electron beam irradiation) of the Cu atoms (Fig. 5c). Furthermore, the researchers reported that the coordination environment can be confirmed using ac-HADDF-STEM coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). In another study by Wang et al.160 a number of evenly scattered bright spots ascribed to Co atom sites were clearly observed in the carbon particles carbonized from ZIF nanocrystals based on the obtained ac-HADDF-STEM image (Fig. 5d), and was further confirmed in the obtained EELS point spectra (Fig. 5e and f). Here, the researchers reported that during ac-HADDF-STEM, if the electron beam was placed on the dark neighboring carbon support (green circle in Fig. 5d), no N or Co signals were observed in the accompanying EELS spectrum (Fig. 5e) whereas if the electron beam was moved over the bright dots (red circle), both Co and N were observed, suggesting coexistence in the form of CoNx (Fig. 5f) and verifying that Co atoms in their 20Co-NC-1100 catalyst were coordinated with N from ZIF precursors.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ammonia-pyrolyzed ZIF-8 with the inset showing the ring-like selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (b) Corresponding EELS mapping images of copper, carbon and nitrogen. (c) ac-HADDF-STEM image of Cu-SAs/N–C. Reproduced with permission180 Copyright 2018, Nature publishing group (NPG). (d) ac-HADDF-STEM image with (e and f) accompanying EEL point spectra of the 20Co-NC-1100 catalyst. The point spectra in (e) and (f) were taken at the dark neighboring support and bright atoms in (d) respectively. Compared with point spectrum (e), point spectrum (f) showed both Co and N, indicating that Co is coordinated with N at an atomic scale. Reproduced with permission160 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Other powerful techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) can also be used to identify the exact structure of ADMCs. And as a technique with true atomic resolution, STM is an ideal tool to study ADMCs for which Parkinson231 has discussed the prospect of STM experiments under realistic reaction conditions. Furthermore, ETEM can be used to directly observe the dynamic transformation process of noble metal nanoparticles into thermally stable single atoms,181 which might be beneficial to the in situ observation of the growing process of atomically dispersed metal catalysts for the ORR.


3.1.2 X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy. 
Synchrotron radiation-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a powerful tool to characterize the geometric structure of the active moiety of ADMCs65,232,233 and can be roughly divided into X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy and the complementary extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. XANES is highly sensitive to the oxidation states and coordination chemistries (e.g., tetrahedral or octahedral coordination) of metal species.61,131,133,215,234 As reported, the white-line intensity in the normalized XANES reflects the oxidation state of determined metal elements.235 For example, Liu et al. obtained XANES spectra of Pt1/BP and Pt1–N/BP catalysts to study their near-edge absorption energy between those of Pt foil and bulk PtO2 reference (Fig. 6a). The research revealed that the white-line intensities of Pt1/BP and Pt1–N/BP were both between those of Pt foil and bulk PtO2 reference, representing the oxidation of some Pt atoms in Pt1/BP and Pt1–N/BP. However, the L3-edge of Pt1–N/BP showed a lower white-line intensity than that of Pt1/BP, demonstrating the lower content of Pt oxide in Pt1–N/BP than that in Pt1/BP.235 As reported in another research, as annealing temperatures increased from 600 to 800 °C and subsequently to 1100 °C, the corresponding XANES edge can shift to lower energies, suggesting the reduction of Co oxidation states (Fig. 6b) in which the derivative of XANES showed that the characteristic peaks of the catalyst shifted from Co(3+δ)+(δ > 0) (600 °C) to predominantly Co2+ (1100 °C) (Fig. 6c). In addition, XANES revealed that the pre-edge peak (≈7710 eV) of Co-NC-1100 °C assigned to the forbidden 1s-to-3d transition was much lower than those of the precursor and catalysts from Co-NC-600 °C to Co-NC-800 °C, suggesting higher cation symmetry.160
 Fig. 6  (a) Pt L3-edge XANES for Pt1/BP, Pt1–N/BP, Pt foil and bulk Pt oxide. Reproduced with permission,235 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group (NPG). (b and c) XANES spectra of Co–N–C catalysts annealed at different temperatures with (b) Co K-edge XANES and (c) the responding derivative of XANES. Reproduced with permission,160 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.3 Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. 
Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy can be used to evaluate the fabrication of ADMCs and the local coordination environments of central metal atoms (e.g., coordination numbers, distances and adjacent atomic species).133,234 In general, EXAFS raw data are background-subtracted and normalized, followed by Fourier transformation and wavelet transformation.98 Fourier transform (FT) is a fundamental step in the data reduction and clarification of EXAFS through the separation of backscattering atoms using their radial distance from absorbed atoms (namely shells) and wavelet transform (WT) is a routine complement to FT to provide radial distance resolution in k-space.236,237 Furthermore, the ability to determine metal–metal coordination numbers has resulted in the effective use of EXAFS to evaluate the successful fabrication of ADMCs.131,238 For example, Yang et al.140 used FT-EXAFS to characterize single Pt atoms supported on titanium nitride (Pt/TiN, 0.35 wt%) and reported that the obtained FT-EXAFS curves showed only one strong peak at 2 Å and smaller wiggles at 2–3 Å. The only strong peak at 2 Å mainly originated from the Pt–Cl interaction and the smaller wiggles were because of the small Pt–Ti and Pt–Pt interactions (Fig. 7a). In another example, the researchers carried out WT-EXAFS to more clearly indicate the atomic dispersion of metal throughout the whole catalyst, which was owing to the powerful resolutions in both k and R space WT-EXAFS. In detail, the WT contour plot of Fe ISAs/CN displayed only one intensity maximum at 5 Å−1, which could be attributed to the Fe–N (or Fe–O) coordination. However, the WT contour plots of Fe bulk (Fe foil) and Fe2O3 standards displayed the intensity maxima at 8 and 5 Å−1, respectively, which were associated with the Fe–Fe and Fe–N(O) contributions (Fig. 7b). Impressively, compared to Fe foil and Fe2O3 standards, no WT signals assigned to Fe–Fe coordination were detected in the WT-EXAFS, suggesting only the presence of single Fe atoms anchored onto the carbon supports.149 Moreover, WT-EXAFS is in particular useful for the identification of dual-metal atomic catalysts. For example, Xiao et al.55 used WT-EXAFS to study a Co2N5 dimer metal site system and reported that the WT-EXAFS of the as-synthesized Co–N–C-10 sample (B in Fig. 7d) showed the coexistence of a Co–N path in the bottom contour map (A in Fig. 7d) and a Co–Co path in the top contour map (C in Fig. 7d) from Co nanoparticles. In addition, the WT-EXAFS obtained in this study revealed that kB (6.88 Å−1) was smaller than kC (7.09 Å−1), demonstrating the formation of a shortened Co–Co distance in the as-synthesized Co–N–C-10 sample. Therefore, through the FT- and WT-EXAFS analysis, the dispersed states of metal atomic catalysts can be determined.
 Fig. 7  (a) Pt L3 edge k3-weighted FT-EXAFS curves of the samples: 0.35 wt% and 5 wt% Pt/TiN, and 5 wt% Pt NP/TiN (tripled). (b) The corresponding FT-EXAFS fitting curves of 0.35 wt%, 2 wt% and 5 wt% Pt/TiN, 5 wt% Pt NP/TiN (tripled), 20 wt% JM Pt/C (doubled) and Pt foil with the fitting range from 1.0 to 3.5 Å; 20 wt% JM Pt/C Pt foil. Dots show the experimental data, and the lines are the fitted results. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) WT-EXAFS of Fe ISAs/CN (top), Fe foil (middle) and Fe2O3 standards (bottom). Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) WT-EXAFS of a Co2N5 dimer metal site system with k2-weighted χ(k) Co K-edge signals. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (e) Mössbauer spectroscopy of 57Fe in SA-Fe/NG. Reproduced with permission,175 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. 


3.1.4 Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). 
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is an important technique for the characterization of the nature of supporting materials that adsorb probing molecules in which through the direct monitoring of the changes in the probe molecules based on vibrational frequency and intensity, the properties of the local structure, homogeneity and active centers can be deduced.131,239 For example, FTIR has been applied to identify the presence of isolated single metals (Rh, Pt, etc.) on support materials240,241 in which CO, NH3, pyridine, etc. are often used as probing molecules. In addition, the percentage of isolated single metal atoms in supports can also be quantified using FTIR and time- and temperature-resolved FTIR spectroscopy can be applied to detect intermediate species during catalytic reaction processes.131


3.1.5 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is another tool that can be used to detect the existence of single atom catalysts and can provide information on the nature of metal species and the coordination between isolated active centers and supports. For example, under in situ conditions, NMR can be used to detect binding ligands during catalytic reactions and is useful for the understanding of the catalytic performance and formation mechanisms of ADMCs.131,215,242


3.1.6 Mössbauer spectrum. 
Mössbauer spectrum is a sensitive and powerful technique to characterize ORR catalysts, especially for iron-containing compounds, such as Fe–N4 centers.243–245 Recently, combined with EXAFS and HAADF-STEM measurements, Mössbauer spectrum has been used to gain insight into the Fe coordination type of ADMCs.172,246–248 In general, Mössbauer spectrum of FeN4-sites can be fitted with three doublets which can result in a ferrous low-spin and two ferrous mid-spin sites.246 For example, Yang et al.175 analyzed the coordination environment (Fe–N or Fe–O) of SA-Fe/NG by performing Mössbauer spectroscopy based on the recoil-free absorption of γ-rays by 57Fe nuclei at 295 K. Being consistent with the EXAFS and HAADF-STEM observation, the Mössbauer curve did not show any sextets and singlet, indicating the absence of iron carbide phases and zero-valence iron crystals in SA-Fe/NG. As shown in Fig. 7e, Mössbauer curves of SA-Fe/NG are mainly fitted with three doublets (D1, D2, and D3) which are all assigned to Fe–Nx moieties. Here, D1 is assigned to ferrous low-spin Fe–N sites, while D3 and D2 are assigned to ferrous mid-spin sites. The main difference between D2 and D3 probably originates from their local environment. Among them, the D2 proportion is the largest, signifying that the most possible coordination types of Fe–N species in SA-Fe/NG are the analog of the iron phthalocyanine structure. Furthermore, the Mössbauer spectrum can also be used to help understand the coordination environment of a Fe-base dual site catalyst, such as (Fe,Co)/N–C etc. In their research, (Fe,Co)/N–C also shows a three-doublet Mössbauer spectrum (D1, D2, and D3), and consists of square-planar Fe(II)N4 coordination and is similar to the as-synthesized single metal catalyst (Fe SAs/N–C).83,248

4. ADMCs for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in electrochemical energy devices
ADMCs can display high electrocatalytic ORR performance in both acidic and basic media; for instance, FeCo-ISAs/CN, as an ADMC, can provide a half-wave potential of 0.920 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH.139 However, the ORR activity of ADMCs in acidic electrolytes needs to be further improved, particularly in membrane electrode assemblies (MEA) for PEMFCs. The electrocatalytic performance of ADMCs towards the ORR is statistically shown in Table 2, including the half-wave potential (E1/2), proposed active sites and mass active areas. As for the application of ADMCs in electrochemical energy devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries, ADMC-based catalyst layers can provide superior ORR performance in half-cell apparatus, but need to be further developed in real cells or batteries. But overall, ADMCs for the ORR have shown promising performances in PEMFCs,144,175,249 regenerative fuel cells83,144 and metal–air batteries.117,250
Table 2 Summary of the ORR catalytic properties of various ADMCs




Materials
Active center
Properties (E1/2 (vs. RHE) or active area)
Loading
Ref.




SCE: saturated calomel electrode; RHE: reversible hydrogen electrode.




Pt/TiN
Isolated single atomic Pt sites
78 A gPt−1 at an overpotential of 0.05 V, 0.1 M HClO4
0.35 wt%

140



Pt1/TiC; Pt1/TiN
Atomically dispersed active sites
0.96 mA cm−2 (0.2 V), 0.1 M HClO4; 0.34 mA cm−2 (0.2 V), 0.1 M HClO4
0.2 wt%; 0.2 wt%

141



High selectivity toward H2O2


Pt1@Fe–N–C
Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4
0.80 V, 280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V, 0.5 M H2SO4
2.1 wt% Pt

144



Pt1–N/BP
g-P–N1–Pt1
0.87 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.76 V, 0.1 M HClO4
0.4 wt%

235



S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT
Fe–Nx species
0.85 V, 0.1 M KOH
—

23



Fe50-N–C-900
Fe–N–C active sites
0.92 V, 0.1 M KOH; 6.83 mA cm−2, 1 M HClO4
0.1 mg cm−2

31



0.3 mg cm−2


Fe-ISA/NC
FeN4S2
0.896 V, 100.7 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V 0.1 M KOH
0.947 wt%

148



Fe-ISAs/CN
Fe–N4
0.900 V, 37.83 mV cm−2 at 0.85 V, 0.1 M KOH
2.16 wt%

149



(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
FeN4
0.80 V, 0.39 W cm−2 at 1.0 bar partial pressure of H2 and air, 0.5 M H2SO4
0.2 at%

161



FeSAs/PTF-600
Fe–N4
0.87 V, 5.51 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. RHE), 0.1 M KOH; 5.42 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. RHE), 0.1 M HClO4
8.3 wt%

166



Fe SAs–N/C-20
FeN4-6r-c1, FeN4-6r-c2
0.915 V, 0.1 M KOH
0.20 wt%

157



FeNC-MSUFC
Fe–N4
∼0.73 V
0.044–0.048 at%

251



FeSA–N–C
Fe–N4
0.891 V, 23.27 mA cm−2 (0.85 V), 0.1 M KOH; 0.776 V, 9.60 mA cm−2 (0.75 V), 0.1 M HClO4
1.76 wt%

156



SA-Fe/NHPC
ORR
0.87 V, 4.1 mA cm−2 at 0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH
2.3 wt%

168



Fe-N-CNTAs-5-900
Fe–Nx
0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH
0.09 at%

174



FeNx-Embedded
ORR/OER Fe–Nx
0.86 V, 0.1 M KOH
3.935 at%

252



PNC


Fe-N-SCCFs
Fe-Containing active sites
0.883 V, alkaline
0.8 at%

125



Fe-NCCs
Fe–Nx
0.82 V, 0.1 M KOH
0.26 at%

173



SA-Fe/NG
Fe–N4 moieties
0.88 V, 52.4 mA cm−2, 0.1 M KOH; 0.8 V, 15.6 mA cm−2 (0.75 V), 0.1 M HClO4
2.0 mg cm−2

175



C-FeZIF-1.44-950
Fe–Nx
0.864 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.78 V, 0.1 M HClO4



253



C-FeHZ8@g-C3N4-950


0.845 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.78 V 0.1 M HClO4
3.17 wt%

247



A-Co/r-GO
CoN3C
0.842 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.71 V, 0.5 M H2SO4
3.6 wt%

143



CoSAs@CNTs
M–N–C and single Co atom sites
0.86 V, 0.1 M KOH
0.14 at%

164



CoN4/NG
Co–N4
0.87 V (0.1 M KOH), 23.4 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V
11.4 mF cm−2

176



NGM-Co
Co–Nx–C
≈50 mV more positive than NGM, 0.1 M KOH
0.18 at%

170



Co-SAs@NC
ORR
0.82 V, 0.1 M KOH
1.70 wt%

159



Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres
ORR
0.837 V, 5.2 mA cm−2 (0.83 V), 0.1 M KOH
0.42 wt%

169



Co-SAs/N–C-900
Co–N2
0.881 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.863 VRHE
4 wt%

99



Co-SAs/N–C-800
Co–N4


NC-Co SA
Co–Nx
0.72 V
1.84 wt%

150



CoNC700
Co–N4 square-planar structures
0.85 ± 0.01 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.73 V, 0.1 M HClO4
0.73 at%

163



20Co-NC-1100
Co–N4
ORR 0.80 V, 0.5 M H2SO4
0.34 at%

160



Zn/CoN–C
ZnCoN6
0.861 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.796 V, 0.1 M HClO4
Zn 0.33 wt%; Co 0.14 wt%

118



ZnNx/BP
Zn–N4
−175 mV vs. SCE, 0.1 M KOH
0.3 wt%

165



Zn–N–C
Zn–N4
0.746 V, 0.1 M HClO4; 0.873 V, 0.1 M KOH
9.33 wt% (2.06 atom%)

146



Co2NxC
Co2N5
0.79 V, 0.1 M HClO4, 3734 mA mgCo−1, 7468 mA mgCo2−1
—

55



(Fe,Co)/N–C
Fe–Co dual-sites
0.863 V, 2.842 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V, 0.1 M HClO4
—

83



FeCo-ISAs/CN
Fe–N4 and Co–N4
0.920 V, 31.1 mA cm−2 at 0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH
Fe 0.964 wt%, Co 0.218 wt%

139



A-PtCo-NC
(Co–Pt)@N8 V4
0.96 V, mass activity of 45.47 A mg−1, 0.1 M KOH
Co: 1.72 wt%; Pt: 0.16 wt%

254



Fe, Mn–N/C-900
Fe–Nx and Mn–Nx
0.905 V, 33.33 mA cm−2 (0.85 V), 0.1 M KOH
Fe: 1.75 wt%; Mn: 0.07 wt%

250



(Zn,Co)/NSC
Zn,Co–N6–C–S
0.893 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.70 V, 0.5 M H2SO4
—

119



Nb-in-C complex
Niobium atoms incorporated in graphite layers
12.3 mA cm−2 (−0.5 VAg/AgCl), 0.1 M KOH
60 μg cm−2

177



Cu-SAs/N–C
Cu–N4
0.895 V, 0.005 mA cm−2 (0.9 V), 0.1 M KOH; 0.74 V, 0.1 M KOH
0.54 wt%; 1.26 wt%

180



Cu-SAs/N–G




4.1 ADMC-catalyzed fuel cells
From Table 2, we can see that the maximum metal loading of ADMCs can achieve up to 9.33 wt% (2.6 at%).146 Generally, ADMCs show better ORR catalytic activity in alkali than in acid. For example, the half-wave potential (E1/2) of Fe50-N–C-900 and FeCo-ISAs/CN can reach 0.92 V31,139 in 0.1 M KOH, and Pt-based ADMCs (A-PtCo-NC) can give an E1/2 of 0.96 V vs. RHE. However, under acidic conditions, a relatively positive E1/2 of 0.863 V can be obtained with a current density of 2.842 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V.83 To date, ADMCs have been widely investigated in fuel cell applications, as shown in Table 3. For fuel cell applications, ADMCs can be used to construct cathodic catalyst layers in membrane electrode assemblies (MEA) to test PEM fuel cells under real operational conditions144,175,190,249 such as at a constant cell voltage of 0.5 V with H2 and O2 feeds. Here, conditions such as the effects of catalyst/catalyst layer/MEA structures (particularly ORR active centers and support materials) and electrolytes should also be considered during the electrocatalytic process.62 Generally, H2/O2 fuel cells can give better performance than hydrogen–air fuel cells. Currently, the maximum current density is reported to be 1100 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V,253 while the max power density can reach ∼0.87 W cm−2 (PO2 = 1.0 bar) and even 0.94 W cm−2 (PO2 = 2.0 bar).161 In one example, Wang et al.83 used a (Fe,Co)/N–C hollow carbon-derived catalyst with N-coordinated Fe, Co-dual metal sites as a cathode electrocatalyst and reported higher ORR performance with an onset potential (Eonset) of 1.06 VRHE and half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.863 VRHE as compared with commercial Pt/C catalysts (1.03 and 0.858 V respectively). In addition, the researchers verified full cell ORR activities in which (Fe,Co)/N–C dual atoms were used as a catalyst in single fuel cell tests and delivered activities that outperformed most reported Pt-free catalysts under both H2/O2 and H2/air conditions. The maximum power density of the (Fe,Co)/N–C catalyzed single H2/O2 fuel cell reached ∼0.85 and 0.98 W cm−2 at 0.1 and 0.2 MPa partial pressures respectively. Furthermore, the researchers reported that this ADMC with dual metal sites demonstrated excellent durability in long-term operations with 50000 cycles in an electrode cyclic voltammetry test and 100 hours for H2/air single cell operations. This study also reported that by using pure O2 as the oxidant for a H2/O2 single cell with ∼0.77 mg cm−2 (Fe,Co)/N–C at the cathode and 0.1 mgPt cm−2 Pt/C at the anode, O2 mass transport issues can be alleviated and that a cell voltage of 0.6 V at a current density higher than 550 mA cm−2 and a peak power density higher than 505 mW cm−2 at 0.42 V can be achieved. However, despite these performances being better than most reported Pt-free catalysts, they are only ∼76% of the power density of commercial Pt/C catalyst-based fuel cells.
Table 3 Summary of ADMC-catalyzed fuel cells




Materials
Open circuit
Current density
Power density
Ref.




(Fe,Co)/N–C
H2/O2 fuel cell
>550 mA cm−2, 0.6 V and a peak power density >505 mW cm−2 at 0.42 V
Max power density: ∼0.85 W cm−2 at 0.1 MPa; 0.98 W cm−2 at 0.2 MPa

83



Pt1@Fe–N–C
H2/O2 fuel cells
280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V
Peak power density: 0.86 W cm−2 at 0.49 V; high power density: 0.79 W cm−2 at 0.6 V

144



(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
H2–air fuel cell
—
0.39 W cm−2

161



(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
H2/O2 fuel cell
—
∼0.87 W cm−2 (pO2 = 1.0 bar)

161



0.94 W cm−2 (pO2 = 2.0 bar)


SA-Fe/NG
PEMFC
0.85 A cm−2 at 0.6 V; 3.34 A cm−2 at 0.2 V
823 mW cm−2

175



20Co-NC-1100
H2/O2 fuel cell
—
0.56 W cm−2

160



Pt1–N/BP
H2/O2 fuel cells
Surface area of 1102 m2 g−1
0.68 W cm−2 with 0.13 gPt kW−1

235



C-FeZIF-1.44-950
H2/O2 PEMFC
1100 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V; 637 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V
775 mW cm−2

253



H2–air PEMFC
650 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V; 350 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V
463 mW cm−2


C-FeHZ8@g-C3N4-950
H2/O2 PEMFC
400 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V; 133 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V
628 mW cm−2

247





In another example, Zeng et al.144 tested atomically dispersed Pt1@Fe–N–C catalysts in a real acidic PEM fuel cell and reported that with a cathode catalyst loading of 3 mg cm−2, the Pt1@Fe–N–C provided a high current density of 280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V, which was higher than those of Fe–N–C (211 mA cm−2) and 20% Pt/C (193 mA cm−2), and that the power density curves of the MEAs showed that the Pt1@Fe–N–C was 0.86 and 0.79 W cm−2 at 0.49 and 0.6 V respectively. More importantly, stability tests revealed that compared with Fe–N–C-based single cells, the Pt1@Fe–N–C single cell at a constant voltage of 0.5 V for 50 hours with H2 and O2 feeds demonstrated remarkably alleviated performance decay in which the Pt1@Fe–N–C normalized current remained at ∼50% after 20 hour testing whereas Fe–N–C remained at 22%. In addition, the current density of the Pt1@Fe–N–C (2.1 wt%) remained at almost twice that of Fe–N–C in the initial test stage.
4.2 ADMC-catalyzed metal–air batteries
ADMCs as cathode catalysts in Zn–air batteries have shown promising performances, demonstrating potential in practical applications.117,118,250Table 4 summarizes the performance of ADMC-catalyzed metal–air batteries, including the open circuit voltage, current density, power density, specific capacity and energy density, etc. For example, the current density and the max power density of Fe–N-SCCF-based zinc–air batteries can reach ∼205 mA cm−2 (at 1.0 V) and 300 mW cm−2, respectively. Wang et al.117 reported that Fe–Co dual site ADMC embedded in carbon nanotube ((Fe,Co)/CNT)-based batteries exhibited a superior open-circuit voltage (1.63 V) as compared with commercial Pt/C-based batteries (1.56 V), validating the excellent ORR performance of (Fe,Co)/CNT (Fig. 8A). Here, an ADMC of (Fe,Co)/CNT dispersed on carbon paper (CP) with a loading of 1 mgtotal cm−2 was used as the air cathode in a Zn–air battery with 6 M KOH as the electrolyte and Zn foil as the anode and produced a high voltage of 1.31 V at a discharge current density of 20 mA cm−2, with the power density and specific energy density of the full battery reaching 260 mW cm−2 and 870 W h kgZn−1, respectively. Furthermore, discharge polarization curves revealed that this battery can perform at a high current density of 178 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.0 V (Fig. 8B) with both the power density and current density significantly better than that of commercial Pt/C (105 mW cm−2 and 18 mA cm−2 respectively) (Fig. 8C). Galvanostatic discharge measurements were also conducted and revealed that the performance of the (Fe,Co)/CNT-based battery was better than that of commercial Pt/C-based batteries, as the specific capacity of the (Fe,Co)/CNT–Zn battery reached 774 mA h gZn−1 at 50 mA cm−2, corresponding to a gravimetric energy density of 870 W h kgZn−1 (Fig. 8D). And because these values are higher than those of commercial Pt/C-based batteries (748 mA h gZn−1vs. 640 W h kgZn−1 at 50 mA cm−2), (Fe,Co)/CNT is a highly promising substitute for commercial Pt/C with great application potential in Zn–air batteries.
Table 4 Summary of ADMC-catalyzed metal–air batteries




Materials
Application
Open circuit voltage (V)
Current density
Power density
Ref.




S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT
Zinc–air batteries
1.35
—
102.7 mW cm−2

23



FeNx-Embedded PNC
Zinc–air batteries
1.55
—
278 mW cm−2

252



Fe–N-SCCFs
Zinc–air batteries


∼205 mA cm−2 (1.0 V)
300 mW cm−2

125



Fe–NCCs
Zinc–air batteries
1.36
Specific capacity: 705 mA h g−1 at 5 mA cm−2
Peak power density: 66 mW cm−2 at 0.55 V

173



pCNT@Fe@GL
Zn–air batteries
—
—
—

255



No significant change on overpotential (0.58 V, Fe–N–C pCNT + NiFe LDH) and discharge potential (≈1.36 V, pCNT@Fe@GL towards ORR)


CoN4/NG
Flexible solid zinc–air batteries
1.51
50.0 mA cm−2
115 mW cm−2

176



Specific capacity: 730 mA h g−1


Energy density: 671 W h kg−1


All-solid-state foldable Zn–air battery
—
—
28 mW cm−2


NGM-Co
Zinc–air batteries
1.439
—
152 mW cm−2

170



840 W h kgZn−1 at 20.0 mA cm−2


NC-Co SA
Zn–air battery
1.411
31.0 mA cm−2
20.9 mW cm−3

150



Zn–N–C
Zn–O2 battery


683.3 mA h gZn−1 (100 mA cm−2)
179 mW cm−2

146



(Fe,Co)/CNT
Zn–air batteries
1.63
178 mA cm−2 (1.0 V)
260 mW cm−2 with specific energy density of 870 W h kgZn−1

117



Zn/CoN–C
Zn–air battery
1.4
—
230 mW cm−2

118



(Zn,Co)/NSC
Zinc–air batteries
1.5
—
Peak power density: 150 mW cm−2

119



Solid-state zinc–air battery
1.56
—
15 mW cm−2




 Fig. 8  (A) Open circuit voltage curves of (Fe,Co)/CNT-based and Pt/C-based Zn–air batteries using (Fe,Co)/CNT and Pt/C as cathode catalysts respectively. (B) Discharge polarization curves of Zn–air batteries with corresponding power densities. (C) Galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries at 20 mA cm−2. (D) Long-term galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries before the complete consumption of the Zn anode at 50 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Theoretical electrochemical ORR mechanisms catalyzed by ADMCs
The rational design of ADMCs with highly active sites and the elucidation of their nature remain challenging. In addition to physicochemical characterization methods, various theoretical modeling and simulations are effective in the understanding of ADMC structural effects and their catalytic ORR mechanisms. And with the rapid development of computer technologies, data processing speeds are becoming faster, resulting in the simulation of electrocatalytic performances using computational chemistry becoming increasingly precise and accurate. The development of electrochemical reaction models and simulation methods have made computational chemistry an indispensable means of electrocatalytic research and evaluation of catalyst electrocatalytic properties at the atomic level.256
First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations are an important tool to investigate the fundamental ORR mechanisms of supported ADMCs, including the geometric configurations and electronic structures of ADMCs as well as reaction dynamics such as active centers, strong metal–support interactions (SMSI) and charge transfer processes.131,137,257,258 Compared with DFT calculations for metal nanoparticles and cluster catalysts, the DFT calculations for ADMCs are much faster because only one metal atom is involved.259,260 However, it should be noticed that a lot of calculations are still needed for finding the right spin states. DFT calculations can provide quantitative structural information on coordination numbers, bond lengths, bond angles, bonding energies, charge density distributions, and Bader charges,122,257 and are vital in the investigation of reaction intermediates catalyzed by metal atoms. Furthermore, the state of metal catalysts (metallic or insulating) can be obtained through the analysis of density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, which is important in the determination of chemical reaction dynamics.261,262 Aside from DFT calculations, ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) is also widely applied to characterize active site properties of electrocatalysts.263 For example, Holby et al. used ab initio molecular dynamics to evaluate the stability of metal–nitrogen clusters through observations of the reconstruction of water molecules around the active sites. The simulated system was studied in the presence of solvent molecules (H2O) at a thermal temperature of 300 K for a period of time and revealed that as O2 molecules were introduced, constraints relaxed and spontaneous dissociation occurred in the presence of water in which this spontaneous reaction was likely to be unaffected by solvation, indicating that solvents appear to have no effect on the stability of edge defects.263 Nevertheless, the effects of solvents on the adsorption energies of ORR intermediates are so appreciable that the solvation is also a key issue currently in computational electrocatalysis, because it can change adsorption energies and activity predictions.264,265 Besides, the potential energy surface of ADMCs for ORR may be studied using ab initio molecular dynamics for geometry optimizations in solvent environments. Furthermore, DFT can also be used to approximate free energies of adsorption and provide a first-order estimation of ORR activities by means of the calculated overpotentials. Furthermore, the complementary stability modelling, such as Pourbaix diagrams (or potential-pH predominance diagrams) is also a useful tool to visualize electrochemical equilibrium conditions and analyze the free energy dependency of the electrochemical intermediates in changing potential and pH situations.88,266 Based on all of this, Section 5 will review and analyze the current state of theoretical research for single atom ORR catalysts from the aspects of active sites and catalyst–support interactions.
5.1 Catalytic ORR active centers of ADMCs
ADMCs with structural uniformity are ideal model systems to investigate structure and performance relationships110 and the study of active site structures is beneficial to the design and optimization of catalyst structures to increase active site density, efficiency and durability for the ORR. Based on numerous theoretical studies, metal–ligand element moieties supported on carbon (M–Lx–C; M = Fe, Co, Zn, Pt, etc., L = N, S, etc.) structures are promising candidates for electrocatalytic ORR in which atomic M–Lx–C structures with high electrical conductivity can display comparable ORR performances to commercial Pt/C catalysts, especially in alkaline environments. In addition, the presence of nitrogen in catalysts can also play an important role in developing M–N–C ADMCs with highly catalytic ORR activities. For example, carbon-hosted porphyrin-like FeN4C12 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) moieties have been identified to be active for the ORR.54,90,243,266,267 Based on DFT calculations, Calle-Vallejo et al.88 pointed out that the transition metal atoms and 4 nitrogen atoms on graphitic materials are active towards the ORR and OER.90 They also compared single-metal active sites of metal–N4 sites in porphyrins and ADMCs in functionalized graphitic materials towards both ORR and OER.266 It was found that the activity trend of the two materials was basically the same, and the active sites containing groups 7 to 9 transition metals (in the periodic table) might be good ORR and OER electrocatalysts. In both research studies, the authors also computationally determined the oxidation states of the active sites based on ligand-field theory and the spin states of the metal centers. The spin analysis results showed that the possible oxidation state of the transition metal atoms in these active sites had flexibility and was generally 2+.90,266
In ORR catalysis by ADMCs, three mechanisms have been proposed to describe the reduction of oxygen molecules to form water molecules, including oxygen dissociation, peroxyl dissociation and hydrogen peroxide dissociation in which peroxyl dissociation is one possible ORR mechanism with the smallest energy pathway (MEP) to describe the ORR.55,268 The free energy of each elementary step can be calculated by uniting the enthalpy with the harmonic entropy. The reaction free energy (ΔG) within the purely thermodynamic model is given by Nørskov et al.269 with the expression: ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS + ΔEsolvation, where ΔE is the reaction energy of an elementary chemical reaction and can be obtained from DFT calculations, ΔZPE is the difference in zero point energy, and ΔS is the change in entropy, and ΔEsolvation is related to solvation energy. Here, the zero-point energy comes from vibrational frequency analysis normally made using the harmonic oscillator approximation. In their work, they also introduced the concept of computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) which was the basis of most computational electrochemistry studies and allowed for the relatively accurate modelling of protons and electrons in solution.270 In acidic media, the general ORR process could be described by five elementary steps, as follows:209 O2(g) + * → O2*(3.1) O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*(3.2) OOH* + H+ + e− → O* + H2O(3.3) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(3.4) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O(3.5)where * represents the adsorption site and the latter four steps (2 to 5) give the 4e− transfer mechanism. For example, Liu et al.235 reported that the pure carbon-supported Pt SAC (Pt1/BP) displayed a lower ORR performance (0.44 VRHE of E1/2) than N/BP (0.51 VRHE of E1/2), suggesting that single Pt atoms with oxidation state, supported on carbon materials, were almost inert to the ORR process.140 However, by doping N, the catalytic activity of the modified Pt SAC (Pt1–N/BP) with a Pt loading of 0.4 wt% was significantly increased (0.76 VRHE of E1/2). This could provide a strategy for improving the catalytic activity of carbon-based atomically dispersed metal catalysts by utilizing the intrinsic catalytic activities of the complex active sites based on single metal atoms and doped heterogeneous elements. Notably, the authors also observed the above synergistic-effect-induced high ORR activity of Pt1–N/BP under alkaline conditions with a much higher E1/2 of 0.87 VRHE (Fig. 9b), which was at the same level as that of the traditional state-of-the-art Pt/C catalysts. The coordination number of the Pt atoms in Pt1–N/BP was revealed to be 5 with a distance of 2.0 Å. DFT calculations further revealed that the O–O bond of O2 adsorbed on a single Pt atom of g-P–N1–Pt1 sites was longer than that on the traditional bulk Pt–NP-based active sites (Fig. 9c), which probably indicated the easier breaking of the O–O bond. The formation of OOH* on the g-P–N1–Pt1 site further elongated the O–O bond length to 1.49 Å, suggesting an easier dissociation of the O–O bond in the succeeding steps. Besides, an important indicator of the catalytic properties of a catalyst was found to be ORR overpotential, which could be demonstrated in the calculated free energy diagrams.88,89,271 The circle of Fig. 9c displayed the free energy diagrams on g-P–N1–Pt1 site. At U = 0 V, all the electron-transfer steps are exothermic and the free energy pathway is downhill. From this, it can be seen that the atomic structure model is an effective approach to verify catalytic active sites through the quantitative estimation of the free energy of elementary reaction steps by calculating the entropy, binding energy, solvation energy and zero-point energy of possible intermediates on catalysts in which the resulting energy diagrams can be used to identify the potential determining steps during catalytic ORR and the activity of different atomic sites.257 In addition, the potential-limiting steps are more appropriate because they are thermodynamic steps, while the rate-limiting step is a kinetic one.272
 Fig. 9  (a) RRDE polarization curves of different catalysts (BP, Pt1/BP, N/BP, Pt1–N/BP and commercial Pt/C) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (a) and 0.1 M KOH (b) with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (c) The proposed reaction pathways and free energy diagram (the inset) for the ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst in acidic medium, (d) side view and bond lengths of the proposed catalytic sites. Reproduced with permission.235 
For alkaline conditions, the catalytic cycle is described by steps (4.1)–(4.5) as follows:149,269 O2(g) + * → O2*(4.1) O2* + H2O(l) + e− → OOH* + OH−(4.2) OOH* + e− → O* + OH−(4.3) O* + H2O(l) + e− → OH* + OH−(4.4) OH* + e− → OH− + *(4.5)where steps (7)–(10) correspond to the 4e− transfer processes. For example, Chen et al.149 reported that at U = 0 V, the first three electron-transfer steps (steps (2), (3) and (4)) of Fe-ISAs/CN and Fe particles (Fe-NPs/CN) exhibited similar free-energy changes. Here, by comparing free energetics, the electron transfer in steps (2) and (5) of Fe-ISAs/CN was revealed to be endothermic, suggesting the need for external forces (i.e., applied voltage) at U = 0 V. In addition, the formation of OH* is energetically facile, suggesting that resident *OH adsorbed on the catalyst is difficult to remove.55 Step (5) is the potential determining step with the highest endothermic energy in which an estimated overpotential of 0.65 V for Fe-ISAs/CN is required for step 5 to become exothermic. This is much lower than that of Fe-NPs/CN (1.76 V), making electron transfer in Fe-ISAs/CN much easier from Fe single atoms to adsorbed *OH species followed by charging of adsorbed *OH to form OH−, resulting in high ORR reactivity.
As for isolated Pt atom catalysts on sulfur-doped zeolite-templated carbon supports (Pt/HSC catalyst), Choi et al.111 modeled Pt–S4 catalytic centers and, through DFT calculations using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof function and semi-empirical dispersion correction, obtained the best fitted ligation model with one Pt atom ligated by two thiophenes and two thiolates in which the Pt–S4 species form a square-planar-type ligand arrangement with a typical d8 electron configuration (Fig. 10a). The researchers reported that if solvated in water, Pt2+ centers can be activated by favorably interacting with two water molecules to substitute two S of the thiophene-like moiety (0.63 eV downhill; Fig. 10b) and the stronger Lewis basicity of the oxygen lone-pairs as compared with sulfur lone-pairs in thiophene results in a distorted Pt center positioned out of the original square planar geometry, allowing this ligand substitution to make Pt more suitable for catalytic actions. Furthermore, the researchers reported that by substituting a H2O molecule, the Pt center can reduce oxygen molecules through a series of proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes in which the first PCET is the potential-determining step in both the 2e− and 4e− pathways (Fig. 10c). Here, the calculated ORR limiting potential was reported to be 0.64 VRHE, which matched well with the experimental onset potential of 0.71 VRHE.
 Fig. 10  Possible ORR mechanisms on the atomic Pt/HSC catalyst. (a) Atomically dispersed Pt complexed with two thiophene and two thiolate groups in one carbon framework. (b) Activation of Pt centers by substituting two S from the thiophene-like moiety with two O from water molecules. (c) The first proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process during the oxygen reduction process to form OOH. (d) 2e− pathway: H2O2 formation through the second PCET followed by the substitution of an H2O2 molecule with an outer-sphere H2O molecule, recuperating the initial state in which Pt is complexed with two thiolates and two water molecules. (e) 4e− pathway: H2O formation through the second PCET process involving the breaking of O–O bonds. (f) The formation of OH through the third PCET process and (g) an inner-sphere H2O through the fourth PCET process (C: grey, H: white, S: yellow, O: red, Pt: purple). (h) Calculated kinetic barriers of the second PCET step for 2e− (blue) and 4e− (red) pathways using the Marcus kinetic theory. Ref. 111 Copyright 2016, NPG. 
According to the different coordination configurations of active M–Nx centers, there are several possible active centers other than MN4 sites such as MN2 moieties.74 Notably, recent theoretical and experimental results have indicated that abundant atomically dispersed MN2 moieties show better ORR behaviors than MN4 moieties and even better than commercial Pt/C catalysts.99,172,244 The researchers attribute this performance to the weaker interactions between MN2 moieties and *O2 and *OH intermediates in comparison with MN4 moieties, which can promote the electron transport process.172 In addition, researchers have also reported that MN2 moieties can exhibit stronger interactions with peroxide as compared with MN4 according to DFT calculations99 which is strongly associated with improved ORR performances. Furthermore, DFT calculations have also revealed that FeN2 moieties are more active than CoN2 moieties for the ORR due to the lower energy barriers of the intermediates and products involved.54
Dual atomic catalysts, which possess more atomic metal active sites, have been recently reported to exhibit higher intrinsic activities towards the ORR and theoretical and experimental studies have revealed that dual-atom catalysts can considerably reduce thermodynamic barriers.55 For example, Holby et al.263 investigated Fe atoms located between N-terminated zigzag edges and found that the FeN3 cluster structure (which can form Fe2N5 sites) appeared to be capable of undergoing barrierless cleavage of O–O bonds through a dissociative ORR pathway thus avoiding the formation of H2O2. In addition, ab initio molecular dynamics in that study revealed that the solvation process does not appear to affect the spontaneous reaction and stability of these N-coordinated intra-edge defects in the carbon support.263
Pt-Free dual site ADMCs such as binuclear Co2N5 and Fe–Co dual sites have also been shown to possess outstanding ORR performance in acidic media55,83 and such dual sites are reported to be able to activate and spontaneously cleave O–O bonds, which is crucial for the 4e− transfer of the ORR.83,273 For example, Xiao et al.55 built several possible Co2Nx configurations to identify potential active site structures, including Co2N5, CoN4–CoN3, CoN2–CoN2 and Co2N6 through DFT calculations. The results proved that the shortest Co–Co distance of 2.21 Å obtained from the binuclear site (Co2N5) structure was close to 2.12 Å attained in the EXAFS fitting process. In addition, the researchers reported that their novel binuclear Co2N5 sites demonstrated extreme activity towards the ORR that was 12 times higher than that of conventional CoN4 sites. This might be attributed to the greatly reduced thermodynamic energy barrier originated from the binuclear site structure.
Another type of ADMC with dual sites consists of two different metal single atoms isolated on the support.118,119,139 Here, the introduction of a second doping metal or ligand element complicates situations and there are controversies concerning the binding modes of the two metal elements in dual atomic catalysts; namely, the type of bonding, including M1–M1, M2–M2 or M1–M2 bonding and the presence of metal–metal bonding, especially in cases in which M–L bonding coordination is close. A typical example is FeCo-ISAs/CN with atomically dispersed Fe and Co atoms. Zhang et al.139 conducted FT-EXAFS and reported that the main peak at 1.5 Å in the FT-EXAFS for the Fe K-edge was assigned to the Fe–N coordination and the only main peak at 1.4 Å in the Co K-edge spectra was assigned to the Co–N coordination. Additionally, no other peaks, especially those of Fe–Fe bonds and Co–Co bonds at ∼2.2 Å, were detected in the FT-EXAFS spectra, indicating the atomic dispersion of Fe and Co atoms. The researchers attributed the enhanced kinetics of the ORR active centers of FeCo-ISAs/CN not only to the increased metal sites, but also to the synergistic effects of the adjacent atomically dispersed Fe and Co active sites. In another example Lu et al.118 investigated Zn/CoN–C with Zn and Co atoms forming Zn–Co dual atomic pairs with a distance of 0.22 ± 0.04 nm. Zn/CoN–C presented the best ORR performance with a E1/2 of 0.861 V that was 35, 68 and 155 mV more positive than those of Pt/C (0.826 V), CoN–C (0.793 V) and ZnN–C (0.706 V) respectively. The researchers in this study also obtained the structural information of Zn/CoN–C and the ORR active sites using a combination of XAFS and DFT and reported that based on the fitting results of XAFS, the coordination number of both Co–N and Zn–N was 3.5 in the first shell, suggesting that the Co–N and Zn–N interactions were both in a mixed M–N3 and M–N4 (M = Co, Zn) environment. As for the second shell, the coordination number of both Co–M and Zn–M was reported to be 0.5 ± 0.1, suggesting a weak Co–M and Zn–M interaction in the form of a ZnCoN6 structure. Furthermore, DFT calculations revealed that the lowest energy could be obtained through Co bonding with Zn, suggesting the tendency to form Co–Zn diatomic pairs. Finally, in situ XANES spectra of Zn/CoN–C confirmed that Co acted as an active center during the ORR due to its more involved activity.
Although the dual-atom strategy can increase the catalyst loading of ADMCs, coordination situations become more complex because pure dual-atom ADMCs are difficult to prepare due to the coexistence of single and dual atoms simultaneously. And for the second introduced ligand (L′), the identification of active sites (Fe–Lx) requires the understanding of the coordination conditions of Fe, L and L′, which is more complex.23 This structural information might be obtained through a combination of theoretical calculations and advanced characterization technologies, such as probe molecules, Mössbauer, nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy, etc.274 For example, using a combination of DFT calculations with local scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM-STS) measurements, Kondo et al.275 was able to obtain the density of states in the occupied region near the Fermi level of the carbon atoms adjacent to pyridinic N.
5.2 Strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs)
In general, the structure of ADMCs, their vicinal coordination environments and the close contact of catalyst atoms with supporting materials play a significant role in the enhancement of catalyst ORR activities.276–279 For metal atoms, they carry charge (s), which can affect their binding strengths with reactant molecules or regulate their behavior.277 And for supports of ADMCs, they not only act as anchoring sites to strongly interact with isolated atoms and further prevent migration and agglomeration, but also actively participate in surface reactions.141 Based on this, numerous DFT calculations on different ADMC systems have focused on metal atom–support interactions and corresponding catalytic performances.131 And to increase the aggregation barrier to prevent sintering, many factors including the support type and defects, particle size and morphology and metal–reactant interactions should be taken into consideration.120,279 In general, the metal atom–support interactions originate from the chemical bonding effect and charge transfer between metal catalysts and supports and the associated interface.101,280 Single metal atoms are chemically anchored onto the surface of supports through strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs), which usually involve interfacial bonding, including metal–metal bonds or coordination bonds with O, N and S atoms on supports.281 SMSIs can ensure the tight anchoring of atomically dispersed metals onto support surfaces, preventing the migration and aggregation of single-atoms and maintaining their stability during the catalytic process.131 Furthermore, SMSIs can lower the free energy and form highly stable and catalytically active centers for desired catalytic reactions.120 Therefore, the selection of appropriate supports is necessary to strongly interact with isolated atoms and prevent the migration and agglomeration of isolated atoms, forming stable, finely dispersed active sites. And among promising catalysts, nanocarbon-based materials have attracted intense attention due to their economic viability, tunable surface chemistry and fast electron transfer capacity. However, significant enhancements in the active sites of heteroatom-decorated carbon materials remain challenging.23
The rational design of ORR electrocatalysts and even bifunctional ORR and OER electrocatalysts with atomic modulation is greatly desired for fuel cells and rechargeable flexible metal–air batteries. Numerous studies have demonstrated that DFT is a powerful technique for understanding the nature of active centers, metal atom–support interactions and the evaluation of catalytic activity.86 And based on the single metal atomic scale data obtained through ac-STEM imaging, theoretical calculations can be carried out to help understand the structure and ORR activity of single atom catalysts on support materials. For example, on the surface of selected supports, ac-STEM imaging data of ADMCs can be directly used to establish models for DFT calculations of catalytic processes,103,228 allowing for the elucidation of stable conformations and providing new perspectives in the detection of structures and characteristics.4,5,135,215 And ultimately, more robust ORR catalysts toward specific electrochemical processes can be precisely and rationally designed at the atomic level.
6. Summary, technical challenges and possible research directions
6.1 Summary
In this Review, the most recent developments of atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) with single-atom and dual-atom active sites for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) have been summarized, including their synthesis/characterization, reaction mechanisms and application in electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices. Here, ADMCs with minimal size and maximum atomic utilization are of significance for the rational utilization of precious metal resources and the improvement of the economic feasibility of electrocatalytic systems. The realized ADMCs show excellent ORR performance and can be used as model systems for the fundamental understanding of ORR mechanisms in terms of active sites and interactions between ADMCs and supports. In ADMCs, the catalytic active sites can be verified through the quantitative estimation of the free energy of elementary reaction steps; however, to compare between different active sites, researchers usually assume that the reaction mechanism is identical on all sites, which is not necessarily true and may lead to erroneous conclusions.282 For example, MN2 moieties show higher ORR performance due to weaker interactions with *O2 and *OH intermediates than MN4 species. As for dual atomic catalysts with increased number of active sites, these have recently been reported to show higher intrinsic activities towards the ORR due to the considerably low onset potential. The dual metal sites can activate and spontaneously cleave O–O bonds which is crucial for the 4e− pathway, further promoting the electron transport process. In addition, strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs) allow ADMCs to be able to tightly anchor onto supports, improving the stability of single-atom catalysts. And overall, the understanding of the nature of ADMC structures can allow for the rational design of better electrocatalysts with precise active site structures and excellent ORR properties at the atomic level.
6.2 Technical challenges and their analysis
Although ADMCs possess many advantages over conventional catalysts, several challenges remain in terms of their development and practical application:

(1) Insufficient catalytic ORR activity. 
The improvement of ADMC catalytic performance towards the ORR is necessary yet challenging, especially under acidic conditions. In addition, an in-depth understanding of reaction mechanisms including active centers, strong metal–support interactions (SMSI) and charge transfer processes, especially in practical applications of fuel cells and metal–air batteries, is also challenging.


(2) Insufficient catalytic ORR stability, particularly in PEM fuel cell and metal–air battery applications. 
To achieve commercialization, the stability of ADMCs is critical. However, problems originating from agglomeration during material sintering and increased metal atom loading due to their high free energy as well as deactivation of isolated metal atoms during the catalytic reaction process of energy devices due to aggregation or leaching remain. Particularly in acidic media, due to the corrosiveness of the environment and sluggish kinetics, ADMCs face greater challenges. Here, because ADMCs are generally confined and stabilized on support materials, metal–support interactions play a key role in the homogeneous dispersion and enhanced stability of ADMCs. Therefore, the availability of homogeneous structures of anchor sites on supports becomes particularly important for the rational design of ADMCs with high stability.


(3) Lack of fundamental understanding. 
An understanding of the structure and electrochemical performance of ADMCs at the atomic level can be achieved by the development of advanced atomic resolution characterization and calculation techniques. However, deeper insights into the geometric configuration and electronic structure of ADMCs are still required, such as the local coordination environments of centrally active metal sites (e.g., coordination numbers, distances and adjacent atomic species), especially for ADMCs with dual and even multiple sites, in which coordination conditions and active sites are more complex and difficult to identify.


(4) Difficulty in the scale-up synthesis of ADMCs. 
Simple and large-scale synthesis of ADMCs with perfectly balanced metal active center loading and dispersal is still challenging. Here, the difficulty in the accurate synthesis of atomic catalysts is caused by the lack of precise control over the atomic active site formation process. And presently, synthesis methods play a key role in the development and practical application of ADMCs; however, most of them are produced using bottom-up strategies with metal precursors adsorbed/anchored, reduced or confined by defects on oxides or carbon supports with ample N or O defects or vacancies, which are not suitable for large-scale production.

6.3 Possible research directions
To facilitate further development and overcome challenges, several research directions are proposed as follows:

(1) Further development and optimization of synthesis strategies to obtain more active and stable ADMCs. 
To achieve significantly enhanced catalytic ORR activities and stabilities in ADMCs, especially in practical applications, synthesis methods and optimizations are key and new material exploration and selection for catalysts and supports are crucial. One strategy to increase the catalytic activity is to dope carbon materials with heterogeneous elements (such as nitrogen, boron, sulfur, oxygen, phosphorus, etc.). Furthermore, the strengthening of the affinity and synergistic interactions between support surfaces and metal precursors, including interfacial chemical bonding and finely dispersed anchor sites, needs to be given larger emphasis and more effort.


(2) Further investigations into structure–activity relationships and reaction catalytic mechanisms at the atomic level. 
Theoretical calculations, advanced modern characterizations and experimental validations are all methods to achieve the fundamental understanding of catalyst performances and mechanisms for new catalyst design and performance optimization. Theoretical calculation is an important topic now to realistically include electrochemical barriers in computational models by using the computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) and it will be a major advance when it happens.270 Besides, a better explanation of solvation is also a current requirement.264,265 In addition, the activity model should be supplemented by the stability model (e.g., Pourbaix diagram).283 Finally, besides the associative pathways based on *OOH, *OH and *O proposed by Norskov et al.,284 there are also several other pathways which should be considered when analyzing the activity trends. Through a combination of physicochemical characterization techniques (e.g., ac-STEM, XAFS, FTIR, NMR) and theoretical calculations (e.g., DFT), the structures and electrochemical reaction mechanisms of ADMCs can be investigated and understood, including binding energies, coordination environments and active centers. In this regard, the development of in situ characterization technologies such as in situ electron microscopy and in situ X-ray absorption fine structure is expected to aid the catalyst growth process and reaction mechanism research, especially in practical performance validation. Furthermore, the identification and detailed characterization of active site chemical structures towards the ORR are highly desirable and a deeper understanding of ADMC structures, including reactive active sites and interactions between metal atoms and support surfaces, will benefit the rational design and optimized synthesis of ADMCs at the atomic level. In addition, it is also highly desirable to achieve atomic modulation of ADMCs towards the ORR with accurately controlled coordination environments for metal atoms.


(3) Development of large-scale rational design and synthesis strategies for ADMCs with elaborately controlled active sites and increased metal loading. 
For rational design and optimized synthesis of ADMCs at the atomic level, several strategies can be elaborated. For the high-temperature pyrolysis strategies, ensuring the original ratio of metal and the strong affinity between support surfaces and metal complexes is the most basic requirement. Besides, high temperature pyrolysis is also affected by the heating rate and heating conditions, etc., so it needs to be precisely regulated to achieve micro-area pyrolysis. In addition, through the exploration of new/advanced materials and/or novel large-scale synthesis strategies, including atomic layer deposition, mass-selected soft-landing etc., ADMCs can be rationally designed and fabricated with perfectly balanced metal loadings and dispersal states for practical application, in which ADMCs with dual- and even multi-site atomic catalysts can possess more metal loading and more active centers.


(4) Further design and optimization of ADMC catalyst layers and membrane electrode assemblies for fuel cells and metal–air batteries. 
The advanced structure and high ADMC loading of catalyst layers (CLs) as well as associated membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) play a crucial role in device performance. Therefore, ADMC-based CLs and MEAs need to be innovatively designed and optimized to achieve high performances in fuel cells and metal–air batteries toward practical application.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the partial financial support of this work by the Shanghai Sailing Program (No. 18YF1408600) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21601122).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, H.-L. Wang and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273–1307 RSC .
H. D. Yoo, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon and D. Aurbach, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
Y.-J. Wang, B. Fang, D. Zhang, A. Li, D. P. Wilkinson, A. Ignaszak, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 1–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Zhao, M. A. Khan, W. Zou, J. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20564–20620 RSC .
R. Wang, H. Wang, F. Luo and S. Liao, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 324–387 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Yu, V. Chabot and J. Zhang, Electrochemical Supercapacitors for Energy Storage and Delivery: Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, S. Feng, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1713–1721 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Khan, H. Zhao, W. Zou, Z. Chen, W. Cao, J. Fang, J. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 483–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 1962–1966 CrossRef .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Xing, G. Yin and J. Zhang, Rotating Electrode Methods and Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysts, Elsevier Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
K. Strickland, E. Miner, Q. Jia, U. Tylus, N. Ramaswamy, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen and S. Mukerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K.-I. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, P. Zamani, J.-Y. Choi, F. M. Hassan, G. Jiang, D. C. Higgins, Y. Zhang, M. A. Hoque and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604456 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1759–A1771 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, M. Park, G. Nam, J.-S. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1396–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Xing, K. Xu, Y. Tong, H. Xie, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 610–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, J. Guo, Y. Lei, H. Liang, C. Zhao and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705580 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cui, G. Fu, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 10033–10037 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shui, T. Jin, J. Hu and H. Liu, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1401–1406 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, B. Y. Xia, C. Xiao, L. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Xie and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8643–8647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fu, C. Zhu, D. Su, J. Song, S. Yao, S. Feng, M. H. Engelhard, D. Du and Y. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1703118 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Huang, M. Xia, S. Rehman, S. Mu, Z. Kou, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, F. Gao and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, I. S. Amiinu, H. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Tang and S. Mu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 148–156 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2780–2832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, S. Huang, Y. Yang, Q. Tong and F. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2018, 113, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1878–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, U. Grønbjerg, J. Rossmeisl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6744–6762 RSC .
L. Bu, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Su, G. Lu, X. Zhu, J. Yao, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J.-Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. He, L. Zhang, D. He, G. Zhou, Y. Lin, Z. Deng, X. Hong, Y. Wu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carrette, K. A. Friedrich and U. Stimming, ChemPhysChem, 2000, 1, 162–193 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yeager, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1527–1537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, P. Liu, E. Velasco, G. Yao, Z. Tian, L. Zhang and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1808193 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kinoshita, Electrochemical oxygen technology, John Wiley & Sons,  1992 Search PubMed .
H. S. Wroblowa, P. Yen Chi and G. Razumney, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1976, 69, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Li and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 242–250 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Marković, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenković and P. N. Ross, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 105–116 CrossRef .
N. M. Marković and P. N. Ross, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 45, 117–229 CrossRef .
J. Yi, P. Liang, X. Liu, K. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3075–3095 RSC .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Gao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 396–403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Lu and W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1289–1296 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stäb, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb and R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rabis, P. Rodriguez and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 864–890 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, J. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Hou, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. O'Mullane, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4012–4026 RSC .
Z. Wang, H. Jin, T. Meng, K. Liao, W. Meng, J. Yang, D. He, Y. Xiong and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802596 CrossRef .

          A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Materials for Sustainable Energy: a collection of peer-reviewed research and review articles from Nature Publishing Group,  2011, pp. 148–159 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
M. Escudero-Escribano, P. Malacrida, M. H. Hansen, U. G. Vej-Hansen, A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, V. Tripkovic, J. Schiøtz, J. Rossmeisl, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2016, 352, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. Tymoczko, V. Colic, Q. H. Vu, M. D. Pohl, K. Morgenstern, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bandarenka, Science, 2015, 350, 185–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chattot, O. Le Bacq, V. Beermann, S. Kühl, J. Herranz, S. Henning, L. Kühn, T. Asset, L. Guétaz, G. Renou, J. Drnec, P. Bordet, A. Pasturel, A. Eychmüller, T. J. Schmidt, P. Strasser, L. Dubau and F. Maillard, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 827–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Zhao, T. Cheng, A. Fortunelli, C.-Y. Chen, R. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, B. V. Merinov, Z. Lin, E. Zhu, T. Yu, Q. Jia, J. Guo, L. Zhang, W. A. Goddard, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Science, 2016, 354, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, X. Li, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, H. B. Wu, N. Li, Y. Yan, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3797–3801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. Qiao, L. Yang and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301523 CrossRef .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins, A. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 RSC .
J. Masa, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10102–10120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Artyushkova, I. Matanovic, B. Halevi and P. Atanassov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2836–2843 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. B. Bezerra, L. Zhang, K. Lee, H. Liu, A. L. B. Marques, E. P. Marques, H. Wang and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4937–4951 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Wang, Y.-J. Lai, L. Song, Z.-Y. Zhou, J.-G. Liu, Q. Wang, X.-D. Yang, C. Chen, W. Shi, Y.-P. Zheng, M. Rauf and S.-G. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 10045–10048 CrossRef .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefèvre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J.-P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wan, W. Chen, J. Yang, M. Liu, X. Liu and J. Shui, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Keith and T. Jacob, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9521–9525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3722–3730 RSC .
H.-Y. Su, Y. Gorlin, I. C. Man, F. Calle-Vallejo, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14010–14022 RSC .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martínez and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15639–15643 RSC .
D. Raciti, J. Kubal, C. Ma, M. Barclay, M. Gonzalez, M. Chi, J. Greeley, K. L. More and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 202–211 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kolb, J. Wermink, F. Calle-Vallejo, L. B. F. Juurlink and M. T. M. Koper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3416–3422 RSC .
F. Calle-Vallejo, M. D. Pohl, D. Reinisch, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet and A. S. Bandarenka, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2283–2289 RSC .
A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, A. F. Carley, P. Landon and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2008, 321, 1331–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Heiz, A. Sanchez, S. Abbet and W.-D. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3214–3217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turner, V. B. Golovko, O. P. Vaughan, P. Abdulkin, A. Berenguer-Murcia, M. S. Tikhov, B. F. Johnson and R. M. Lambert, Nature, 2008, 454, 981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jiménez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. G. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Campbell, S. C. Parker and D. E. Starr, Science, 2002, 298, 811–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. Pereira Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Science, 2016, 352, 797–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, L. F. Allard and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3768–3771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. J. Hackett, R. M. Brydson, M. H. Gass, I. Harvey, A. D. Newman, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8593–8596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H.-T. Kim, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Collman, P. Denisevich, Y. Konai, M. Marrocco, C. Koval and F. C. Anson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 6027–6036 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yeager, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 38(1–2), 5–26 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Sahraie, U. I. Kramm, J. Steinberg, Y. Zhang, A. Thomas, T. Reier, J.-P. Paraknowitsch and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. He, H. Cao, S. Sun, W. Diao, D. Gao, P. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. Li, R. Liu, D. Ren, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Liu, B. Wang, H. Li, S. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Wang and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 277–283 CrossRef .
J.-C. Liu, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6190–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, S. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Gong, Z. Wu, L. Song, L. Gu, W. Hu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 3551–3556 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Li, W. Zhang, X. Zhao, J. Qiu, A. Li, X. Zheng, Z. Hu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4712–4718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1443–1445 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zou, Y. Yan, S. Xie, G. Hu, Y. Li and A. Dong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2003–2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801649 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liang, C. Hao and Y. Shi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Uzun, V. Ortalan, Y. Hao, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3691–3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mackus, M. A. Verheijen, N. M. Leick, A. A. Bol and W. M. Kessels, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1905–1911 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. James, S. L. Hemmingson and C. T. Campbell, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5673–5678 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 34–59 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L.-J. Zhang, J.-Q. Wang, J.-S. Hu, Z. Wei and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673–689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 938–996 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700191 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
D. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Gong, Q. Li, R. Shen, Y. Han, W.-C. Cheong, L. Gu and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4274–4277 RSC .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. J. Tak, J. Kim, A. Soon and H. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Wang, M. Qiao, G. Wu, W. Chen, T. Yuan, Q. Xu, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Ge, X. Hong, Y. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Jia, R. Cai, W. Theis, X. Yang, Y. Xia, D. Yang and X. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18417–18425 RSC .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhou, C. Chen, Z. Han, B. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, L. Du, Y. Bu, P. Wang, X. Wang, H. Yang and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1657 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, W. Chen, H. Xiao, Y. Gong, Z. Li, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, N. Fu, L. Gu, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800588 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, J. Xiao, Y. Wu, P. Du, R. Si, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, W.-H. Zhang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6820–6824 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Wu, X. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Li, H. Xu, X. Li, X. Yu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14675 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Zhao, H. Wei, J. Guo, S. Liang, A. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Liu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8147–8153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Chen, L. Zhang, T. Yao, W. Liu, Y. Lin, H. Ju, J. Dong, L. Zheng and W. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9419–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, L. Li, T. Sheng, G. Hu, Y. Chen and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11594–11598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 5413–5418 CrossRef .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y.-T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang, W. Chen, J. Dong, L. Zheng, J. Luo, J. Wan, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10976–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wan, P. Yu, H. Chen, J. Wen, C.-J. Sun, H. Zhou, N. Zhang, Q. Li, W. Zhao, B. Xie, T. Li and J. Shi, Small, 2018, 14, 1704319 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dilpazir, H. He, Z. Li, M. Wang, P. Lu, R. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Gao and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, M. Luo, X. Liu, W. Xing, W. Xu, Z. Jiang and L. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700802 CrossRef .
J.-D. Yi, R. Xu, Q. Wu, T. Zhang, K.-T. Zang, J. Luo, Y.-L. Liang, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 883–889 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Cheng, H. Zhao and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9915–9922 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Gao, M. Dou, J. Ji and F. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1604290 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Han, W. Chen, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Zhang, S. Ji, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706508 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang, B. Wang, H.-F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703185 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, H. Tang, X. Mamat, T. Wagberg, G. Hu and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jia, Q. Xu, F. Zhao, H.-X. Gao, J. Song, P. Chen, Z. An, X. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4982–4990 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, J. Song, Q. Shi, D. Su, M. H. Engelhard, X. Li, D. Xiao, D. Li, L. Estevez, D. Du and Y. Lin, Small, 2017, 13, 1603407 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6626–6631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Piernavieja-Hermida, Z. Lu, A. White, K.-B. Low, T. Wu, J. W. Elam, Z. Wu and Y. Lei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15348–15356 RSC .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, A. Li, J.-C. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Gong, Q. Zhang, W.-C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, H. Xiao, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu, X. Han, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 856–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, G. Fang, G. Li, H. Ma, H. Fan, L. Yu, C. Ma, X. Wu, D. Deng, M. Wei, D. Tan, R. Si, S. Zhang, J. Li, L. Sun, Z. Tang, X. Pan and X. Bao, Science, 2014, 344, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu, P. Du, R. Si, J. Wang, X. Cui, H. Li, J. Xiao, T. Xu, J. Deng, F. Yang, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Li, X. Pan and X. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H.-E. Kim and H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 104–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, X. Chen, J. Liu, J. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2402–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamiya, R. Kamai, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Wang, R. Wang and M. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7610–7618 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14–19 RSC .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, H. Zhang, W. Cai, M. Ni, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2056–2080 RSC .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 RSC .
M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 675–702 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, D. Xia, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9604–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 626–627 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Q. Shang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao, T. Yao, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and H.-L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705112 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Karakalos, L. Luo, Z. Qiao, X. Xie, C. Wang, D. Su, Y. Shao and G. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14143–14149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 16302–16306 CrossRef .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D.-J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Li, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 517–531 RSC .
J. Tang, J. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, M. O. Tade, S. Dai and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 588–593 CAS .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Yan, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5758–5764 RSC .
X. Sun, A. I. Olivos-Suarez, D. Osadchii, M. J. V. Romero, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 20–28 CrossRef .
Y. Han, Y.-G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R.-A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W.-C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, S. J. Bradley, A. Chan, G. I. N. Waterhouse, T. Nann, P. E. Kruger and S. G. Telfer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11872–11881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, P. Xu, M. Wu, Q. Meng, H. Chen, Z. Shu, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4294–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. Pulinthanathu Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .
N. Cheng, Y. Shao, J. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 220–242 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L.-M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Yang, J. A. Schott, X. Liu, S. M. Mahurin, C. Huang, Y. Zhang, P. F. Fulvio, M. F. Chisholm and S. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15020 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Heiz, A. Sanchez, S. Abbet and W. D. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3214–3217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abbet, A. Sanchez, U. Heiz, W. D. Schneider, A. M. Ferrari, G. Pacchioni and N. Rösch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3453–3457 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Kaden, T. Wu, W. A. Kunkel and S. L. Anderson, Science, 2009, 326, 826–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, Science, 2010, 328, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vajda and M. G. White, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7152–7176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. E. Dick and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17677–17682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, C. Wan, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Liu, K. Zang, J. Luo, S. Zhao, W. Hu, W. Yan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802146 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. C. Young, Computational chemistry: a practical guide for applying techniques to real world problems[M], John Wiley & Sons,  2004 Search PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, M. Zhu and L. Kang, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 2992–3002 CrossRef CAS .
I. MacLaren and Q. M. Ramasse, Int. Mater. Rev., 2014, 59, 115–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1460–1472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Y. Borisevich, S. N. Rashkeev, M. V. Glazoff, K. Sohlberg, S. J. Pennycook and S. T. Pantelides, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Parkinson, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1454–1459 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. Li and Z. Jiang, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 14, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and T.-C. Weng, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 466–472 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ogino, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1481–1488 CrossRef .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D.-J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Funke, A. C. Scheinost and M. Chukalina, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 094110 CrossRef .
Z. Xia, H. Zhang, K. Shen, Y. Qu and Z. Jiang, Phys. B, 2018, 542, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang, X. Meng, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 14522–14526 CrossRef .
C. Asokan, L. DeRita and P. Christopher, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1473–1480 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Yates Jr., S. D. Worley, T. M. Duncan and R. W. Vaughan, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 70, 1225–1230 CrossRef .
V. L. Zholobenko, G.-D. Lei, B. T. Carvill, B. A. Lerner and W. M. H. Sachtler, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 233–238 RSC .
W. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Han and X. Bao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 192–210 RSC .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M.-T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, K. Zang, J. Luo, L. Wang, S. Gao, X. Mamat, G. Hu and T. Wagberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13800–13804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ferrandon, A. J. Kropf, D. J. Myers, K. Artyushkova, U. Kramm, P. Bogdanoff, G. Wu, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16001–16013 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, I. Herrmann-Geppert, J. Behrends, K. Lips, S. Fiechter and P. Bogdanoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 635–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, B. Chi, X. Tian, Z. Cui, E. Liu, Q. Jia, W. Fan, G. Wang, D. Dang, M. Li, K. Zang, J. Luo, Y. Hu, S. Liao, X. Sun and S. Mukerjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5020–5030 RSC .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. He, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Su, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824–2832 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J.-L. Shui, L. R. Grabstanowicz, C. Chen, S. M. Commet, T. Xu, J. Lu and D.-J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1093–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, C. Wang, P. Jiang, L. Hu, H. Lei and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13254–13262 RSC .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6254–6262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Huang, G. Liang, F. Mo, Q. Yang, J. Su, Y. Gao, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1949–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, B. Chi, J. Li, G. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Shi, Z. Cui, L. Du, S. Liao, K. Zang, J. Luo, Y. Hu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802856 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, J. M. T. A. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606534 CrossRef PubMed .

          Z. Wei, in Electrocatalysis, ed. S. Sun and S. Chen, Chemical Industry Press,  2013, ch. 4, pp. 113–195 Search PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
F. He, K. Li, C. Yin, Y. Wang, H. Tang and Z. Wu, Carbon, 2017, 114, 619–627 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kozlov, G. Kovács, R. Ferrando and K. M. Neyman, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3868–3880 RSC .
A. Krasheninnikov, P. Lehtinen, A. S. Foster, P. Pyykkö and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 126807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lu, T. J. Smart, D. Qin, J. E. Lu, N. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Peng, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5617–5628 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Poh, S. H. Lim, J. Lin and Y. P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13525–13538 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Holby, G. Wu, P. Zelenay and C. D. Taylor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14388–14393 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tripkovic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29381–29388 RSC .
Z.-D. He, S. Hanselman, Y.-X. Chen, M. T. M. Koper and F. Calle-Vallejo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2243–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martínez, J. M. García-Lastra, E. Abad and M. T. M. Koper, Surf. Sci., 2013, 607, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13800–13806 RSC .
Z. Duan and G. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20178–20187 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
J. A. Gauthier, S. Ringe, C. F. Dickens, A. J. Garza, A. T. Bell, M. Head-Gordon, J. K. Nørskov and K. Chan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 920–931 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Wang, F. A. Uribe, T. E. Springer, J. Zhang and R. R. Adzic, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 347–362 RSC .
V. Tripkovic and T. Vegge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26785–26793 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Holby and C. D. Taylor, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9286 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Kneebone, S. L. Daifuku, J. A. Kehl, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, M. Y. Hu, E. E. Alp, K. L. More, P. Zelenay, E. F. Holby and M. L. Neidig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16283–16290 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, S. Casolo, T. Suzuki, T. Shikano, M. Sakurai, Y. Harada, M. Saito, M. Oshima, M. I. Trioni, G. F. Tantardini and J. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 035436 CrossRef .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, B. R. Bunes, L. Zang and C. Wang, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2018, 16, 477–505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Ma, J. Chen and X. Tang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4250–4258 RSC .
J.-C. Liu, Y. Tang, Y.-G. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Campbell, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu and N. Zheng, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 636–638 CrossRef CAS .
N. Govindarajan, J. M. García-Lastra, E. J. Meijer and F. Calle-Vallejo, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 8, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. de Groot and M. T. M. Koper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1023–1031 RSC .
M. Busch, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 278–284 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Minmin Liu
	Dr Minmin Liu received her PhD in Analytic Chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), under the direction of Professor Wei Chen in 2016. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2018. She is a lecturer at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the design and application of carbon based nanomaterial electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries.

Linlin Wang
	Dr Linlin Wang received her PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the direction of Prof. Kai-bin Tang and Prof. Yi-tai Qian in 2013. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2014. She is currently a full associate professor at Shanghai University. Her current research is focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, including electrodes in Li/Na/K-based batteries, Li/Na/K ion batteries, and electrocatalysis in fuel cells.

Kangning Zhao
	Dr Kangning Zhao received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology under the direction of Prof. Liang Zhou and Prof. Liqiang Mai in 2019. He is currently a research associate at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. His current research interest is focused on the defect engineering and electrode/electrolyte interface modulation of electrocatalysis for fuel cells.

Lei Zhang
	Lei Zhang is a Senior Research Officer at the National Research Council Canada (NRC) and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). Lei received her first Master's degree in Materials Chemistry (1993) from Wuhan University (China) and her second Master's degree in Physical Chemistry (2000) from Simon Fraser University (Canada). Lei's main research interests include advanced materials and electrochemical energy technologies in the areas of PEM fuel cell electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, metal–air batteries and Li-ion batteries. She has co-authored more than 200 publications (∼16500 citations).

Xueliang Sun
	Dr Xueliang Sun is a Canada Research Chair in Development of Nanomaterials for Clean Energy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and Canadian Academy of Engineering and Full Professor at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Sun received his PhD in Materials chemistry in 1999 from the University of Manchester, UK, which he followed up by working as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of British Columbia, Canada.

Jiujun Zhang
	Dr Jiujun Zhang is a Professor at Shanghai University, Adjunct Professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo, and former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada Energy (NRC). Dr Zhang received his BS and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and PhD in electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 35 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
In this review, the most recent developments in advanced atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) with single-metal and dual-metal active sites on support materials in the application field of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are comprehensively discussed, including their synthesis/characterization, reaction mechanisms and application in electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries. To facilitate the future development of high-performance ADMCs, several technical challenges are summarized and analyzed and possible research directions are proposed to overcome these challenges. The challenges mainly include the rational and scale-up design and fabrication of ADMCs and a deeper understanding of their geometric configuration, electronic structure and reaction dynamics towards the ORR. In addition, mechanisms of the ORR catalyzed by ADMCs and structure–activity relationships can be further investigated by combining advanced physicochemical characterization techniques and theoretical calculations. And applications of ADMCs as the catalyst layer of fuel cells and metal–air batteries as well as corresponding electrochemical performances are thoroughly reviewed and discussed. This review also focuses on further design and optimization of ADMC catalyst layers and membrane electrode assemblies for fuel cells and metal–air batteries.


 	Scheme 1  Scheme of (a) proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and (b) metal–air batteries.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic depiction of possible principal ORR mechanisms. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
O2* → O* + O*,	(1.1)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*,	(1.2)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*;	(1.3)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*,	(2.1)
OOH* → O* + OH*,	(2.2)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(2.3)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*;	(2.4)
O2* → HOOH*,	(2.1′)
HOOH* → OH* + OH*	(2.2′)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*.	(2.3′)

 		 

 	Scheme 3  Scheme of atomically dispersed metal catalysts or single-atom catalysts, and the relationship between surface free energy and metal size. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 


Wet chemistry strategy	FeCo-ISAs/CN	ORR	Fe 0.964 wt%, Co 0.218 wt%	
139
	Advantage: no need for specialized equipment, easy operation and possible large-scale production.
Pt/TiN	ORR	0.35 wt%	
140
	Disadvantage: metals might become buried and the easy formation of nanoparticles or clusters.
Pt1/TiC; Pt1/TiN	ORR	0.2 wt%; 0.2 wt%	
141
	

H2O2 reduction	

Au1/C3N4	NRR	0.15%	
142
	

Rh1/VO2	AB hydrolysis	0.5 wt%	
123
	

A-Co/r-GO	ORR	3.6 wt%	
143
	

Pt1@Fe–N–C	ORR/HER/OER	2.1 wt% Pt	
144
	

Pt–CN	Photocatalytic H2 evolution	0.075 wt%, 0.11 wt%, 0.16 wt%	
145
	

Zn–N–C	ORR	9.33 wt% (2.06 atom%)	
146
	

Pt1/hNCNC	HER	0.75 to 1.48, 2.92, and 5.68 wt%	
147
	

High-temperature pyrolysis of MOFs	Fe-ISA/NC	ORR	0.947 wt%	
148
	Advantage: precise control over the size of MOF-derived carbon supports and interconnected 3D molecular-scale cages offering abundant mass transfer channels and active nitrogen sites.
Fe-ISAs/CN	ORR	2.16 wt%	
149
	Disadvantage: low carbonization ratios, tedious procedures and extreme difficulty in the modification of the molecular structure and surface properties of resulting ADMCs at such high temperatures.
S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT	OER/ORR	—	
23
	

Co-SAs/N–C-900	ORR	4 wt%	
99
	

Co-SAs/N–C-800	ORR	
	
	

Fe50-N–C-900	ORR	0.1 mg cm−2	
31
	

0.3 mg cm−2
NC-Co SA	ORR	1.84 wt%	
150
	

Co2NxC	ORR	—	
55
	

Fe,Co/N–C	ORR	—	
83
	

Ni SAs/N–C	CO2RR	1.53%	
151
	

CoN4/GN	DSSCs	—	
152
	

CoPc/CNT	CO2RR	6%	
153
	

Ni–N	CO2RR	4 wt%	
14
	

Ni–S	
	2.5 wt%	
	

Pd1/TiO2	Hydrogenation of CC bonds	1.5%	
105
	

Pt/FeOx SAC	DSSC	0.08–2.40%	
154
	

Co-NG	HER	0.57 at%	
98
	

Ru SAs/N–C	Hydrogenation of quinoline	0.30 wt%	
155
	

FeSA–N–C	ORR	1.76 wt%	
156
	

Fe SAs–N/C-20	ORR	0.20 wt%	
157
	

A-PtCo-NC	ORR	Co: 1.72 wt%; Pt: 0.16 wt%	
158
	

Co-SAs@NC	ORR	1.70 wt%	
159
	

20Co-NC-1100	ORR 0.80 V, 0.5 M H2SO4	0.34 at%	
160
	

High-temperature pyrolysis of metal-containing complexes or mixtures of specific precursors	(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	ORR	0.2 at%	
161
	Advantages: top-down approach to synthesize ADMCs through the thermal decomposition of select precursors at appropriate pyrolysis temperatures.
SA–Fe/CN	Benzene conversion	0.9 wt%	
162
	Disadvantage: low carbonization ratios, tedious procedures, and extreme difficulty in the modification of the molecular structure and surface properties of the resulting ADMCs at such high temperatures.
CoNC700	ORR	0.73 at%	
163
	

CoSAs@CNTs	ORR	0.14 at%	
164
	

ZnNx/BP	ORR	0.3 wt%	
165
	

Zn/CoN–C	ORR	Zn 0.33 wt%; Co 0.14 wt%	
118
	

(Zn,Co)/NSC	ORR	—	
119
	

FeSAs/PTF-600	ORR	8.3 wt%	
166
	

Fe-NGM	ORR	0.21 at%	
167
	

Fe-NGM/C–Fe	
	0.53 at%	
	

SA–Fe/NHPC	ORR	2.3 wt%	
168
	

Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres	ORR	0.42 wt%	
169
	

NGM-Co	ORR	0.18 at%	
170
	

Template-assisted pyrolysis approach	Fe–N-SCCFs	ORR	0.8 at%	
125
	Advantage: structural integrity in large-scale production with controlled morphology.
BET 1180 m2 g−1
Single-atom Ni-doped graphene	HER	4–8 at%	
171
	Disadvantage: tedious operation processes, structure destroyed during the hard template removal process along with the introduction of impurities, strong acid/base or organic solvents used in the removal of templates are not environmentally-friendly.
FeN2/NOMC-3	ORR FeN2	0.35 at%	
172
	

Fe–NCCs	ORR	0.26 at%	
173
	

Fe–N-CNTAs-5-900	ORR	0.09 at%	
174
	

Surfactant-assisted pyrolysis process	SA–Fe/NG	ORR	2.0 mg cm−2	
175
	Advantage: effective and facile method that can be easily extended to the synthesis of other ADMCs, relatively easy to remove the soft template.
CoN4/NG	ORR	11.4 mF cm−2	
176
	Disadvantage: worse stability of the soft template due to weak intermolecular or intramolecular interactions.
Pd/meso-Al2O3	Selective aerobic oxidation of allylic alcohols	0.03 wt%	
108
	

Atomic layer deposition (ALD) method	Nb-in-C complex	ORR	60 μg cm−2	
177
	Advantage: bottom-up precise synthesis of ADMCs with accurate control of atom layers with extremely uniform thicknesses, excellent uniformity and shape retention.
Pd1/graphene	Selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene	0.25 wt%	
158
	Disadvantage: expensive, slow deposition rates and low yields limit large-scale production.
ALD25Pt/NGNs	HER	0.19 wt%	
122
	

ALD TiO2 stabilized Pd1 catalysts	Methanol decomposition	0.5 wt%	
178
	

ALDPt/GNS	MOR	—	
179
	

Pt1/graphene	AB hydrolysis	—	
112
	

Pt2/graphene	
	
	
	

Nanoparticle transforming method	Cu-SAs/N–C	ORR	0.54 wt%	
180
	Advantage: great potential for large-scale production and readily scalable at industrial levels.
Cu-SAs/N–G	
	1.26 wt%	
	Disadvantage: presence of agglomeration and atomization competition in the dynamic transformation process of NP-to-SA.
Pt/La-Al2O3	CO oxidation	1 wt%	
104
	

Pd-SAs	Acetylene conversion	—	
181
	

SE-Ni SAs@PNC	CO2RR	—	
182
	

Pt SAs/DG	HER	2.1 wt%	
183
	

High-energy ball milling synthesis	Fe©SiO2	Conversion of methane	0.5 wt%	
184
	Advantage: high efficiency in the breaking and reconstructing of material chemical bonds, favorable for large-scale preparation.
CoN4/GN	DDSC	—	
152
	Disadvantage: low powder yields, raw material wastage and long-time consumption.
FeN4/GN	Oxidation of benzene	1.5%	
185
	


 	Fig. 1  Synthetic procedure of (Fe,Co)/N–C. Co nodes in the metal–organic framework acted as the host and adsorbed Fe ions as the guest. Continuous decomposition and graphitization can result in interior cavities and size enlargements through the Kirkendall effect. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of the synthetic procedures for single-atom electrocatalysts using the hard template process: (a) hierarchically porous M–N–C (M = Co and Fe) ADMCs; reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) FeN2/NOMC; reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (c) ISAS-Co/HNCS. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic for the preparation of dimeric Pt2/graphene catalysts through a bottom-up ALD approach. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group (NPG).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the preparation of copper single atoms supported on nitrogen-doped carbon (Cu-SAs/N–C) and (b) its proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission,180 Copyright 2018, Nature publishing group (NPG).	 

 	Scheme 4  The integrated figure of advanced synthesis methods for ADMCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ammonia-pyrolyzed ZIF-8 with the inset showing the ring-like selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (b) Corresponding EELS mapping images of copper, carbon and nitrogen. (c) ac-HADDF-STEM image of Cu-SAs/N–C. Reproduced with permission180 Copyright 2018, Nature publishing group (NPG). (d) ac-HADDF-STEM image with (e and f) accompanying EEL point spectra of the 20Co-NC-1100 catalyst. The point spectra in (e) and (f) were taken at the dark neighboring support and bright atoms in (d) respectively. Compared with point spectrum (e), point spectrum (f) showed both Co and N, indicating that Co is coordinated with N at an atomic scale. Reproduced with permission160 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Pt L3-edge XANES for Pt1/BP, Pt1–N/BP, Pt foil and bulk Pt oxide. Reproduced with permission,235 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group (NPG). (b and c) XANES spectra of Co–N–C catalysts annealed at different temperatures with (b) Co K-edge XANES and (c) the responding derivative of XANES. Reproduced with permission,160 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Pt L3 edge k3-weighted FT-EXAFS curves of the samples: 0.35 wt% and 5 wt% Pt/TiN, and 5 wt% Pt NP/TiN (tripled). (b) The corresponding FT-EXAFS fitting curves of 0.35 wt%, 2 wt% and 5 wt% Pt/TiN, 5 wt% Pt NP/TiN (tripled), 20 wt% JM Pt/C (doubled) and Pt foil with the fitting range from 1.0 to 3.5 Å; 20 wt% JM Pt/C Pt foil. Dots show the experimental data, and the lines are the fitted results. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) WT-EXAFS of Fe ISAs/CN (top), Fe foil (middle) and Fe2O3 standards (bottom). Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) WT-EXAFS of a Co2N5 dimer metal site system with k2-weighted χ(k) Co K-edge signals. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (e) Mössbauer spectroscopy of 57Fe in SA-Fe/NG. Reproduced with permission,175 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences.	 


Pt/TiN	Isolated single atomic Pt sites	78 A gPt−1 at an overpotential of 0.05 V, 0.1 M HClO4	0.35 wt%	
140

Pt1/TiC; Pt1/TiN	Atomically dispersed active sites	0.96 mA cm−2 (0.2 V), 0.1 M HClO4; 0.34 mA cm−2 (0.2 V), 0.1 M HClO4	0.2 wt%; 0.2 wt%	
141

High selectivity toward H2O2
Pt1@Fe–N–C	Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4	0.80 V, 280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V, 0.5 M H2SO4	2.1 wt% Pt	
144

Pt1–N/BP	g-P–N1–Pt1	0.87 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.76 V, 0.1 M HClO4	0.4 wt%	
235

S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT	Fe–Nx species	0.85 V, 0.1 M KOH	—	
23

Fe50-N–C-900	Fe–N–C active sites	0.92 V, 0.1 M KOH; 6.83 mA cm−2, 1 M HClO4	0.1 mg cm−2	
31

0.3 mg cm−2
Fe-ISA/NC	FeN4S2	0.896 V, 100.7 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V 0.1 M KOH	0.947 wt%	
148

Fe-ISAs/CN	Fe–N4	0.900 V, 37.83 mV cm−2 at 0.85 V, 0.1 M KOH	2.16 wt%	
149

(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	FeN4	0.80 V, 0.39 W cm−2 at 1.0 bar partial pressure of H2 and air, 0.5 M H2SO4	0.2 at%	
161

FeSAs/PTF-600	Fe–N4	0.87 V, 5.51 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. RHE), 0.1 M KOH; 5.42 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. RHE), 0.1 M HClO4	8.3 wt%	
166

Fe SAs–N/C-20	FeN4-6r-c1, FeN4-6r-c2	0.915 V, 0.1 M KOH	0.20 wt%	
157

FeNC-MSUFC	Fe–N4	∼0.73 V	0.044–0.048 at%	
251

FeSA–N–C	Fe–N4	0.891 V, 23.27 mA cm−2 (0.85 V), 0.1 M KOH; 0.776 V, 9.60 mA cm−2 (0.75 V), 0.1 M HClO4	1.76 wt%	
156

SA-Fe/NHPC	ORR	0.87 V, 4.1 mA cm−2 at 0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH	2.3 wt%	
168

Fe-N-CNTAs-5-900	Fe–Nx	0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH	0.09 at%	
174

FeNx-Embedded	ORR/OER Fe–Nx	0.86 V, 0.1 M KOH	3.935 at%	
252

PNC
Fe-N-SCCFs	Fe-Containing active sites	0.883 V, alkaline	0.8 at%	
125

Fe-NCCs	Fe–Nx	0.82 V, 0.1 M KOH	0.26 at%	
173

SA-Fe/NG	Fe–N4 moieties	0.88 V, 52.4 mA cm−2, 0.1 M KOH; 0.8 V, 15.6 mA cm−2 (0.75 V), 0.1 M HClO4	2.0 mg cm−2	
175

C-FeZIF-1.44-950	Fe–Nx	0.864 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.78 V, 0.1 M HClO4	
	
253

C-FeHZ8@g-C3N4-950	
	0.845 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.78 V 0.1 M HClO4	3.17 wt%	
247

A-Co/r-GO	CoN3C	0.842 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.71 V, 0.5 M H2SO4	3.6 wt%	
143

CoSAs@CNTs	M–N–C and single Co atom sites	0.86 V, 0.1 M KOH	0.14 at%	
164

CoN4/NG	Co–N4	0.87 V (0.1 M KOH), 23.4 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V	11.4 mF cm−2	
176

NGM-Co	Co–Nx–C	≈50 mV more positive than NGM, 0.1 M KOH	0.18 at%	
170

Co-SAs@NC	ORR	0.82 V, 0.1 M KOH	1.70 wt%	
159

Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres	ORR	0.837 V, 5.2 mA cm−2 (0.83 V), 0.1 M KOH	0.42 wt%	
169

Co-SAs/N–C-900	Co–N2	0.881 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.863 VRHE	4 wt%	
99

Co-SAs/N–C-800	Co–N4
NC-Co SA	Co–Nx	0.72 V	1.84 wt%	
150

CoNC700	Co–N4 square-planar structures	0.85 ± 0.01 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.73 V, 0.1 M HClO4	0.73 at%	
163

20Co-NC-1100	Co–N4	ORR 0.80 V, 0.5 M H2SO4	0.34 at%	
160

Zn/CoN–C	ZnCoN6	0.861 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.796 V, 0.1 M HClO4	Zn 0.33 wt%; Co 0.14 wt%	
118

ZnNx/BP	Zn–N4	−175 mV vs. SCE, 0.1 M KOH	0.3 wt%	
165

Zn–N–C	Zn–N4	0.746 V, 0.1 M HClO4; 0.873 V, 0.1 M KOH	9.33 wt% (2.06 atom%)	
146

Co2NxC	Co2N5	0.79 V, 0.1 M HClO4, 3734 mA mgCo−1, 7468 mA mgCo2−1	—	
55

(Fe,Co)/N–C	Fe–Co dual-sites	0.863 V, 2.842 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V, 0.1 M HClO4	—	
83

FeCo-ISAs/CN	Fe–N4 and Co–N4	0.920 V, 31.1 mA cm−2 at 0.88 V, 0.1 M KOH	Fe 0.964 wt%, Co 0.218 wt%	
139

A-PtCo-NC	(Co–Pt)@N8 V4	0.96 V, mass activity of 45.47 A mg−1, 0.1 M KOH	Co: 1.72 wt%; Pt: 0.16 wt%	
254

Fe, Mn–N/C-900	Fe–Nx and Mn–Nx	0.905 V, 33.33 mA cm−2 (0.85 V), 0.1 M KOH	Fe: 1.75 wt%; Mn: 0.07 wt%	
250

(Zn,Co)/NSC	Zn,Co–N6–C–S	0.893 V, 0.1 M KOH; 0.70 V, 0.5 M H2SO4	—	
119

Nb-in-C complex	Niobium atoms incorporated in graphite layers	12.3 mA cm−2 (−0.5 VAg/AgCl), 0.1 M KOH	60 μg cm−2	
177

Cu-SAs/N–C	Cu–N4	0.895 V, 0.005 mA cm−2 (0.9 V), 0.1 M KOH; 0.74 V, 0.1 M KOH	0.54 wt%; 1.26 wt%	
180

Cu-SAs/N–G

(Fe,Co)/N–C	H2/O2 fuel cell	>550 mA cm−2, 0.6 V and a peak power density >505 mW cm−2 at 0.42 V	Max power density: ∼0.85 W cm−2 at 0.1 MPa; 0.98 W cm−2 at 0.2 MPa	
83

Pt1@Fe–N–C	H2/O2 fuel cells	280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V	Peak power density: 0.86 W cm−2 at 0.49 V; high power density: 0.79 W cm−2 at 0.6 V	
144

(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	H2–air fuel cell	—	0.39 W cm−2	
161

(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	H2/O2 fuel cell	—	∼0.87 W cm−2 (pO2 = 1.0 bar)	
161

0.94 W cm−2 (pO2 = 2.0 bar)
SA-Fe/NG	PEMFC	0.85 A cm−2 at 0.6 V; 3.34 A cm−2 at 0.2 V	823 mW cm−2	
175

20Co-NC-1100	H2/O2 fuel cell	—	0.56 W cm−2	
160

Pt1–N/BP	H2/O2 fuel cells	Surface area of 1102 m2 g−1	0.68 W cm−2 with 0.13 gPt kW−1	
235

C-FeZIF-1.44-950	H2/O2 PEMFC	1100 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V; 637 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V	775 mW cm−2	
253

H2–air PEMFC	650 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V; 350 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V	463 mW cm−2
C-FeHZ8@g-C3N4-950	H2/O2 PEMFC	400 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V; 133 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V	628 mW cm−2	
247


S,N–Fe/N/C-CNT	Zinc–air batteries	1.35	—	102.7 mW cm−2	
23

FeNx-Embedded PNC	Zinc–air batteries	1.55	—	278 mW cm−2	
252

Fe–N-SCCFs	Zinc–air batteries	
	∼205 mA cm−2 (1.0 V)	300 mW cm−2	
125

Fe–NCCs	Zinc–air batteries	1.36	Specific capacity: 705 mA h g−1 at 5 mA cm−2	Peak power density: 66 mW cm−2 at 0.55 V	
173

pCNT@Fe@GL	Zn–air batteries	—	—	—	
255

No significant change on overpotential (0.58 V, Fe–N–C pCNT + NiFe LDH) and discharge potential (≈1.36 V, pCNT@Fe@GL towards ORR)
CoN4/NG	Flexible solid zinc–air batteries	1.51	50.0 mA cm−2	115 mW cm−2	
176

Specific capacity: 730 mA h g−1
Energy density: 671 W h kg−1
All-solid-state foldable Zn–air battery	—	—	28 mW cm−2
NGM-Co	Zinc–air batteries	1.439	—	152 mW cm−2	
170

840 W h kgZn−1 at 20.0 mA cm−2
NC-Co SA	Zn–air battery	1.411	31.0 mA cm−2	20.9 mW cm−3	
150

Zn–N–C	Zn–O2 battery	
	683.3 mA h gZn−1 (100 mA cm−2)	179 mW cm−2	
146

(Fe,Co)/CNT	Zn–air batteries	1.63	178 mA cm−2 (1.0 V)	260 mW cm−2 with specific energy density of 870 W h kgZn−1	
117

Zn/CoN–C	Zn–air battery	1.4	—	230 mW cm−2	
118

(Zn,Co)/NSC	Zinc–air batteries	1.5	—	Peak power density: 150 mW cm−2	
119

Solid-state zinc–air battery	1.56	—	15 mW cm−2

 	Fig. 8  (A) Open circuit voltage curves of (Fe,Co)/CNT-based and Pt/C-based Zn–air batteries using (Fe,Co)/CNT and Pt/C as cathode catalysts respectively. (B) Discharge polarization curves of Zn–air batteries with corresponding power densities. (C) Galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries at 20 mA cm−2. (D) Long-term galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries before the complete consumption of the Zn anode at 50 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
O2(g) + * → O2*	(3.1)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*	(3.2)
OOH* + H+ + e− → O* + H2O	(3.3)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(3.4)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O	(3.5)

 	Fig. 9  (a) RRDE polarization curves of different catalysts (BP, Pt1/BP, N/BP, Pt1–N/BP and commercial Pt/C) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (a) and 0.1 M KOH (b) with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (c) The proposed reaction pathways and free energy diagram (the inset) for the ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst in acidic medium, (d) side view and bond lengths of the proposed catalytic sites. Reproduced with permission.235	 
O2(g) + * → O2*	(4.1)
O2* + H2O(l) + e− → OOH* + OH−	(4.2)
OOH* + e− → O* + OH−	(4.3)
O* + H2O(l) + e− → OH* + OH−	(4.4)
OH* + e− → OH− + *	(4.5)

 	Fig. 10  Possible ORR mechanisms on the atomic Pt/HSC catalyst. (a) Atomically dispersed Pt complexed with two thiophene and two thiolate groups in one carbon framework. (b) Activation of Pt centers by substituting two S from the thiophene-like moiety with two O from water molecules. (c) The first proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process during the oxygen reduction process to form OOH. (d) 2e− pathway: H2O2 formation through the second PCET followed by the substitution of an H2O2 molecule with an outer-sphere H2O molecule, recuperating the initial state in which Pt is complexed with two thiolates and two water molecules. (e) 4e− pathway: H2O formation through the second PCET process involving the breaking of O–O bonds. (f) The formation of OH through the third PCET process and (g) an inner-sphere H2O through the fourth PCET process (C: grey, H: white, S: yellow, O: red, Pt: purple). (h) Calculated kinetic barriers of the second PCET step for 2e− (blue) and 4e− (red) pathways using the Marcus kinetic theory. Ref. 111 Copyright 2016, NPG.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
