Low-temperature processed non-TiO 2 electron selective layers for perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA10742K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA10742K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4572-4589Low-temperature processed non-TiO2 electron selective layers for perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Zhanglin 
            Guo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liguo 
            Gao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chu 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenhua 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tingli 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *ab
aGraduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan. E-mail: tinglima@life.kyutech.ac.jp
bSchool of Petroleum and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Panjin Campus, Panjin 124221, P. R. China
Received 
      7th December 2017
    , Accepted 30th January 2018First published on 1st February 2018AbstractOrganic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much attention in recent years and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has rapidly improved from 3.8% to 22.7%. However, the commonly used electron selective layer (ESL), TiO2, requires a high-temperature post-treatment during its preparation process, which is not compatible with flexible PSCs on plastic substrates. Moreover, it is energy intensive and not suitable for the low-cost mass production of PSCs. Developing low-temperature processable ESLs can solve these problems and realize the all-low-temperature fabrication of PSCs. Therefore, in this review, the current progress in low-temperature processed ESLs, especially non-TiO2 inorganic and organic materials and quantum dots (QDs), such as SnO2, ZnO, WOx, CeOx, Nb2O5, In2O3, CdS, Bi2S3, In2S3, Zn2SnO4, fullerene, non-fullerene, CdSe QDs, etc., is summarized. Their preparation methods, properties and applications for use in PSCs are highlighted. Several results obtained by our group are also included. These low-temperature processed ESLs will provide more possibilities for implementing the all-low-temperature fabrication of PSCs with high performances.Zhanglin GuoZhanglin Guo is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree from Shaanxi University of Science & Technology in 2013 and 2016, respectively. His current research work is focused on the applications of two-dimensional materials in perovskite solar cells.Liguo GaoDr Liguo Gao graduated from Jilin University. Now he is working at Dalian University of Technology. His interests include researching on integrating silicon solar cells with perovskite solar cells, developing a novel architecture for perovskite solar cells, and photoelectrochemical systems.Chu ZhangChu Zhang is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a bachelor's degree from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2010, and a master's degree from Oregon State University in 2014. His current research work is focused on Pb-free perovskite materials and perovskite solar cell devices.Zhenhua XuZhenhua Xu is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a master's degree from Lanzhou University in 2015. His current research work is focused on perovskite solar cells.Tingli MaDr Tingli Ma received a PhD degree in 1999 from Kyushu University, Japan. She worked at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology as a Special Postdoctoral Researcher from 1999 to 2004. She moved to Dalian University of Technology, China in 2007. She has worked at Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan since 2014. She leads research teams working on inorganic and organic solar cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells, and other related projects including development of catalysts, hydrogen production, functional dyes and nanosemiconductor materials. Dr Ma has published more than 100 papers in peer-reviewed journals.
1 Introduction
Over the last decade, deploying photovoltaic solar cells has been regarded as one of the most promising choices for replacing traditional fossil fuels. Among the various photovoltaic devices, PSCs experienced the fastest increase in PCE over the past seven years.1,2 Currently, perovskite photovoltaic devices exhibit a PCE as high as 22.7%, comparable to those of the more established thin-film inorganic photovoltaics such as copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) and cadmium telluride (CdTe) solar cells.2 More importantly, PSCs are low-temperature processable, which results in a significant advantage for next-generation cost-competitive photovoltaic technology to address the scalability issue. Meanwhile, the low-temperature solution processability makes PSCs compatible with flexible and wearable electronic devices.3,4
A typical PSC is comprised of five parts as shown in Fig. 1a. They are the front electrode of a transparent conductive oxide (mainly fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO)) on a rigid or flexible substrate, ESL, perovskite layer, hole transporting layer (HTL), and back electrode of a noble metal, carbon or metal oxide.5,6 The ESL is designed to collect and transport the photogenerated electrons and block the holes from the perovskite, while the HTL plays the role of transporting the holes and blocking the electrons from the perovskite. Due to the ambipolar properties of the perovskite light absorber, the transportation mechanism works efficiently. The perovskite light absorber, with the formula of ABX3 (A = CH3NH3 (abbreviated as MA), HC(NH2)2 (abbreviated as FA), Cs; B = Pb, Sn; X = Cl, Br, I), is the core of PSCs. The advantages of the perovskite include a suitable bandgap, high absorption coefficient, and long carrier transport distance that account for the high performances of PSCs.7 The most widely used HTL is the organic p-type semiconductor of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD). In addition, some other p-type materials, such as poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA), NiO, CuSCN, and CuGaO2, have also been utilized as efficient HTLs.8
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic view and (b) the working mechanism of PSCs. 
In the structure of PSCs, the perovskite material can absorb light over a broad spectral range owing to its narrow band gap and effectively convert the incident light into charges.9 The photogenerated electrons and holes coexist in the perovskite layer due to its unique ambipolar properties.10,11 Then the electrons can be injected into the n-type ESL (with subsequent electron transport to the FTO electrode) and the holes can be transferred to the p-type HTL (with subsequent transport to the Au electrode), as shown in Fig. 1b. Additionally, the ESL performs as an electron blocking layer to prevent the holes from the perovskite and HTL from reaching the FTO electrode due to its valence band position being lower than that of the perovskite material. Meanwhile, the HTL blocks the electrons from the perovskite and ESL due to its higher conduction band position than that of the perovskite material. Therefore, this effective charge transport and blocking mechanism can avoid short circuits in the device. The uniform films including the ESL, the perovskite layer and the HTL, and the optimized interfaces are crucial to the performance of PSCs.
TiO2 is commonly used as the ESL material in most PSCs. Despite the excellent PCEs, high temperature (around 500 °C) post-treatment of the TiO2 layer is always necessary in order to get a condensed TiO2 layer with a high crystallinity and conductivity.12 The high temperature hinders the simple and low cost mass production of PSCs, because the annealing is complex and energy intensive. Moreover, PSCs based on TiO2 suffer from UV-light instability due to the high photocatalytic activity of TiO2, which can damage the perovskite materials and impede the reproducibility of the devices.13,14 Another drawback of TiO2 is that its electron mobility (1 cm2 V−1 s−1) is much lower than that of the perovskite layer (24.8 1 cm2 V−1 s−1), resulting in an unbalanced charge transport.15 The imperfect alignment between the conduction bands of TiO2 and the perovskite layer, resulting in the hysteresis of the J–V characteristics, might be another disadvantage. Therefore, considerable attention has been devoted to modify the conventional TiO2 ESL in order to overcome the aforementioned disadvantages. The general strategies are preparing low-temperature processable amorphous TiOx films,16 constructing TiO2 composite films with other compounds,17,18 morphology control of TiO2 films,19 and metal doping within TiO2 films.20–22 For instance, Ta doped TiO2 ESL based PSCs exhibited remarkable improvement in PCE, as compared to those with un-doped TiO2.21,22
Flexible PSCs are fabricated on flexible substrates, such as polyethylene naphthalate/indium-doped tin oxide (PEN/ITO)-coated substrates, ethylene terephthalate/indium-doped tin oxide (PET/ITO)-coated substrates, etc.23–26 These flexible PSCs have great potential for use in wearable electronic devices because they can maintain a high performance even after being bent thousands of times during use.24 Meanwhile, these flexible substrates are low-cost and lightweight, beneficial for the commercialization of wearable electronics. However, different from the rigid substrates including glass/FTO and glass/ITO, these flexible substrates cannot withstand high temperatures. Therefore, low-temperature processable ESLs are urgently required for manufacturing high-performance flexible PSCs, which will promote the industrial printing processes with roll-to-roll technology and reduce the production costs of wearable electronics.
Inspired by the low-temperature fabrication of the perovskite layer and the HTL, it is crucial to develop efficient and low-temperature processable ESLs to reduce the production costs, simplify the process, meet the requirement of flexible PSC fabrication, and realize the all-low-temperature mass manufacturing of PSCs.
Therefore, many groups have been focusing on developing low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESL materials, such as inorganic materials, organic materials and QDs. Their target is to simplify the preparation process and further improve the performances of PSCs. Although reviews have reported the progress of n-type semiconductors in PSCs, none of them has focused on the development of low-temperature processable non-TiO2 ESLs.27–29 We now summarize the recent advancements in low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs, encompassing their preparation, properties, and applications in PSCs. We also discuss the issues in further developments of low-temperature ESLs.
2 Inorganic ESLs
2.1 Binary metal compound ESLs

2.1.1 SnO2 ESLs. 
Tin oxide (SnO2) is regarded as an ideal alternative material to the TiO2 ESL. SnO2 has a large band gap of 3.6–3.8 eV, which results in a high transparency throughout the visible region and the suitable band structure makes it possess the ability to transport electrons and block holes. At the same time, SnO2 displays a carrier mobility about two orders of magnitude higher than that of TiO2. Our group has done some research on SnO2-based PSCs, in which the high-temperature sintering was conducted as first reported by Ma et al.30–32 As for the low-temperature processes, Fang et al. first reported PSCs based on the SnO2 ESL with high PCEs in early 2015.33 The SnO2 ESLs were synthesized by spin-coating the SnCl2·2H2O precursor prepared at room temperature, following thermal annealing in air at 180 °C for 1 h. It was found that the FTO substrate coated with a 60 nm thick SnO2 film has a high transmittance, even better than that of bare FTO substrates. This is due to the antireflection effect of the SnO2 film, which benefits the light transmission through the ESL and light absorption by the perovskite layer. A schematic view of the planar cell structure and the energy band diagram of the PSCs based on SnO2 are shown in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. It was demonstrated that the low-temperature solution processed SnO2 is an excellent ESL and the PSCs based on SnO2 achieved high average PCEs of 16.44% and a superior efficiency of 17.21%. The remarkable performance of the PSCs originates from the good antireflection, high electron mobility and wide band gap of the SnO2 nanocrystal film. Later in 2016, Hagfeldt and co-workers reported the highest PCE of close to 21% for the SnO2-based PSCs.34 They combined spin-coating and chemical bath deposition (SC-CBD) at a low temperature, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. Moreover, the perovskite layers grown on the prepared SnO2 are composed of large crystals ca. 300 nm, indicating a high quality perovskite layer.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic view and (b) energy band diagram of the PSCs based on the SnO2 ESL structure.33 (c) Schematic illustration of the SC-CBD method and (d) top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the low-temperature layer by layer deposition process: bare FTO, SnO2 deposited by the SC-CBD process on FTO and the perovskite crystals grown atop.34 (e) Schematic illustration of the chemical bath deposition method and J–V curves of the PSCs with a-SnO2 or compact TiO2 as the ESL.35 (f) Cross-sectional SEM image, (g) energy diagram and (h) J–V curves measured at backward–forward scans of the PSCs with Li:SnO2 as the ESL.39 Adapted with permission from ref. 33–35 and 39. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Elsevier. 
Although the high efficiencies of the SnO2-based PSCs have been achieved by a simple method, the high preparation temperature of SnO2 limited its application to flexible PSCs. In order to decrease the fabrication temperature, Tietze et al. prepared an amorphous SnO2 film by the CBD method at 55 °C without a post annealing treatment,35 as shown in Fig. 2e. The results indicated that even when prepared at a very low temperature, the amorphous SnO2 ESL possesses a high transparency and uniform substrate coverage. It acquired a perfect alignment of the conduction band at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, which can efficiently extract electrons, while the deep valence band of SnO2 ensures strong hole-blocking properties.
Besides the spin-coating and CBD process, another direct deposition method, the dual-fuel combustion process, was also employed by Jen et al.36 In their research, dual fuels were used to modulate the associated exothermic process of the combustion reaction and a homogeneous SnO2 film was obtained at 140 °C. The perovskite film grown on the SnO2 film exhibits a fully covered surface morphology with densely packed grains, whose average grain size is around 100–200 nm. A maximum PCE of 12.93% was achieved based on the single component SnO2 ESL while a higher PCE of 15.18% with negligible hysteresis was acquired when passivated with a fullerene-based self-assembled monolayer (C60-SAM). Moreover, Jen's group also adopted the electrodeposition method to prepare SnO2 films.37 During the electrodeposition process at the reaction temperature of 70 °C, they precisely controlled the growth of the SnO2 nanostructures, leading to an excellent adhesion between the SnO2 layer and the substrate. With a high transparency, crystallinity, conductivity and the significant charge-extraction capability of the SnO2 film, a PCE of 13.88% was achieved. More recently, Yan et al. used a plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition method to prepare SnO2 films,38 with a water vapor post treatment at 100 °C. They found that the water vapor treatment can improve the electrical conductivity. This is because annealing with water vapor facilitates the complete reaction of the organic materials, leading to the formation of a purer SnO2. With this SnO2 ESL, they achieved a very high PCE of 18.36% on a flexible substrate, which is the highest among those of flexible PSCs with a regular structure.
Spin-coating of pre-synthesized nanocrystals on a substrate with a subsequent heat treatment was reported by Wang and co-workers.40 They spin-coated the purchased SnO2 nanoparticles (ca. 22–43 nm) and baked them at 200 °C for 1 h. The SnO2-based PSCs with the passivation of the SnO2/perovskite interface by the remnant PbI2 crystallites achieved a maximum PCE of 13.0% with an excellent durability. Their results also indicate that the reduction of photovoltaic performance upon light illumination of PSC devices is not attributed to the degradation of materials, but resulted from the ferroelectric nature of the perovskite materials that accumulate charge carriers at the interface to interfere with the electricity flow under working conditions. Lately, Zhang et al.41 did a similar study by directly spin-coating the purchased SnO2 nanoparticles and then subsequently baking at 150 °C for 30 min. With the HC(NH2)2PbI3 based perovskite absorber, the SnO2 based devices are almost free of hysteresis because of the enhanced electron extraction from the perovskite to SnO2 and no obvious charge accumulation at the interface. In addition, perovskite films grown on SnO2 and TiO2 displayed similar crystal morphologies and thicknesses. Thus, the different hysteresis behaviours mainly originate from the different ESLs, and SnO2 is a better ESL especially in terms of electron transport properties. A high PCE of 20.27% for SnO2 based PSCs was obtained after introducing a PbI2 passivation phase.
Even though high PCEs of over 20% have already been achieved, some researchers pointed out that the hysteresis behaviour of SnO2-based planar PSCs can be reduced by further improving the electron extraction efficiency across the interface.39,42,43 Therefore, researchers doped metals into SnO2. For example, Ko et al. prepared an effective Li:SnO2 ESL by a spin-coating process and post annealing at 185 °C.39 The doped Li in the SnO2 enhanced the conductivity and induced a downward shift of the conduction band minimum of the SnO2, which facilitated the injection and transfer of electrons from the conduction band of the perovskite (Fig. 2f and g). Highly crystalline and pin hole-free perovskite films were prepared on both SnO2 and Li:SnO2 films and there were no obvious differences. The PCE was found to be 18.2% and 14.78% for the rigid and flexible substrates, respectively (Fig. 2h). Huang et al.42 prepared Sb-doped SnO2 nanocrystallites by a precipitation method, and then spin-coated them on a substrate with further annealing at 100 °C. They found that doping with Sb could increase the electrical conductivity and improve the Fermi level of SnO2, which in turn, improved the FF and the Voc of the devices. The PCE of the devices was improved from 15.7 to 17.7% with reduced hysteresis after Sb doping. More recently, Yan et al.44 prepared Y-doped SnO2 nanosheet arrays by an in situ hydrothermal growth process at 95 °C. They found that the Y-doped SnO2 induced a more positive conduction band position than the undoped SnO2 and the nanosheet arrays improved the perovskite infiltration and enhanced the contact with the perovskite. However, there were no significant morphological differences between the perovskite layer grown on doped SnO2 and the pristine SnO2 layer. As a result, PSCs with the Y-SnO2 ESL exhibited significantly improved PCEs of 17.29% with a much reduced hysteresis. Moreover, the Nb-doped SnO2 ESL has also been studied.45 PSCs based on the Nb-doped SnO2 ESL displayed a higher PCE of 17.57% than that of 15.13% for the pristine SnO2-based PSCs. Fang et al.46 incorporated a MgO nanolayer between the FTO electrode and the SnO2 ESL that enhanced the electron transport and hole blocking properties, and the resultant PSCs displayed a high PCE of 18.23%. Moreover, SnO2 was also composited with other materials,43,47,48 such as phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), C60 and graphene QDs, and high PCEs were achieved. From the reviewed literature, we found no significant differences in the morphologies of the perovskite grown on SnO2 and metal doped SnO2. However, metal doping into SnO2 can improve the conductivity of SnO2 and modulate the band alignment in order to achieve a balance between the electron injection efficiency and the theoretical Voc of the devices.
Therefore, SnO2 is a good candidate for a highly efficient ESL due to its excellent high conductivity. The low-temperature processes, such as spin-coating, chemical bath deposition and electrodeposition are promising methods to prepare dense SnO2 films. Furthermore, doping SnO2 with metals can properly modify the conduction band position and enhance the performance of the devices.


2.1.2 ZnO ESLs. 
ZnO is a kind of widely used n-type semiconductor with low cost and outstanding compatible properties. More importantly, due to its comparable energy structure and higher electron mobility, ZnO is regarded as a viable alternative to TiO2 as an efficient ESL for PSCs. Actually, ZnO has been studied since 2013; in these studies, ZnO layers were prepared by a low-temperature solution process and the corresponding PSCs achieved high PCEs.49–52 For example, Boix et al. prepared a ZnO compact layer by electrodeposition and a ZnO nanorod layer by chemical bath deposition.49 PSCs on both rigid and flexible substrates were fabricated and PCEs of 8.9% and 2.62% were achieved, respectively.
Kelly et al. prepared ZnO nanoparticles by a solution process, and then spin-coated them on a substrate without post annealing.53 They fabricated planar PSCs with the architecture and energy levels depicted in Fig. 3a and b. Without a mesoporous layer, the perovskite crystal growth was relatively unconstrained, with the formation of large crystals, which served to increase the carrier mobility, reduce the recombination from defect and trap states and increase the effective optical path length of the device. Consequently, the PSCs on a rigid substrate exhibited a high PCE of 15.7% and a decent PCE of 10.2% on a flexible substrate (Fig. 3c). Subsequently, the research on the ZnO ESL focused on modifying the surface morphology and simplifying the process.54–57 Recently, Pelicano et al. developed a novel method for the oxidation of a Zn thin film in water to produce a ZnO film.54 By varying the water temperature and growth time, they obtained various morphologies, such as particles, fibers, rods, tubes and platelets, with different preferential growth orientations.
 Fig. 3  (a) Device architecture, (b) energy levels and (c) J–V curves of the ZnO ESL based PSCs on rigid and flexible substrates, respectively.53 (d) Energy level diagram of the ZnO ESL based PSCs with a carbon electrode.56 (e) Device architecture and (f) energy level diagram of the PSCs based on ZnO, SnO2 or ZnO/SnO2 (2:1).57 Adapted with permission from ref. 53, 56 and 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, 2015 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Elsevier. 
The rod-like ZnO enables better perovskite penetration and effective interfacial area, which resulted in a reduced charge carrier path length and increased photovoltaic parameters. However, the PCEs of the ZnO-based PSCs were rather low (the highest PCE of 5.96%), which was attributed to additional factors, such as a large amount of pinholes in ZnO and high recombination possibility at the interface. Our group first prepared carbon-based planar PSCs on FTO glass and flexible polymer substrates with a ZnO ESL,56 and the energy level diagram is shown in Fig. 3d. The ZnO layer was prepared by direct spin-coating of ZnO nanoparticles along with low-temperature drying. For the rigid and flexible PSCs, the PCE of 8% and 4% were achieved, respectively. The flexible devices were capable of maintaining 80% of their initial PCEs after bending 1000 times. For the low-temperature solution processed ZnO films, there is a large amount of hydroxyl groups and defects on the film surface, which can reduce the PCEs and limit the long-time stability.58,59 Therefore, researchers also focused on the modification of the ZnO surface or adding a buffer layer between the perovskite and ZnO. Lee and his co-workers55 reported an effective surface modification method for the ZnO ESL, in which they combined UV exposure and nitric acid treatment to remove the hydroxyl groups and passivate the surface defects in the ZnO film. The perovskite grown on the modified ZnO possesses fewer pinholes and higher crystallinity than those with only the as-synthesized ZnO film. Therefore, after the surface modification, the PCE increased to 14% and the stability of the PSCs also enhanced compared to the pristine ZnO-based PSCs.
As for the ZnO based nanocomposite ESL, Wang et al. prepared ZnO–SnO2 nanocomposites with different Zn/Sn ratios at low temperature as the ESL for planar PSCs,57 as shown in Fig. 3e. The nanocomposite with an optimal 89 mol% ZnO content displayed the highest PCE of 14.0%. The measurements showed that the ZnO–SnO2 ESL possessed an excellent charge extraction efficiency and a large recombination resistance between the perovskite and ZnO–SnO2, which were the main reasons for the higher performance than that of the single component ZnO and SnO2 (Fig. 3f). Moreover, the ZnO–SnO2 film-based PSCs exhibited better thermal stabilities than the ZnO-based PSCs, suggesting that the hydroxyl-induced degradation of the perovskite was predominant.
Although the ZnO-based PSCs achieved high PCEs, the stability of the device and the chemical stability of ZnO are still important issues. The stability can be improved by surface modification, introducing buffer layers or constructing ZnO-based nanocomposite ESLs, which can optimize the interface between the perovskite and ZnO.


2.1.3 WOx ESLs. 
Tungsten oxides (WOx) are low-cost n-type semiconductors with suitable bandgaps (2 to 3 eV) and high electron mobility (10–20 cm2 V−1 s−1). Recently, WOx were used in PSCs as a component of the WOx–TiO2 core–shell nanostructure ESL,60 where the ESL was prepared by a high temperature process. In early 2015, we first reported low-temperature processed WOx ESL based efficient PSCs.61 As shown in Fig. 4a, the WOx film was prepared using a facile spin-coating process and post heat-treatment at a low temperature of 150 °C. The results indicated that the WOx film exhibited a comparable light transmittance but higher electrical conductivity than the TiO2 film. The perovskite grown on the WOx had an oriented crystallization along the 〈110〉 direction, which was not observed for the TiO2 based sample. The orientation resulted in higher light absorption ability and faster electron extraction than those of the TiO2 based device. Moreover, the PSC based on the WOx ESL exhibited a comparable PCE, higher short-circuit current density, but lower open-circuit voltage when compared to the TiO2-based device. We found that for the WOx-based PSCs, the poor Voc and FF were caused by the inherent charge recombination. In order to overcome this defect, we also first prepared a series of amorphous TiOx–WOx composite ESLs at low temperatures of 150, 70 °C or even room temperature.62 These amorphous WOx based ESLs displayed an improved light transmittance, electrical conductivity, charge dissociation, and obviously suppressed charge recombination. After optimizing the ESL component prepared at 150 °C, the PSC achieved a high PCE of 14.47%. Meanwhile, PSCs with ESLs fabricated at 70 °C and room temperature were also very efficient with the maximum PCEs of 13.45% and 11.56%, respectively (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of PSCs based on WOx or TiO2 (inset: the spin-coating process of WOx preparation).61 (b) J–V curves of the champion PSCs based on the WOx–TiOx composite ESL prepared at different temperatures (inset: the device architecture of the PSCs).62 (c) Configuration and (d) J–V curves of champion flexible PSCs based on W(Nb)Ox obtained under different temperatures.63 (e) J–V curves (inset: configuration) and (f) energy level diagram of WOx based PSCs.64 Adapted with permission from ref. 61–64. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 Wiley, 2017 Elsevier, and 2017 Elsevier. 
As mentioned in the introduction, one of the most important reasons for developing low-temperature processed ESLs is to use them in flexible PSCs, in which plastic substrates cannot withstand high temperatures. Therefore, we developed a series of niobium-modified tungsten oxide W(Nb)Ox ESLs on a plastic substrate at 120 °C and room temperature,63 as shown in Fig. 4c. This is the first report on metal doping in a WOx ESL. We found that modification with Nb5+ ions improved the electron transport ability of the WOx-based ESL by enhancing the donor density, reducing the interfacial depletion width of the ITO/ESL, and minimizing the trap states of the ESL. The existence of capacitance CE across the ESL in the ITO/ESL/perovskite structure could well interpret the effect of the ESL thickness on the hysteresis behaviour. High PCEs of 15.65% and 13.14% were achieved with ESLs prepared at 120 °C and room temperature, respectively (Fig. 4d). Thus amorphous and composite WOx ESLs are very suitable for flexible PSCs with a high efficiency and low cost.
Gheno et al. compared the performance and stability of WO3-based PSCs to those of classical PSCs with a compact TiOx layer and a mesoporous TiO2 layer.65 In their research, the WO3 ESLs were spin-coated or printed with WO3 nanocrystals, with or without a post annealing process at 100 °C. The PCEs of the WO3 ESL-based PSCs reached 9.5% for both the spin coating and print processes, lower than that of the TiO2-based PSCs of 15%. Moreover, they found that the WO3 devices are more sensitive to moisture during illumination than the TiO2 devices, leading to a decreased photocurrent, which is due to the higher photocatalytic properties of WO3 than that of TiO2. Under dark and ambient conditions, the WO3 devices displayed an enhanced stability. Thus, the relatively small bandgap of the tungsten oxides (2–3 eV) has some negative effects on the stability of the devices because of the strong photocatalytic activities. In another study, Mori et al.64 reported the highest PCE of the WOx-based PSCs, in which they combined WOx with C60 and achieved a high PCE of 16.07% (Fig. 4e). Characterization suggested that the significantly improved efficiency of the WOx/C60-based device originated from improved electron extraction and transport and reduced charge recombination at the WOx/C60 and perovskite interface (Fig. 4f).
Therefore, we think that tungsten oxide can be a potential ESL candidate, especially for flexible devices. Some modifications should be conducted on the WOx ESL for restraining the high photocatalytic activity to improve the device stability.


2.1.4 Other binary metal oxide ESLs. 
Besides the metal oxides summarized above, in the last two years, some other low-temperature processed metal oxides have also been prepared and used as the ESL for high performance PSCs.
Cerium oxide (CeOx), with the merits of a wide band gap, high ionic conductivity, and high thermal and chemical stabilities, has a significant potential for use as an ESL in PSCs. In 2017, Deng and co-workers prepared CeOx through a simple sol–gel method at low temperature (150 °C) and applied it in PSCs.66 The configuration and the energy levels of the PSCs are shown in Fig. 5a and b. After optimization by adjusting the precursor solution, they achieved the highest PCE of 14.32% for a single component CeOx ESL. By introducing a thin PCBM layer between the CeOx film and the perovskite layer, the PCE of the CeOx-based PSCs increased to 17.04% (Fig. 5c). Moreover, the CeOx-based devices exhibited a superior stability under light soaking, which might be attributed to the PCBM buffer layer by preventing the perovskite film from direct contact with the ESL. CeOx might be a potential replacement for the high-temperature TiO2 for PSCs, but the overall production cost would be another issue to be addressed.
 Fig. 5  (a) Device architecture, (b) energy level diagram and (c) J–V curves of CeOx based PSCs.66 (d) J–V curve (inset: device architecture) and (e) energy level diagram of Nb2O5 based PSCs.69 (f) Energy level diagram and (g) J–V curve of In2O3 based PSCs.71 Adapted with permission from ref. 66, 69 and 71. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017 American Chemical Society, and 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Niobium oxide (Nb2O5) is an n-type semiconductor with a similar optical band structure, electronic properties and higher chemical stability relative to that of TiO2. Miyasaka et al. reported the application of Nb2O5 as a hole-blocking layer in PSCs, but the thick Nb2O5 layer required a high-temperature (∼500 °C) heat treatment.67 Recently, researchers developed low-temperature processes to prepare Nb2O5 films and they found that even when obtained at a low temperature, the Nb2O5 films still displayed a high conductivity and a suitable Fermi level for efficient electron extraction from the perovskite. For example, Liu's group developed an e-beam evaporation method to deposit Nb2O5 films, which was directly used as an ESL without post-treatment.68 Electrical impedance spectroscopy was performed to investigate the interfacial dynamics of perovskite solar cells. The results indicated that the device based on Nb2O5 with 60 nm thickness exhibits the largest recombination resistance, indicating smallest carrier recombination processes. With the optimized ESL thickness, the PSCs fabricated on glass and PET substrates achieved an efficiency of 18.59% and 15.56%, respectively. Moreover, the e-beam evaporated Nb2O5 was found to be advantageous in large area flexible PSCs, with comparable Jsc and Voc values to smaller area devices, and the PCE loss was mainly caused by an increased series resistance leading to a reduced FF. They pointed out that further reducing the intrinsic resistance of the devices should be an effective way to increase the FF and PCEs of both large-scale and flexible PSCs. Lately, the same group prepared a dense amorphous Nb2O5via the room-temperature radio frequency magnetron sputtering technique.69 The structure and energy level diagram are shown in Fig. 5d and e, respectively. Without heat treatment, the PSCs with this ESL achieved the highest PCE of 17.1% (Fig. 5d). Moreover, flexible PSCs based on amorphous Nb2O5 also acquired a decent PCE of 12.1%.
Feng and co-workers reported another low-temperature method for Nb2O5 preparation.70 Ultra small Nb2O5 nanoparticles were synthesized by a hydrolysis reaction using an ethanol-based NbCl5 precursor and H2O2 as a strong oxidizer with UV treatment. The Nb2O5 nanoparticles were then spin-coated on FTO and used as the ESL of the PSCs. The peak PCE of the Nb2O5-based PSCs was 14.6%, which should be attributed to the high-transmittance, low capacitance and low series resistance of the Nb2O5 layer. Furthermore, the hysteresis was suppressed due to the increased conductivity and decreased capacitance of the Nb2O5. Therefore, Nb2O5 with excellent properties and low cost and low-temperature processing has great potential for replacing the high-temperature TiO2 ESL.
Indium oxide (In2O3) is an n-type semiconductor with not only a wide band gap (∼3.75 eV), but also a high mobility (∼20 cm2 V−1 s−1) and good thermal stability. These merits imply that In2O3 is a potential ESL candidate for PSCs. Recently, Fang et al.72 first reported low-temperature sol–gel processed In2O3 films as ESLs in PSCs, and a PCE of 13.01% was obtained after optimizing the concentration of the precursor solution and the annealing temperature (200 °C is the most suitable). The In2O3 films exhibited good antireflection properties, leading to better light absorption by the perovskite layer. Furthermore, they improved the PCE of the In2O3-based PSCs to 14.83% after introducing a PCBM layer between the In2O3 ESL and the perovskite layer. Yin and co-workers did similar research with a different precursor and a higher PCE of 15.30% and a steady-state efficiency of 14.39% were achieved,71 as shown in Fig. 5f and g. After storage in the dark for three months, the PCE of the unsealed PSCs based on the In2O3 films retained 94% of their peak efficiency.
Therefore, we can conclude that many kinds of binary metal oxides with low-temperature process possibilities are potential alternatives to the currently used TiO2 ESL. These low-temperature processed non-TiO2 binary metal oxide ESLs can reduce the cost, simplify the fabrication process and provide more choices of ESLs for PSCs.


2.1.5 CdS ESLs. 
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is one of the most common metal chalcogenide materials due to its excellent stability and high mobility. CdS has been widely used in established CdTe and CIGS solar cells with an excellent stability and high mobility. It is reported that CdS has a comparable electron mobility and similar conduction band position to those of TiO2.73 Moreover, CdS is very easy to prepare by chemical bath deposition or a hydrothermal process.
Liu and co-workers introduced two metal sulfides as the ESL for PSCs.74 After evaluating the alignment of the energy levels at the perovskite/metal sulfide interface, they found that ZnS is not a suitable ESL because its conduction band is higher than that of the perovskite (Fig. 6a and b). The CdS-based PSCs achieved a maximum PCE of 11.2% (Fig. 6c). They concluded that the suitable conduction band offset at the interface for efficient electron collection and reduced recombination are the main reasons for the excellent performance of the CdS-based PSCs. The PCE of the CdS-based PSCs was recently further improved by Peng et al.75 They prepared CdS films by a chemical bath deposition process and the corresponding PSCs achieved the highest PCE so far of 16.1%, comparable to that of the TiO2 PSCs. They proposed similar mechanisms that the CdS-based device presents a higher recombination resistance than the TiO2-based devices, which reduces the carrier recombination and increases the open circuit voltage. The interface between the CdS and the perovskite displayed an efficient carrier extraction and reduced the surface defect-associated degradation in the devices, which helped to alleviate the anomalous hysteresis and long-term instability. Gobbo's group then achieved a PCE of 11% for PSCs with the CdS ESL prepared by the chemical bath deposition process.73 Moreover, they found that the device performance could be further improved through device optimization by controlling the interface and tuning the band gap of CdS by the doping method.
 Fig. 6  (a) Device structure, (b) energy diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with different device structures.74 (d) comparison of the J–V curves of PSCs based on CdS and TiO2, respectively.76 (e) Device structure and J–V curve variation of PSCs with the Cd doped perovskite layer.78 Adapted with permission from ref. 74, 76 and 78. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 American Chemical Society, and 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In another study, the thermal evaporation process was adopted by Yong et al. to prepare a CdS ESL for planar PSCs.76 The PSCs achieved the highest PCE of 12.2% (Fig. 6d) and the device displayed a considerably enhanced stability under continuous sunlight illumination (maintained 91% of its initial PCE after a 12 hour illumination). They attributed this great photo-stability to the advantageous characteristics of the oxygen-vacancy-free CdS layer, different from TiO2 with many oxygen vacancies and surface traps activated by light illumination. Moreover, the dense CdS layer was also prepared by the homogeneous precipitation method in a urea solution by Yang's group.77 They achieved the highest PCE of 2.27%, which is rather low among those of the CdS-based PSCs. They mentioned that the low PCEs originated from the inferior perovskite/CdS interface, such as pinholes. We also propose that during this homogeneous precipitation method, the interface of the CdS and FTO might not be compact enough for preventing current leakage.
For the CdS-based PSCs, the Cd ions can migrate to the perovskite during the perovskite deposition process or during the working condition of the PSCs. This migration has been studied and it was found that it has a significant impact on the performance of the PSCs. Mitzi's group did some research on the CdS-based PSCs and a PCE exceeding 15% was achieved.78 The XPS results revealed a small presence of Cd at the surface of the perovskite film. They deliberately doped Cd into the perovskite film and found that the doping increased the grain size of the perovskite materials, but reduced the PCE (inferred by the S-shape of their J–V curve) by the formation of a secondary phase of (CH3NH3)2CdI4, which is an electrical barrier (Fig. 6e). They speculated that the secondary phase should form via the reaction of CdS with MAI during the deposition of the perovskite. Two possible reasons for the reduction in performance with the Cd incorporation were proposed. The first reason is the generation of deep defect states within the band gap of the perovskite. The second one is the introduction of defects at the junctions between the perovskite and CdS layers or at the grain boundaries in the perovskite, or through interfacial reactions involving the formation of secondary phases. Furthermore, they found that excessive annealing leads to a reaction between the CdS and perovskite and degradation of the device performance, while on the other hand, annealing leads to a larger perovskite grain size with reduced carrier recombination at the grain boundary. They determined that 125 °C provided an acceptable compromise between the grain growth and the barrier prevention. In 2017, Yu and co-workers also reported the same phenomenon that Cd could be doped into perovskite films.79 In their research, a CdS film was prepared via a low temperature (85 °C) chemical bath deposition process and served as an ESL. They prepared the perovskite layer through a two-step physical-chemical evaporation deposition process, which promoted the Cd doping into the perovskite. The doping could engineer the conduction band edge to lower energies. Through this method, the CdS-based PSCs yielded a high PCE of 14.68% for a rigid substrate, while 9.93% for a flexible PET substrate.
As already discussed, CdS might be a potential ESL for PSCs because of its ease of preparation, excellent properties, and suitable energy band structure. Additionally, the migration of Cd ions into the perovskite, generating a secondary phase, is an important issue for CdS-based PSCs.


2.1.6 Other sulfide ESLs. 
Recently, Tang's group utilized bismuth trisulfide (Bi2S3) as the ESL of PSCs for the first time.80 They pointed out that this compound has several advantages, which make it suitable for electron extraction from the perovskite layer. First, Bi2S3 has intrinsic n-type defect properties. According to the first-principles theoretical calculations, Bi2S3 possesses intrinsic n-type defects whenever the dominant defects are sulfur vacancies or interstitial sulfur, guaranteeing a high carrier concentration in the Bi2S3 film regardless of the preparation process. Secondly, Bi2S3 has a high carrier mobility (257 cm2 V−1 s−1). The third reason is that Bi2S3 is composed of one-dimensional (Bi4S6)n ribbons. When processed into an amorphous state, the ordering of these ribbons is ruined, yet the dangling bonds are limited, as in an amorphous chained polymer, thus resulting in a low defect density. In their research, a simple thermal evaporation process was employed to prepare an amorphous Bi2S3 film as the ESL of the PSCs with an inverted configuration (Fig. 7a). During the thermal evaporation process, the substrate was kept at room temperature in order to minimize any damage to the as-deposited perovskite layer. With the inverted configuration, the PSCs achieved the highest PCE of 13.1% after optimizing the thickness of the Bi2S3 layer (Fig. 7b and c). This decent PCE should be attributed to the high carrier mobility and conductivity of the amorphous Bi2S3 and the efficient charge separation at the Bi2S3/MAPbI3 interface. Moreover, it was found that the devices possess a very good ambient storage stability due to the hydrophobicity and chemical stability of the Bi2S3 ESL.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic demonstration of the inverted PSC, (b) J–V curves of devices with Bi2S3 and PC61BM as the ESL in reverse and forward modes and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with different Bi2S3 film thicknesses.80 (d) Device architecture, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on In2S3 and TiO2 ESLs, respectively.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 80 and 81. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society and 2017 Elsevier. 
Indium trisulfide (In2S3) is a highly stable and non-toxic n-type semiconductor with a high carrier mobility (above 17.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) and moderate band gap (2.0–2.8 eV), all of which are desirable properties for the ESL in PSCs. Very recently, Zhao and co-workers reported In2S3 as the ESL of PSCs for the first time.81 In their research, an In2S3 film constructed from well-organized nanoflake arrays was prepared by a low-temperature chemical bath deposition method (Fig. 7d). The device based on In2S3 exhibited a higher recombination resistance than that of the TiO2 ESL, meaning better electron extraction ability. Accompanied by good energy level matching among each component (Fig. 7e) the resultant In2S3 based PSCs achieved a high PCE of 18.22% with negligible hysteresis, higher than that of 15.70% for the TiO2-based PSCs (Fig. 7f). Therefore, they concluded that the optimized band structure, the enhanced light trapping of the In2S3 ESL and the high carrier separation efficiency are responsible for the high performance.
The research on low-temperature processed metal sulfide ESLs, except for CdS, is still in the initial stage, and the literature is limited. Based on the above research, metal sulfides have the potential to replace the traditional TiO2 ESL in PSCs, not only because of their relatively high performances, but also because of their ease of preparation at low temperature. This inspired us to explore other low-temperature processed transition metal sulfides for PSCs to achieve high performance.

2.2 Ternary metal compound ESLs

2.2.1 Zn2SnO4 ESLs. 
Besides the binary metal oxides discussed above, some ternary oxides have also been used as efficient ESLs in recent years. The binary metal oxides are easily prepared by a simple hydrolysis and oxidation process. However, the synthesis of ternary oxides always requires a relatively high energy. For example, the efficient ESLs in PSCs, such as BaSnO3, La-doped BaSnO3 and BaTiO3, are synthesized at high temperature or require high-temperature post sintering.82–85 In this review, we focus on the low-temperature processed ESLs, and thus, the high-temperature processed ESLs will be skipped.
Except for the aforementioned ternary oxides, in recent years, Zn2SnO4 has been synthesized at low temperature and employed as an efficient ESL. Zn2SnO4 has a high-electron Hall mobility of 10–30 cm2 V−1 s−1, a wide optical band gap of 3.8 eV, a low refractive index of 2.0 in the visible spectrum and a similar conduction band edge position to that of TiO2. Moreover, Zn2SnO4 has a very good chemical stability with respect to acid/base solutions and polar organic solvents. Our group synthesized Zn2SnO4 nanocrystals and used them in dye-sensitized solar cells, achieving decent PCEs in 2014.86 Therefore, Zn2SnO4 has good potential for replacing the TiO2 ESL. Shin and co-workers synthesized highly-dispersed Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles at 95 °C, and then spin-coated the nanoparticles on a flexible substrate with a post annealing at about 100 °C.87 The cross-sectional SEM image, photograph and energy levels of the materials are shown in Fig. 8a and b. The Zn2SnO4 layer allowed superior transmittance in the visible regions than the bare flexible PEN/ITO substrate due to the antireflection effect of the Zn2SnO4. A high PCE of 15.3% was achieved, the highest performance reported at that time for flexible PSCs (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and photograph, (b) energy levels of the materials and (c) J–V curve of the PSCs based on the Zn2SnO4 ESL.87 (d) Device configuration, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on the Zn2SnO4 ESL.88 Adapted with permission from ref. 87 and 88. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group and 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Soon after these studies, the PCE of the Zn2SnO4-based PSCs was further improved by Jen et al. by introducing PCBM into the configuration.88 Similar to that of Shin et al.'s research, Jen et al. prepared the Zn2SnO4 by a hydrothermal process but at a higher reaction temperature of 180 °C. They designed inverted p-i-n PSCs (Fig. 8d and e) in which the PCBM was deposited between the perovskite and the Zn2SnO4 layer to facilitate the electron transfer from the perovskite to the cathode. As a result, the Zn2SnO4-based ESL enabled efficient p-i-n PSCs with the highest PCE of 17.7% (Fig. 8f). At the same time, an initial PCE of over 90% can be retained after a 14 day storage in an ambient environment. This is because the surface of the Zn2SnO4-based ESL is more hydrophobic than that of the simple PCBM ESL, as manifested through the contact angle test. For the conventional n-i-p PSCs and flexible PSCs, PCEs of 14.5% and 11.4% were achieved, respectively. Recently, there are some other studies of the Zn2SnO4 ESL for PSCs, such as the Zn2SnO4-based composites and mesoporous Zn2SnO4.89–91 But in these reports, the preparation of Zn2SnO4 requires a high-temperature annealing at 500 °C or higher, thus they will not be discussed here.
Though Zn2SnO4 is promising as an efficient ESL for PSCs with high PCEs, the preparation process is slightly complex, which might hinder its application for the large-scale production of PSCs.

3 Organic ESLs
3.1 Fullerene ESLs
Fullerenes, such as C60 and PCBM, have been widely used as the ESLs of PSCs because of their high electron transport abilities. C60 lacks bulky side-chains and can be packed more densely, which facilitates intermolecular charge transport. Furthermore, C60 exhibits a high electron mobility of 1.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a conductivity of 2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1. Recently, C60 thin films have been fabricated by low-temperature processes and employed as ESLs in both inverted and regular structure PSCs.
In 2015, Snaith's group developed efficient PSCs with a regular n-i-p architecture by employing C60 as the ESL, which was prepared by a spin-coating process.92 Through characterization, they found that compared to the TiO2 compact layer, the C60 ESL-based devices displayed an enhanced electron extraction from the photo-excited perovskite to the C60 layer. The luminescent measurements were conducted by observation the switching on and off charge extraction depending on the pre-biasing history. In addition, the devices displayed a negligible hysteresis, highly-stabilized PCEs and long-term stability when tested under full sunlight.
In another study, Yan and co-workers demonstrated efficient PSCs using vacuum-processed and room temperature deposited C60 films as the ESL.93 The best-performing planar PSC using an ultra-thin C60 interface layer achieved a maximum PCE of 15.14% (Fig. 9a–c). They demonstrated that the C60 ESL can not only block hole transport but also passivate the FTO/perovskite interface. Therefore, the PSCs with C60 interface layers showed much higher performances and lower hysteresis than the reference cells without the interface layers. Lee's group recently reported C60-based PSCs with similar fabrication processes as that of Yan's work.94 The optimized C60 ESL with a thickness of 35 nm afforded the best PCE of 19.1%. The C60 layers displayed significant electron transport properties and reduced leakage loss. Furthermore, a hysteresis-free flexible PSC with a PCE of 16.0% was also demonstrated. Thus C60 is really a promising candidate for replacing the traditional high-temperature processed TiO2 ESL, not only because of the resultant high performances, but also because of its low-temperature processing and compatibility with various kinds of substrates.
 Fig. 9  (a) Device structure, (b) energy band diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with the C60 ESL.93 (d) Device structure, (e) energy band diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on PCBM with different concentrations.95 (g) Schematic device structure, (h) the corresponding energy level diagram and (i) J–V curves of PSCs based on CPTA (comparison with PC61BM).96 Adapted with permission from ref. 93, 95 and 96. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2017 Wiley. 
PCBM is another kind of fullerene that has been widely used as the ESL in PSCs with different configurations. It has been reported that PCBM can efficiently collect and transport electrons through the PCBM/perovskite interface. Moreover, PCBM can effectively passivate grain boundaries and reduce the density of the trap states of the perovskite layer, therefore reducing the hysteresis of the PSCs. To the best of our knowledge, the PCBM ESLs were always fabricated through low-temperature solution processes.
Yang's group used a single component PCBM as the ESL in inverted structure PSCs in early 2014.3 The PSCs with a low-temperature solution-processed PCBM achieved a PCE of 11.5% on an ITO substrate, while the flexible PSCs with the PCBM ESL displayed a PCE of 9.2%. Actually, the PCEs of PSCs on the ITO substrate were still lower than those of the conventional high-temperature TiO2-based PSCs. The main reasons are the imperfect morphology of the perovskite layer, induced carrier recombination, Voc and PCE loss. The PCBM then started to be a universal ESL in PSCs, especially in inverted PSCs. At that time, in most of the studies about the PCBM based PSCs, the inverted p-i-n (conducting substrate/p-type semiconductor layer/perovskite/PCBM/metal electrode) configuration was employed. This is because if the n-i-p (conducting substrate/PCBM/perovskite/p-type semiconductor layer/metal electrode) architecture was utilized, it would be a challenge to deposit a uniform and dense perovskite layer on the PCBM.
Seok et al. solved this problem of PCBM-based PSCs with the n-i-p configuration.95 They used a diethyl ether drip as an orthogonal solvent in the modified solvent engineering process that enabled the formation of a dense and uniform perovskite layer without damage to the afore-deposited PCBM layer. The configuration of the device and the energy level diagram are shown in Fig. 9d and e. Variation in PCBM concentrations resulted in PCBM layers with different thicknesses, and the optimized device with a 55 nm thick PCBM layer afforded a PCE of 15.3% and a steady-state efficiency of 13.9% (Fig. 9f). Furthermore, the use of the low-temperature processed dense-TiO2 layer in conjunction with the PCBM layer resulted in an efficiency comparable to that of the single PCBM device, and enabled the fabrication of flexible PSCs with the highest PCE of 11.1%. This study provided a new route for fabricating the n-i-p device architecture via a simple and facile solution process. In another similar study, Petrozza et al. reported TiOx/PCBM ESL-based PSCs with the n-i-p structure, and the devices reached a relatively high PCE of 17.6% with negligible hysteresis.97 Numerous pinholes were observed from the perovskite layer deposited on the crystalline TiO2, while enhanced surface coverage was obtained with the presence of amorphous PCBM. This was induced by the growth of the crystals along different planes, possibly allowing denser packing. The high coverage of the perovskite layer and the efficient charge extraction by the PCBM based ESL were the key criteria for the high efficiency of the PSCs.
In addition, some groups reported composite PCBM ESLs with organic compounds. For example, Yu and co-workers98 reported the self-organization method of the [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid 2-((2-(dimethylamino)-ethyl)(methyl)amino)ethyl ester (PCBDAN) interlayer between the PCBM and the ITO for PSCs with the n-i-p structure. The introduction of the self-organized PCBDAN interlayer can effectively reduce the work function of ITO and therefore eliminate the interface barrier between the electron transport layer and the electrode. This modification was beneficial for enhancing the charge extraction and decreasing the recombination loss at the interface. With this configuration, they achieved the highest PCE of 18.1% with an almost negligible hysteresis. Furthermore, the PSCs could maintain 85% of their original efficiency after 240 h of accelerated UV aging. This is because the PCBM:PCBDAN ESL is stable over long-term operation against UV-light soaking, while the traditional TiO2 can induce the decomposition of the perovskite under UV-light exposure. This self-organization method for the formation of the interlayer is able to not only simplify the fabrication process of low-cost PSCs, but also be compatible with the roll-to-roll processing devices on flexible substrates.
In another study, Kang et al. combined the polyethyleneimine (PEI) surface work function modifier with PCBM, forming the self-assembled organic nanocomposites and acting as the ESL for PSCs.99 The low-temperature processed nanocomposite ESL leads to hysteresis-free, planar heterojunction PSCs with stabilized PCEs of over 18%. In addition, the organic nanocomposite was printable and the resultant PSCs displayed a PCE over 17%.
Very recently, another type of fullerene derivative, C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid (CPTA), was attempted to be used as the ESL of PSCs. Specifically, Fang's group96 spin-coated a CPTA film on an ITO substrate and fabricated PSCs with the structure shown in Fig. 10g and energy level shown in Fig. 10h. The best PSC device exhibited a promising PCE of 18.39% and remarkable long-term stability of over 100 days without encapsulation (Fig. 10i). This CPTA ESL was also applied to flexible PSCs with an excellent PCE of 17.04% and excellent durability against mechanical bending. Moreover, a uniform and robust layer was formed through the esterification of the carboxylic groups of the CPTA molecule with the ITO substrate, noticeably eliminating photocurrent hysteresis effects before and after the bending tests. These results indicated that CPTA is also a promising ESL candidate because of its ease of fabrication and high PCEs with an excellent stability on both rigid and flexible substrates.
 Fig. 10  (a) Device structure, (b) energy band diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with the PDI ESL.100 (d) Cross-sectional SEM image, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of PSCs based on the CDIN ESL.101 Adapted with permission from ref. 100 and 101. Copyright 2017 Elsevier, and 2016 Wiley. 
Thus, we concluded that fullerenes are very efficient ESLs not only due to their high performances and negligible hysteresis, but also because they are low-temperature processable. The main disadvantage of the fullerene ESLs is their high price, which may hinder their applications in the low-cost mass production of PSCs.
3.2 Non-fullerene organic ESLs
Beyond the widely used fullerene derivatives, some non-fullerene n-type organic compounds have been utilized as ESLs or a modifier of ESLs. For example, NunZi's group demonstrated the surface modification of TiOx by using a thin layer of an amorphous 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylicdiimide-functionalized mexylaminotriazine derivative (PDI-glass) as an interfacial layer.100 The configuration and the energy levels are shown in Fig. 10a and b. They optimized the thickness of the interfacial PDI-glass layer, and the devices showed the best performance with a thickness of 10 nm. The highest PCE of 5.75% was higher than that of 4.11% without the PDI-glass layer (Fig. 10c). We think that the noncompact TiOx layer and the quality of the perovskite layer are the main reasons for the low performances of the PSCs. The PDI-glass has the effect of promoting the electron extraction in the PSCs.
In another study, Jen and co-workers developed a low-temperature, solution-processable organic ESL comprised of a discotic coronene diimide (CDI) core with an expanded π-conjugated plane along the short axis of the perylene diimide (PDI), enabling a more efficient face-on π–π stacking in the solid-state to provide a good charge carrier mobility.101 Furthermore, the CDI core was functionalized with polar 3-(dimethylamino)propyl moieties, such as N,N'-bis(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-5,11-dioctylcoronene-2,3,8,9-tetracarboxdiimide (CDIN) to modulate the polarity of the ESL for enhancing the crystal growth of the perovskites atop. As a result, the derived n-i-p PSC on the rigid ITO showed a high PCE of 17.1% (Fig. 10d–f), outperforming that of the device using a regular TiO2 ESL. Benefitting from the low-temperature solution processability of CDIN, a flexible PSC also achieved a high PCE of 14.2%.
Thus, we can conclude that some non-fullerenes have significant potential to act as efficient electron transport layers in PSCs. In future studies, low-temperature processable and cheap non-fullerenes are yet to be explored, which will be compatible with the printing process for both rigid and flexible devices.
4 QD ESLs
4.1 CdSe QD ESLs
QDs have been widely used in photovoltaics due to their remarkable properties, including a tunable band gap, inherently high absorption coefficient, hot electron transfer and multiple exciton generation.102 CdSe is an n-type semiconductor with a good chemical stability and has a superior hydrophobicity. More importantly, CdSe has a much higher electron mobility (450–900 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2.103,104
As early as 2014, Li and co-workers tried to use CdSe QDs in a PSC as an ESL.103 The configuration and energy levels are shown in Fig. 11a and b, respectively. The CdSe QDs were prepared by a hot-injection method followed by a ligand exchange with pyridine. The pyridine replaced the long chain surfactant on CdSe and thus enhanced the electron mobility of the CdSe film. The relatively high PCE at that time of 11.7% was achieved, which indicated that CdSe nanocrystals are an efficient ESL material for PSCs (Fig. 11c). They concluded that 140 °C is the appropriate temperature and 50 nm is the most suitable film thickness (Fig. 11c and d). More recently, Zang et al. utilized a CdSe quantum dot/PCBM composite as an ESL and investigated the structure, stability and performance of the PSCs.104 They found that CdSe/PCBM could reduce the roughness of the perovskite, leading to a high-quality perovskite layer. Their density functional theory calculations showed that there was a strong atomic orbital hybridization between CdSe and perovskite, much stronger than that between CdSe and CH3NH3, and thus the perovskite layer possesses an excellent chemical stability. Moreover, the superior hydrophobicity of CdSe inhibits water penetration into the perovskite layer, which substantially improves the stability of the device. PSCs using the CdSe/PCBM composite as the ESL exhibited the highest PCE of 13.7% after optimizing the CdSe content in the composites. The high PCEs were attributed to the CdSe doping, which induced an in-built electric field between the perovskite and CdSe, leading to an efficient electron–hole separation. These results indicated that CdSe plays multiple roles in enhancing the PCE and improving the stability of the devices. Even though the studies of QD ESLs are limited, employing QDs as an ESL is meaningful because it can provide us a new aspect for ESL research.
 Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) energy levels of the CdSe QD based PSCs; (c) and (d) J–V curves of PSCs based on CdSe QDs obtained under different temperatures and with different thicknesses.103 Adapted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5 Summary
In this review, we introduced the very recent developments in low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs including inorganic, organic and QD ESLs. We summarized the preparation methods for the above ESLs, as shown in Fig. 12. We can find that the spin-coating process is the most prevalent method, resulting from its ease of operation, low cost and high quality of the resultant film. Moreover, we summarized the low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs and the performances of the resultant PSCs in Table 1 and Fig. 13.
 Fig. 12  Preparation method distribution for low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs. 
Table 1 Preparation methods of inorganic ESLs and the performances of the resultant PSCs








ESL
Preparation method
Preparation temperature of the ESL (°C)
Perovskite layer
Champion PCE (%) on a rigid substrate
Champion PCE (%) of flexible PSCs
Reference




Inorganic ESLs
SnO2
SnO2
Sol–gel & spin-coating
80
(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
19.20
16.11

32



SnO2
Spin-coating
180
MAPbI3
17.21
N/A

33



SnO2
Spin-coating & chemical bath deposition
180
CsxFAyMA1−x−yPb(IzBr1−z)3
20.70
N/A

34



a-SnO2
Chemical bath deposition
55
MAPbI3
14.80
N/A

35



SnO2
Electro-deposition technique
50
MAPbI3
13.88
N/A

37



SnO2
Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition
100
MA0.7FA0.3PbI3
N/A
18.36

38



Li-doped SnO2
Spin-coating
185
MAPbI3
18.20
14.78

39



SnO2
Spin-coating
200
MAPbI3
13.00
N/A

40



SnO2
Spin-coating
150
(FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbBr3)0.03
19.90
N/A

41



Sb-doped SnO2
Oil bath & spin-coating
100
MAPbI3
17.70
N/A

42



SnO2/graphene quantum dots
Spin-coating
180
MAPbI3
20.23
N/A

43



Y-doped SnO2
Hydrothermal reaction
95
MAPbI3
17.29
N/A

44



Nb-doped SnO2
Spin-coating
190
(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
17.57
N/A

45



MgO/SnO2
Spin-coating
200
MAPbI3
18.82
N/A

46



SnO2/PCBM
Spin-coating
185
MAPbI3
19.12
N/A

47



SnO2/C60
Spin-coating
140
MAPbI3
15.18
N/A

48



ZnO
ZnO
Chemical bath deposition
90
MAPbI3
8.90
2.62

49



ZnO
Electro-deposition technique
150
MAPbI3
10.91
N/A

50



ZnO
Sol–gel & spin-coating
140
MAPbI3
8.77
N/A

51



ZnO
Atomic layer deposition
80
MAPbI3
16.50
N/A

52



ZnO
Precipitation method & spin-coating
65
MAPbI3
15.70
10.2

53



ZnO
Precipitation method & spin-coating
60
MAPbI3
14.00
N/A

55



ZnO
Precipitation method & spin-coating
120
MAPbI3
8.73
4.29

56



ZnO/SnO2
Spin-coating
200
MAPbI3
14.00
N/A

57



ZnO/PCBM
Spin-coating
RT
MAPbIxCl3−x
16.80
N/A

59



WOx
WOx–TiOx
Spin-coating
150
MAPbI3
14.47
N/A

61



WOx
Spin-coating
150
MAPbIxCl3−x
8.99
N/A

62



W(Nb)Ox
Spin-coating
120
MAPbIxCl3−x
N/A
15.65

63



WOx/C60
Spin-coating
150
MAPbI3
16.07
N/A

64



WO3
Spin-coating
100
MAPbIxCl3−x
9.50
N/A

65



Other oxides
CeOx
Sol–gel & spin-coating
150
MAPbI3
17.04
N/A

66



Nb2O5
e-beam evaporation
RT
MA0.33FA0.66Pb(Br0.16I0.84)3
18.59
15.56

68



a-Nb2O5
Radio frequency magnetron sputtering
RT
MAPbI3
17.10
12.1

69



Nb2O5
Electrophoresis
RT
MAPbI3
14.60
N/A

70



In2O3
Sol–gel & spin-coating
200
MAPbI3
15.30
N/A

71



In2O3/PCBM
Sol–gel & spin-coating
200
MAPbI3
14.83
N/A

72



CdS
CdS
Chemical bath deposition
60
MAPbI3
10.80
N/A

73



CdS
Spin-coating
100
MAPbI3
11.20
N/A

74



CdS
Chemical bath deposition
65
MAPbI3
16.10
N/A

75



CdS
Thermal evaporation
RT
MAPbI3
12.20
N/A

76



CdS
Homogeneous precipitation
90
MAPbI3
2.27
N/A

77



CdS
Chemical bath deposition
72
MAPbI3
15.10
N/A

78



CdS
Chemical bath deposition
85
MAPbI3
14.68
9.9

79



Bi2S3
Bi2S3
Thermal evaporation
RT
MAPbI3
13.10
N/A

80



In2S3
In2S3
Chemical bath deposition
100
MAPbI3
18.22
N/A

81



Zn2SnO4
Zn2SnO4
Spin-coating
100
MAPbI3
N/A
15.3

87



Zn2SnO4
Hydrothermal & spin-coating
180
MAxFA1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3
17.70
11.4

88







a: amorphous


RT: room temperature
MA: methylammonium FA: formamidinium










 Fig. 13  PCE distributions of PSCs based on various low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs obtained at different temperatures. 
As for the inorganic ESLs, low-temperature processed binary metal oxides are the ideal alternatives to TiO2, not only because of their promising high performance, but also due to their low cost and easy preparation. As we can see in Fig. 13 and Table 1, among the various inorganic ESLs, SnO2 is the most promising material as the SnO2-based PSCs always display high PCEs, because the conductivity and the surface coverage of the film on the substrate are highly dependent on the annealing temperature. Therefore, seeking a balance between a low-temperature preparation and a uniform morphology is a very important criterion for binary oxide films. We think that metal doping and second phase compositing, with the effects of tuning the conduction band position and enhancing the electron transfer efficiency, are reliable ways to further improve the performances of binary oxide ESL-based PSCs. Binary metal sulfides are also used in PSCs as ESLs and decent PCEs were achieved, although not as high as those of PSCs with metal oxide ESLs. However, the impacts of sulfides on the perovskite layer, such as the generation of a secondary phase acting as an electrical barrier, still lack sufficient studies. Several kinds of ternary metal compounds have been used as ESLs, while the low-temperature processable compound is currently only Zn2SnO4. The hydrothermal process and spin-coating method were utilized to prepare Zn2SnO4 films and high performances were achieved. We think that other new materials with a low-temperature processability need to be developed.
As shown in Fig. 13 and Table 2, organic ESLs, such as fullerene derivatives and non-fullerenes, have been widely used in PSCs and very high PCEs were achieved. Because they are low-temperature processable and versatile in various configurations and show promising high performances, organic materials, especially fullerene derivatives, are very suitable ESLs. As we can see in Fig. 13, the PCEs of most fullerene-based PSCs have high PCE values. However, there is an important issue that the price of these organic materials is much higher than that of the traditional TiO2. Therefore, in the future, while maintaining high performances, their price should be reduced or new types of organic materials with low prices should be explored.
Table 2 Preparation methods of organic ESLs and the performances of the resultant PSCs








ESL
Preparation method
Preparation temperature of the ESL (°C)
Perovskite layer
Champion PCE (%) on a rigid substrate
Champion PCE (%) of flexible PSCs
Reference




Organic ESLs
Fullerene
C60
Spin-coating
60
MAPbIxCl3−x
13.50
N/A

92



C60
Thermal evaporation
RT
MAPbI3
15.14
N/A

93



C60
Thermal evaporation
RT
MAPbI3
19.12
16

94



C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid
Spin-coating
RT
MAPbI3
18.39
17.04

96



PCBM
Spin-coating
RT
MAPbIxCl3−x
11.50
9.2

3



PCBM
Spin-coating
RT
MAPbI3
15.30
11.1

95



TiOx/PCBM
Spin-coating
120
MAPbI3
17.60
N/A

97



PCBM:PCBDAN
Spin-coating
100
MAPbI3
18.10
14.2

98



PCBM:PEI
Printing
RT
MAPbI3
17.30
N/A

99



Non-fullerene
TiOx/PDI-glass
Chemical bath deposition & spin-coating
150
MAPbI3
5.75
N/A

100



CDIN
Spin-coating
80
MAPbI3
17.10
14.2

101











RT: room temperature
MA: methylammonium










QDs were reported as ESLs and researchers proved that the chemical stability of the perovskite can be enhanced by the strong orbital hybridization effect of the perovskite and QDs. However, the efficiencies of QD ESL-based PSCs, compared to PSCs with other kinds of ESLs are still very low, and thus they need to be further improved as shown in Fig. 13 and Table 3.
Table 3 Preparation methods of QD ESLs and the performances of the resultant PSCs








ESL
Preparation method
Preparation temperature of the ESL (°C)
Perovskite layer
Champion PCE (%) on a rigid substrate
Champion PCE (%) of flexible PSCs
Reference




QDs ESLs
CdSe QDs
CdSe QDs
Hot-injection
140
MAPbI3
11.70
N/A

103



CdSe QDs/PCBM
Spin-coating
RT
MAPbIxCl3−x
13.70
N/A

104











RT: room temperature
MA: methylammonium











Fig. 14 shows the energy level distributions of different ESLs from the literature. It shows that non-TiO2 ESLs possess a similar energy band structure to that of TiO2, which enables efficient electron extraction from the perovskite. Moreover, these non-TiO2 ESLs possess comparable conductivity to TiO2, and thus the electrons from the perovskite can be rapidly transferred to the FTO electrode by a suppressed charge recombination process. The advantages of non-TiO2 ESLs over the traditional TiO2 ESL are their low-temperature processability and energy-efficiency. Specifically, the non-TiO2 ESLs require only low temperature and a short operation duration for post-treatment, which will simplify the processes of PSC fabrication. Another significant advantage is that the non-TiO2 ESLs are compatible with the flexible devices, credited to their low preparation temperature, which is withstandable for the flexible substrate. The low-temperature processable non-TiO2 ESLs are envisioned to be able to promote the industrial printing processes and reduce the production costs of wearable electronics.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of energy level distributions for different ESLs of PSCs and comparison of TiO2 and non-TiO2 ESLs. 
In summary, the low-temperature fabrication of ESLs can ensure low cost and simple fabrication processes of PSCs, maintain performances comparable to those of high-temperature processed TiO2-based PSCs, and be compatible with flexible devices. Thus it is very meaningful to replace traditional high-temperature TiO2 ESLs with low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs.
6 Outlook
As summarized in this review, low-temperature processed ESLs have recently achieved much progress in both the material varieties and performance. However, the performances of some ESLs are still not comparable to those of the basic TiO2 PSCs at high-temperature, and thus several issues as follows need to be addressed.
First, an ideal non-TiO2 ESL should be of low cost and suitable for fast and large area preparation. Low cost includes two aspects, an inexpensive material and low preparation costs. Many kinds of non-TiO2 ESLs, such as fullerenes and rare metal oxides, are much more expensive than TiO2 ESLs. Until now, there are still some non-TiO2 ESL materials synthesized at temperatures over 100 °C, such as SnO2, In2O3 and Zn2SnO4. This temperature also causes wasted energy and equipment costs, which will hinder their practical application in commercial PSCs, even though non-TiO2 ESLs can provide high performances.
Second, proper ESLs must have a significant electron transfer ability. The electron-transport layer also serves as the hole-blocking layer to mitigate recombination at the interface. To possess an excellent PCE performance, ESLs should have their energy band alignment optimized to that of the perovskite layer, which will result in a lower Voc loss or insufficient electron transport from the perovskite to the ESLs. This alignment includes element doping, surface passivation, compositing a second phase, and heteroepitaxial growth, which can increase the electron extraction efficiency and block hole transfer.
Third, the correlation between the conductivity, the surface coverage and the preparation temperature of the ESL is an important issue. Usually, a low annealing temperature leads to an unsatisfactory conductivity and surface coverage, which results in more electron–hole recombination between the heterogeneous interface of the perovskite and ESLs. Increasing the temperature will raise the cost and hinder the realization of an all-low-temperature fabrication of PSCs. Moreover, as shown in Table 1, not all low-temperature processed ESLs were used in flexible devices because the preparation temperature of the ESLs is still high. Therefore, a balance between lowering the preparation temperature and maintaining the high performance of the PSCs should be paid attention to in future studies. In spite of this, the low-temperature processed ESLs are also great alternatives to the traditional TiO2 ESL, and in the future, more kinds of low-temperature processable ESLs will be explored to reduce the cost and simplify the fabrication process of efficient PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) program, Japan (C, Grant Number 15K05597) and Takahashi Industrial and Economic Research Foundation (Takahashi Grant Number 06-003-154). The authors would like to thank the Research Center for Solar Light Energy Conversion, Kyushu Institute of Technology for its support.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png
        .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 562–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500213 CrossRef .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tyson, W. Gao, Y.-S. Chen, S. Ghose and Y. Yan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 9401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful and M. Grätzel, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca Jr, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. r. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits and A. Stepanov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Deng, G. C. Wilkes, A. Z. Chen, N. S. Prasad, M. C. Gupta and J. J. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3206–3210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T.-W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 14, 724–730 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, W. Shi, W. Huang, E.-P. Yao, J. Han, Z. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2328–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. K. Thakur, A. M. Askar, R. Kisslinger, B. D. Wiltshire, P. Kar and K. Shankar, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 274001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yin, J. Ma, H. Jiang, J. Li, D. Yang, F. Gao, J. Zeng, Z. Liu and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10752–10758 CAS .
Q. Cui, X. Zhao, H. Lin, L. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18897–18907 RSC .
R. Ranjan, A. Prakash, A. Singh, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1037–1047 CAS .
D. Yang, R. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. F. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 CAS .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo and K. S. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 CAS .
Y.-F. Chiang, J.-Y. Jeng, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, P. Chen, T.-F. Guo, T.-C. Wen, Y.-J. Hsu and C.-M. Hsu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6033–6040 RSC .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10092–10109 CAS .
M. A. Haque, A. D. Sheikh, X. Guan and T. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602803 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Shi, K. Wang, Y. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Xing, Y. Du, X. Bai and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10212–10217 CAS .
Q. Dong, M. Wang, Q. Zhang, F. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Bian, T. Ma, L. Wang and Y. Shi, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 358–367 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Wu and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li and J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 CAS .
J. Barbé, M. L. Tietze, M. Neophytou, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, A. E. Labban, M. Abulikemu, W. Yue, O. F. Mohammed and I. McCulloch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11828–11836 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, K. W. Tsai, Z. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600122 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Zhu, W.-C. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Guan, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. R. Grice, Z. Song, R. A. Awni, J. Chen, J. Wang, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2118–2124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, J.-Y. Kim, H. J. Son, C.-H. Lee, S. S. Jang and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, E. Zheng, J. Bian, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837–10844 CAS .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Zhang and J. Huang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2686–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, K. Huang, X. Yu, Z. Yang, K. Xiao, Y. Qiang, X. Zhu, L. Xu, P. Wang and C. Cui, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9176–9182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, J. Ma, Q. Liu, W. Ke, Z. Chen, L. Xiong, P. Qin, Z. Chen, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Yan and G. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601769 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, D. Yang, Z. Yang, J. Feng, X. Zhu, J. Niu, Y. Liu, W. Zhao and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2421–2429 CAS .
J. Ma, G. Yang, M. Qin, X. Zheng, H. Lei, C. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Guo, H. Han, X. Zhao and G. Fang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700031 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. Xiao, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, M. Yang, Z. Li, C.-S. Jiang and M. Al-Jassim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14276–14283 CAS .
C. Wang, C. Xiao, Y. Yu, D. Zhao, R. A. Awni, C. R. Grice, K. Ghimire, D. Constantinou, W. Liao and A. J. Cimaroli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700414 CrossRef .
M. H. Kumar, N. Yantara, S. Dharani, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11089–11091 RSC .
J. Zhang, E. J. Juárez-Pérez, I. Mora-Seró, B. Viana and T. Pauporté, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4909–4915 CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, K. H. Chan, M. Wright, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 251–264 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, K.-T. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y.-C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5122–5130 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. O. Pelicano and H. Yanagi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8059–8070 RSC .
G. S. Han, H. W. Shim, S. Lee, M. L. Duff and J. K. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2425–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Shi, K. Wang, Q. Dong, X. Bai, Y. Xing, Y. Du and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4600–4605 CAS .
J. Song, E. Zheng, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian and T. Miyasaka, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 623–630 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, L. Zhang, Q. Luo, H. Lu, X. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Yang, Y.-Q. Li, X. Liu and C.-Q. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18410–18417 CAS .
L. Q. Zhang, X. W. Zhang, Z. G. Yin, Q. Jiang, X. Liu, J. H. Meng, Y. J. Zhao and H. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12133–12138 CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain, A. R. Kirmani and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9051–9057 CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, Q. Dong, Y. Li, S. Wang, X. Yu, M. Wu and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Li, L. Zhao, W. Wang, X. Wang, X. Bai, S. Wang, C. Hao and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1891–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Gao, R. Chi, K. Shi, B. Guo, L. Zhao and T. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
V. O. Eze, Y. Seike and T. Mori, Org. Electron., 2017, 46, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gheno, T. T. T. Pham, C. Di Bin, J. Bouclé, B. Ratier and S. Vedraine, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L.-L. Deng, L.-Y. Wang, S.-M. Dai, Z. Xing, X.-X. Zhan, X.-Z. Lu, S.-Y. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1706–1712 CAS .
A. Kogo, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 829–830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, X. Zhu, Z. Jin, W. Zi, Q. Wei and S. F. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ling, J. Yuan, D. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Wu, F. Jin, F. Wu and G. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23181–23188 CAS .
Y.-T. Huang, R. Cheng, P. Zhai, H. Lee, Y.-H. Chang and S.-P. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Yin, M. Que, X. Liu and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9641–9648 CAS .
M. Qin, J. Ma, W. Ke, P. Qin, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, L. Xiong, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Lu, G. Yang and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8460–8466 CAS .
M. Abulikemu, J. Barbé, A. El Labban, J. Eid and S. Del Gobbo, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 636, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Gao, L. Luo, Q. Ye, X. He, L. Ouyang, X. Guo, D. Zhuang, C. Liao and J. Mei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11750–11755 CAS .
H. Peng, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, P. Yu, H. Zhou, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 6, 022002 CrossRef .
I. Hwang and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4226–4232 CAS .
J. Wang, L. Liu, S. Liu, L. Yang, B. Zhang, S. Feng, J. Yang, X. Meng, W. Fu and H. Yang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 504–509 CAS .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, R. Younts, B. Gautam, K. Gundogdu and D. B. Mitzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16437–16445 CAS .
G. Tong, Z. Song, C. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Yu, J. Xu, Y. Jiang, Y. Sheng, Y. Shi and K. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 19457–19463 RSC .
D.-B. Li, L. Hu, Y. Xie, G. Niu, T. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. Gao, B. Yang and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2122–2128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Chen, S. Yang, Y. L. Zhong, C. Li, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Z. Shao, J. Ye, X. Zhang, X. Pan and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970–973 RSC .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, H. Zheng, G. Liu, X. Pan and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3675–3682 CAS .
A. Bera, K. Wu, A. Sheikh, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28494–28501 CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, W. Guo, X. Yu and T. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shin, W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, J. H. Suk, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, W. M. Seong and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Zhu, S. B. Jo, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15294–15301 CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. Kim and C. K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12158–12169 CAS .
A. Bera, A. D. Sheikh, M. A. Haque, R. Bose, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28404–28411 CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim and C. K. Hong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11424 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, T. Leijtens, S. Siprova, C. Schlueter, M. T. Hörantner, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-Z. Li, A. K.-Y. Jen, T.-L. Lee and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2399–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Ge, H. Tao, H. Lei, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17971–17976 CAS .
H. Yoon, S. M. Kang, J.-K. Lee and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2262–2266 CAS .
S. Ryu, J. Seo, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3271–3275 CAS .
Y. C. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhu, X. Liu, W. Zhang and J. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701144 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. Neutzner, L. Colella, S. Marras, A. R. S. Kandada, M. Gandini, M. De Bastiani, G. Pace, L. Manna, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2365–2370 CAS .
J. Xie, X. Yu, J. Huang, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, M. Lei, L. Xu, Z. Tang and C. Cui, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700018 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Kim, C. L. Lee, G. Kim, T. K. Kim, H. Back, S. Jung, K. Yu, S. Hong, S. Lee, S. Kim, S. Jeong, H. Kang and K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700226 CrossRef .
T. Adhikari, M. Shahiduzzaman, K. Yamamoto, O. Lebel and J.-M. Nunzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 294–300 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Q. Xu, C. C. Chueh, H. Liu, Z. a. Li, X. Li, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10786–10793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Fu, Z. Gu, C. Fan, X. Yang, H. Li and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9087–9090 RSC .
X. Zeng, T. Zhou, C. Leng, Z. Zang, M. Wang, W. Hu, X. Tang, S. Lu, L. Fang and M. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17499–17505 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Zhanglin Guo	Zhanglin Guo is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree from Shaanxi University of Science & Technology in 2013 and 2016, respectively. His current research work is focused on the applications of two-dimensional materials in perovskite solar cells.
Liguo Gao	Dr Liguo Gao graduated from Jilin University. Now he is working at Dalian University of Technology. His interests include researching on integrating silicon solar cells with perovskite solar cells, developing a novel architecture for perovskite solar cells, and photoelectrochemical systems.
Chu Zhang	Chu Zhang is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a bachelor's degree from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2010, and a master's degree from Oregon State University in 2014. His current research work is focused on Pb-free perovskite materials and perovskite solar cell devices.
Zhenhua Xu	Zhenhua Xu is a Ph.D. candidate of Tingli Ma's Lab, Kyushu Institute of Technology. He received a master's degree from Lanzhou University in 2015. His current research work is focused on perovskite solar cells.
Tingli Ma	Dr Tingli Ma received a PhD degree in 1999 from Kyushu University, Japan. She worked at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology as a Special Postdoctoral Researcher from 1999 to 2004. She moved to Dalian University of Technology, China in 2007. She has worked at Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan since 2014. She leads research teams working on inorganic and organic solar cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells, and other related projects including development of catalysts, hydrogen production, functional dyes and nanosemiconductor materials. Dr Ma has published more than 100 papers in peer-reviewed journals.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic view and (b) the working mechanism of PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic view and (b) energy band diagram of the PSCs based on the SnO2 ESL structure.33 (c) Schematic illustration of the SC-CBD method and (d) top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the low-temperature layer by layer deposition process: bare FTO, SnO2 deposited by the SC-CBD process on FTO and the perovskite crystals grown atop.34 (e) Schematic illustration of the chemical bath deposition method and J–V curves of the PSCs with a-SnO2 or compact TiO2 as the ESL.35 (f) Cross-sectional SEM image, (g) energy diagram and (h) J–V curves measured at backward–forward scans of the PSCs with Li:SnO2 as the ESL.39 Adapted with permission from ref. 33–35 and 39. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Device architecture, (b) energy levels and (c) J–V curves of the ZnO ESL based PSCs on rigid and flexible substrates, respectively.53 (d) Energy level diagram of the ZnO ESL based PSCs with a carbon electrode.56 (e) Device architecture and (f) energy level diagram of the PSCs based on ZnO, SnO2 or ZnO/SnO2 (2:1).57 Adapted with permission from ref. 53, 56 and 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, 2015 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of PSCs based on WOx or TiO2 (inset: the spin-coating process of WOx preparation).61 (b) J–V curves of the champion PSCs based on the WOx–TiOx composite ESL prepared at different temperatures (inset: the device architecture of the PSCs).62 (c) Configuration and (d) J–V curves of champion flexible PSCs based on W(Nb)Ox obtained under different temperatures.63 (e) J–V curves (inset: configuration) and (f) energy level diagram of WOx based PSCs.64 Adapted with permission from ref. 61–64. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 Wiley, 2017 Elsevier, and 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Device architecture, (b) energy level diagram and (c) J–V curves of CeOx based PSCs.66 (d) J–V curve (inset: device architecture) and (e) energy level diagram of Nb2O5 based PSCs.69 (f) Energy level diagram and (g) J–V curve of In2O3 based PSCs.71 Adapted with permission from ref. 66, 69 and 71. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017 American Chemical Society, and 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device structure, (b) energy diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with different device structures.74 (d) comparison of the J–V curves of PSCs based on CdS and TiO2, respectively.76 (e) Device structure and J–V curve variation of PSCs with the Cd doped perovskite layer.78 Adapted with permission from ref. 74, 76 and 78. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 American Chemical Society, and 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic demonstration of the inverted PSC, (b) J–V curves of devices with Bi2S3 and PC61BM as the ESL in reverse and forward modes and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with different Bi2S3 film thicknesses.80 (d) Device architecture, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on In2S3 and TiO2 ESLs, respectively.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 80 and 81. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society and 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and photograph, (b) energy levels of the materials and (c) J–V curve of the PSCs based on the Zn2SnO4 ESL.87 (d) Device configuration, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on the Zn2SnO4 ESL.88 Adapted with permission from ref. 87 and 88. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group and 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Device structure, (b) energy band diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with the C60 ESL.93 (d) Device structure, (e) energy band diagram and (f) J–V curves of the PSCs based on PCBM with different concentrations.95 (g) Schematic device structure, (h) the corresponding energy level diagram and (i) J–V curves of PSCs based on CPTA (comparison with PC61BM).96 Adapted with permission from ref. 93, 95 and 96. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2017 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Device structure, (b) energy band diagram and (c) J–V curves of the PSCs with the PDI ESL.100 (d) Cross-sectional SEM image, (e) energy level diagram and (f) J–V curves of PSCs based on the CDIN ESL.101 Adapted with permission from ref. 100 and 101. Copyright 2017 Elsevier, and 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) energy levels of the CdSe QD based PSCs; (c) and (d) J–V curves of PSCs based on CdSe QDs obtained under different temperatures and with different thicknesses.103 Adapted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Preparation method distribution for low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs.	 

Inorganic ESLs	SnO2	SnO2	Sol–gel & spin-coating	80	(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15	19.20	16.11	
32

SnO2	Spin-coating	180	MAPbI3	17.21	N/A	
33

SnO2	Spin-coating & chemical bath deposition	180	CsxFAyMA1−x−yPb(IzBr1−z)3	20.70	N/A	
34

a-SnO2	Chemical bath deposition	55	MAPbI3	14.80	N/A	
35

SnO2	Electro-deposition technique	50	MAPbI3	13.88	N/A	
37

SnO2	Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition	100	MA0.7FA0.3PbI3	N/A	18.36	
38

Li-doped SnO2	Spin-coating	185	MAPbI3	18.20	14.78	
39

SnO2	Spin-coating	200	MAPbI3	13.00	N/A	
40

SnO2	Spin-coating	150	(FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbBr3)0.03	19.90	N/A	
41

Sb-doped SnO2	Oil bath & spin-coating	100	MAPbI3	17.70	N/A	
42

SnO2/graphene quantum dots	Spin-coating	180	MAPbI3	20.23	N/A	
43

Y-doped SnO2	Hydrothermal reaction	95	MAPbI3	17.29	N/A	
44

Nb-doped SnO2	Spin-coating	190	(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15	17.57	N/A	
45

MgO/SnO2	Spin-coating	200	MAPbI3	18.82	N/A	
46

SnO2/PCBM	Spin-coating	185	MAPbI3	19.12	N/A	
47

SnO2/C60	Spin-coating	140	MAPbI3	15.18	N/A	
48

ZnO	ZnO	Chemical bath deposition	90	MAPbI3	8.90	2.62	
49

ZnO	Electro-deposition technique	150	MAPbI3	10.91	N/A	
50

ZnO	Sol–gel & spin-coating	140	MAPbI3	8.77	N/A	
51

ZnO	Atomic layer deposition	80	MAPbI3	16.50	N/A	
52

ZnO	Precipitation method & spin-coating	65	MAPbI3	15.70	10.2	
53

ZnO	Precipitation method & spin-coating	60	MAPbI3	14.00	N/A	
55

ZnO	Precipitation method & spin-coating	120	MAPbI3	8.73	4.29	
56

ZnO/SnO2	Spin-coating	200	MAPbI3	14.00	N/A	
57

ZnO/PCBM	Spin-coating	RT	MAPbIxCl3−x	16.80	N/A	
59

WOx	WOx–TiOx	Spin-coating	150	MAPbI3	14.47	N/A	
61

WOx	Spin-coating	150	MAPbIxCl3−x	8.99	N/A	
62

W(Nb)Ox	Spin-coating	120	MAPbIxCl3−x	N/A	15.65	
63

WOx/C60	Spin-coating	150	MAPbI3	16.07	N/A	
64

WO3	Spin-coating	100	MAPbIxCl3−x	9.50	N/A	
65

Other oxides	CeOx	Sol–gel & spin-coating	150	MAPbI3	17.04	N/A	
66

Nb2O5	e-beam evaporation	RT	MA0.33FA0.66Pb(Br0.16I0.84)3	18.59	15.56	
68

a-Nb2O5	Radio frequency magnetron sputtering	RT	MAPbI3	17.10	12.1	
69

Nb2O5	Electrophoresis	RT	MAPbI3	14.60	N/A	
70

In2O3	Sol–gel & spin-coating	200	MAPbI3	15.30	N/A	
71

In2O3/PCBM	Sol–gel & spin-coating	200	MAPbI3	14.83	N/A	
72

CdS	CdS	Chemical bath deposition	60	MAPbI3	10.80	N/A	
73

CdS	Spin-coating	100	MAPbI3	11.20	N/A	
74

CdS	Chemical bath deposition	65	MAPbI3	16.10	N/A	
75

CdS	Thermal evaporation	RT	MAPbI3	12.20	N/A	
76

CdS	Homogeneous precipitation	90	MAPbI3	2.27	N/A	
77

CdS	Chemical bath deposition	72	MAPbI3	15.10	N/A	
78

CdS	Chemical bath deposition	85	MAPbI3	14.68	9.9	
79

Bi2S3	Bi2S3	Thermal evaporation	RT	MAPbI3	13.10	N/A	
80

In2S3	In2S3	Chemical bath deposition	100	MAPbI3	18.22	N/A	
81

Zn2SnO4	Zn2SnO4	Spin-coating	100	MAPbI3	N/A	15.3	
87

Zn2SnO4	Hydrothermal & spin-coating	180	MAxFA1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3	17.70	11.4	
88


	
	a: amorphous	
	RT: room temperature	MA: methylammonium FA: formamidinium	
	
	


 	Fig. 13  PCE distributions of PSCs based on various low-temperature processed non-TiO2 ESLs obtained at different temperatures.	 

Organic ESLs	Fullerene	C60	Spin-coating	60	MAPbIxCl3−x	13.50	N/A	
92

C60	Thermal evaporation	RT	MAPbI3	15.14	N/A	
93

C60	Thermal evaporation	RT	MAPbI3	19.12	16	
94

C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid	Spin-coating	RT	MAPbI3	18.39	17.04	
96

PCBM	Spin-coating	RT	MAPbIxCl3−x	11.50	9.2	
3

PCBM	Spin-coating	RT	MAPbI3	15.30	11.1	
95

TiOx/PCBM	Spin-coating	120	MAPbI3	17.60	N/A	
97

PCBM:PCBDAN	Spin-coating	100	MAPbI3	18.10	14.2	
98

PCBM:PEI	Printing	RT	MAPbI3	17.30	N/A	
99

Non-fullerene	TiOx/PDI-glass	Chemical bath deposition & spin-coating	150	MAPbI3	5.75	N/A	
100

CDIN	Spin-coating	80	MAPbI3	17.10	14.2	
101


	
	
	
	RT: room temperature	MA: methylammonium	
	
	


QDs ESLs	CdSe QDs	CdSe QDs	Hot-injection	140	MAPbI3	11.70	N/A	
103

CdSe QDs/PCBM	Spin-coating	RT	MAPbIxCl3−x	13.70	N/A	
104


	
	
	
	RT: room temperature	MA: methylammonium	
	
	


 	Fig. 14  Schematic of energy level distributions for different ESLs of PSCs and comparison of TiO2 and non-TiO2 ESLs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
