Tuning the thermal conductivity of methylammonium lead halide by the molecular substructure   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP04246E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP04246E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24318-24324Tuning the thermal conductivity of methylammonium lead halide by the molecular substructure†

        
          
            Claudia 
            Caddeo
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Claudio 
            Melis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Maria Ilenia 
            Saba
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alessio 
            Filippetti
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luciano 
            Colombo
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Mattoni
          
        
      *a
aIstituto Officina dei Materiali (CNR – IOM), Unità di Cagliari SLACS, Cittadella Universitaria, I-09042 Monserrato, (CA), Italy. E-mail: caddeo@iom.cnr.it; mattoni@iom.cnr.it
bDipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cittadella Universitaria, I-09042 Monserrato, (CA), Italy
Received 
      17th June 2016
    , Accepted 29th July 2016First published on 29th July 2016AbstractBy using state-of-the-art atomistic methods we provide an accurate estimate of thermal conductivity of methylammonium lead halide as a function of sample size and temperature, in agreement with experimental works. We show that the thermal conductivity of methylammonium lead halide is intrinsically low, due to the low sound velocity of the PbI lattice. Furthermore, by selectively analyzing the effect of different molecular degrees of freedom, we clarify the role of the molecular substructure by showing that the internal modes above 150 cm−1 (in addition to rotations) are effective in reducing the thermal conductivity of hybrid perovskites. This analysis suggests strategies to tailor the thermal conductivity by modifying the internal structure of organic cations.
1 Introduction
Hybrid perovskite semiconductors formed by organic cations and inorganic lead halides have attracted enormous interest in photovoltaics with 22% power conversion efficiency achieved in methylammonium lead halide (MAPI) solar cells.1,2 Such hybrid crystalline materials are exceptionally attractive since they combine the superior optoelectronic and semiconducting properties of lead halide3–5 with the possibility of being easily synthesized from solutions. Despite the great technological opportunities, hybrid perovskites have several drawbacks. One of the major drawbacks is the thermal instability of the material; MAPI is in fact characterized by a low sublimation temperature6 and by degradation reactions (e.g. CH3NH3PbI3 → CH3NH3I + PbI2), which can be easily activated with small thermal budgets.7,8
The heat control in crystalline films of MAPI is accordingly technologically relevant and it requires a precise determination of the thermal conductivity κ. Furthermore, it is important to understand the dependence of κ on parameters such as temperature and crystal size and to find strategies to tune the thermal conductivity. On the one hand, increasing κ favors the efficient heat dissipation and prevents the device overheating. On the other hand, a lower thermal conductivity could increase the thermoelectric figure of merit enabling the use of hybrid perovskites for thermoelectric devices, as suggested in the literature.9,10 The experimental results are conflicting: though most experimental11,12 and theoretical13–15 works indicate ultralow κ for both monocrystalline and polycrystalline MAPI, some recent reports provide much higher values in spin-coated samples.16 The accurate determination of the thermal conductivity of the ideally perfect material is accordingly important for elucidating experiments and for technological applications.
This, in turn, requires the understanding of the interplay between organic and inorganic components of the material. In fact, due to its hybrid organic–inorganic nature, relatively low cohesive energy and large lattice spacing, MAPI can be considered a relatively soft material.2,17–19 The temperature-induced structural fluctuations and the MA cation dynamics17 have a strong impact on several material properties such as: electron–phonon coupling,20 charge transport,21 ferroelectricity,22 and luminescence.23,24 For example, it has been shown that the rotational entropy due to the organic component of the material25 can suppress the spontaneous ferroelectric distortions of MAPI at room temperature.22 Recent works11,13 have suggested the importance of molecules also in thermal transport. In particular, it has been proposed that the coupling between molecular rotations and acoustic11 or optical phonons13 is responsible for the low value of thermal conductivity at room temperature.
These studies, however, do not fully clarify the role of molecules in the thermal properties. For example, an abrupt change in thermal conductivity across the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition has been observed in solution-processed films, but not in single- or polycrystalline perovskites,11,12 though the rotational dynamics of cations is very different in the two phases;25,26 this is in contrast to the idea that only the molecular rotations affect κ. Concerning atomistic studies, some have adopted different interatomic potentials for different phases13,14 and this makes it difficult to correlate the thermal conductivity with the cation dynamics.
Recently, some of the authors have derived the MYP interatomic potential to describe methylammonium rotational dynamics25 by classical molecular dynamics (MD). This model is able to correctly reproduce orthorhombic-to-tetragonal transition, vibrational properties and defect diffusion.27 Very recently, the model has been applied to study thermal transport15 by equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD) but the role of molecular degrees of freedom was not investigated. Furthermore, despite the good results (representing a further validation of MYP in qualitative agreement with experiments) the calculated κ at room temperature (0.3 W m−1 K−1) is slightly underestimated with respect to most experiments on crystalline MAPI.
Here we make use of the MYP potential together with the approach-to-equilibrium molecular dynamics (AEMD28) to get an estimate of κ more consistent with experiments and to study the role of molecular degrees of freedom on the thermal transport properties. This is done by an original approach in which rigid constraints are applied during the dynamics to selectively turn-off specific molecular degrees of freedom. We show that the maximum κ is found when the organic cations are ideally rigid and only retain the translational motion. This sets an upper limit of ∼2 W m−1 K−1 for the lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI at room temperature. This result is consistent with most of the previous reports11,12 and it excludes the lattice thermal conductivity as the origin of the anomalously high κ recently measured in spin-coated samples.16
Molecular rotations reduce sizably the thermal conductivity in the case of rigid molecules, a result that is in line with previous findings by Hata et al.13 focusing only on molecular rotations. However, we find that for the case of realistic soft molecules the rotations have minor effects with respect to the internal modes, the latter being able to severely reduce κ.
The present study shows that the molecular degrees of freedom can in principle be used to tune the thermal conductivity up to a factor two giving indications for the design of hybrid perovskites with tailored thermal properties through cation modification.
2 Methods
The heat transport can be modeled using MD simulations by either equilibrium or out-of-equilibrium methods.29–31 Equilibrium MD calculates the thermal conductivity κ at temperature T along a given z direction using the equilibrium fluctuations of the heat current vector J through the current-current autocorrelation function,32 while non-equilibrium methods calculate κ similarly to the experimental measurements by using Fourier's law . Among the out-of-equilibrium methods, nonequilibrium MD (NEMD)29,33 reproduces steady-state experimental conditions such as those employed in ref. 11, while AEMD simulates a transient thermal conduction regime, by analogy with transient experiments such as the time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) pump–probe method used in ref. 12. We observe that each method has advantages and drawbacks. The main merit of AEMD is its comparatively smaller computational burden with respect to other methodologies, as extensively discussed in the literature.28 The AEMD method provides κ by directly solving the heat equation along the flux direction z (1)for a given periodically repeated one dimensional step-like initial temperature profile, where  = κ/ρCV is the thermal diffusivity of the system with mass density ρ and specific heat CV. The product ρCV is also referred to as volumetric heat capacity. Briefly, we initially thermalize the system by imposing a periodic step-like temperature profile to a sample as long as Lz  Next, the system is evolved in a microcanonical MD simulation during which the time-dependent difference in average temperatures of the two system portions ΔT(t) = 〈T1(t)〉 − 〈T2(t)〉 evolves and can be fitted by the solution of eqn (1) (2)where Cn and αn are coefficients depending on known quantities: the positive integer n, the initial temperature profile and the size of the system Lz. The thermal diffusivity  is thus obtained by fitting the atomistic data and the conductivity is eventually calculated by κ = ·ρCV. Further details of this method can be found elsewhere.28
All the simulations have been performed using the LAMMPS package34 with atomic forces calculated by the model potential for hybrid perovskites (MYP).25 Electrostatic interactions have been determined using the particle–particle particle–mesh summation method as implemented in LAMMPS, with an accuracy of 10−5. The samples have been first carefully equilibrated in the isothermal–isobaric ensemble (NPT), with temperature and pressure controlled using a Nosé–Hoover thermostat with damping parameters of 100 and 1000 fs for the thermostat and the barostat, respectively. The time step was chosen to be 1 fs. After equilibration, AEMD was applied to all samples. ΔT(0) was chosen to be 50 K. All the simulations are performed in periodic boundary conditions in x, y and z directions.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Lattice thermal conductivity: size and temperature dependence
The lattice thermal conductivity at T = 300 K calculated for different sample lengths Lz, ranging from 20 to 500 nm, is reported in Fig. 1. It is well known that, for sample sizes Lz smaller than the phonon mean free path, κ is a function of the sample length κ−1 = χ(Lz−1) along the heat flux direction28–30,35 and can be approximately expressed as (3)where z is the sound velocity along z and τ is the relaxation time for intrinsic phonon–phonon bulk-like scattering (i.e. for Lz = ∞). In most cases the thermal conductivity increases with the sample length and calculations on small samples give underestimated results. The actual value of κ is usually obtained from the atomistic simulations by plotting 1/κ(Lz) versus 1/Lz for a suitable range of sample lengths and extrapolating κ to the limit of Lz → ∞. Concerning the sample section, we have observed that the variation of thermal conductivity along z from Lx = Ly ≃ 3 nm to Lx = Ly ≃ 11 nm is around 5%. This was expected since the dependence of κ on the sample section is usually very small for materials with low thermal conductivity.28
 Fig. 1  Lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI at room temperature. Error bars, which are bigger for smaller samples, are calculated as the standard error of the ΔT(t) fit. 
The value of κ for Lz = ∞ has been extrapolated and it is found to be κ = 0.8 W m−1 K−1.
In a recent work, Wang et al.,15 by using the same MYP interatomic potential but a different EMD method, obtained a value as small as 0.2–0.3 W m−1 K−1. The two methods should give in principle similar results, but, as stated by the authors themselves in ref. 15, they could have slightly underestimated the value of κ.
The AEMD value κ = 0.8 W m−1 K−1 represents the upper limit for bulk thermal conductivity, since it refers to an infinitely long sample with perfect crystallinity and no defects. The phonon mean free path in real samples is expected to be limited by defects such as e.g. grain boundaries, interstitials and vacancies. Accordingly, the above calculation compared to experimental κ values can be used to provide an estimate of the “effective” mean free path λ of real samples. The shadowed region in Fig. 1 indicates the experimental range, between 0.3 and 0.5 W m−1 K−1. This region intersects the 1/κ versus 1/Lz curve for Lz between ∼50 and ∼200 nm, which can be taken as an indication of the “effective” mean free path λ. Interestingly this result is in agreement with X-ray diffraction measurements indicating a coherence length between 73 and 150 nm.12 We remark that all the simulated systems do not contain neither true interfaces nor grains since they are pristine periodically replicated crystals. The case of a realistic nanocrystalline microstructure requires more complex models with grains randomly oriented and corresponding grain boundaries.36,37
Besides crystallinity, another physical factor that affects κ is the temperature T. It is well known that at high temperature κ decreases as T increases due to phonon–phonon Umklapp scattering.38 Here, we investigate the range of temperatures 80 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K higher than or comparable to the Debye temperature of MAPI (∼120 K),11 for which the thermal conductivity is only marginally affected by quantum features. Furthermore, in the absence of significant doping, the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity is discardable at any temperature, and only the lattice contribution matters. This temperature range includes the orthorhombic-to-tetragonal transition occurring at T = 160 K. In fact, the present interatomic force field is able to reproduce the transition from the appropriate a−a−c + PbI octahedral tilting of the orthorhombic Pnma structure (see Fig. 2, top left panel), to the a0a0c− one of the tetragonal phase at room temperature (top right panel). The stick and balls representation of methylammonium clearly shows the increase of molecular disorder with temperature associated with the ability of molecules to rotate in the room-T phase. The agreement is also quantitative as the dependence of methylammonium reorientational times on temperature is consistent with neutron-based investigations.25,26 We remark that all the investigated crystals are perfectly stoichiometric and do not contain any defect. In particular the number of molecules in the two panels of Fig. 2 is the same, though the molecular disorder is much higher in the right panel due to the higher temperature, as expected.
 Fig. 2  Top: Snapshots of the simulations showing two different crystallographic phases of MAPI at T = 80 K (left) and T = 300 K (right). Bottom: Normalized lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI 〈κ〉/〈κ300〉 for temperatures between 80 and 300 K. Experimental values are taken from ref. 11. 
For each T we have equilibrated four different configurations and calculated the average thermal conductivity 〈κ(T)〉 and the corresponding standard deviation, here taken as the statistical error. Due to the long-range electrostatic interactions, the computational cost of the simulations increases as NlogN, with N being the number of atoms. Furthermore, also the simulation time needed to achieve equilibrium increases with N resulting in an overall computational workload scaling as ≃N2. This makes the calculation of κ by using the longest systems Lz = 0.5 μm unpractical, since a large number of calculations of κ as a function of temperature (or other parameters of interest) are necessary. Under the assumption that the size dependence does not change dramatically with temperature, and taking into account that only relative variations are important, we use the shortest system with Lz = 25 nm to calculate the dependence of κ on temperature T. For better comparison with experiments we rescale both theoretical and experimental data to the corresponding values at T = 300 K (i.e. 〈κ(T)〉/〈κ300〉). The results are reported in Fig. 2. The fitting curve is based on Callaway's approach39 as in ref. 11, where the scattering by defects has not been included since we consider perfect crystals. κ(T) increases at lower temperatures according to κ ∼ T−1 in good agreement with experiments. At 80 K the conductivity is two times larger than at room temperature reaching a value κ = 1.6 W m−1 K−1.
The above results show that the lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI is low even for a perfect crystal at low temperature. It is interesting to further analyze the origin of such a low value in terms of classical kinetic theory. The bulk thermal conductivity is related to the relaxation time τ for phonon–phonon scattering by the formula κ ∼ 2ρCVτ (see eqn (3)). The velocity can be further expressed as  so obtaining κ as a function of density ρ, bulk modulus B and τ. By using the available experimental values40,41 for MAPI B = 14 GPa and ρ = 4.15 g cm−2 we get . Given the volumetric energy density ρCV = 1.19 × 106 J m−3 K−1, and taking κ ∼ 0.5 W m−1 K−1 we finally derive τ ∼ 0.13 ps. If we repeat the same calculations for a typical oxide such as SrTiO3, for which42,43κ = 11 W m−1 K−1, ρCV = 2.78 × 106 J m−3 K−1, B = 174 GPa, and ρ = 5.12 g cm−3, the obtained value τ ∼ 0.12 ps is very close to that of MAPI. Even though the scattering times are very similar, the thermal conductivity of SrTiO3 is about 20 times higher than that of MAPI. As already pointed out by Wang and Lin15 the low thermal conductivity in MAPI can be explained with the low sound velocity that in turn depends on the low bulk modulus to mass density ratio. The above arguments apply also to our AEMD calculation since the MYP reproduces well the sound velocity15,17 and volumetric heat capacity of MAPI. The above conclusions are apparently independent of the details of the molecule since it is reasonable to think that the bulk modulus and density are mainly sensitive only to the average molecular properties, such as the total mass, total charge and molecular volume. It is interesting to check the validity of this expectation and to use MD to test whether and to what extent the submolecular structure and its internal degrees of freedom are able to modify the thermal conductivity either by changing the sound velocity or the scattering time τ.
3.2 Effect of molecular degrees of freedom
In order to understand how the different degrees of freedom (DOFs) of the MA molecules can modify the thermal conductivity, we have performed a series of proof-of-concept AEMD simulations on the sample with Lz = 25 nm, at T = 300 K.
The number of DOFs (g) of methylammonium is g = 24 (since the unit cell contains 8 atoms). The role of internal DOFs of the molecule (e.g. twisting or stretching) in κ can be studied by rigidly constraining specific parts of the MA. For example, if all the interatomic distances of the CH3 group are kept fixed during the dynamics, we inhibit the C–H stretching, torsion and breathing modes internal to the methyl group and we are left with g = 11; the case of the whole interatomic distances kept fixed (i.e. rigid molecule) corresponds to only six DOFs, i.e. 3 rotations and 3 translations. The full set of cases investigated in the present work are reported as cartoons in the top panel of Fig. 3; rigid groups are shadowed, tilted molecules represent dynamics with no constraints on torque and vertical ones correspond to dynamics without rotations. We remark that the constrained dynamics corresponds to the replacement of methylammonium by pseudo-molecules (with different rigidity or rotational inertia) leaving the organic–inorganic atomic interactions identical.
 Fig. 3  Effect of different molecular motions on the thermal diffusivity , volumetric heat capacity ρCV and conductivity κ at room temperature. The values of  and κ are normalized to those obtained for the unconstrained molecule at T = 300 K, i.e. the values of 〈〉/〈300〉 and 〈κ〉/〈κ300〉 are reported. Top cartoons represent the different dynamics analyzed. 
The abscissa in the diagram of Fig. 3 is the number of molecule DOFs g during the corresponding dynamics and the calculated thermal diffusivity  and thermal conductivity are reported in bottom and top panels, obtained by the constrained AEMD. The thermal conductivity requires the correct estimation of the heat capacity that depends on the number of degrees of freedom. To this aim CV was extrapolated by linearly fitting the energy-temperature relation Etot(T) as proposed in ref. 44, i.e.. The calculated values are reported in Fig. 3 in terms of volumetric heat capacity ρCV. It is verified that ρCV is close to the expected equilibrium value (g + 12)·kB, where 12 is the number of DOFs associated with the inorganic lattice. The κ and  values of unconstrained dynamics are set to one, which are the reference values. The values of  and κ are also reported in Table S1 in the ESI.†
Since molecular rotations correspond to the lowest frequency molecular modes,17 they are believed to play an important role in limiting the thermal conductivity. Therefore, we discuss first the case where only MA rotations are inhibited (torque = 0 and g = 21). Surprisingly, the corresponding κ is not higher than the standard dynamics, indicating that the molecular rotations alone do not sizably affect the thermal conductivity in MAPI. Fig. 3 shows that higher κ is found for the smallest number of degrees of freedom (g = 6, 3). Though a simple monotonic relation between κ and g cannot be established, nevertheless, Fig. 3 clearly shows that the internal molecular modes can induce a variation of κ up to 50% with respect to the standard dynamics. Interestingly the case g = 3 (that is the most similar to the case of inorganic perovskite where the A cations are atoms of the same mass and charge and only translational degrees of freedom left) gives the highest κ.
The analysis of the vibrational density of states (VDOS) during the constrained dynamics makes it possible to better understand the role of each molecular degree of freedom. The VDOS are calculated as the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function of mass-weighted atomic velocities17,45 and are shown in Fig. 3 for frequencies up to 400 cm−1 (the full spectra can be found in the ESI†). The VDOS projected on the PbI shows no appreciable differences in the constrained dynamics and it is reported once as the dashed line (top). The molecular projections are reported as solid lines for all cases. The molecular peaks are labeled in Fig. 4 consistent with the vibrational analysis of ref. 17. The lowest-energy peak (RC) corresponds to modes with a rotational character, and it thus sizably decreases in the two cases with torque = 0 (g = 21 and g = 3); interestingly, when the MA is rigid (g = 6) the peak is still present but slightly blue-shifted.
 Fig. 4  Vibrational density of states of MAPI by using different molecular constraints; solid lines are the MA projections, and the dashed line is the PbI projection (that is unchanged for constrained or unconstrained molecules). The corresponding thermal conductivities κ and the number of DOFs g are reported on the left and on the right, respectively. 
The T shoulder, which is a signature of the translations, is always present as expected. By comparing the standard dynamics (g = 24) to the rigid one (g = 6), we notice that the low energy part of the spectrum is relatively unchanged (apart from the small blueshift in the rigid case) while it is found that κ has a large increment. Conversely, by comparing the standard dynamics (g = 24) to the “no torque” case (g = 21) in which the molecule cannot rotate but the other internal DOFs are still active, the value of κ is almost unchanged. In other words, rotations are important for the rigid case but there is not a trivial correlation between a high κ value and the absence of rotations (i.e. no peak RC). The present results indicate that thermal conductivity cannot be tuned by only acting on molecular rotations.
It is also interesting to study the other peaks R, TW and X corresponding to internal molecular modes. The presence of the R peak corresponds to a (mixed) vibrational mode that is localized on the NH3 group. Consistently it disappears when the NH3 group is kept rigid (g = 11 and g = 18, blue curve in Fig. 4). Similarly, the TW peak is localized on the CH3 and it disappears when methyl groups are kept rigid (g = 11 and g = 18, orange curve in Fig. 4). More interesting is the case of the rocking mode peak (referred to as X) consisting of relative motion of the NH3 and CH3 groups. This mode involves atomic displacements of the methyl relative to the ammonium group and, consistently, it disappears only when the whole molecule is kept rigid. We argue that this peak is the only one which exhibits some correlation with the low values of κ.
It is surprising that the internal modes above 150 cm−1 such as X could affect thermal conductivity. We can speculate that the X mode acts as a coupling between low-frequency PbI modes (see the dashed spectrum in Fig. 4) and higher-frequency molecular modes. When a rigid molecule scatters the PbI lattice during the finite temperature dynamics, the collision is elastic and the transferred kinetic energy only affects rotations and translations. Conversely, if the molecules are soft, the energy can be transferred to a large number of modes incoherently related to the long-wavelength phonons which carry the heat across the sample, perturbing the transport more efficiently with respect to a stiff case. Since the bulk modulus, density and, in turn, the sound velocity17 of MAPI calculated for rigid and standard molecular are similar we conclude that the observed effect on κ corresponds to the change of the phonon lifetime depending on the molecular DOFs. The MA molecules can thus tune κ and rigid molecules should in principle favor thermal transport, while compounds formed by a larger number of atoms inelastically perturb PbI phonons and effectively lower the thermal conductivity. In some sense, the molecules behave similarly to the rattling atoms in skutterudites and clathrates, which act as strong scattering centers for thermal transport.46 The present results indicate that the internal degrees of freedom of the molecules tend to reduce the thermal conductivity of the inorganic sublattice. We emphasize that such conclusions are obtained considering perfect crystals with ideal stoichiometry. In real samples defects (e.g. methylammonium vacancies) can easily form during synthesis. The removal of some molecules, corresponding to a lower number of molecular degrees of freedom, could in principle favor the thermal transport; however molecular vacancies are necessarily associated with local perturbations of the PbI charge and structure that can act as scattering centers for heat. The role of molecular vacancies in the thermal conductivity requires accordingly a specific analysis that is beyond the present investigation. Besides the relevance for material design, the above analysis shows the importance of understanding the effect of hybrid anharmonic interactions (electrostatic and dispersive) on the thermal properties of hybrid perovskites.
4 Conclusions
By using state-of-the-art atomistic methods we have provided an accurate estimate of the upper limit for the thermal conductivity of MAPI that is consistent with experimental works. The thermal conductivity of MAPI is intrinsically low, due to the low sound velocity of the PbI lattice. Nevertheless, the molecular degrees of freedom provide a route to tune κ by up to a factor two and design hybrid perovskites with controlled thermal conductivity. We find that on soft molecules the rotations have no effect on κ with respect to the internal torsional modes of the molecules. The maximum thermal conductivity is found when the organic cations retain the translational motion only, and we set an overall upper limit as low as ∼2 W m−1 K−1 for the ideal ionic thermal conductivity at room temperature.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Project MIUR-PON Netergit and computational support of CINECA through ISCRA initiative (project VIPER).
References
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe and L. Kronik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 573–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. B. Mitzi, Synthesis, Structure, and Properties of Organic-Inorganic Perovskites and Related Materials, John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,  2007, pp. 1–121 Search PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 CAS .
A. Dualeh, P. Gao, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6160–6164 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He and G. Galli, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5394–5400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mettan, R. Pisoni, P. Matus, A. Pisoni, J. Jaćimović, B. Náfrádi, M. Spina, D. Pavuna, L. Forró and E. Horváth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11506–11510 CAS .
A. Pisoni, J. Jaćimović, O. S. Barišić, M. Spina, R. Gaál, L. Forró and E. Horváth, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2488–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, S. J. Yoon, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat and T. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6394–6401 CAS .
T. Hata, G. Giorgi and K. Yamashita, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2749–2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qian, X. Gu and R. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063902 CrossRef .
M. Wang and S. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5297–5306 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Zhu, S. Liu, M. E. Siemens, S. Gu, J. Zhu, J. Shen, X. Wu, C. Liao, J. Zhang, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 081902 CrossRef .
A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. Saba, C. Caddeo and P. Delugas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 529–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger and L. Kronik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2728–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berry, T. Buonassisi, D. A. Egger, G. Hodes, L. Kronik, Y.-L. Loo, I. Lubomirsky, S. R. Marder, Y. Mastai, J. S. Miller, D. B. Mitzi, Y. Paz, A. M. Rappe, I. Riess, B. Rybtchinski, O. Stafsudd, V. Stevanovic, M. F. Toney, D. Zitoun, A. Kahn, D. Ginley and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5102–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4463–4469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, P. Delugas, M. I. Saba and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4909–4915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, A. R. Srimath Kandada, J. M. Frost, A. J. Barker, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini, S. Marras, G. Lanzani, A. Walsh and A. Petrozza, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Delugas, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045301 CrossRef .
A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17421–17428 CAS .
T. Chen, B. J. Foley, B. Ipek, M. Tyagi, J. R. D. Copley, C. M. Brown, J. J. Choi and S.-H. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31278–31286 RSC .
P. Delugas, C. Caddeo, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2356–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Melis, R. Dettori, S. Vandermeulen and L. Colombo, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2014, 87, 96 CrossRef .
P. K. Schelling, S. R. Phillpot and P. Keblinski, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 144306 CrossRef .
D. P. Sellan, E. S. Landry, J. E. Turney, A. J. H. McGaughey and C. H. Amon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 214305 CrossRef .
Y. He, I. Savic, D. Donadio and G. Galli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16209–16222 RSC .

          D. McQuarrie, Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books, Sausalito,  2000 Search PubMed .
F. Müller-Plathe, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 6082–6085 CrossRef .
S. Plimpton, J. Comput. Phys., 1995, 117, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Melis and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 065901 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mattoni and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 075408 CrossRef .
C. Melis and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 065901 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Berman, Thermal Conduction in Solids, Oxford University Press, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .
J. Callaway, Phys. Rev., 1959, 113, 1046–1051 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rakita, S. R. Cohen, N. K. Kedem, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo and H. Suga, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1990, 51, 1383–1395 CrossRef CAS .
E. Breckenfeld, R. Wilson, J. Karthik, A. R. Damodaran, D. G. Cahill and L. W. Martin, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 331–337 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Fischer, Z. Wang and S. Karato, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1993, 20, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. H. McGaughey and M. Kaviany, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 94303 CrossRef .
J. M. Dickey and A. Paskin, Phys. Rev., 1969, 188, 1407–1418 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beekman, D. T. Morelli and G. S. Nolas, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1182–1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp04246eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:
	(1)

 		 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI at room temperature. Error bars, which are bigger for smaller samples, are calculated as the standard error of the ΔT(t) fit.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top: Snapshots of the simulations showing two different crystallographic phases of MAPI at T = 80 K (left) and T = 300 K (right). Bottom: Normalized lattice thermal conductivity of MAPI 〈κ〉/〈κ300〉 for temperatures between 80 and 300 K. Experimental values are taken from ref. 11.	 

 	Fig. 3  Effect of different molecular motions on the thermal diffusivity , volumetric heat capacity ρCV and conductivity κ at room temperature. The values of  and κ are normalized to those obtained for the unconstrained molecule at T = 300 K, i.e. the values of 〈〉/〈300〉 and 〈κ〉/〈κ300〉 are reported. Top cartoons represent the different dynamics analyzed.	 

 	Fig. 4  Vibrational density of states of MAPI by using different molecular constraints; solid lines are the MA projections, and the dashed line is the PbI projection (that is unchanged for constrained or unconstrained molecules). The corresponding thermal conductivities κ and the number of DOFs g are reported on the left and on the right, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp04246e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
