Hydrovoltaic technology: from mechanism to applications   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00778E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00778E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4902-4927Hydrovoltaic technology: from mechanism to applications†

        
          
            Xiaofan 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Fanrong 
            Lin‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Sunmiao 
            Fang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Tan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Weicun 
            Chu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Rong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Yin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhuhua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yanpeng 
            Liu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Wanlin 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Mechanics and Control of Mechanical Structures, and Institute for Frontier Science, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China. E-mail: wlguo@nuaa.edu.cn; chmliuyp@nuaa.edu.cn; chuwazhang@nuaa.edu.cn
Received 
      25th January 2022
    First published on 31st May 2022AbstractWater is a colossal reservoir of clean energy as it adsorbs thirty-five percent of solar energy reaching the Earth's surface. More than half of the adsorbed energy turns into latent heat for water evaporation, driving the water cycle of the Earth.1 Yet, only very limited energy in the water cycle is harvested by current industrial technologies. The past decade has witnessed the emergence of hydrovoltaic technology, which generates electricity from nanomaterials by direct interaction with water and enables energy harvesting from the water cycle such as from rain, waves, flows, moisture and natural evaporation. Years of efforts have been committed to improve the conversion efficiency of hydrovoltaic devices through chemical synthesis of advanced nanomaterials and innovative design of device structures. Further development of this field, however, still requires in-depth understanding of hydrovoltaic mechanisms and boosting of the electrical outputs for wider applications. Here, we present a tutorial review of different mechanisms of generating electricity from droplets, flows, natural evaporation and ambient moisture by analyzing basic interactions at various water–material interfaces. Key aspects in raising the output power of hydrovoltaic devices are then discussed in terms of material synthesis, structural design, and device optimization. We also provide an outlook on the potential applications of this technology ranging from sensors, power suppliers to multifunctional systems as well as on the scientific and technological challenges in transforming its potential into practical utility. The prospects of this emerging field are considered for future endeavor.
Xiaofan Wang
Mr Xiaofan Wang is currently a PhD candidate in the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. He obtained his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xiangtan University in 2020. His current research focuses on physical properties of low-dimensional nanomaterials, especially those with solid–liquid interfaces.
Fanrong Lin
Dr Fanrong Lin received his PhD from National University of Singapore and then joined the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, in 2021. He is interested in exploring electronic properties in low-dimensional systems and developing functional devices.
Zhuhua Zhang
Dr Zhuhua Zhang obtained his PhD from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2010. He was co-trained at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln from 2009 to 2010, and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Nanoengineering at Rice University from 2012 to 2016. He is a professor and doctoral supervisor of Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. His research interests include theoretical and computational research on the surface/interface interaction of nanomaterials and device principles.
Yanpeng Liu
Dr Yanpeng Liu obtained his PhD from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2016, and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry and Centre for Advanced 2D Materials from 2016 to 2019. He is currently a professor and doctoral supervisor of Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. His research interests include hydrovoltaic technology and microscopic and spectral studies of low dimensional materials.
Wanlin Guo
Dr Wanlin Guo obtained his PhD from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 1991, and was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Science in 2017. He is a Chair Professor at NUAA and the founding director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education. His research focuses on intelligent nano materials and devices, novel conception and technology for efficient energy conversion, molecular physical mechanics for neuronal signaling and molecular biomimics, as well as strength and safety of aircraft and engines.

Key learning points
1. Basic concepts, mechanisms, and significance of green hydrovoltaic technology as well as its typical device configurations.
2. Key factors for harvesting electricity from water waves and flows, dragging and impinging droplets, water evaporation and ambient moisture.
3. Guidelines and design criteria for constructing high-performance hydrovoltaic devices for harvesting four distinct forms of water energy.
4. Current applications of hydrovoltaic devices in sensors, power suppliers and hybrid devices.
5. Challenges and perspectives of hydrovoltaic technology, especially toward addressing the issues of global warming and carbon neutrality.

1. Introduction
Water covers about 71 percent of the Earth's surface and makes up as much as 80 percent of cell weight. As an important medium that stores, converts and transfers energy, water also maintains the energy cycle of the Earth and the temperature balance of any living organism. Water absorbs nearly 35% of the solar energy that reaches the Earth's surface and the dynamically absorbed/released water energy is estimated to be 60 trillion kilowatts (1015 watts) per year, three orders of magnitude higher than the annual global energy consumption.1 Water stores heat in the form of thermal energy, and converts it into kinetic energy and other energy forms by evaporation and condensation. More importantly, water absorbs solar energy in warm zones, condenses and releases it in cold zones via evaporation, convection and other processes, and then flows into the sea via sedimentation and runoff, transferring huge energy all the time through the Earth's water cycle.
The exploitable energy in water mainly includes mechanical energy, latent heat and chemical energy. The mechanical energy of water, most accessible and ubiquitous in daily life, has been pursued throughout the development of human civilization. The history of utilizing hydraulic machinery could be traced back to the ancient Greek period as well as the Spring and Autumn Period in China, when water wheels and mills were invented to convert kinetic energy of bulk water into useful mechanical energy. One and a half centuries ago, hydropower technology was developed to harvest mechanical energy of bulk flow into electricity based on the principles of electrodynamics. However, only very limited mechanical energy of water has been harnessed in this way while a larger volume of evaporation energy remains untapped and even overlooked.
With the rapid progress in nanoscience and nanotechnology, the last decade has witnessed the blossoming of research activities in harvesting energy from water waves, raindrops, moisture, and evaporation by using nanomaterials.2–5 Nanomaterials are sensitive to external stimuli due to quantum confinement effects and surface effects and strongly interact with various forms of water to generate electricity. For example, graphene (Gr) could directly convert mechanical energy of water waves and falling droplets into electrical energy.2,3 Recently, nanostructured materials (e.g. carbon black and graphene oxide) were reported to generate sustainable volt-level voltages by utilizing latent heat of natural evaporation and ambient moisture.4,5 These phenomena of direct electricity generation in nanomaterials based on the interaction with each form of water without any additional inputs have been termed the hydrovoltaic effect.6 The emergence of hydrovoltaic effect and technology has greatly extended the technical capability of harvesting mechanical and latent energies of water until now.
The hydrovoltaic effect simulates the revisiting of the solid–liquid interfaces where the interaction is often considered as structural and mechanical issues but now extended into electronic one for the electricity generation. For example, by moving ionic droplets on graphene, electricity could be generated from electronic motion in graphene drawn by a moving boundary of an electric double layer (EDL) at the graphene–water interface. The electric voltage induced by natural evaporation is more complicated, with contribution from the traditional streaming potential7 as well as other multi-field coupling and interfacial effects. New theories and simulation methods are demanded to describe the coupled molecules, ions, and electrons at the solid–liquid interfaces.
Extensive efforts have been devoted to improving the energy conversion efficiency of hydrovoltaic devices by on-demand optimization of material components, modification of material surfaces and rational design of device configurations.6,8–12 However, a systematic survey of the hydrovoltaic technology from the viewpoints of theoretical mechanisms, material synthesis, device design and application remains absent. Here, we review the current progress in water energy harvesting based on four major domains: bulk water (water with continuous, uniform mass), water droplets, water evaporation and moisture (Fig. 1).2–5 For each domain, starting from the mechanisms of electricity power generation, active host materials of different categories are comprehensively discussed. Approaches for improving the performance of hydrovoltaic devices, including material composition control, device structure optimization and multifunctional device integration, are then summarized (Table S1 in ESI†). Finally, the challenges and prospects of this emerging field will be analyzed to promote future development.
 Fig. 1  The scope of the present review. 
2. Water–solid interfaces
At the interface between chargeable solid materials and ionic water, an electric double layer comprised of a Stern layer and a diffusion layer emerges spontaneously owing to coulomb interactions (Fig. 2a).13 To be specific, the Stern layer consists of polar ions (cations for instance) that are firmly adsorbed onto solid surfaces by surface charges. Driven by coulomb force, anions of the diffusion layer are adsorbed close to the Stern layer and consequently shield the electrostatic potential of the Stern layer. The electrical potential at the shear plane between the Stern layer and the diffusion layer is named Zeta potential. Various phenomena that external forces (e.g. pressure, gravity, electric force) applied to liquid induce relative motion of the diffusion layer with respect to the Stern layer have been coined as the electrokinetic effects.14 According to the forms of driving forces and moving objects, electrokinetic phenomena can be categorized into electroosmosis, electrophoresis, sedimentation potential and streaming potential. Among them, the streaming potential can effectively convert mechanical energy into electrical energy, providing a primitive form of water energy harvesting based on direct solid–liquid interaction.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the electric double layer and streaming potential at solid–liquid interfaces. (a) Electric double layer at the solid–liquid interface. The blue curve is the potential profile near the interface. (b) Schematic of the streaming potential within a nanochannel driven by a pressure difference. The gray curve is the velocity profile of a nano-flow. 
The presence of Coulomb force breaks the equilibrium of anions and cations within diffusion layers, but the solution beyond the diffusion layer returns to bulk phase (Fig. 2a). Confining water within nanoscale channels or pores is an efficient way to bring out the diffusion layers. The EDL will overlap significantly when the channel size becomes comparable to the Debye length of solutions, allowing the confined solution dominated by counterions (Fig. 2b). Hydrodynamic flow driven by a pressure gradient leads to directional motion of counterions, giving rise to a stable potential difference between two ends of the channel. The voltage (streaming potential) generated in this way is determined by the magnitude of the pressure gradient, channel geometry and hydrophilicity.7,15 Dekker et al. measured streaming currents in individual rectangular silica nanochannels as a function of pressure, channel diameter, and salt concentration. According to their experimental results, the streaming potential (Ustr) and current (Istr) could be expressed as (1)For Ustr, εr, η and σ are the relative permittivity, viscosity and specific conductivity of liquid, and ε0, ζ and ΔP are the vacuum permittivity, Zeta potential and pressure difference, respectively.16 For Istr, x, h and w are the midplane-height, height and width of channels, respectively. The charge density ρ(x) and velocity distribution u(x) can be described by nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann theory and Poiseuille law, respectively [u(x) = −ΔP/8Lδ(h2 − 4x2), where L is the length of the channel, ΔP is the pressure difference and δ is the viscosity].7 Interestingly, their experimental results showed that the current increased with decreasing NaCl concentration and became saturated at ∼10−3–10−5 M. To understand the relevance between current and salt concentration, Daiguji et al. theoretically deduced that the solution at low salt limit became unipolar (charges of single polarity) when confined in channels with diameter smaller than the solution's Debye length, so as to balance surface charges.17 Moreover, a higher counterion density tends to promote convective charge transport in a channel with comparable size to the Debye length. Concurrently, the friction between solutions and interior walls would increase and the energy of ion conductance dissipates. When these two competing processes are equilibrated, subsequent calculations estimated that the conversion efficiency of hydrostatic pressure to electricity can reach 12% at optimized solution concentration and channel size.15 Attempts to harvest energy by solutions flowing over nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have been reported.18,19 However, there is wide discrepancy in the results and the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Moreover, it is also challenging to generate electrical energy without a pressure gradient. It is worth noting that attention should be paid to exclude contributions from the interaction between metal electrodes and the liquid.20 If active materials are used as the electrode or functional channels, their contact with water forms a metal–air battery under ambient conditions, which irreversibly converts electrochemical energy into electricity, instead of harvesting energy from water. The contribution from the metal–air battery usually produces misleading results. Specifically, if alligator clips that are usually made from iron are used for the electrical measurements, electrical outputs with more than hundreds of millivolts or few microamps can be easily observed.
3. Bulk water for energy harvesting
Existing massively in oceans, lakes and rivers, bulk water usually contains abundant free ions (ionization) and circulates in a ceaseless way. Up to now, the flow of ionic water along the surfaces of nanomaterials is proven to generate considerable electricity, opening a new energy-harvesting era from bulk water through direct liquid–solid interaction. The rapid development of chemical synthesis methods in tandem with nanofabrication technologies has led to the creation of plenty of nanomaterials (Table S1 in ESI†) for hydrovoltaic devices within the last decade. In this section, the mechanisms of bulk-water-induced electricity devices (BEDs) are first discussed and breakthroughs in material classification, device operation modes and factors for tuning outputs are then intensively reviewed.
3.1 Mechanism
Guided by the electrokinetic effects, massive BEDs, firstly based on graphene and then quickly extending to metal oxides and polymers, have been gradually developed to pump electricity. In the scenario of moving bulk water on solid surfaces at a constant velocity, the motion of the diffusion layer is lagging behind that of the Stern layer at a moving EDL boundary. Therefore, a potential difference is induced between two ends of solid materials. This potential is called waving potential and was firstly observed in graphene when repeatedly drawing it up and down in ionic solutions (Fig. 3a). As graphene is inserted into water, for instance, the asynchronous formation of anion and cation layers leaves the cationic layer near the liquid surface unscreened. These unscreened cations attract more electrons in graphene than the equilibrium state, thus increasing the local hole concentration and driving a current flow in external circuits. For an in-depth understanding, the researchers simplified the EDL into a series of parallel equidistant capacitors C1 ∼ Cn and resistors (Fig. 3b).2 During graphene insertion, the capacitor Cn closest to the liquid surface has a larger plate spacing, leading to a higher potential than that of capacitors below (C1 ∼ Cn−1). In order to return to the equilibrium state, Cn releases excess charges and drives the flowing current that can be written as (2)where q0 is the discharge amount per unit area of Cn, W is the width and v is the movement velocity of the graphene sheet. Then, the overall voltage across the entire graphene sheet is expressed as (3)where x is the distance of each graphene fragment from the water surface, Rsq is the square resistance of the graphene sheet and d is the inserted depth. The mechanism is further formulated by an electric triple layer model that additionally introduced an image charge layer in graphene to the classical EDL. The electric triple layer can well describe the dynamics of coupled ions and electrons at the water/Gr/substrate interface and further quantify the electrical current in graphene.21 Experimentally, this mechanism was confirmed by measuring the potential distribution in graphene during the dynamic process. After fully immersing graphene in liquids (here, C1 = C2 = ⋯ = Cn), the system reached equilibrium state and the voltage vanished. After the ultimate optimization of a 10 × 2 (length × width) cm2 graphene device, the output voltage approached ∼0.1 V (short circuit current, Isc ∼ 11 μA) during inserting the device into 0.6 M NaCl solution at a velocity of 1 m s−1. Furthermore, the authors demonstrated the simple parallel and/or series connections of graphene BEDs capable of achieving higher power requirements. Afterwards, more nanomaterials with hydrophobicity, electronic polarity and surface functionality were adopted to enhance the output power, such as metal oxide layers, two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors and polymers.
 Fig. 3  Typical bulk-water-induced electricity devices. (a) Schematic of the EDL (left panel) for partially inserting a graphene sheet into ionic solution and the corresponding charge redistribution (right panel). (b) Equivalent circuit of a graphene device. (c) Induced voltages vs. various ionic solutions and different velocities with a salt concentration of 0.6 M. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2014]. (d) Schematic of the experimental setup with two graphene-PET sheets vertically immersed in an electrolyte container. (e) Induced voltage by moving a single graphene sheet. (f) Peak power vs. load resistors during inserting and pulling motions. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (g) Equivalent circuit of heterogeneous water flowing over a metal oxide nanolayer. (h) Induced current by alternating high- and low-salinity flow segments on a 10 nm Fe:FeOx nanolayer. (i) Proposed mechanism of energy conversion. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright [2019]. (j) and (k) Schematics of the setup and equivalent circuits of water flowing in a PTFE tube. (l) The output performance of PTFE tubes induced by the volume effect (red line) and the interfacial effect (blue line). Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. 
3.2 Wetting and dewetting
Aside from monolithic graphene-based devices, Fei et al. demonstrated another efficient way to generate electricity by employing two parallel graphene electrodes (Fig. 3d).22 By cyclically inserting and lifting one piece of graphene while fixing the other one as a reference electrode, the voltage across these two graphene sheets reached a peak value of 120 mV (Fig. 3e). The authors deduced that the motion of graphene results in ion fluctuations near solid surfaces. Limited by ion transport, electrons were deficient in screening ion charges that were attached to the moving graphene. After connecting load resistors of ∼0.3–1.0 MΩ, the wetting/dewetting-induced potential (Fig. 3f) was reported to approach ∼1.0 V with a power density of 1.6 mW m−2 at an optimized concentration of aqueous solution and moving speed of the graphene electrode.
3.3 Heterogeneous liquid flow
More recently, constantly flowing water with salinity gradients or periodically flowing water with low/high salinity (heterogeneous liquid flow, Fig. 3g and h) over tens of nm thick iron oxide nanolayers was shown to generate an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 10 mV and a Isc of several μA cm−2.23 The electric output was largely attributed to the multiple metal oxidation states spontaneously formed in the oxidized nanolayers. Once iron nanolayers are exposed to water flow, an asymmetrical EDL forms at the interface between water and the iron layer, and drives electron transfer within the oxide nano-coverlayers, as depicted in Fig. 3i. Note that both iron and nickel nanolayers are semi-transparent and foldable, uniquely allowing for compatible integration with solar cells and other energy devices.
3.4 Tube flow
As the main tool to supply water remotely, the tube possesses abundant interfaces with water and has become a raised platform for harvesting water energy. Recently, a tube-based device (Fig. 3j) was reported by connecting the inner solution with the outer surface of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubes via two electrodes.24 PTFE is an electret material with hydrophobicity, non-wettability and high stability, and it usually contains excess negative charges. According to a capacitor–resistor model (Fig. 3k), charge accumulation at two capacitors C2 (water/PTFE interface) and C3 (water/internal electrode interface) generates a voltage peak up to 904 V (Fig. 3l, I ∼ 509 μA) by flowing a 10 cm-long water column. However, the voltage output is largely reduced when replacing tap water with salt solution, due to the screening effect of excessive ions. This finding underscores the importance of the interaction between ions and materials toward electricity generation enhancement.
3.5 Factors for tuning voltages

3.5.1 Water: species and concentrations of ions. 
According to eqn (2) and (3), the voltage and current are highly influenced by ion's nature, moving velocity and wetting behavior of materials. Among them, the adsorption energy of ions determines the EDL structure and the polarity of waving potential. First-principles calculations of graphene–ion interaction showed that the adsorption energies of Na+ ions are positive while those of Cl− ions are negative (right panel, Fig. 3a). At equilibrium, an EDL forms with a firmly adsorbed Na+ layer (Stern layer) and an attracted Cl− layer (diffusion layer). Regarding the effect of ion radius, the generated voltages (Fig. 3c) in 0.6 M LiCl, NaCl and KCl solutions share the same sign but increase with deceasing radius of cations. The voltage difference is related to the adsorption density, the hydration size of cations and the sensitivity of graphene–ion coupling to moving boundaries. For HCl solution, however, the sign of voltage reverses because of stronger H3O+ adsorption on the graphene sheet. In a follow-up study, the adsorption of ions was shown to be influenced by the surface dipoles of solid substrates and will be discussed in detail in the next section.25 Last, the increase of ion concentration monotonically increases the electricity generation when the solution concentration is below a critical value (e.g. 0.01 M for the NaCl/graphene system). Beyond the critical concentration, the efficiency of electricity generation starts to decline due to the screening effect by excessive ions.


3.5.2 Solid materials: primary attributes. 
As the key factors of BEDs, the surface states and physical properties of hydrovoltaic materials dominate the performance of each specific device. To date, the importance of conductivity, dielectric property and wettability has been successively reflected in several BEDs. In the classic graphene-based EDL model, graphene sheets serve as the charge transport layer to generate and conduct non-equilibrium charges. As such, semi-metallic or semiconducting materials with tunable electrical conductivity (e.g. MoS2) are potential candidates for high-performance BEDs. For insulating electret materials, higher capacity of storing charges may also enable an ultrahigh electrical pulse (Fig. 3j). Last but not least, appropriate wetting behavior of host materials develops a well-defined solid–liquid interface boundary and is conducive to efficient BEDs. In a nutshell, intensive efforts should be devoted to probing the mechanisms and influencing factors for further BED optimization in either a qualitative or a quantitative way.

4. Water droplet for energy harvesting
The universal droplet–solid interfaces are accompanied by assorted motions and are readily accessible for energy generation. By utilizing these dynamic liquid–solid interfaces, intensive materials and devices were developed for converting mechanical energy of water droplets into voltage output. In theory, we have summarized a model of moving EDL boundaries that classified into the moving boundary as L − (dL/dt) for one-dimensional (1D) motions (dragging, sliding, etc.) and as S − (dS/dt) for two-dimensional motions (vibrating, impinging, etc.), respectively. In this section, the prevalent mechanisms for various droplet motions and effective means for maximizing electricity generation by material development and device structure optimization will be systematically discussed, interspersed with key advances in this hot realm.
4.1 Mechanism

Fig. 4a shows one representative device with linear drawing of one ionic droplet along a charged solid surface. The ions in EDL redistribute dynamically and the pseudocapacitors at solid–liquid interfaces are charged/discharged at the front and rear ends of the droplet, with pseudocapacitance denoted as CF and CR, respectively. As a result, an electric potential arises from the charging/discharging process, corresponding to the moving boundary L (dL/dt) mode. This effect was referred to as the drawing potential in the literature which firstly reported this novel phenomenon for the first time.3 For a moving droplet on graphene at a velocity (v), we have dCF/dt = C0Wv and dCR/dt = −C0Wv. Hence, the equivalent current can be written as (4)where φ is the surface potential with reference to the Stern layer, C0 is the pseudocapacitance per unit area, W is the graphene width under droplets and L is the distance traveled by the droplet.
 Fig. 4  Electricity generation based on the moving boundary of the electric double layer. (a) Moving boundary L (dL/dt) model. (b) Moving boundary S (dS/dt) model. 
Recently, Mugele et al. and Guo et al. successively proposed respective models to elucidate the mechanism of electricity generation by impinging droplets onto electret films.26,27 Departing from resistor–capacitor (RC) circuits and droplet dynamics, these two independent groups consistently proposed that the dynamic EDL capacitor here varies as a function of the derivative area of spreading droplets (dS/dt, Fig. 4b). By measuring the surface charge density of solids (σ) and recording the evolution of the droplet area (S), one could quantify the induced current as (5)Eqn (4) and (5) have reached a unified description of different mechanisms of electricity generation at various dynamic droplet–solid interfaces, providing a useful guidance for the design of material systems and device configurations to achieve higher energy harvesting efficiency.
4.2 Moving boundary L of the electric double layer mode (V ∝ dL/dt)
Regarding the drawing potential, polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-supported graphene (Fig. 5a) was first attempted to interact with sliding NaCl droplets. When the NaCl droplet rested on graphene, charges within the droplet were symmetrically distributed and produced no potential difference. Once the droplet started to move, cation accumulation at the front boundary of the water–graphene interface drew electrons from graphene. Meanwhile, electrons at the rear boundary were released to graphene after ion desorption (Fig. 5b and c). The charging at the front end and discharging at the rear end concertedly produced a few millivolts in graphene along the moving direction of the droplet. Importantly, a robust linear dependence of the produced voltage on the droplet velocity (Fig. 5d–f) was observed, in good agreement with eqn (4). Furthermore, increased number of droplets (patterned in parallel or array) and the regulation of ionic concentrations were proven effective to scale up the output voltage.
 Fig. 5  Device development based on moving boundary L (dL/dt) mode. (a) Experimental setup of a graphene/PET device under a moving droplet. The inset shows the contact angles of a moving NaCl droplet (front part ∼91.9° and rear part ∼60.2°). (b) Schematic of potential difference between the front and rear parts of a moving droplet. (c) Equivalent circuit of a graphene-based device. (d–f) Induced voltages vs. velocities for 0.6 M NaCl droplets in graphene/PET devices. Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2014]. (g) and (h) Experimental setup and electrical performance of the Gr/PVDF/SiO2/Si device with weak or strong polarization. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2018]. (i) Induced voltage of MoS2-based devices supported by different substrates. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2021]. 
Due to the 2D nature of graphene, the interaction of graphene with indispensable substrates can influence graphene's properties and thereby the device performance. For instance, the polarity effects of polymer substrates (PMMA < PET < PVDF) on EDLs and output voltages were investigated by sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy. In a Gr/polymer device, the authors identified graphene as a carrier transporting layer and the surface dipoles of polymer substrates could attract more ions to the front of the solid–droplet interface. Among these polymers, the PMMA substrate exhibited the lowest polarity since its surface is terminated by –CO2CH3 chains. After transferring graphene onto a PMMA film, the device outputted a negligible voltage. By replacing the PMMA with a PET layer that possessed certain polar-oriented convex carbonyl groups, the Gr/PET device exhibited an enhanced signal of ∼100 mV. Furthermore, by laying graphene on the pre-polarized (Vg = 30 V) polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) layer with enhanced dipole strength, a voltage of ∼500 mV can be generated upon impinging of NaCl droplets (Fig. 5g and h), five times that of Gr/PET devices.25 A recent study systematically investigated the charge exchange between ion-containing water and graphene-covered substrates including polymers, SiO2 and transition metal dichalcogenides by first-principles calculations. It was found that the synergistic effect of water containing Na+ ions and the electronegativity of substrates determined the charge parity of graphene, along with a significantly enhanced charge transfer onto graphene. Electron accumulation always occurred on graphene in the presence of Na+ solutions, which facilitated the formation of an EDL with Na+ ions. When a salt droplet moved on the graphene covered substrate, the induced currents and voltages depended on the charge density differences between the dry and wet regions of graphene.28
Inspired by the success of graphene, 2D semiconductors have been successively attempted to harvest electricity from moving ionic droplets. For instance, single-layer MoS2 on a polyethylene naphthalene (PEN) substrate was found to generate a voltage of >5 V (Fig. 5i) from the motion of 1 M NaCl droplets. The peak voltage is higher than those of MoS2/SiO2/Si and MoS2/sapphire devices as well as graphene-based devices on arbitrary substrates. Assisted by current measurements and Raman spectra, the outstanding performance of the MoS2/PEN device was ascribed to the large resistance (3009 MΩ square−1) of MoS2 and improved Na+ adsorption on its surface.29 Therefore, how to regulate the surface polarity, charge density and functional groups of functional materials and substrates underneath is the key issue for developing devices with improved performance. In the wake of accelerated perfection of material composition, rational design of device structure gradually opens an additional way to further improve the efficiency of energy conversion. Voltages of dozens of volts have been achieved in devices with optimal structures, but a wide space remains open in the pursuit of more efficient devices under the dL/dt mode.30
4.3 Moving boundary S of the electric double layer mode (V ∝ dS/dt)
The last decade has also witnessed the progress in electricity generation from water droplets in the frame of moving boundary S mode. In 2011, Krupenkin and Taylor first achieved electricity generation (∼103 W m−2) from vibration or shear motion of liquid metal droplets (Fig. 6a),31 but an input electrical power is needed in this process to provide a constant bias voltage between droplets and electrodes. Later, an advanced device was constructed by vertically sandwiching a water droplet between two indium tin oxide (ITO) glasses with the upper one pre-coated with a PTFE film (Fig. 6b).32 By modulating the spacing between two ITO plates with a constant frequency, the charges redistribute within the droplets and the best electrical power approached ∼3 mW m−2 without an extra electrical input.
 Fig. 6  The advances of the energy harvesting devices based on the moving boundary S (dS/dt) mode. (a) Schematics of liquid metal droplets between vibrating plates (left panel) and sliding plates (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2011]. (b) Device illustration of sandwiching a water droplet by two ITO plates. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2013]. (c) Device configuration of impinging tap water droplets onto the PTFE surface and the optical image showing four device units. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (d) Relationship between output current and droplet area derivative after one droplet impinging the electrode directly. The blue region is the time interval of droplet–electrode contacting. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright [2020]. (e) The relationship between output voltage and droplet surface area derivative when the droplet is contacting the electrode during expansion. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. 
The impinging of water droplets on solid surfaces usually occurs in the temporal scale of milliseconds (ms). Many researchers have attempted to harvest the transient mechanical energy. Recently, Wang et al. reported an unprecedented electrical power output with a Voc of ∼143.5 V, a Isc of ∼270.0 μA, and a peak power density of ∼50.1 W m−2 by impinging tap water droplets onto a PTFE film between a thin top Al electrode and a bottom ITO electrode, as illustrated in Fig. 6c.33 Here, once the spreading droplet contacted the top Al electrode, electricity was instantaneously generated between the Al and ITO electrodes. Meanwhile, the electricity outputs were almost the same for Al, Au and Cu electrodes, suggesting that the chemical interaction between the liquid and the electrode could be ignored. Meticulous observation with high-speed cameras confirmed that the induced voltages and currents are proportional to dS/dt (Fig. 6d and e), as described by eqn (5).26,27 The dynamics of droplet spreading, shrinking, and bouncing on nanomaterials’ surfaces can be tuned by controlling the surface roughness. For materials with a nanostructured surface that is formed either naturally or artificially, air trapped in nanosized dents, trenches and pleats on the surface can reduce the effective contact area between nanomaterials and droplets and then enhance the surface hydrophobicity. Every droplet bounces off immediately even under high frequency impinging with little residuals, leading to an improved energy harvesting efficiency to a new performance record.34 In short, the aforementioned progress heralds a flourishing age of electricity harvesting from moving water droplets, assisted by means of improved material synthesis and functionalization, device design and interconnection.
5. Water evaporation for energy harvesting
Water evaporation, a spontaneous and unintermittent process of phase transition from liquid into gas by absorbing ambient heat, plays an important role in maintaining the Earth's water cycle. Looking back at the energy-harvesting history from water, harvesting energy from water evaporation has received limited attention due to the absence of explicit working principles and reliable devices. In 2017, the research group led by Guo and Zhou first broke the ice by developing a carbon-based device, which triggered broad research interests in the following years.4Fig. 7a presents one typical device that is partially inserted into DI water. The device is made of a porous carbon black (CB) film with two multi-walled carbon nanotube electrodes deposited at two ends, respectively. Under ambient conditions, water was absorbed by the bottom part of the device and flowed upward within the CB film by capillary force. A natural evaporation process at the exposed CB part enables a long-term capillary flow. In this case, a CB-based device (Fig. 7d) could generate a continuous voltage up to ∼1.0 V (Isc ∼ 150 nA) between two electrodes. During this process, nothing but heat from the ambient environment was consumed without any carbon emission, claiming its nature of negative-heat technology. Accompanied by this phenomenal work, several key factors that significantly influence the electricity generation efficiency are outlined to guide further research: (1) the existence of numerous nanochannels in the CB film is the footstone for generating capillary force and forming solid/liquid interfaces (Fig. 7b and c). (2) The surface hydrophilicity maintains a wet solid surface during long-term operation. For CB films, high-temperature annealing and oxygen plasma treatment were adopted to reduce the water contact angle from 143.25° to 10.15° (Fig. 7e) by enriching C–OH, C–O–C, CO and OC–OH functional groups. (3) Environmental factors that modulate the capillary flow and evaporation rate of water can also regulate device performance, including temperature, wind speed and humidity. (4) The increase of ion concentration reduces both the Debye length and the overlapping of EDLs within nanochannels. The enhanced ionic transport causes power dissipation and reduced voltages (Fig. 7f). Moreover, recent studies proved that Zeta potential is an additional factor for evaluating nanomaterials for electricity generation.35 In the following section, the mechanism of evaporation-based electricity devices (EEDs) and the corresponding regulation means will be discussed in detail.
 Fig. 7  One typical evaporation-based electricity device and several influencing factors. (a) Schematic of an experimental setup for harvesting energy from water evaporation. (b) Typical HR-TEM image of CB. Scale bar, 5 nm. (c) Evaporation-induced water flow in the CB film. (d) The continuous Voc of a typical device under ambient conditions for 163 hours (humidity fluctuated between 53.5% and 66%, temperature varied between 21.7 °C and 23.6 °C). (e) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of the pristine (black line) and annealing/plasma-treated (red line) CB film. The inset images show the water contact angles of the pristine (bottom right panel) and treated CB (top left panel) film. (f) The induced voltage of the CB-based device versus NaCl concentration. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017]. 
5.1 Mechanism
For efficient EEDs, the dimension of nanochannels should be on the same scale as the Debye length of solution to maintain a strengthened EDL overlapping through capillary action.36 To explain the electricity generation (Voc of ∼1 V) in full carbon-based EEDs, an experiment (Fig. 8a) was implemented by sealing a CB sheet and two electrodes in a beaker by a polyethylene (PE) film while the upper CB sheet was exposed to air. The humidity in the sealed beaker approached 100% under steady state conditions and the evaporation ceased. In this case, the measured output voltage (0.16 V) arises entirely from the water flow through nanochannels. The water flow was pumped by evaporation process of the CB portion in the open area. Accelerated capillary flow and evaporation by external wind (speed ∼0.32 m s−1) raised the voltage from 0.16 to 0.27 V (Fig. 8b), implying that the evaporation-induced electricity is related to the traditional streaming potential. The adopted MWCNT electrodes are relatively inert, so possible attributions of redox reactions might be neglected. Here, there exist two unclear issues: (1) how the counter-ion motion along nanochannels transforms into electronic motion within the materials. (2) Whether additional processes such as chemical reactions and charge transfer at solution/material interfaces contribute to electricity generation.
 Fig. 8  Mechanism exploration of the evaporation-induced electricity device. (a) Experimental setup for measuring potentials entirely induced from the capillary flow. (b) Corresponding voltage of the typical setup as a function of wind velocity. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017]. (c) Simulated electron transfers between graphene (pristine or functionalized ones) and a single water molecule. Positive and negative values stand for electron accumulation and depletion within graphene, respectively. (d) Simulated electron transfer between graphene (without/with a carboxyl group) and water molecules/clusters. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2021]. 
Recently, it was reported that evaporation of ethanol from the CB film could generate sustainable electricity as well, but the contribution of the streaming potential was proved negligible. Instead, the direct interaction between the polar ethanol molecules and the carbon layer was demonstrated to be the key for electricity generation. In more detail, when the carboxyl functionalized graphene was adsorbed with ethanol molecules, there was electron transfer from the molecules to the graphene, drawing holes in the graphene. As the ethanol molecules evaporated from the interface, the transferred electrons returned to molecules, thus raising local hole concentration and electrostatic potential in the carbon layer. In addition, other polar molecules, such as methanol and acetonitrile, could generate voltages comparable to those induced by ethanol.37 Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 8c) also found that oxygen-containing functional groups promoted the charge transfer (0.024 e) from water molecules to graphene.38 Moreover, water molecules within CB nanochannels tend to be protonated as more stable (H2O)3H+ clusters, additionally drawing 0.128 e per cluster from the graphene film (Fig. 8d). Therefore, the water–material charge transfer may be an additional ‘X’ factor to differentiate the output voltage from the streaming potential.
5.2 Material classification and morphology
In light of the existing reports, nanochannels, wettability, Zeta potential and surface functional groups of solid materials are of great importance for efficient EEDs. With increasing investments from worldwide research groups, plenty of candidate materials (Table S1 in ESI†) have emerged to substitute the conventional carbon black (CB) film. In Fig. 9, we summarize and categorize the host materials into six classes: carbon black, graphene oxide, metal oxides, metal derivatives, cellulose and composite materials, according to material morphology and electrical output characteristics.
 Fig. 9  Material classification of evaporation-induced electricity generation. (a) Schematic of the CB sheet and its SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017]. (b) Device sketch and SEM image of GO sponges. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (c) The EED based on ZnO nanowires sealed in PVC and a SEM image of nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. (d) Illustration of water flowing within the AlOOH/UIO-66 flakes and its SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2020]. (e) Schematic of a wood-based EED and the corresponding SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]. (f) Schematic and TEM image of the CB/TiO2 nanowire composite material. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019]. 
First, high porosity, facile fabrication and low cost enable CB to be one prevalent material for EEDs.4,39,40 Initially, CB films were locally grown by placing quartz plates/masks over alcohol flame. Fig. 9a shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of one CB sheet with a thickness of ∼70 μm. Disordered nanochannels with a specific surface area of 167 m2 g−1 were formed by nanoparticle aggregation with an average diameter of 20 nm. As a trade-off of the ultra-high surface area, the large resistance (a few megohm) of pristine CB sheets limited the current of around a few hundred nanoamperes, emphasizing the necessity of synthesizing nanomaterials with large specific surface area and excellent electrical conductivity. Motivated by this, three-dimensional (3D) graphene oxide (GO) was then attempted and the as-fabricated EEDs exhibited an improved current to the microamps level and a voltage ranging from 0.2 V to 0.6 V. Fig. 9b shows the SEM image of cross-linked 3D GO sponges prepared by freeze-drying the GO suspension. Profiting from appropriate microscopic channels, mechanical strength and conductivity, a single freestanding device made of 3D GO sponges could produce a Voc of 0.63 V for >15 hours and an output power density up to 1.74 μW cm−2.41 In a recent report, the chemical etching method was employed for GO dispersion to increase the concentration of carboxylic acid groups and nanopores, which facilitated high mass transport and an evaporation rate of 290 g m−2 h−1. In a single device based on the holey GO nanosheet, the electrical output reached ∼0.44 V, contributed mostly by the streaming potential.42
Metal oxides are recognized to be charged in aqueous suspensions, benefiting from the amphoteric dissociation of surface hydroxyl groups or adsorption of hydroxocomplexes derived from hydrolysis products.43 The high Zeta potentials make metal oxides, especially in the form of nanoparticles and nanowires, promising for EEDs to capture ambient heat through natural evaporation. For example, Al2O3 nanoparticles (diameter of 200–300 nm) were randomly distributed onto hydrophilic PET films by blade coating. Based on this, a device could produce a Voc of ∼2.5 V and a Isc of ∼0.8 μA for 10 days without any attenuation.35 In addition to interconnected nanochannels, the high Zeta potential (40.3 mV) of Al2O3 was also verified to be one attribute for the enhanced outputs. In general, the voltage positively associated with the polarities and strengths of Zeta potential. This positive relevance applied well to the majority of metal oxides. But deviation appeared for CuO, SnO2 and Fe3O4 nanoparticles, probably originating from extra difference in morphology, channel size and wettability. In addition to disordered nanoparticles, well-ordered structures also show their potential in electricity generation. For instance, the bottom half of an aligned ZnO nanowire array (Fig. 9c, diameter ∼60 to 120 nm) was sealed by PVC to uniformly fix the spacing between NWs at ∼180 nm.44 During the wetting and evaporation processes of an ethanol droplet on the ZnO surface, a Voc of 133 mV for 150 s was generated, showcasing the feasibility of ordered nanochannels for advanced EEDs.
Metal derivatives usually form layered structures during nucleation and crystallization processes, serving as extra disordered materials promising for efficient EEDs. For instance, the Ni–Al layered double hydroxide (Ni–Al LDH) film was developed by layer-by-layer stacking of hexagonal flakes with an average diameter of ∼200 nm, a thickness of ∼20 nm, and an interlayer width of <50 nm. Compared to the Debye length (∼900 nm) of DI water, the smaller interlayer width ensured overlapped EDLs on opposite sides of Ni–Al LDH flakes. A single device fabricated from Ni–Al LDH on a PET substrate produced a power density of 16.1 μW cm−3 (Voc of ∼0.7 V, Isc of ∼1.3 μA).45 Along this direction, one of the promising strategies is the precise tunability of crystal structures and surface properties at the molecular levels, such as burgeoning metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Fig. 9d shows the representative SEM image of AlOOH/UIO-66 MOFs. By adding UIO-66 nanoparticles onto 2D AlOOH nanoflakes, the laminar morphology of AlOOH was retained but the corresponding surface potential increased from 25.9 mV to 90.6 mV. Finally, the improved AlOOH/UIO-66 devices provided electrical outputs with a Voc of ∼1.63 V and a Isc of ∼500 nA, allowing driving a digital calculator by employing a 3 × 3 device array.46
The settlement of environmental and ecological issues imperatively requires functional materials to be biocompatible and degradable after device failure. Hence, natural products (cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, etc.) that contain abundant functional groups and nanochannels were adopted to construct EEDs. As a representative, natural beech wood (Fig. 9e, SEM image) possesses abundant moderate channels with an average size of ∼10 μm and ions were generated from the hydrolysis of hydroxyl groups. After further optimizing the Zeta potential and hydrophilicity through esterification of hydroxyl groups with citric acid, beech wood based devices could uninterruptedly generate a Voc of 300 mV and a Isc of 10 μA.47 In addition to natural products, artificial wearable textiles consisting of intertwined woven fibers were also successfully demonstrated to produce a Voc of ∼700 mV and a Isc of ∼3 μA.48
To pursue higher performances of EEDs, composite materials in which dominant materials are functionalized by additives might be customized and demonstrate enormous capacity.46,49–52 Composite materials generally retain the morphological characteristics of dominant materials while the additives endow new properties or functional surfaces for enhancing electrical outputs. For intuitive clarifications, several efficient EEDs based on composite materials would be overviewed. First, TiO2 nanowire was additively mixed with traditional CB particles, owing to its excess surface electrons, high hydrophilicity and large specific surface area. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) image (Fig. 9f) clearly shows that the average diameters of TiO2 nanowires and evenly distributed CB particles are 130 and 50 nm, respectively. The embedded CB particles induced stronger hydrophilicity and enhanced electrical outputs to a Voc of ∼1.6 V and a Isc of ∼250 nA.50 Moreover, the semiconductor characteristics of TiO2 nanowires endowed the system with additional photoelectric characteristics. Second, a PEDOT:PSS/GO composite membrane was developed by dispensing PEDOT:PSS into GO solution and then freeze-drying. The microscopic structure of the GO membrane remained disordered and cross-linked under SEM characterization. The PEDOT:PSS endowed the GO-based devices with additional thermoelectric properties. As a result, a Voc of 2.13 V was realized at a temperature difference of 110 K and a relative humidity (RH) of ∼ 73%.49 Similarly, a graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel film and a MoS2/SiO2 composite film were also adopted.51,52 These devices pave the way for realizing efficient EEDs using composite materials.
5.3 Device optimization
The boosting diversity of host materials put forward new demands for device optimization, in order to synergistically elevate generation efficiency to a higher level. Since the first attempt in 2017, an increased number of EEDs with various device optimization strategies have been brought under focus lamp in succession. In this section, we review all the latest research in optimizing the structures and modifying the interfaces for EEDs, followed by brief discussions of environmental enhancements.

5.3.1 Structure optimization. 
Nanopores and nanochannels are indispensable for the overlapped EDLs and the eventual outputs of EEDs. Nanowire materials (such as silicon nanowire arrays, SiNWs) were patterned into regular arrays to form desired directional channels, increasing the charged surface/volume ratio. By modulating water flow within SiNWs (Fig. 10a and b), the output power density was enhanced to 6 μW cm−2.53 Moreover, the shape of nanomaterials (appropriate inverted trapezoidal) was also verified to promote the electrical output of EEDs.54 Toward practical industrialization, the durability of EEDs should be guaranteed with top superiority against the complicated service environment with intense capillary forces and other chronic external forces. In order to enhance the durability, there were two proposed means: adding adhesives (the mixture of terpinol, ethyl cellulose and ethanol) and supporting nanomaterials by a polymer skeleton or flexible substrates.35,39,45,55Fig. 10c shows a self-supporting and flexible (bendable up to 120°) PVA/FCB/DS based EED.55 More specifically, functionalized carbon black was incorporated onto a 3D sponge supporter (Fig. 10d), followed by coating a stabilizing layer of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA). Meanwhile, one piece of a superabsorbent hydrogel in a PET/PDMS enclosure was assembled to supply water for a PVA/FCB/3DS-based device, maintaining a sustainable Voc of ∼0.7 V and a Isc of ∼63 μA for more than 150 hours. Note that water was trapped in the hydrogel rather than existing in a free state, making this EED promising for portable power suppliers outdoors.
 Fig. 10  Device optimization based on the evaporation process. (a) Schematic of an EED based on SiNWs. (b) SEM image of SiNWs. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2020]. (c) and (d) Schematic of a portable hydrovoltaic device using the hydrogel as a water source (c) and SEM image of the PVA/FCB/3DS film (d). Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (e) Schematic of a device integrating two hybrid films with opposite charges. (f) Proposed chemical modifications of carbon nanoparticles by different polymers. (g) Zeta potentials and the corresponding Voc outputs of various polymeric modifiers. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (h) Schematic of a device that simultaneously generates water vapor and electricity from seawater enhanced by solar irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (i) Experimental setup that converts asymmetric light irradiation into water evaporation gradients by a Mxene membrane. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (j) Energy level diagrams of a photo-to-electricity device without and with light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019]. 


5.3.2 Interface optimization. 
Wettability and Zeta potential of host nanomaterials are of great significance for EEDs and therefore several methods of modifying surface functional groups were exploited.40,56 The functional groups can be divided into two types: (1) the functional groups are inherent to nanomaterials as a component for material synthesis, defined as intrinsic-functional-groups. (2) The groups are intentionally introduced by artificial doping or modification, defined as tunable-functional-groups. Taking the CB film as an example, the ionization of intrinsic-functional-groups in aqueous solution negatively charges the surface of CB nanoparticles and promotes electricity generation. In the pursuit of higher power outputs, subsequent tunable-functional-group modifications are required to cooperate with intrinsic-functional-groups to increase the Zeta potential to a higher level. Fig. 10e shows a hybrid device consisting of two CB-glass fiber films that were modified by two polymers with opposing electron affinities, respectively.56 The extra introduction of negative charges by the anionic polymer doubled the Voc from ∼1.5 V to ∼3 V (red part of Fig. 10e and f). Conversely, the amino-group-rich polymer (0.5 wt% polyethyleneimine) endows the film with positive charges, reversing Voc from +1 V to −3.2 V under the same measurement conditions (blue part of Fig. 10e and f). After surveying four polymeric modifiers, the Voc of functionalized EEDs (Fig. 10g) was found to be proportional to Zeta potential. However, the electrical output of this hybrid device saturated at a Voc of ∼5 V and a Isc of 1.5 μA, because the excessive cross-linked chains partially blocked the nanochannels at higher concentrations of the polymeric modifiers.


5.3.3 Environmental enhancements. 
The evaporation rate of water highly relies on the surrounding environmental factors (temperature, wind rate, humidity, etc.) and feasible evaporation accelerations would lead to higher electrical outputs of particular EED devices. The solar energy absorbed by Earth's atmosphere, oceans and land masses is approximately 3850000 exajoules per year. The majority of solar energy absorbed by water molecules exists in the form of vibration and heat that accelerate water evaporation. Therefore, rational integrations of water energy withsolar energy in EEDs were attempted to relief energy crisis and the tension supply of fossil fuels.57–59Fig. 10h illustrates one solar-thermal-electrical device with an asymmetrical structure. Floating CNTs/Xerox paper was the core component and was partially encapsulated by a hydrophobic PDMS layer to form a water gradient.57 When irradiated by sunlight, the Voc and Isc of the CNTs/paper device were increased to ∼0.6 V and ∼22 μA from ∼0.47 V and ∼15 μA (in the dark), respectively. The solar-enhanced water evaporation was confirmed by the extra mass loss rate (Δ = 2 kg m−2 h−1) upon increasing irradiation from 0.5 Sun to 2.5 Sun. In another report, inhomogeneous irradiation introduced an evaporation gradient and promoted water flow in a photothermal Ti3C2TX Mxene film. Under partial irradiation, a floating Ti3C2TX film produced a temperature gradient and then generated asymmetric water evaporation because of photothermal effects (Fig. 10i).58 In this way, an Isc of ∼12 μA was detected for a single device with a size of 0.5 cm × 2.0 cm. Moreover, electricity generation induced by asymmetrical irradiation was also obtained in a sandwiched CNT/separator/CNT device (V ∼ 0.17 V) by locally irradiating the CNT film from one side.59 The mechanism was proposed as follows (Fig. 10j): when exposed to illumination, electrons were excited into the conduction bands of CNTs and upshifted the Fermi level. Afterwards, the Schottky barrier formed at the interface of water and CNTs. As a result, holes transferred from the valence band of CNT sheets to the CNT/water interface and reacted with OH− anions to form OH radicals. Meanwhile, electrons transferred to the unirradiated CNT sheet and reduced the OH radicals, creating a current flow in an external circuit.
The mechanical energy of wind has stimulated a plethora of novel materials and technologies for energy generation, such as windmills and wind turbine generators. In nature, wind also promotes the evaporation of water. We here reiterate the importance of wind for EEDs and advocate further efforts to generate more electricity from water energy in coordination with wind power.

5.4 Electrode effect
For the vast majority of EEDs, at least one electrode is directly immersed in water. So the effect of possible electrochemistry from the electrodes on electricity generation should be considered. In 2011, Dhiman et al. reported a voltage of ∼30 mV by flowing hydrochloric acid solution through 2D graphene films with two immersed metal electrodes.60 Later, the voltage was found to vanish after isolating the metal electrodes from solution, revealing the correlation of electricity to exposed electrodes rather than graphene films.20 Therefore, particular attention should be paid to distinguish whether the electricity arises from chemical reactions at the electrode/solution interface or from the interaction between solution and nanomaterial. Recently, Li et al. conducted a systematic investigation of active metal (Fe) electrodes in composite (air-laid paper, PVA and CB particles) EEDs.61Fig. 11a shows the oxidation reaction of 2Fe − 4e− → 2Fe2+ at the bottom electrode below the salt solution level and the reduction reaction of O2 + 4e− + H2O → 4OH− at the top electrode above the solution level. By increasing the NaCl concentration from 0.5 mM to 6 M, the output power was enhanced by two orders of magnitude (from ∼1 μW to ∼200 μW) due to the additional redox reactions of iron electrodes (Fig. 11b). For the traditional EEDs with inert Pt, Au or CNT electrodes, a voltage of ∼0.15 V was generated in 2 M NaCl solution. In contrast, due to the existence of redox reactions, the device using active Fe electrodes could generate a Voc of up to ∼1.04 V under the same measurement conditions (Fig. 11c). Meanwhile, Fig. 11d shows that the prominent role of redox reactions is universal for several salt solutions. To distinguish the presence of chemical reactions, one feasible solution is to analyze the electrical responses to environmental factors. The electrochemistry induced electricity is generally unaffected by varying atmospheric circumstances. But the evaporation-induced electricity is sensitive to the fluctuations of humidity, temperature and wind rate.4 With these considerations in mind, inert electrodes were suggested to study the mechanisms of EEDs while short-term concurrency with active electrodes may produce more electricity in a cooperative way.
 Fig. 11  Electrode effects in evaporation-induced electricity devices. (a) Working process of a PVA/OCB/AP device with Fe electrodes in ion solutions. (b) Voc and Isc variations as a function of NaCl concentration. (c) The Voc of EED devices with Fe, Cu, Pt, Au, and CNT electrodes in 2 M NaCl solutions. (d) The Voc of the devices with Fe electrodes in DI water, seawater, and MgCl2, MgSO4, NaCl, and NaOH solutions (2 M). Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. 
6. Moisture for energy harvesting
Moisture, the mixture of water vapor and air, is one basic form of water. The 15 trillion liters of moisture on the earth stimulate plenty of investigations on moisture-induced electricity devices (MEDs), to harvest electricity from green and sustainable moisture energy. In a typical MED, asymmetric functional groups or device structures are the premises to introduce concentration gradients of water molecules and dissociated ions during moisture absorption. Then, directional diffusion of the ions produces an electrical signal. In the last decade, extensive research on MEDs has been conducted via material filtration and structural optimization.
6.1 Mechanism
The key actuation of MEDs is the graded distribution of chemical groups or moisture through host materials. One of the efficient approaches is constructing gradients of hydrophilic oxygen-containing groups or deliquescent salts (Fig. 12a). After absorbing moisture, the dissociation of functional groups produces a concentration gradient of mobile ions and then a current is generated in an external circuit. Alternatively, asymmetrical electrodes or device architectures (Fig. 12b, a pair of asymmetrical electrodes with different moisture permeability) are also found to be capable of spontaneously inducing a moisture gradient and electricity generation. To sum up, the ion gradient and diffusion could be manipulated by the gradient of oxygen-containing groups and moisture. However, the activation, reduction and recovery of the ion gradient extremely rely on relative humidity variation (ΔRH) of the environment. Typically, at a rapid alternating ΔRH of ∼30%, an inchoate GO-based MED produced a pulsed Voc of ∼30 mV with a period within 3 s.5 Recently, advanced MEDs based on graphene oxide and protein nanowires successfully extended the electrical duration to 100 hours (RH = 85%) and 2 months (RH = 50%), respectively.62,63 The long durability of moisture-induced electricity devices was ascribed to the self-maintained moisture difference and ion transfer induced by the appropriate hygroscopicity of the nanomaterial. Weaker hygroscopicity may result in insufficient ionic dissociation while stronger one ends up in rapid moisture saturation. Experimentally, material hygroscopicity could be modulated by engineering material composition and device structures. Note that the output currents tend to decay over time due to the irreversibility of the ion transfer process.62 However, the underlying mechanisms for this durability enhancement remain debated, awaiting for further exploration. To conclude, the operations of MEDs are complicated and are accompanied by possible processes of moisture absorption, phase transition, ion diffusion, water stream (streaming potential) and evaporation, which call for further experimental and theoretical studies.
 Fig. 12  Proposed mechanisms, materials and device optimization of moisture-induced electricity devices. Schematics of the oxygen functional group gradient mode (a) and the spontaneous moisture gradient mode (b). Material classification: (c) GO film. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (d) Polydopamine films. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2019]. (e) Biological materials with nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. (f) Other inorganic materials including carbon black (top panel) and TiO2 nanowires (bottom panel). Reproduced from ref. 76 and 87 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016 and 2018, respectively. Device structure classification: (g) GO with oxygen containing groups sandwiched by two electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2018]. (h) A protein membrane-based MED that is capable of spontaneously forming a self-sustaining moisture gradient. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (i) GO-based devices in planar structure. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2018]. (j) A heterogeneous bilayer MED based on a polyelectrolyte PSSA/PDDA film. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021]. 
6.2 Material composition
Graphene and graphene oxide, owing to their tunable property and massive production capability, are the first batch of materials for developing MEDs (Fig. 12c).5,62,64 For example, Qu et al. reported a pre-annealed GO film with an oxygen-containing group gradient, in which the O/C atomic ratio was ∼0.52 and ∼0.22 for bottom and top regions, respectively. By sandwiching the ∼2.8 μm-thick GO film between two gold electrodes with asymmetrical sizes, the device generated impressive pulsed electric signals (∼20 mV and ∼5 μA cm−2) in an environment with an alternating ΔRH of ∼30%.5 For ion kinetics, the authors deduced an ion diffusion mode: on exposing the device to moisture with increased humidity, solvation effects weaken the O–H bonds of oxygen-containing groups (–OH and –COOH), and free H+ ions released from the group-rich region. Conversely, the humidity reduction accelerated the recombination of H+ and negatively charged groups (–O− and –COO−), and then reduced the ion gradient and the potential difference.5
Stimulated by the GO-based devices, many hygroscopic polymers with abundant hydrophilic groups were synthesized and applied for efficient MEDs.65–70 For instance, polypyrene (PPy) was widely used for its easy synthesis, mature doping methods and high environmental stability.65,66 After introducing an anion gradient via electrolyte-electric annealing, a 3D porous PPy based MED exhibited a Voc of ∼60 mV and a power density of ∼6.9 mW m−2 under the conditions with ΔRH = 85%.65 Following this trend, poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid), polyvinyl alcohol, polyacrylic acid and other polymer analogues were successively used for fabricating MEDs.67,68 Furthermore, Fig. 12d shows a biocompatible and flexible polydopamine device that utilized spiral electrodes to create an asymmetrical distribution of hydroxyl groups.69
Complying with the criteria of constructing gradients of functional groups and moisture, several MEDs focusing on biological materials were reported and exhibited outstanding flexibility, biocompatibility and degradability.71–75 For example, nanofiber-based MEDs consisting of cellulose, chitin, silk fibroin and amyloid (in Fig. 12e) could produce a Voc of ∼100 mV and a Isc of ∼30 nA.71 Recently, a thin gelatin film and a common printing paper were demonstrated to generate ∼5.5 μW cm−2 and ∼2.5 nW cm−2 electricity from ambient humidity, respectively.72,73
Moreover, the advances of modification methods endow host materials with additional hygroscopicity, enabling efficient electricity generation in high humidity environments. By partially plasma-cleaning porous carbon films (Fig. 12f, top panel), the contents of oxygen-containing functional groups, the hydrophilicity and the hygroscopic ability in treated regions were significantly increased. At RH > 95%, this asymmetrically modified carbon MED was able to produce a voltage of ∼68 mV for 8 hours.76 Likewise, deliquescent chemicals such as CaCl2 and LiCl were also reported to enhance the hygroscopic abilities of host nanomaterials. For example, the modification of deliquescent chemicals showed excellent universality for various material systems including stalk/CB with LiCl solution and HCl/PVA electrolyte gel with CaCl2 solution.77,78
6.3 Device structure
In this section, the importance and feasible means of optimizing the device structure toward efficient MEDs will be addressed in detail. In light of device dimension and electrode configuration, the device structures of MEDs could be divided into sandwiched, planar, and heterogeneous ones. Fig. 12g shows a representative sandwiched structure of silver/pristine GO/gradient-reduced GO/gold. This device exhibited two advantages: (1) the pristine GO layer at the bottom with a higher O/C ratio offered abundant movable ions that might diffuse into the gradient-GO layer. (2) The Schottky junction at the GO/silver interface rectified the ion flow direction by blocking the electron transferring from silver to GO. As a result, a high performance of GO-based MEDs with a Voc of ∼1.5 V and a Ioc of ∼98–136 nA was recorded under the condition of ΔRH ∼ 80%.79 Afterwards, the sandwiched structures were applied to protein nanowires. As shown in Fig. 12h, a protein film is sandwiched between the bottom and top gold electrodes, with areas of 25 and 1 mm2, respectively.63 Under a constant RH of ∼50%, a moisture gradient was spontaneously formed and then the protein MED continuously sustained a voltage of ∼0.5 V with a current density of 17 μA cm−2 for more than two months. The moisture gradient in the protein film created mobile protons with a gradient. The surrounding environment provided a large reservoir to preserve the long-term gradient and then a continuous electrical output was produced.
Massive adoption of rigid metal electrodes in vertical alignment limits the flexibility of MEDs and the exposed area of hygroscopic materials. To address these issues, flexible and planar rGO electrodes were in situ reduced from GO films by a 458 nm laser (Fig. 12i).80 The desirable gradient of oxygen-containing groups was readily introduced by applying a bias to GO in high-humidity environments. Apart from outstanding power density, the planar structure and full carbon basis made the device flexible and potential for further integration toward wearable electronics. Similarly, GO fibers were also partially reduced by a laser to construct a quasi-1D rGO/g-GO/rGO MED that generated a Voc of ∼355 mV and a current density of ∼1.06 mA cm−2.81
Very recently, a heterogeneous moisture-induced electricity device based on bilayer polyelectrolyte films (Fig. 12j) was developed by combining a poly-cation film (PDDA, polydiallyl dimethyl ammonium chloride) and a poly-anion film [PSSA: PSS and PVA hybrid film]. The bilayer films spontaneously absorb water from damp air, resulting in the dissociation of Cl− ions in the PDDA layer and H+ ions in the PSSA layer. The fluctuations of ion concentration in different layers drive Cl− and H+ ions diffusing in opposite directions. Consequently, a voltage of ∼0.95 V for ∼258 hours under ambient conditions is achieved. More importantly, simple integration of heterogeneous moisture-induced units by a sequential stacking strategy was demonstrated to deliver an overall voltage larger than 1000 V.82
7. Applications
The advance of diverse water-based electricity devices (WEDs) has given rise to applications such as power suppliers and sensors, as illustrated in Fig. 13.67,72,83,84 In addition, the majority of WEDs exhibit outstanding compatibility and could serve as exceptional components for hybrid devices, such as the combination with information storage (Fig. 13c) and human health monitoring (Fig. 13d).81,85 In this section, we have reviewed these applications of WEDs in detail.
 Fig. 13  Typical applications of water-induced electricity devices. Power suppliers as (a) all-weather-solar cells (reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2016]) and (b) self-power suppliers to light LEDs (reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019]). Hybrid devices integrated with (c) information storage (reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2017]) and (d) perspiration analysis (reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]). (e) Breathing sensors (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]) and (f) wearable sensors (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]). 
7.1 Sensors
Sensors that respond to external stimuli by electrical readouts promote the advance of healthy human lives. A person's health can be reflected by the exhale and inhale processes and monitoring the periodic humidity variation of breathing air plays an increasing important role in medical care.5,69,71,74Fig. 14a shows a moisture-induced breathing sensor that adopted a graphene oxide film. When exposed to calm breathing from an adult, the breathing sensor generated a voltage of ∼18 mV with a sensitivity of ∼0.6 mV per RH (%).5 The frequency and magnitude of voltage signals reflect the breath states straightforwardly. Based on this framework, an improved version of a wearable sensing system was developed by employing porous polydopamine layers, which could realize a voltage of 150–200 mV and a sensitivity of ∼4.7 mV per RH (%).69 Moreover, bio-nanofibers including cellulose, chitin, silk fibroin and amyloid were adopted into breathing sensors (Fig. 14b) integrated with a commercial mask and the devices exhibited a sensitivity of ∼1.5 mV per RH (%). The sensors are completely degradable in the environment, suitable for sustainable development.71
 Fig. 14  Representative sensors based on WEDs. Breathing sensors: (a) A device based on a GO film (left panel) and its responses to human breathing (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2015]. (b) A breathing sensor made of biological nanofibers and its output performance (left panel). These biological nanofibers are completely degradable (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. Touching sensors: (c) A gelatin film-based humidity sensor matrix (left panel) and the corresponding outputs vs. humidity of human fingers (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]. (d) A non-touching sensor that can sense the proximity of a finger (left panel) and employed as an artificial skin for a robot (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2018]. Environmental sensors: (e) a flexible humidity sensor based on a TiO2 nanowire network (left panel) and its performance in responding to different objects (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2019]. (f) Asymmetric ionic aerogel of biologic nanofibers for harvesting electricity from moisture. It is able to quantitatively monitor the transpiration of plants. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. 
Human fingers are usually surrounded by relatively humid air originating from the evaporation of sweat and water. Therefore, the approaching or touching of WEDs by human fingers straightforwardly creates a relative humidity fluctuation near WEDs and then a current variation in the WEDs. As such, WEDs are growing to be outstanding touching sensors with humidity-sensitivity and flexibility.72,80,86Fig. 14c shows a humidity sensor matrix by sandwiching gelatin protein films between copper and aluminum electrodes. Under a humidity variation induced by an approaching fingertip, the sensing process was realized by mapping the humidity indices at different matrix locations.72 Similarly, a sensor based on TiO2 nanowire networks was reported to respond to the moisture from human fingers with an enhanced voltage of ∼150 mV.86 More importantly, the voltages of TiO2 devices fluctuated under finger pressing, promising for multifunctional detection of pressure and moisture simultaneously. Even without direct contact, flexible in-plane WEDs (Fig. 14d, left) were demonstrated to generate currents with densities up to 10, 8 and 4.5 mA cm−2 for finger–device distances of 1, 2 and 3 mm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 14d (right panel), a robot armed with this WED skin became intelligent to trace the approaching fingers.80
The sensitivity to humidity, temperature, light intensity and absorbable molecules enables WEDs to be adopted as environmental sensors. With a functionalized TiO2 nanowire network wrapped around a finger, the flexible device displayed fast response and relaxation times (4.5 s and 2.8 s) in the humidity range of 20–90% (Fig. 14e).87 Furthermore, ethanol sensors based on TiO2 nanowires showed a broad detection range (50–1000 ppm) to ethanol, providing a credible substitute of low-power consumable breath alcohol testers.84 In addition, the output voltage of WEDs was further proven to be a function of ambient light intensity, temperature and humidity. As shown in Fig. 14f, a device made of asymmetric ion aerogels readily quantified the transpiration strength of green plants in ever-changing environments during a whole day.75
7.2 Power suppliers
Due to the low cost, flexibility and high-power density, WEDs are easily integrated or hybridized to facilitate humans’ daily lives. In 2013, a primitive WED consisting of an array of water droplets was reported to light up three LEDs (Fig. 15a) by inputting vertical vibrations.32 In 2020, a well-developed WED achieved a Voc pulse of 100–200 V by one spreading droplet instantly contacting an electrode on polymer films, successfully lighting up 100 LEDs.33 Recently, a power management circuit (Fig. 15b) successfully transformed the discrete electricity pulse into constant output. After pre-charging by droplet-induced electricity, the integrated device could provide a steady power for a smartphone.88
 Fig. 15  Typical power suppliers based on liquid–solid, liquid–solid–vapor and moisture–solid interfaces. Liquid–solid interface: (a) a device of press-release mode to power LEDs. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2013]. (b) Photograph of a droplet-based device in combination with the power-management circuit to charge a smart phone. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2022]. Liquid–solid–vapor interface: (c) schematic of five CB-based devices for electrodeposition. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2017]. (d) A self-charging hybrid power unit consisting of a CB-based device and a flexible nano-patterned supercapacitor. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Science China Press, copyright [2019]. (e) A self-powered memristor system driven by CB-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. Moisture–solid interfaces: (f) optical images of a mask armed with a self-powered moisture monitor. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (g) Planar GO-based integrated devices driving a calculator. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2018]. (h) A lamp bulb (10 W) lighted by heterogeneous moisture-induced electricity devices. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021]. 
The continuous and stable electricity generation driven by water evaporation has great potential for practical application in power suppliers. For example, five CB-based devices connected in series generated a Voc of 1.45 V and a Isc of 2.85 μA, which could drive the electrodeposition of silver structures at a micrometer scale (Fig. 15c).39 Similarly, He et al. fabricated a self-charging hybrid power unit (Fig. 15d) that integrated a CB-based device with a flexible PPy-based supercapacitor, revealing new possibilities in powering randomly distributed electronic devices.89 Recently, a self-powered and resistance-switching device was successfully integrated with carbon-based WEDs and carbon memristors.90 The power supplier composed of three carbon-based devices in series sufficiently drove a memristor by supplying a voltage of 2.75–3.05 V. Fig. 15e shows the fast switching behavior of memristors by regulating current directions of the WEDs. Both on-site information storage and long-term communications were realized with no extra energy input. Moreover, by integrating three WEDs made by printing carbon slurry on a Al2O3 plate, the electrical outputs sensitively detected the quality and composition of local air and simultaneously powered wireless transmitters to communicate the sensing information.91
The WEDs focused on human's breath and moisture also promote several new types of power suppliers without an external water source. For instance, when exposed to an adult's breathing for 30 min, the power supplier within a medical mask charged a capacitor up to 0.9 V.67 In another report, two capacitors were charged to 1.4 V by a conductive polymer nanowire WED in a mask and then successfully powered a temperature and humidity sensor to monitor breathing conditions in real time (Fig. 15f).92 Moreover, a planar and integrated WED array (Fig. 15g, five units in series) fabricated by printing GO onto a moisture insulation substrate could drive a liquid-crystal calculator.93 Last year, the electrical output of integrated WEDs was able to charge commercial capacitors up to several dozen volts that successfully powered a 10 W lamp bulb (Fig. 15h),82 opening the new possibility of WEDs for the green-economy era.
7.3 Hybrid devices
The inherent properties of heat absorptivity, nonvolatility and sensitivity make WEDs suitable for multifunctional hybrid devices. First, clean water harvesting and electricity generation can be achieved simultaneously for certain hybrid WEDs. Fig. 16a presents a representative hybrid device fabricated by coating wood chip with a CB/PVA film. The CB slurries with 1 wt% and 5 wt% PVA were coated onto the front and back wood sides for steam and electricity generation, respectively. Utilizing this asymmetric structure, the authors achieved a water evaporation rate of 1.93 kg m−2 h−1 and a power output of ∼0.6 μW in salt solutions.94 With intense further efforts, clean water made from these elaborate devices may alleviate the water crisis of insufficient capacity, industrial contamination and the overburdened consumption.
 Fig. 16  Applications of water-induced electricity devices as hybrid devices. (a) A device that can generate clean water and electricity simultaneously. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2021]. (b) A moisture-powered memristor with interfacial oxygen migration for power-free reading of multiple memory states. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (c) A wearable and battery-free perspiration analysis site based on ZnO nanoarrays. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (d) Schematic of a device showing kinetic photovoltage generation across the silicon strip in water under beam scanning. (e) Photography of a silicon array capped with a hydrogel to sense the trace of a moving insect. (f) Recorded voltage curves from each silicon strip while the insect moves under light illumination of one-sun intensity. Each colored curve corresponds to the silicon strip marked by the spot of same color. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021]. 
The prevalent materials for WEDs are typically semi-metallic or semiconducting and the corresponding electrical outputs usually show outstanding environmental sensitivity. These advantages enable WEDs to integrate with conventional semiconductors for information storage.81,95,96Fig. 16b shows a hydrodynamic memristor made of W/WOX/OAC (oxygen-plasma-treated amorphous-carbon)/Pt arrays.95 The reversible oxygen migration at the WOX/OAC interface modulated the resistance state while the oxygen gradient in the OAC membrane dictated electricity from moisture. The periodic voltage signals from different functional units in response to regular breathing were binarily coded to realize information storage.
Human sweat contains much physiological information. Therefore, systematic analysis of sweat would definitely offer an nondestructive and rapid means to monitor health conditions. Fig. 16c displays a wearable and medical hybrid WED based on lactate oxidase modified ZnO nanowire arrays on a flexible PDMS substrate.85 The magnitude of electric potential varied monotonically with the lactic acid concentration within sweat. Therefore, the lactic acid information could be clearly reflected by the evolution of electric potential, opening the possibility of onsite medical tracing and monitoring.
In 2020, optical stimulation at the silicon/water interface (Fig. 16d) was clarified to induce a notable in-plane photoelectric voltage.97 Under a light beam, the photo-generated electrons accumulated at the silicon surface due to the band-offset-induced electric field near the silicon surface. Meanwhile, the surface potential variation would drive the transfer of H3O+ cations to the silicon surface in order to screen the increased electrons. Therefore, the electrical output was dominated by the light beam and consequently the shadow trajectory of a moving cubaris could be flexibly tracked by the voltage variations (Fig. 16e and f). Here, the combination of the silicon/water interface with light irradiation is anticipated to enable diverse hybrid applications in power suppliers and sensors.
8. Conclusion and perspectives
We have presented a comprehensive review of harvesting mechanical energy and latent heat of water, including bulk-water waves and flows, dragging and impinging droplets, water evaporation and ambient moisture. Starting from introducing the developmental history of hydrovoltaic technology, we systematically discussed in-depth mechanisms, proper material synthesis and device optimization for harvesting electricity from different forms of water. The diverse materials for fabricating efficient water-based electricity devices are summarized by categorizing them into carbon-based nanomaterials, semiconductors, metal-based nanomaterials, polymers, cellulose and composites. In combination with rational device design, the increasing electricity generation was overviewed from single and multiple water forms. Finally, we briefed the representative applications of water-based electricity devices as sensors, power suppliers and hybrid devices.
With the joint efforts from multidisciplinary fields including chemistry, physics, materials and energy, the studies of hydrovoltaic technology come to a better position than ever to boost multifunctional material innovation and scalable integrated/hybrid devices. Fig. 17 summarizes the development tendency of materials and electrical outputs for three prevalent categories of hydrovoltaic devices to date. For relative-motion-induced electricity (Fig. 17a), systems of graphene-based materials, semiconductors and polymers have been attempted in succession. To date, the best electrical pulse output (Voc ∼ 904 V, Isc ∼ 509 μA) is achieved in polymer-based devices.24 As shown in Fig. 17b, carbon-based materials, metal derivatives, biological materials and composite materials are the dominant systems for evaporation-induced electricity generation. The voltage and current here are continuous. The best Voc reached ∼5 V in the hybrid CB-based device and the highest Isc of ∼30 μA was achieved in the GO-based device.41,56 For moisture-induced electricity (Fig. 17c), graphene-based devices occupy the leading position in voltage (Voc) and current density of pulsed outputs. However, the outstanding power densities of continuous outputs reach ∼5.52 μW cm−2 and ∼8.5 μW cm−2 in heterogeneous polymer and protein devices, respectively.63,82 Until now, significant progress in harvesting energy from water has been achieved, including the exploration of new mechanisms, the enhancement of performance and the diversification of applications. However, to our best knowledge, there still exist severe obstacles that urgently need to be addressed before widespread applications of hydrovoltaic devices:
 Fig. 17  The output merits for different WEDs and the corresponding performance comparisons. (The hollow symbols represent pulsed outputs and the solid symbols represent continuous outputs. The serial number of each data point corresponds to the references in the ESI.†) (a) Reported electricity generation from the relative motion at the solid–liquid interface. (b) Performance summary of water evaporation induced electricity. (c) Overview of the moisture-induced electricity generation. 
(1) The majority of proposed mechanisms remain phenomenological. There is a lack of in situ characterization technologies to reveal the underlying charge generation and transfer process of water–solid interactions at the atomic level, especially for evaporation-based and moisture-based electricity generation.
(2) The rules for material synthesis and device design require further efforts to be standardized. In other words, developing nanostructured materials with tunable properties (wettability, surface polarity, charge density, etc.) in an elegant way and establishing a reliable rule between material properties and output power are unexplored but promising directions.
(3) For various forms of water, further advances in conversion efficiency require intense efforts to be devoted into not only novel material synthesis and architecture optimization, but also integrated devices that could synergistically function together to enhance the overall power output.
(4) From the perspective of practical applications, most of the afore-reported devices are prototypical for laboratory-based demonstration and practical WEDs operating in unsteady and harsh environments are still scarce. Moreover, cost-effectiveness, convenient fabrication and eco-friendly nature are the other ultimate pursuits while maintaining efficient power outputs of WEDs without any decay.
(5) In the landscape of assorted hydrovoltaic devices till now, mechanical energy and latent heat of water are two mainstreams of power sources while the chemical reactions caused at the liquid–solid interface should be identified. In specified scenarios, the chemical energy in water may contribute to the overall electricity, so special care should be taken, especially in mechanism studies. Furthermore, satisfying options in exploiting chemical energy collaboratively may push hydrovoltaic devices one step closer toward practical commercialization.
Since entering the 21st century, human beings have been encountering tremendous burden in mitigating climate changes that arise from increased emissions of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, CO2) from human activities. To overcome this challenge, carbon neutrality, which refers to a balance between emitting carbon and absorbing carbon, is put forward and many countries are committed to develop sustainable solutions in line with this vision. Herein, harvesting energy from water is free of CO2 emission and even conducive to adsorb heat from the ambient environment (especially for the evaporation process), articulated with the hope to be a possible route toward the carbon neutral target. In conclusion, with further efforts, we are facing more opportunities than ever to derive innovative solutions to tackle these grand challenges by hydrovoltaic technology.
Author contributions
W. L. Guo, Y. P. Liu and Z. H. Zhang conceived and supervised this review. Y. P. Liu, Z. H. Zhang and X. F. Wang prepared the outline of this review. X. F. Wang, F. R. Lin and Y. P. Liu drafted the Abstract, Introduction, Water–solid interfaces, Conclusion and perspectives with the advice from W. L. Guo. Z. H. Zhang rewrote the Abstract and Introduction and carefully revised the whole manuscript. X. F. Wang, F. R. Lin and J. Yin co-wrote Section 3. X. F. Wang and Y. P. Liu co-wrote Sections 4–6 with valuable inputs from X. Wang, S. M. Fang and J. Tan, respectively. X. F. Wang, J. Yin and Y. P. Liu co-wrote Section 7. X. F. Wang, F. R. Lin, R. Rong and Y. P. Liu prepared the graphic design and compiled the tables. All the authors contributed to the editing and agreed to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFA0705400), the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 1210040808), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20210312, BK20190018), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (NJ2022002, NS2020008, NC2018001, NP2019301, NJ2019002), the Program for Innovative Talents and Entrepreneur in Jiangsu, Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of Mechanics and Control of Mechanical Structures (MCMS-I-0419G02) and a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
References
G. L. Stephens, J. Li, M. Wild, C. A. Clayson, N. Loeb, S. Kato, T. L'Ecuyer, P. W. Stackhouse, M. Lebsock and T. Andrews, Nat. Geosci., 2012, 5, 691–696 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. Chen and W. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Li, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 378–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4351–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yin, Y. Xu, W. Fei, M. Xue, Q. Wang, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1109–1119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. van der Heyden, D. Stein and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 116104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Liu, G. Zhang, A. L. Cottrill, Y. Kunai, A. Kaplan, P. Liu, V. B. Koman and M. S. Strano, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802212 CrossRef .
J. Yin, J. Zhou, S. Fang and W. Guo, Joule, 2020, 4, 1852–1855 CrossRef .
D. Shen, W. W. Duley, P. Peng, M. Xiao, J. Feng, L. Liu, G. Zou and Y. N. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003722 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, Y. Song, R. X. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 8, 2000670 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 193–209 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Stern, Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie und angewandte physikalische Chemie, 1924, 30, 508 CAS .
S. Wall, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 15, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
F. Heyden, D. J. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. J.-N. L. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2232–2237 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Booth, Nature, 1948, 161, 83–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daiguji, P. Yang, A. J. Szeri and A. J.-N. L. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, A. K. Sood and N. Kumar, Science, 2003, 299, 1042–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Cohen, Science, 2003, 300, 1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1736–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhang and W. Guo, Sci. China: Mater., 2021, 64, 2242–2250 CAS .
W. Fei, C. Shen, S. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Li and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 656–660 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Boamah, E. H. Lozier, J. Kim, P. E. Ohno, C. E. Walker, T. F. Miller, 3rd and F. M. Geiger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 16210–16215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, H. Gu, H. Zheng, S. Ye, L. Kang, C. Huang, K. Lu, W. Xu, Q. Miao, Z. Wang, J. Zhang and X. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104748 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Su, Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, M. B. Raschke, M. Ren, Y. Chen, J. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Ron Shen and C. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13746–13752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, N. Mendel, D. van den Ende, G. Zhou and F. Mugele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 125, 078301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Fang, J. Tan, T. Hu, W. Chu, J. Yin, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105558 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cai, Y. Guo and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105939 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aji, R. Nishi, H. Ago and Y. Ohno, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, E. Ma and T. Ma, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 17145 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Krupenkin and J. A. Taylor, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 448 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Moon, J. Jeong, D. Lee and H. K. Pak, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1487 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Deng, M. Leung, Z. Yang, R. X. Xu, Z. L. Wang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Wang, Nature, 2020, 578, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Song, W. Xu, W. Li, Y. Jin, S. Gao, S. Yang, C. Wu, S. Wang and Z. Wang, EcoMat, 2021, 3, e12116 CAS .
C. Shao, B. Ji, T. Xu, J. Gao, X. Gao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30927–30935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, W. Chu, L. Li and W. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 8959–8964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, J. Li, Y. Xu, C. Shen and W. Guo, Joule, 2022, 6, 690–701 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, B. Tian, S. Fang, W. Guo and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4580–4587 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, K. Liu, J. Li, G. Xue, Q. Chen, L. Huang, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700551 CrossRef .
J. Li, K. Liu, G. Xue, T. Ding, P. Yang, Q. Chen, Y. Shen, S. Li, G. Feng, A. Shen, M. Xu and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Z. Duan, X. Qi, Y. Xu, L. Li, W. Ma, H. Zhang, C. Liu and W. Yao, Carbon, 2019, 148, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, D. J. Kang, W. Eom, H. Lee and T. H. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132759 CrossRef CAS .
G. Brown, V. E. Henrich, W. H. Casey, D. L. Clark and J. M.-J. C. Zachara, Chem. Rev., 1999, 30, 77 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Li, D. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Chen, N. Ou, P. Wang, D. Wang, X. Wang and J. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, e1804146 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, P. Li, J. Qu, X. Lu, Y. Xie, F. Gao, Y. Li, M. Gang, Q. Feng, H. Liang, X. Xia, C. Li, S. Xu and J. Bian, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, Q. He, P. Yin, H. Cheng, X. Cui, Q. Yun and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003720 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Tan, J. Guo, Z. Sun and X. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11232–11239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Das, V. M. Pedireddi, A. Bandopadhyay, P. Saha and S. Chakraborty, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7191–7200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qi, T. Miao, C. Chi, G. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Du, M. An, W.-G. Ma and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105096 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ji, N. Chen, C. Shao, Q. Liu, J. Gao, T. Xu, H. Cheng and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6766–6772 RSC .
W. Wang, W. Gong, Y. Wang, G. Li, W. Lu, Y. You and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5588–5596 RSC .
S. G. Yoon, H. Jin, W. H. Lee, J. Han, Y. H. Cho and Y. S. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105522 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, Y. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Li, H. Xu, Y. Tan, Y. Li, T. Song and B. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2020, 59, 10619–10625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. Fang, L. Li and W. Guo, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2021, 64, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Hao, X. Yang, F. Sun, Y. Bai, H. Ding, S. Wang and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Liu, T. Ding, P. Yang, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 797–802 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. He, F. Ni, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Gu, J. Xia, S.-W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lao, S. Wu, J. Gao, A. Dong, G. Li and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, S. He, X. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Wen, F. Ni, M. Jia, B. Zhang, X. Sun, P. Chen and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1996–2001 RSC .
P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Gao, M. Hao, X. Yang, S. Feng, L. Li, S. Wang, Z. Xiong, F. Sun, Y. Li, Y. Bai, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105970 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Yang, H. Yao, C. Li and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1848–1856 RSC .
X. Liu, H. Gao, J. E. Ward, X. Liu, B. Yin, T. Fu, J. Chen, D. R. Lovley and J. Yao, Nature, 2020, 578, 550–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Liang, H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 912–916 RSC .
J. Xue, F. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. Luo, L. Dai and L. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8784–8792 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, B. Ji, N. Chen, Y. Liang, Q. Han and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 297–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, X. Ding, Y. Huang, C. Shao, L. Song, X. Gao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 972–978 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, C. Yang, D. Wang, C. Li and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104238 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Chen, M. Hao, S. Wang, F. Sun, Z. Zhao and T. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5544–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Long, P. He, Z. Shao, Z. Li, H. Kim, A. M. Yao, Y. Peng, R. Xu, C. H. Ahn, S. W. Lee, J. Zhong and L. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zong, W. Yang, X. Li, J. You, X. Wu, Z. Li and C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901798 CrossRef .
S. Mandal, S. Roy, A. Mandal, T. Ghoshal, G. Das, A. Singh and D. K. Goswami, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 780–789 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, T. Xu, C. Shao, Y. Han, B. Lu, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20574–20578 RSC .
Q. Lyu, B. Peng, Z. Xie, S. Du, L. Zhang and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57373–57381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, X. Li, X. Han, W. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Ma, M. Li and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104610 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, P. Yang, S. Li, J. Li, T. Ding, G. Xue, Q. Chen, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8003–8007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Li, Q. Zhou, M. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Lv, R. Xiao and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104922 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, C. Liu and S. Fan, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, G. Shi and L. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4166 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, Y. Huang, L. Qu, Q. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, F. Zhao, Z. Cheng, Q. Zhou, H. Shao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Sun, T. He, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Li, D. Xie, P. Yang, Y. Zhang and L. Qu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 811–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, H. Zhang, B. He and P. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shen, Y. Xiao, G. Zou, L. Liu, A. Wu, M. Xiao, J. Feng, Z. Hui, W. W. Duley and Y. N. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 5, 1900819 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, H. Guan, T. Zhong, T. Zhao, L. Xing and X. Xue, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 2–11 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shen, M. Xiao, G. Zou, L. Liu, W. W. Duley and Y. N. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705925 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shen, M. Xiao, Y. Xiao, G. Zou, L. Hu, B. Zhao, L. Liu, W. W. Duley and Y. N. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14249–14255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Ning, L. Li, X. Wang, B. Li, J. Li, J. Yin and W. Guo, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106705 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, T. Zhao, H. Guan, T. Zhong, H. Zeng, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and X. Xue, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1409–1417 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Z. Ren, L. Wang, J. Wu, B. Sun, A. Zhou, G. Zhang, S. Zheng, S. Duan and Q. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103793 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhong, H. Guan, Y. Dai, H. He, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and X. Xue, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Q. Liu, C. Liu, G. Zhang, J. Jing, C. Shao, Y. Han and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, F. Zhao, Z. Cheng, Y. Deng, Y. Xiao, H. Cheng, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Shao and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1730–1735 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Gui, W. Zhou, X. Tian, Z. Liu, J. Wang, J. Liu, L. Yang, P. Zhang, W. Huang, J. Tu and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, Z. Wang, H. Xu, W. Ding, X. Zhao, Y. Lin and Y. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104628 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Qu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Long, Z. Hu, J. Niu, T. Xu, M. Yu, B. Li, X. Li, J. Zhou, Y. Liu, C. Wang, L. Shen, W. Guo and J. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cs00778e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Xiaofan Wang
	Mr Xiaofan Wang is currently a PhD candidate in the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. He obtained his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xiangtan University in 2020. His current research focuses on physical properties of low-dimensional nanomaterials, especially those with solid–liquid interfaces.

Fanrong Lin
	Dr Fanrong Lin received his PhD from National University of Singapore and then joined the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, in 2021. He is interested in exploring electronic properties in low-dimensional systems and developing functional devices.

Zhuhua Zhang
	Dr Zhuhua Zhang obtained his PhD from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2010. He was co-trained at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln from 2009 to 2010, and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Nanoengineering at Rice University from 2012 to 2016. He is a professor and doctoral supervisor of Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. His research interests include theoretical and computational research on the surface/interface interaction of nanomaterials and device principles.

Yanpeng Liu
	Dr Yanpeng Liu obtained his PhD from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2016, and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry and Centre for Advanced 2D Materials from 2016 to 2019. He is currently a professor and doctoral supervisor of Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education in NUAA. His research interests include hydrovoltaic technology and microscopic and spectral studies of low dimensional materials.

Wanlin Guo
	Dr Wanlin Guo obtained his PhD from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 1991, and was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Science in 2017. He is a Chair Professor at NUAA and the founding director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Nano Materials and Devices of Ministry of Education. His research focuses on intelligent nano materials and devices, novel conception and technology for efficient energy conversion, molecular physical mechanics for neuronal signaling and molecular biomimics, as well as strength and safety of aircraft and engines.

Key learning points
1. Basic concepts, mechanisms, and significance of green hydrovoltaic technology as well as its typical device configurations.
2. Key factors for harvesting electricity from water waves and flows, dragging and impinging droplets, water evaporation and ambient moisture.
3. Guidelines and design criteria for constructing high-performance hydrovoltaic devices for harvesting four distinct forms of water energy.
4. Current applications of hydrovoltaic devices in sensors, power suppliers and hybrid devices.
5. Challenges and perspectives of hydrovoltaic technology, especially toward addressing the issues of global warming and carbon neutrality.


 	Fig. 1  The scope of the present review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the electric double layer and streaming potential at solid–liquid interfaces. (a) Electric double layer at the solid–liquid interface. The blue curve is the potential profile near the interface. (b) Schematic of the streaming potential within a nanochannel driven by a pressure difference. The gray curve is the velocity profile of a nano-flow.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Typical bulk-water-induced electricity devices. (a) Schematic of the EDL (left panel) for partially inserting a graphene sheet into ionic solution and the corresponding charge redistribution (right panel). (b) Equivalent circuit of a graphene device. (c) Induced voltages vs. various ionic solutions and different velocities with a salt concentration of 0.6 M. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2014]. (d) Schematic of the experimental setup with two graphene-PET sheets vertically immersed in an electrolyte container. (e) Induced voltage by moving a single graphene sheet. (f) Peak power vs. load resistors during inserting and pulling motions. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (g) Equivalent circuit of heterogeneous water flowing over a metal oxide nanolayer. (h) Induced current by alternating high- and low-salinity flow segments on a 10 nm Fe:FeOx nanolayer. (i) Proposed mechanism of energy conversion. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright [2019]. (j) and (k) Schematics of the setup and equivalent circuits of water flowing in a PTFE tube. (l) The output performance of PTFE tubes induced by the volume effect (red line) and the interfacial effect (blue line). Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020].	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Electricity generation based on the moving boundary of the electric double layer. (a) Moving boundary L (dL/dt) model. (b) Moving boundary S (dS/dt) model.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  Device development based on moving boundary L (dL/dt) mode. (a) Experimental setup of a graphene/PET device under a moving droplet. The inset shows the contact angles of a moving NaCl droplet (front part ∼91.9° and rear part ∼60.2°). (b) Schematic of potential difference between the front and rear parts of a moving droplet. (c) Equivalent circuit of a graphene-based device. (d–f) Induced voltages vs. velocities for 0.6 M NaCl droplets in graphene/PET devices. Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2014]. (g) and (h) Experimental setup and electrical performance of the Gr/PVDF/SiO2/Si device with weak or strong polarization. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2018]. (i) Induced voltage of MoS2-based devices supported by different substrates. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 6  The advances of the energy harvesting devices based on the moving boundary S (dS/dt) mode. (a) Schematics of liquid metal droplets between vibrating plates (left panel) and sliding plates (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2011]. (b) Device illustration of sandwiching a water droplet by two ITO plates. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2013]. (c) Device configuration of impinging tap water droplets onto the PTFE surface and the optical image showing four device units. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (d) Relationship between output current and droplet area derivative after one droplet impinging the electrode directly. The blue region is the time interval of droplet–electrode contacting. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright [2020]. (e) The relationship between output voltage and droplet surface area derivative when the droplet is contacting the electrode during expansion. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 7  One typical evaporation-based electricity device and several influencing factors. (a) Schematic of an experimental setup for harvesting energy from water evaporation. (b) Typical HR-TEM image of CB. Scale bar, 5 nm. (c) Evaporation-induced water flow in the CB film. (d) The continuous Voc of a typical device under ambient conditions for 163 hours (humidity fluctuated between 53.5% and 66%, temperature varied between 21.7 °C and 23.6 °C). (e) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of the pristine (black line) and annealing/plasma-treated (red line) CB film. The inset images show the water contact angles of the pristine (bottom right panel) and treated CB (top left panel) film. (f) The induced voltage of the CB-based device versus NaCl concentration. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017].	 

 	Fig. 8  Mechanism exploration of the evaporation-induced electricity device. (a) Experimental setup for measuring potentials entirely induced from the capillary flow. (b) Corresponding voltage of the typical setup as a function of wind velocity. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017]. (c) Simulated electron transfers between graphene (pristine or functionalized ones) and a single water molecule. Positive and negative values stand for electron accumulation and depletion within graphene, respectively. (d) Simulated electron transfer between graphene (without/with a carboxyl group) and water molecules/clusters. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 9  Material classification of evaporation-induced electricity generation. (a) Schematic of the CB sheet and its SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2017]. (b) Device sketch and SEM image of GO sponges. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (c) The EED based on ZnO nanowires sealed in PVC and a SEM image of nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. (d) Illustration of water flowing within the AlOOH/UIO-66 flakes and its SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2020]. (e) Schematic of a wood-based EED and the corresponding SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]. (f) Schematic and TEM image of the CB/TiO2 nanowire composite material. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 10  Device optimization based on the evaporation process. (a) Schematic of an EED based on SiNWs. (b) SEM image of SiNWs. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2020]. (c) and (d) Schematic of a portable hydrovoltaic device using the hydrogel as a water source (c) and SEM image of the PVA/FCB/3DS film (d). Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (e) Schematic of a device integrating two hybrid films with opposite charges. (f) Proposed chemical modifications of carbon nanoparticles by different polymers. (g) Zeta potentials and the corresponding Voc outputs of various polymeric modifiers. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (h) Schematic of a device that simultaneously generates water vapor and electricity from seawater enhanced by solar irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (i) Experimental setup that converts asymmetric light irradiation into water evaporation gradients by a Mxene membrane. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (j) Energy level diagrams of a photo-to-electricity device without and with light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrode effects in evaporation-induced electricity devices. (a) Working process of a PVA/OCB/AP device with Fe electrodes in ion solutions. (b) Voc and Isc variations as a function of NaCl concentration. (c) The Voc of EED devices with Fe, Cu, Pt, Au, and CNT electrodes in 2 M NaCl solutions. (d) The Voc of the devices with Fe electrodes in DI water, seawater, and MgCl2, MgSO4, NaCl, and NaOH solutions (2 M). Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 12  Proposed mechanisms, materials and device optimization of moisture-induced electricity devices. Schematics of the oxygen functional group gradient mode (a) and the spontaneous moisture gradient mode (b). Material classification: (c) GO film. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (d) Polydopamine films. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2019]. (e) Biological materials with nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. (f) Other inorganic materials including carbon black (top panel) and TiO2 nanowires (bottom panel). Reproduced from ref. 76 and 87 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016 and 2018, respectively. Device structure classification: (g) GO with oxygen containing groups sandwiched by two electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2018]. (h) A protein membrane-based MED that is capable of spontaneously forming a self-sustaining moisture gradient. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (i) GO-based devices in planar structure. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2018]. (j) A heterogeneous bilayer MED based on a polyelectrolyte PSSA/PDDA film. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 13  Typical applications of water-induced electricity devices. Power suppliers as (a) all-weather-solar cells (reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2016]) and (b) self-power suppliers to light LEDs (reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2019]). Hybrid devices integrated with (c) information storage (reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2017]) and (d) perspiration analysis (reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]). (e) Breathing sensors (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]) and (f) wearable sensors (reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]).	 

 	Fig. 14  Representative sensors based on WEDs. Breathing sensors: (a) A device based on a GO film (left panel) and its responses to human breathing (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2015]. (b) A breathing sensor made of biological nanofibers and its output performance (left panel). These biological nanofibers are completely degradable (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2019]. Touching sensors: (c) A gelatin film-based humidity sensor matrix (left panel) and the corresponding outputs vs. humidity of human fingers (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2020]. (d) A non-touching sensor that can sense the proximity of a finger (left panel) and employed as an artificial skin for a robot (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2018]. Environmental sensors: (e) a flexible humidity sensor based on a TiO2 nanowire network (left panel) and its performance in responding to different objects (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2019]. (f) Asymmetric ionic aerogel of biologic nanofibers for harvesting electricity from moisture. It is able to quantitatively monitor the transpiration of plants. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 15  Typical power suppliers based on liquid–solid, liquid–solid–vapor and moisture–solid interfaces. Liquid–solid interface: (a) a device of press-release mode to power LEDs. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2013]. (b) Photograph of a droplet-based device in combination with the power-management circuit to charge a smart phone. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2022]. Liquid–solid–vapor interface: (c) schematic of five CB-based devices for electrodeposition. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright [2017]. (d) A self-charging hybrid power unit consisting of a CB-based device and a flexible nano-patterned supercapacitor. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Science China Press, copyright [2019]. (e) A self-powered memristor system driven by CB-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. Moisture–solid interfaces: (f) optical images of a mask armed with a self-powered moisture monitor. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (g) Planar GO-based integrated devices driving a calculator. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2018]. (h) A lamp bulb (10 W) lighted by heterogeneous moisture-induced electricity devices. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 16  Applications of water-induced electricity devices as hybrid devices. (a) A device that can generate clean water and electricity simultaneously. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2021]. (b) A moisture-powered memristor with interfacial oxygen migration for power-free reading of multiple memory states. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2020]. (c) A wearable and battery-free perspiration analysis site based on ZnO nanoarrays. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2020]. (d) Schematic of a device showing kinetic photovoltage generation across the silicon strip in water under beam scanning. (e) Photography of a silicon array capped with a hydrogel to sense the trace of a moving insect. (f) Recorded voltage curves from each silicon strip while the insect moves under light illumination of one-sun intensity. Each colored curve corresponds to the silicon strip marked by the spot of same color. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 17  The output merits for different WEDs and the corresponding performance comparisons. (The hollow symbols represent pulsed outputs and the solid symbols represent continuous outputs. The serial number of each data point corresponds to the references in the ESI.†) (a) Reported electricity generation from the relative motion at the solid–liquid interface. (b) Performance summary of water evaporation induced electricity. (c) Overview of the moisture-induced electricity generation.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cs00778e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
