A review on morphology engineering for highly efficient and stable hybrid perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA04120B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04120B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12842-12875A review on morphology engineering for highly efficient and stable hybrid perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Yang 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Ji†
*c, 
      
        
          
            Rugeng 
            Liu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Chengxi 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chun Hong 
            Mak
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xingli 
            Zou
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Hsin-Hui 
            Shen
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Shao-Yuan 
            Leu
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Hsien-Yi 
            Hsu
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Energy and Environment, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: sam.hyhsu@cityu.edu.hk
bShenzhen Research Institute of City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518057, China
cMicroelectronics Research Center, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78758, USA. E-mail: nmgjili@utexas.edu
dState Key Laboratory of Advanced Special Steel, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, P. R. China. E-mail: xlzou@shu.edu.cn
eMonash University, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
fThe Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China
Received 
      4th May 2018
    , Accepted 9th June 2018First published on 13th June 2018AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites have been extensively studied due to their remarkable optical and electronic features, such as high absorption coefficient, long exciton diffusion length, excellent carrier transport and low exciton binding energy, as well as a facile solution process for the fabrication of organic–inorganic halide perovskites. High-efficiency solar cells with methylammonium lead halide perovskites have been successfully achieved within just a few years. The high-quality perovskite films have made a significant impact on the fabrication of efficient and stable hybrid perovskite solar cells. Morphology engineering has been recognized as an effective way to obtain highly crystalline and pinhole-free perovskite films with optimized grain sizes. Here, we summarize several methodologies of morphology engineering, consisting of additive engineering, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), solvent engineering, solvent annealing, thermal engineering, compositional engineering and humidity engineering. The highly crystallized perovskite layers prepared by using these techniques show a uniform surface morphology, resulting in enhanced photovoltaic efficiency and long-term stability of hybrid perovskite solar cells.
1. Introduction
With rapid economic development and increased human population, the need for energy has become a major issue that humans have to face today. Until now, the consumption of energy has depended mainly on non-renewable fossil fuels. Compared with fossil energy for electricity generation, solar energy could be a good choice as the main source in the future, since it is a clean, pollution-free and renewable energy source. Right now solar cells are being widely used in daily life.1–5 The development of solar cells has experienced four generations. The first is silicon-based solar cells which possess 90% of market share. However, traditional silicon resources require expensive manufacturing technologies. Besides, growing and sawing of ingots are highly energy-intensive processes. Then inorganic thin film solar cells came out as the second generation, such as CdTe and CIGS solar cells.6–9 These photovoltaic cells have been commercialized with top efficiencies of up to 25.6%. Nevertheless, due to their lack of storage and the toxic feature of the materials, their application has been restricted. Later, researchers began to focus on organic heterojunction solar cells (OHSCs).10–12 But the highest efficiency of single organic material heterojunction solar cells until now is only around 13%, which is much lower than previous solar cells. Since 2009, hybrid perovskites have become the star molecules in the field of solar cells, and hybrid perovskite solar cells (HPSCs) are recognized as the fourth generation of solar cells. Compared with other kinds of solar cells, HPSCs have lots of advantages. (1) At the same level of efficiency, HPSCs are only 1/20 of the cost of silicon-based solar cells. (2) The highest efficiency of HPSCs (22.7%)13 has reached close to the optimum level of silicon-based solar cells (∼25.6%). (3) The diffusion length of perovskite is greater than 1 micrometer, which is an order of magnitude greater than the absorption depth.14 (4) Due to the emergence of roll-to-roll technology, HPSCs can be produced at large scale with a thickness of only several micrometers.15–20 With the efforts of researchers all over the world, the efficiency of HPSCs is currently close to the record for thin film solar cells.15
Generally speaking, there are three main kinds of perovskite solar cell structures: the mesoporous structure, the conventional p–i–n structure and the inverted i–n–p structure, as shown in Fig. 1.21 In the conventional p–i–n structure, Li+ salts act as an additive for increasing the conductivity of the HTL, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,91-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), by an oxidation reaction.22–24 Furthermore, low-cost HTLs can be introduced into inverted n–i–p structure HPSCs.25–27 Also, the inverted n–i–p structure shows better stability than the conventional structure because the [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester(PCBM) top layer that is usually used in the inverted structure as the ETL is more hydrophobic than a hole conductor with a dopant, and it shows lower moisture absorption.28 Besides, compared to the conventional structure, inverted PSCs have less hysteresis, which means the performance of inverted HPSCs is easier to certify.29–31The reason for the high hysteresis in conventional HPSCs is that the contact area of hybrid perovskites will produce blocks to the extraction of electrons from the perovskite layer, which will result in accumulation of electrons, and thus more recombination of charge carriers and so there is an imbalance in the electron transportation phenomenon.28,32 Therefore, a study of inverted HPSCs has become much more significant owing to their ease of fabrication, cost-effectiveness, and suppressed hysteresis characteristics.21,33,34
 Fig. 1  Three typical device structures of perovskite solar cells: (a) mesoporous, (b) regular planar structure, and (c) inverted planar structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Though the PCEs of both inverted and conventional HPSCs have shown an exponential growth within less than 10 years, there are still some stumbling blocks for hybrid perovskite solar cells, which have seriously retarded their commercialization and large-scale applications. Firstly, hybrid perovskites have poor stability in an ambient environment due to their sensitivity to moisture, oxygen, light and heat. Hence, how to make hybrid perovskite with enhanced stability has become a hot research topic. For instance, Smith et al. found a method of fabricating moisture-resistant large-area perovskite layers with improved moisture stability.35 Adding HI can also increase the crystallinity of hybrid perovskites, leading to greater stability.36 Scientists are now struggling with the fabrication of highly efficient and stable HPSCs. Bush and his coworkers announced caesium formamidinium lead halide perovskite/silicon-heterojunction tandem solar cells reaching an efficiency of 23.6% with increased stability.37 Secondly, lead-based perovskite with its strong toxicity will cause a serious environmental impact. Toxic lead has attracted more attention because it can not only pollute water and soil but also damage human health.38–40 Though other divalent metals have been tried for the replacement of lead-based compounds in hybrid perovskites, lead-free perovskite solar cells still produce low efficiencies.14,15 The development of non-toxic hybrid perovskites has a long way to go yet. Thirdly, the basic working principle of HPSCs has not been clarified and this topic is still under debate.13 Some first-principles calculations were introduced to estimate the stable perovskite-like structure.14 Tools such as SPuDS41 and Quantum Espresso42 are used to reach this objective, but lots of problems remain and there is no clear explanation for them.
Several strategies have been used for enhancing the performance and stability of HPSCs. Some scientists focus on synthesizing new materials, such as ETL or HTL in HPSCs, while others try to design new kinds of solar cell structures.43–48 Among all these strategies, morphology engineering has become an effective method. For instance, solar energy conversion for semiconductor materials with spatially ordered architectures could be dramatically enhanced by reason of their distinctive features consisting of efficient carrier separation, decoupling directions of light absorption and charge-carrier collection, as well as directional charge carrier transport.49 Morphology engineering can thus boost the crystallinity of hybrid perovskites and obtain HPSCs with high performance and stability. Up to now, solution-processed lead halide perovskite thin-film solar cells have achieved high PCEs, competing with dominant commercial photovoltaic technologies. But a deeper understanding of surface morphology still needs to be developed. Rapid progress depends on consecutive investigations on the morphology control of hybrid perovskite films. Among all the studies of HPSCs, the enhancement of surface morphology has become the key issue and nowadays attracts the most attention. In order to acquire HPSCs with high efficiency and high stability simultaneously, high-quality morphology of perovskite films is necessary. The initial factors which strongly influence the performance of HPSCs, such as the diffusion coefficient and the diffusion length of the charge species, are determined by the crystallinity of the perovskite films.14,50,51 Plentiful factors can affect the crystallinity of hybrid perovskites, including deposition method, composition, type of surface (surface chemistry, degree of hydrophilicity, surface structure, etc.), and solvents/additives used.52 With morphology engineering, the crystallinity of perovskites can definitely be improved, which will have a positive effect on device performance and stability, because uniform perovskite films with high surface coverage and minimum defects are beneficial for the transportation of both electrons and holes.
In this review, primary techniques related to morphology engineering are introduced, including additives engineering, solvent engineering, humidity control, compositional engineering, thermal engineering, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and interface engineering (Fig. 2). All the techniques can help to improve the morphology, such as improving the grain size, reducing pinholes and forming a uniform and smooth surface. Some of them can also enhance the connection between certain layers. And eventually HPSCs with higher photoelectric properties and better stability can be obtained. Based on the methods mentioned above, we are trying to provide some useful information for HPSC composition and to facilitate a complete understanding of the impact of morphology on HPSCs. Representative examples of morphology engineering are listed in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  Classification of morphology engineering technologies for hybrid perovskite solar cells. 
Table 1 Summary of morphological engineering techniques for hybrid perovskite solar cells




Morphological engineering techniques
Device performance (PCE)
Reference





Additive engineering



Perovskite film doped with AgI
12%

53



Aluminum oxide as post-modification material
4.6%

54



Aniline derivatives as dopant
19.2%

33



PEG as additive into perovskite
13.20%

55



Cesium as additive into triple perovskite
21.1%

56



Doping HI by intramolecular exchanging process
22.1%

57



Using TPPI as additive
13.0%

58



Benzenamine doped perovskite
18.85%

59



Hypophosphorous acid doped perovskite
16.2%

17



CH3NH2 additive-based solution
20.02%

60







Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)



WOx layer in combination with fullerene
14.9%

61



Using silane as SAM
12.7%

62



Crosslinkable silane-functionalized fullerene layer
19.5%

63



C60SAM
11.7%

64



C3-SAM
11.6%

65



DEA as SAM
16%

66







Solvent engineering and solvent annealing



GBL and DMSO solvent system
16.2%

67



DMF, I− and DMSO system
19.7%

68



DMF and DMSO system
>17%

69



Intramolecular exchange process of DMSO
20.2%

70



Chlorobenzene annealing during spin-coating
13.9 ± 0.7%

71



IPA, CB or ET annealing during spin-coating
11.22%

72







Thermal engineering



100 °C, ((FAI)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbI2)0.85(PbBr2)0.15)
19.5%

73



95 °C, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
11.4%

51



175 °C, mixture of FAPbI3 and MAPbI3
11.6%

74



100 °C, MAPbI3
11.7%

75



130 °C, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
10.7%

76







Interface engineering



BCP as buffer layer
13.06%

77



PFN-P2 as electron buffer layer
13.2%

80



PCBA as modification for TiO2
17.76%

78



PDINO as cathode interface layer
13.0%

79



Bphen doped with Ir(MDQ)2(acac)
15.87%

80



Cesium chloride (CsCl) as crystal seeds
16.8%

81



Cesium bromide as buffer layer
16.3%

82







Compositional engineering



(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
18%

83



PEI based perovskite with 2.32 cm2 working area
8.77%

84



FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3
21.1%

34



All inorganic, lead-free perovskite (Cs2SnI6)
1%

85



Rb+ added into perovskite
21.6%

86



(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9
0.054%

87



(CH3NH3)3Sb2I9
0.46%

88



Sn based HPSCs
6.4%

89



CH3NH3PbI3−x(Ac)x
20.3%

90



CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x
15%

25







Humidity engineering



30% RH for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
19.3%

91



35% ± 5% RH for CH3NH3PbI3−xCl
17.1%

92



40% RH for CH3NH3PbI3
12.2%

93



2% water additives in DMF for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
16.06%

94



5% water concentration in MAI solution
12.42%

95





2. Morphology engineering of hybrid perovskite solar cells
2.1 Additive engineering
Various kinds of additives have been doped into perovskite layers as an effective way to enhance the surface morphology in HPSCs, such as inorganic salts, organic halide salts, inorganic acids, fullerene, polymers and even water.96,97 There are different explanations for the doping effects of these additives. In general, the crystallinity of hybrid perovskites is enhanced by doping additives into perovskite layers, so that highly purified and smooth perovskite layers can be formed, leading to highly efficient and more stable HPSCs. Numerous studies have ended up using additive engineering.
Shahbazi et al. added silver iodide (AgI) into a precursor solution of CH3NH3PbI3 with solvent annealing by chlorobenzene (Fig. 3a) and found that the perovskite film shows p-type character after doping with Ag+ ions.53 The device structure is shown in Fig. 3b with a PCE of 12% (Fig. 3g), which is better than that without AgI. Silver additives can play a role in controlling the morphology of hybrid perovskites, forming uniform and close-packed nanocrystals with larger grains, as identified by SEM images (Fig. 3c–f). By using a time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique, they observed that the addition of AgI inside perovskite in contact with PEDOT:PSS led to efficient hole-extraction behavior, while contact with TiO2 resulted in inefficient electron-extraction processes (Fig. 3h). The initial unintentional n-type character of the hybrid perovskite film was converted to a p-type character by this change in carrier transport dynamics, causing a change in Fermi level to enhance the performance of p–i–n devices (Fig. 3i).
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of perovskite film deposition procedure; (b) device structure; (c–f) top-view and cross-section view for devices with and without AgI, respectively; (g) I–V curve and IPCE measurements for perovskite with and without AgI, respectively; (h) time-resolved PL decay profiles for showing the effect of interfacial charge transport caused by AgI additive on an n-type (TiO2) or a p-type (PEDOT:PSS) contact layer with excitation at 635 nm and probe at 770 nm; (i) schematic illustration of the energy levels for two cases of PSK films, the left is the n-type PSK film and the right is p-type PSK film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Liu et al. have shown that the perovskite film quality could be ameliorated by adding methylamine solution-based additives, considerably reducing intrinsic defect density in thick polycrystalline layers.60 The shallow electronic disorder was then diminished, resulting in a sufficient carrier lifetime. By monitoring the spin relaxation time, the remarkable crystalline film quality was further confirmed in comparison to relevant literature. As a result of extended carrier diffusion length, heterojunction planar perovskite solar cells could be fabricated with a 650 nm-thick absorber layer, attaining a power conversion efficiency of 20.02% (average 18.44%), with a highly stable output efficiency of 19.01% under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination of one sun (100 mW cm−2).
Niu et al. introduced aluminum oxide as a post-modification material into all-solid-state HPSCs to boost the stability of solar devices.54 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was used as an additive into hybrid perovskite layers and the PCE of the HPSCs was increased, due to a much smoother and more continuous surface in the presence of DIO (Fig. 4).97 Wang et al. tried aniline derivatives as additives on the perovskite layer and found that the addition of benzylamine can raise the PCE and also stabilize HPSCs for more than four months in an ambient atmosphere.33 Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) was also used as an additives into hybrid perovskites with obvious morphology enhancement.55 Saliba et al. used inorganic cesium as an additive to make highly stable solar devices with a power output of 21.1%.56 Some groups also proved that specific nanoparticles can increase the PCE of HPSCs by exploiting surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effects.98,99
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer with and without DIO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wenheim. 
By using hydrogen iodide (HI) as an additive, smoother perovskite layers can be fabricated through an intramolecular exchange process, resulting in a decrease in deep-level defects, and the defect-engineered thin perovskite layers enable the fabrication of PSCs with a higher PCE. HI was also applied to an HC(NH2)2PbI3 perovskite solar cell with a PCE of 16%.100 In Fig. 5a–h, it was found that the addition of an optimal amount of excess iodide ions in the precursor can form dense, uniform, pinhole-free and highly crystalline perovskite films. However, the pinholes in the film become more evident by adding a higher amount of excess iodide ions, which can give rise to a reduction in exciton diffusion lifetime (Fig. 5i). As shown in Fig. 5j, the electroluminescence (EL) efficiency was improved with increasing HI content and reached its maximum performance when HI = 0.10 g mL−1.
 Fig. 5  (a–d) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography images of FAPbI3 on TiO2/FTO glass deposited by gas-assisted spin-coating and with HI additive at various concentrations (a) 0, (b) 0.05, (c) 0.10, and (d) 0.20 g mL−1. The corresponding KPFM images of the same film are shown in panels (e)–(h). (i) PL decay traces at 800 nm for FAPbI3 with the above HI additive concentrations. (j) Average electroluminescence intensities as a function of applied voltage of FAPbI3 on bl-TiO2/FTO glass formed using various HI additive concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Cao et al. applied a series of organic halide salts with different organic cations and halide anions as processing additives, as shown in Fig. 6a. They found that tetraphenylphosphonium iodide (TPPI) and chloride (TPPCl) are the most efficient additives for an improvement in the crystallinity and morphology of hybrid perovskite films.58 A wide range of hybrid perovskites were formed in the additive-doped films (Fig. 6b). In Fig. 6c, the photovoltaic efficiency of HPSCs was then improved and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) could cover the visible to near infrared region. In 2016, a series of amine-based organic cations acted as additives in hybrid perovskites to obtain highly smooth and compact perovskite films, which showed a PCE of 16.37% for a slightly long annealing time of 30 min.59 After that, aniline, benzylamine and phenethylamine were introduced into the fabrication process of HPSCs.33 But the efficiency of solar cells and the stability of perovskite films could be enhanced only by benzylamine. They demonstrated that the simultaneous enhancement of efficiency and stability PSCs arise from two different aspects: one is the use of the small-sized hydrophobic aromatic group, and the other is the formation of edge-on packing of the benzene rings on the perovskite surface.33
 Fig. 6  (a) Device configuration of the planar-heterojunction solar cell and the chemical structures of different organic halide salts used in this study; (b) SEM images for different molar ratio of additive-doped perovskite surface; (c) current density–voltage characteristics; (d) EQE spectra of pristine and additive-doped perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Furthermore, acids and some metal ions can also be used as dopants into the perovskite layer. Jen et al. found that ascorbic acid is an effective antioxidant additive for enhancing the efficiency and stability of Pb/Sn-based binary perovskite solar cells. It can not only hinder the oxidation of binary perovskite precursor solutions, but also modulate the kinetics of perovskite crystallization by forming intermediate complexes.57
2.2 Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) were firstly applied to the field of synthetic sophistication. Self-assembly, leading to a super-molecular organic silane layer, can improve the surface morphology of hybrid perovskites.62 Hierarchical organization of interlocking components provides very complex systems.101 The ability to combine the head and tail groups of constituent molecules makes SAMs an effective method for surface modification.101 SAMs thus became more popular for the development of HPSCs. Although the exact mechanisms of SAMs have remained ambiguous until now, it is still an attractive approach in the field of HPSCs. Building up SAMs above or under the perovskite layer by the formation of extra chemical bonds can enhance the electronic contact between hybrid perovskites and other interlayers (e.g. ETL or HTL), making transport of the electrons or holes more effective.
SAMs were initially introduced in the fabrication of organic solar cells.102–105 Through the formation of chemical bonds, a better energy level alignment was obtained among anodes, cathodes and protecting layers and active layers.106–109 Besides, an enhancement of the hole and electron transportation results in an improvement in optical and electrical properties.110
Hou et al. reported that by incorporating a low-temperature processed WOx layer in combination with a mixed fullerene functionalized SAM (Fig. 7a), a uniform perovskite layer with larger crystal size was formed (Fig. 7b), where the contact angles of water on reference WOx substrates were much larger (Fig. 7c).61 SAMs are able to modify the surface properties of hybrid perovskites by a combination of surface defect passivation and reduced ion migration,111 resulting in an acceleration of charge transfer from the perovskite to the buffer layers.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of a cross-sectional view of the perovskite solar cell architecture: ITO/WOx/SAMs/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag; SAMs molecules: pure organic spacer (left, SAMs(I-Ph-PA)) and fullerene (right, SAMs (C60-C6-PA)). (b) AFM topography of the surface of a WOx film (left) and a mixed SAMs on top of WOx (right). The size of the AFM images is 2.5 × 2.5 μm2. The measured root mean square roughness is 3.2 nm (left) and 3.9 nm (right). (c) Contact angles of water on reference WOx substrates without and with SAMs.61 Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The power efficiency of HPSCs can also be enhanced by introducing silanes as SAMs between titanium oxide and the perovskite layer. The results of SEM and FTIR measurements showed that an organic silane layer can improve the surface morphology of hybrid perovskites by incorporating SAMs between TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3, and printable HPSCs have reached an efficiency of 12.7% in large-area devices.62 Huang and his co-workers reported that the stable perovskite solar devices delivered an efficiency of 19.5% with a high fill factor of 80.6% (Fig. 8b) by the introduction of crosslinkable silane molecules with hydrophobic functionalization and doped fullerene as electron transport layers, as shown in Fig. 8a.63
 Fig. 8  (a) Device structure and explanation of SAM formed by fullerene and silane; (b) J–V curve with different scanning directions and sweeping rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Similarly, Abrusci et al. used a fullerene-based self-assembled monolayer (C60-SAMs) in conventional hybrid perovskite solar cells. The C60-SAMs as an electron acceptor and the interlayer showed a good energy bandgap alignment with hybrid perovskites, so the forward electron transfer from the hybrid perovskite to the mesoporous titania layer was blocked and the open-circuit voltage loss reduced (Fig. 9).64
 Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectra of P3HT and perovskite films with and without C60-SAMs fullerene functionalization. Inset: energy levels of the system components relative to vacuum. (b) Schematic of the device structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
SAMs can also be applied to the interlayers between the perovskites and HTLs. Gu et al. used 3-aminopropanoic acid as a self-assembling monolayer (C3-SAM) on a PEDOT:PSS HTL to modify the crystallinity and coverage of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film, as shown in Fig. 10a. A much smoother perovskite surface with an increase in PEC from 9.7% to 11.6% was realized (Fig. 10b).65 For an investigation of the interfacial mechanism, they performed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) in Fig. 10c, showing that the surface work function of C3-SAM modified PEDOT:PSS was 0.2 eV lower compared to the intrinsic PEDOT:PSS. In Fig. 10d, they demonstrated that the lowered Fermi level of PEDOT:PSS reduced the energy barrier between the HTL and the perovskite layer, which resulted in more efficient hole transport, thus enhancing the photovoltaic performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cell structure with C3-SAM. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image. (The direction of the extra permanent dipole is stressed with a bold arrow.) (c) UPS spectrum for the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS (black line), methanol-washed PEDOT:PSS (red line) and C3-SAM modified PEDOT:PSS (blue line). (d) The energy level alignment in fabricated PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Detailed mechanisms of C3-SAMs were studied by Zuo et al. through the modification of zinc oxides with C3-SAMs.112 With the incorporation of C3-SAMs, highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 films with reduced pinholes and trap state density were formed. In addition, the work function of the cathode displayed a better alignment with the conduction band minimum state of the hybrid perovskite for efficient charge extraction and electronic coupling. The structure of the hybrid perovskite solar cells and the corresponding energy levels are shown in Fig. 11a and Fig. 11b. With the introduction of SAMs, the absorption was further increased in the range 450–790 nm due to the complete conversion of PbI into CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (Fig. 11c). In Fig. 11d, the result of UPS measurements showed that a lower work function with the incorporation of C3-SAMs would improve the energy level alignment and electronic coupling between ZnO and the perovskite. Fig. 11e shows that the photoluminescence (PL) intensity of hybrid perovskites on C3-SAMs was significantly increased. The exciton diffusion lifetime was quenched in Fig. 11f due to stronger electronic coupling between the ZnO and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite on C3-SAM modified ZnO. Thus, a decent improvement in device performance of the HPSCs was attained.
 Fig. 11  (a) and (b) are schematic diagrams of perovskite solar cell device and energy level diagram; (c) and (d) are UV-vis absorption spectrum and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy for zinc oxide with and without C3-SAM, respectively; (e) and (f) are steady-state PL spectrum and transient PL spectrum for perovskite films on bare ZnO and silica with or without C3-SAM modification, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Yang et al. found that SAMs could be constructed between NiO and the perovskite layer by modifying the surface of the NiO nanocrystal layer with diethanolamine (DEA) molecules.66 The dipole layer formed by molecular adsorption could improve the crystallization of hybrid perovskites and the contact of interfacial layers, leading to a PCE of 16% without hysteresis in the solar device. The –OH and amine groups in the DEA molecules can create SAMs (Fig. 12a), which is beneficial for hole extraction and energy level alignment with hybrid perovskites. In Fig. 12c, it can clearly be seen that the DEA causes a slowdown in PL decay of the hybrid perovskite compared to the perovskite on quartz, because the DEA modification has slowed down the crystallization process at the initial spin-coating stage, which would benefit the formation of a highly uniform and crystallized perovskite with diminished trap states, thus elongating the carrier lifetime. Additionally, Fig. 12b shows that the intensity ratio of CH3NH3PbI3 (110)/PbI2 (002) for the NiO/DEA substrate is markedly lowered as a result of the enhanced crystallinity of the perovskite layer by DEA-based SAMs. This strategy for the modification of surface morphology can also ameliorate the stability of solar devices with a retention of over 85% PCE even after storage in an inert atmosphere for 60 days without encapsulation, probably because of the improved interface contact and superior film morphology.
 Fig. 12  (a) Device structure and schematic illustration of SAMs; (b) XRD data for perovskite precursor films on NiO with and without DEA modification; (c) the transient PL decay for the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer on quartz/DEA, PVK here stands for perovskite layer; (d) schematic energy levels of each layer in the perovskite solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
2.3 Solvent engineering
There are two main solution-based processes which are widely used in the fabrication of HPSCs with low cost and high crystallinity: the one-step solution process and the two-step method.113 The one-step method includes mixing both inorganic and organic precursors in a single solution, casting a thin film from this solution, and then annealing the thin film to accomplish the formation of the perovskite phase.114 The two-step method can be applied to higher-quality hybrid perovskite thin films in HPSCs (Fig. 13a).23 The simplest two-step fabrication process consists of depositing a film of a lead salt, commonly PbI2, and then immersing this lead salt film into a solution containing an organic salt. The SEM image and photovoltaic performance of the HPSCs are shown in Fig. 13b and c, respectively. However, it is difficult for the PbX2 to be completely transformed into the perovskite, which will in turn have negative effects on the performance of the solar devices.115
 Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of two kinds of solution-based methods for perovskite layer fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117, Copyright 2015 Materials Research Society. (b) SEM image and (c) photovoltaic performance of HPSCs made by a two-step method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. 
In order to further improve the morphology of hybrid perovskites, various methods of solvent engineering and solvent annealing have been developed.67,69,72,116 The solvent engineering approach is an attractive way to conquer the limitations of the one-step spin-coating process, and tends to make smoother perovskite film with reduced defect states. On the other hand, solvent annealing can reduce residual PbX2 in the two-step process; thus perovskite with improved crystallinity would be formed. Solvent engineering is a class of fabrication techniques that introduce a solvent to coordinate with the precursor solution, in order to form precursor PbI2–solvent complexes to preventing other chemical reactions in solution. A film of this precursor–solvent complex is then cast and subsequently converted to the hybrid perovskite.
Park et al. also developed a mixed solvent system for the deposition of hybrid perovskites, which achieved a device efficiency of up to 19.7% (Fig. 14a) with the maximum IPCE reaching over 91% (Fig. 14b).68 As shown in Fig. 14e, spin-coating of a DMF solution containing PbI2, MAI and DMSO (1:1:1 mol%) can form the adducts of PbI2·DMSO and CH3NH3I·PbI2·DMSO, resulting from the interaction between DMSO, I− and PbI2. By using diethyl ether, the DMF can be easily removed in the one-step fabrication process. As is shown in the SEM images of Fig. 14e, excellent MAPbI3 films were formed when the DMF solvent was selectively washed with nonpolar diethyl ether while spinning. From Fig. 14c and d, the adduct of PbI2 with DMSO and MAI was confirmed, and a well-defined adduct was formed by the addition of diethyl ether.
 Fig. 14  (a) I–V curve and (b) IPCE measurement for the best devices through solvent engineering; (c) FTIR spectrum of DMSO (solution), PbI2·DMSO (powder), MAI·PbI2·DMSO (powder) and (d) expanded fingerprint region for the SO vibrations; (e) schematic representation of fabrication procedure and plane-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images for the MAPbI3 perovskite layers obtained by direct one-step spin-coating of the DMF solution containing (1) (3) MAI and PbI2 or (2) (4) MAI, PbI2, and DMSO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The fabrication of FAPbI3 layers by solvent engineering was developed by Yang et al. to produce HPSCs with superior PCEs (Fig. 15c).70 In this work, FAPbI3 crystals were formed by the direct intramolecular exchange process (IEP) of DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide, as depicted in Fig. 15a. The main reaction in the IEP can be illustrated as: PbI2–DMSO + FAI → PbI2–FAI + DMSO↑ (removal). A dense and well-developed structure with larger grains was then attained (Fig. 15b). In the XRD patterns of Fig. 15d, the result confirmed that the FAPbI3-based layer was formed by the IEP of DMSA and FAI (MABr) without an additional annealing process.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of FAPbI3 perovskite crystallization involving the direct intramolecular exchange of DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). (b) The comparison of FESEM surface images of the FAPbI3-based layer formed on mp-TiO2 by IEP and conventional method. (c) Representative J–V curves for FAPbI3-based cells fabricated by IEP and conventional process. (d) XRD patterns of as-formed and annealed films for FAPbI3-based layers formed by IEP (red line) and conventional (blue line) process. #, and * denote the identified diffraction peaks corresponding to the FAPbI3 perovskite phase, PbI2, and FAI, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2015 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Seok et al. successfully obtained highly efficient HPSCs by solvent engineering technology, as shown in Fig. 16a and Fig. 16b.67 The use of a mixed solvent of γ-butyrolactone and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) followed by toluene drop-casting led to extremely uniform and dense perovskite layers via a CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase. N–H stretching and bending in the FTIR spectra (Fig. 16c) and XRD measurements (Fig. 16d) illustrated the formation of the intermediate phase, causing a highly uniform and dense surface morphology.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite layer fabrication process including a process of toluene dripping as modification for perovskite; (b) scheme for the formation of the perovskite material via the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase; (c) FTIR spectrum on left and a description of the cell structure on the right; (d) XRD data for the intermediate phase of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO. (e) Device architecture of the bilayered perovskite cell. (f) The J–V curve shows little hysteresis in the devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
Using this mixed solvent engineering, Wang et al. reported DMF and DMSO being used together to dissolve PbI2 first and then producing complexes of PbI2(DMSO)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.86) (Fig. 17). These complexes deformed their shape and interacted with DMSO and MAI, and then the CH3NH3PbI3 film was obtained. Due to the ultra-flat and dense perovskite film, the HPSC device increased its PCE above 17%. The conversion of PbI2(DMSO)x to the perovskite depends largely on the penetration of CH3NH3I into the PbI2 film. In a normal solvent system, the crystallinity of PbI2 lacks control, leading to different crystal sizes and poor film uniformity of the final perovskite film. By adding DMSO as a strongly coordinating solvent, the rate of PbI2 crystallization could be manipulated, and thus the crystallinity and morphology of hybrid perovskites were enhanced.69
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the solvent engineering process by DMSO and DMF mixed solution.69 Reprinted with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Spiccia et al.71 reported that uniform hybrid perovskites could be deposited by a solvent-induced and fast crystallization method consisting of spin-coating a CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution, followed immediately by exposure of the wet film to chlorobenzene to induce crystallization. The chlorobenzene was dropped on top of the wet perovskite film during the spin-coating process, resulting in the fast crystallization of hybrid perovskites with the formation of homogeneous grains (Fig. 18a). From the TEM image in Fig. 18b, a perovskite film with large crystalline grains showed freedom from grain boundaries parallel to the plane of the electrodes. By using this thin-film processing technology, the HPSCs reached an average PCE of ∼13.9% with stabilized power output under working conditions (Fig. 18c).
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite deposition process and conventional spin-coating process for fabricating perovskite films. Device structure and photovoltaic characterization. (b) TEM characterization of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite grain structures. (c) Photocurrent density and PCE as a function of time for the same cell. The cell was placed in the dark prior to the start of the measurement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Huang et al. reported that the crystallinity and grain size of CH3NH3PbI3 film can be adequately raised by utilizing a solvent-annealing approach (Fig. 19a).117 As displayed in Fig. 19d–l, the SEM images showed that the average grain sizes of hybrid perovskite films by the solvent-annealed process are either slightly larger or comparable to the film thicknesses, which could dramatically boost the charge extraction process. In Fig. 19m, the grain sizes of the solvent-annealed films enlarged much more rapidly than the thermally annealed films. Meanwhile, the sharper XRD diffraction peaks of the solvent-annealed films indicated that the solvent-annealing technique enhanced the crystallinity with reduced low-dimensional defects and/or increased the grain size with minor grain boundaries (Fig. 19n). As a result, the solvent-annealing technique showed an increase in the single-path absorption of the hybrid perovskites (Fig. 19o), leading to an enhanced PCE from 9.9% to 15.6% by using DMSO as the solvent for annealing.
 Fig. 19  (a–c) Schematics of the interdiffusion approach and solvent-annealing-induced grain size increase. SEM images of the thermally annealed (TA) perovskite films with thicknesses of 250 nm (d), 430 nm (g), and 1015 nm (j), and solvent-annealed (SA) perovskite films with thicknesses of 250 nm (e), 430 nm (h) and 1015 nm (k); the scale bars in the SEM micrographs are 2 μm. (f, i and l) Grain-size distributions of the SEM images to the left. (m) Average grain size versus annealing time for the 300 nm thick perovskite films. (n) XRD patterns of the thermally annealed and solvent-annealed 300 nm thick perovskite films. (o) Single-path absorption of the perovskite films with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Plentiful solvents have been evaluated in solvent-annealing techniques to form hybrid perovskite films with high crystallinity and smooth morphology.72,118,119 Cheng et al.72 demonstrated that the crystallization of PbI2 films was enhanced by treatment with various solvents (e.g. isopropanol, chlorobenzene, or ethanol), as depicted in Fig. 20. The nanosized PbI2 nanoparticles with voids could facilitate the accessible diffusion of CH3NH3I molecules, thus increasing the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. With more appropriate morphological control of hybrid perovskite layers using solvent treatments, the average PCE of HPSCs has been further improved.72 Later, Wang et al. systematically studied the deposition of PbI2 films using the solvent-annealing method. They found that the solvent annealing of PbI2 films in DMF, acetone, and IPA atmospheres resulted in dense PbI2 films, which obstructed the conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3, while the formation of PbI2 films employing the DMSO solvent-annealing process led to porous PbI2, expediting the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite with increased average grain sizes.116
 Fig. 20  Schematics of two-step sequential deposition process (a) without solvent treatment, and (b) with solvent (IPA, CB, or ET) treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
Despite the remarkable enhancement in the surface morphology of hybrid perovskites, the solvent treatments could possibly have a negative influence on performance. For example, hybrid perovskite films with the toluene-dripped treatment could increase surface trap densities. Thus, there is only a slight improvement in the carrier relaxation lifetimes owing to the competition between the improved surface morphology and the increased surface trap densities.120 Therefore, appropriate treatments for the thin-film deposition have to be prudently determined to optimize the quality of hybrid perovskite films.
2.4 Thermal engineering
Hybrid perovskite films are generally formed by heat treatments to get rid of residual solvents in the solution-based process, produce the perovskite from its precursors, improve crystallization and enhance grain growth. For hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite itself, it typically takes a sufficient annealing time to achieve full conversion. During the annealing process, the quality of the hybrid perovskite films depends on several significant factors, such as the film thickness, the heating duration, the temperature, and film composition.
Eperon et al. systematically studied the influence of thermal annealing on the morphology control of hybrid perovskite films.51 They found that the perovskite layer could be seriously damaged by prolonged heat treatment at higher temperature owing to the decrease in surface coverage. Additionally, the higher thickness of hybrid perovskite films would play an important role in the coverage of hybrid perovskites as well as in the performance of solar devices. Thus, the development of a new annealing process to obtain thick and continuous perovskite layers at low temperature becomes a promising photovoltaic technology.
Bi et al. investigated the relationship between annealing temperature and crystallinity of ((FAI)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbI2)0.85(PbBr2)0.15).73 They collected SEM images and XRD analysis for hybrid perovskites annealed at various temperatures between 80 °C and 180 °C for 120 min. As shown in Fig. 21a, the grain size became larger with an increase in the annealing temperature. Except for the film annealed at 80 °C, the peak at approximately 12.69° corresponding to the PbI2 (001) reflection is observed for all samples in the XRD patterns (Fig. 21b), indicating the formation of PbI2 phases after releasing the organic species in the annealing process. It is obvious that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (001) PbI2 reflection decreases with an increase in annealing temperature because of the increased crystallite size. Moreover, the FWHM of the (101) perovskite phase reflections exhibited almost no change below 125 °C but increased promptly above 125 °C, because the conversion from hybrid perovskites to PbI2 was increased, causing a decrease in the perovskite crystallite size. The excess PbI2 in perovskite films can diminish non-radiative charge-carrier recombination due to a passivation effect of the perovskite induced by PbI2.121 As shown in Fig. 21c, the best performance of HPSCs fabricated under an annealing temperature of 100 °C showed the highest average JSC (23.1 mA cm−2), at which temperature the average grain size is about 329 nm.
 Fig. 21  (a) Top-view SEM images of perovskite films under different annealing temperatures; (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of the films deposited on meso-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO glass substrates after annealing at various temperatures for 90 min; (c) influence of annealing temperature on photovoltaic parameters of the fabricated solar cells. JSC (blue), VOC (red), FF (green), and PCE (black) measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The temperature dependence of formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3), methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and their mixture (FAPbI3:MAPbI3) has been investigated.74Fig. 22 shows the SEM images of hybrid perovskite compositions at various annealing temperatures. The best coverage of MAPbI3 films was achieved at 100 °C (Fig. 22a), while the coverage at 175 °C was not as good as that at 100 °C (Fig. 22d), and the MAPbI3 at 230 °C decomposes to PbI2 (Fig. 22g). The mixture at all annealing temperatures shows good coverage (Fig. 22b, e and h). The crystals of FAPbI3 perovskite films are hardly observable at 100 °C while the FAPbI3 crystals at 175 °C and 230 °C can undoubtedly be recognized (Fig. 22c, f and i). As illustrated in Fig. 22j, the MAPbI3 perovskite showed a dark color up to 200 °C, and at 230 °C the perovskites started to decompose. Furthermore, the FAPbI3 perovskites had a dark color up to 260 °C, and then began to decompose. As a result, the optimized annealing temperature for a mixture of FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 is about 175 °C. The observation matched the SEM result of hybrid perovskites with the occurrence of side reactions, e.g., the decomposition of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3. Hence, the actual molar ratio between FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 after the annealing process is not 1:1, even though a stoichiometric (1:1) molar ratio of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 was originally dripped to form the perovskite films. According to the stability test, it is justifiable that the portion of FAPbI3 is a bit larger than that of MAPbI3 due to the smaller cation, MA+, that is more likely to be diminished in the mixture at the high temperature.
 Fig. 22  SEM images of perovskite compositions at various annealing temperatures (100 °C, 175 °C and 230 °C). The white scale bar is 5 m and the orange scale bar (inset) is 1 m. (a) MAPbI3 annealed at 100 °C. (b) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 100 °C. (c) FAPbI3 annealed at 100 °C. (d) MAPbI3 annealed at 175 °C. (e) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 175 °C. (f) FAPbI3 annealed at 175 °C. (g) MAPbI3 annealed at 230 °C. (h) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 230 °C. (i) FAPbI3 annealed at 230 °C. (j) Pictures of the samples of MAPbI3 or FAPbI3 on glass after annealing at various temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dualeh et al.75 also studied effect of the annealing temperature on the film morphology of solid-state organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells. In their work, the perovskite films were deposited by spin-coating a precursor solution, and different annealing processes were investigated. As indicated in Fig. 23(a–h), the higher annealing temperatures induced rapid growth from a few nucleation sites, leading to the formation of larger crystalline islands, while the lower temperatures generated substantial nucleation sites, resulting in the formation of smaller islands. As confirmed by the XRD patterns (Fig. 23i), once the annealing temperature had been increased to 80 °C, the peaks for the precursors were no longer present and only the peaks for the perovskite materials remained. For annealing temperatures above 120 °C, the re-occurrence of peaks identified as belonging to PbI2 was observed. Similarly, the absorbance across the entire spectral range in the UV-vis absorption spectra increased with an increase in the annealing temperature of the perovskite from 60 °C to 100 °C due to the production of MAPbI3 perovskites (Fig. 23j). Further increasing the annealing temperature resulted in a decrease in absorption. This is because PbI2 re-appeared in the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 23k, a clear correlation can be observed between the annealing temperature of hybrid perovskites and the photovoltaic performance of the solar devices.
 Fig. 23  SEM images of mTiO2 films with deposited perovskite solution heat treated at (a) 60 °C, (b) 80 °C, (c) 100 °C, (d) 120 °C, (e) 150 °C, (f) 175 °C, and (g) 200 °C. (h) Cross-sectional image of sample annealed at 150 °C. Black scale bars correspond to (a) 5 μm, (b–g) 1 μm, and (h) 200 nm. (i) X-ray diffraction patterns of perovskite samples annealed at different temperatures. (j) UV-vis absorption spectra for mTiO2 films with perovskite annealed at different temperatures. (k) J–V characteristics taken under standard AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (solid) and in the dark (dashed) for devices made using different annealing temperatures for the perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The thermally induced morphology and crystallinity of methylammonium lead mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) thin films have been studied by Saliba. et al.76 The SEM images illustrate distinct perovskite crystal sizes depending on the different annealing processes (Fig. 24a–l). The perovskite films annealed at 100 °C for 45 min on mesoporous alumina nanoparticle (NP-Al2O3) thin films (Fig. 24a), mesoporous block copolymer-directed alumina (BCP-Al2O3) thin films (Fig. 24e), and silicon substrates (Fig. 24i) exhibit a broad distribution of crystal sizes from ∼100 to 1000 nm. From the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 24b, f and j), the polycrystalline domains generate a relatively rough surface. When the perovskite films were annealed up to 130 °C, the surface morphology (Fig. 24c, g and k) and respective cross-sections in Fig. 24d, h and l are completely changed and show micron-sized crystals. Then, they produced meso-superstructured (MSSC) and planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells on a mesoporous NP-Al2O3 superstructure and on a planar TiO2 compact layer/FTO glass with different annealing processes (100 °C for 45 min or 130 °C for 5 min). As shown in Fig. 24m and n, the HPSCs with NP-130 MSSCs show a decreased FF (0.53 to 0.44) and PCE (8.4% to 6.9%) in comparison to NP-100 solar devices, while the annealed planar perovskite devices containing planar-100 and planar-130 exhibit indistinguishable VOC (∼0.9 V) and FFs (∼0.6), with improved JSC and PCE from 17.9 to 19.0 mA cm−2 and 9.9% to 10.7%, respectively.
 Fig. 24  Plan-view and cross-sectional SEM micrographs of perovskite films on (a–d) NP-Al2O3, (e–h) BCP-Al2O3, and (i–l) planar silicon substrates prepared by the respective thermal annealing procedures as indicated. (m) NP-Al2O3 MSSC and (n) planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells measured under stimulated AM 1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.5 Interface engineering
The interface plays a crucial role in photovoltaic devices. The high performance of solar cells can be pursued by controlling the carrier behavior across relevant interfaces. The long-term stability of solar devices can also be achieved by retarding interface aging. As a result, rapid progress related to interface engineering has been made by managing the carrier dynamics at the interfaces;91,122–127 and designing a rational structure to improve the performance and stability of the devices. Interface modification of hybrid perovskite solar cells can be realized by the interlayer (or so-called buffer layer), electron buffer layer (EBL) and hole buffer layer (HBL), which are deposited either above or below the perovskite layer (Fig. 25), in order to modify the energy level alignment and/or improve the surface morphology.128 Various kinds of interfacial modification layers are applied to enable better contact between hybrid perovskites and ETL or HTL, and to increase the efficiency of electron and hole transport. For instance, the efficiency of HPSCs has been enhanced by interpolation of a buffer layer, 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP), as shown in Fig. 26a and b.77
 Fig. 25  Interpretation for buffer layers in conventional perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 26  (a) Device structure of MAPbI2.4Br0.6 based perovskite solar cells. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MAPbI2.4Br0.6 based perovskite solar cells measured under AM 1.5 G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Plenty of derivatives of poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) have acted as a buffer layer in HPSCs.129–131 Miyano et al. adopted PFN-P1 as an additive in the perovskite layer (Fig. 27a and d) and PFN-P2 as a buffer layer (Fig. 27c) in inverted HPSCs (Fig. 27b), leading to an improved surface morphology and long-term stability because of the reduction in contact resistance, suppression of bimolecular recombination and enhancement of cell electron transportation.130
 Fig. 27  (a) Perovskite formation by using a successive spin-coating method with PFN-P1. CB: chlorobenzene; IPA: isopropyl alcohol; (b) schematic of device configuration. (c and d) Chemical structures of PFN-P2 and PFN-P1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The stability of photovoltaic devices has been widely addressed by interface engineering.124,132–134 Planar heterojunction (PHJ) HPSCs are mostly degraded due to the interface decay of perovskite/cathode. When PHJ-HPSCs were exposed to air, numerous bubbles were produced instantly at the interface and then grew. After one hour's exposure to air, the efficiency of the solar devices was completely lost, owing to the peeling of the cathode electrode from the device. Thus, Xiong et al. inserted annealing-free TiO2 nanocrystalline particles (TiO2NPs) as an interface modification layer into PHJ-HPSCs, leading to a dramatic improvement in the stability of the HPSCs, as shown in Fig. 28a.135 The PCEs of the HPSCs were reduced by just ∼25% of their initial efficiency after exposure to air for 200 hours, because the TiO2NPs layer can prevent the penetration of water from the Al electrode (Fig. 28b).
 Fig. 28  (a) The degradation trend of PCEs for PHJ-PSC devices with and without a TiO2 NPs interface layer. (b) The cathode electrode of PSC device easily peeled off from the devices, leading to complete loss of efficiency after only 1 h exposure to air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138, Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V. 
Dong et al. inserted a [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid (PCBA) monolayer for the modification layer of the compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) to fabricate HPSCs with a high efficiency of 17.76%,78 as shown schematically in Fig. 29a. From the J–V curves shown in Fig. 29b, the photovoltaic performance of solar devices was significantly improved by the PCBA modification layer. The PCBA monolayer acted as a hole-blocking layer to decrease the trap site density on the c-TiO2, and the hole recombination at the interface between the c-TiO2 and hybrid perovskites. The charge extraction was then improved, which was proved by the partial quenching of the fluorescence of the hybrid perovskites after modification by use of PCBA (Fig. 29c).
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic representation of the typical full-device structure. (b) J–V curves measured under AM 1.5 G illumination. (c) Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films fabricated on the bare c-TiO2 and c-TiO2/PCBA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2015 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
By employing a solution-processed perylene-diimide (PDINO) as the cathode interface layer between the [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) layer and the top Ag electrode (Fig. 30a), Min et al. fabricated PDINO-based HPSCs with a PCE of 14% compared to that without PDINO modification (Fig. 30b).79 PDINO with suitable energy level alignment for electron extraction (Fig. 30c) provides homogeneous and smooth films with an improved probability of charge carrier collections, reduced series resistance (Rs) and enhanced shunt resistance (Rsh) values. Also, PDINO as an effective electron extraction layer (EEL) could avoid the diffusion of silver ions to the semiconductor interface. In addition to the improved performance, the higher stability of PDNO-based solar devices was achieved, as opposed to HPSCs with PCBM/Ag and PCBM/ZnO/Ag cathodes (Fig. 30d).
 Fig. 30  (a) Device structure; (b) the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the perovskite solar cells made from Ag, ZnO/Ag, and PDINO/Ag cathodes measured under illumination of an AM 1.5 G solar simulator (100 mW cm−2) in air; (c) schematic representation of the band energy diagrams for the p–i–n configuration of pero-HSCs; (d) EQE spectra of the pero-HSCs with different cathodes measured in air.79 Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Li et al. reported that the surface coverage of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx absorber layer on TiO2 in planar heterojunction solar cells was strikingly improved due to the insertion of cesium chloride (CsCl) as crystal seeds for the orientation control of perovskite growth processes (Fig. 31a). As shown in Fig. 31b, the PCE of the HPSCs was boosted to 16.8% with a VOC of ∼1.1 V, a JSC of 20.4 mA cm−2 and a relatively higher FF of 0.79.81 Meanwhile, the CsCl-modified solar devices retained 70% of the original photovoltaic efficiency after continuous UV irradiation for 200 min. Due to the improved interface contact between the perovskite and Ag cathode, the efficiency of the HPSCs was enhanced to 15.87% by the incorporation of 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Bphen) doped with bis(2-methyldibenzo-[f,h]quinoxaline) (Ir(MDQ)2(acac)) to modify the interface between perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx)/PCBM (phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) and an Ag electrode (Fig. 32a and Fig. 32b).80 They found that the surface morphology with an appropriate interface roughness reduced the leakage current and carrier recombination (Fig. 32a). From the results of steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra, the PL intensity of hybrid perovskites was seriously quenched by introducing PCBM/Bphen:Ir(MDQ)2(acac), because Bphen:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) could act as an efficient interfacial layer for electron transport (Fig. 32c). Meanwhile, the Rs was obviously decreased by the insertion of Bphen:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) as a result of the better interface contact between the perovskite/electron transporting layer and the Ag electrode (Fig. 32d).
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic view of the CsCl modification of perovskite thin films in different atmospheres. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing device with CsCl modification measured at a scan rate of 0.10 V s−1 under simulated sunlight irradiance and in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 32  (a) Device architecture of perovskite solar cells employing a Bphen:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) interlayer. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of the PSCs with different modification layers under illumination of AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2. (c) Photoluminescence response for a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite film and those coated with PCBM, PCBM/Bphen, and PCBM/Bphen-Ir(MDQ)2(acac) thin films. (d) Nyquist plots at V = VOC for PSCs. EIS was measured in the dark and the equivalent electrical circuit is shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cesium bromide (CsBr) was also used as an efficient interfacial modification layer between the electron collection layer and the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx absorber layer to enhance the performance of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, because the decline in the work function of the c-TiO2 layer results in an increase in the open-circuit voltage (Fig. 33a and b). In addition, the solar devices with CsBr interface modification showed improved stability under ultraviolet illumination due to the decreased chemical activity and reduced defect density at the c-TiO2/perovskite interface.136
 Fig. 33  (a) UPS spectra of c-TiO2 with (w) and without (w/o) CsBr modification. The light source of UPS is a He1 discharge lamp (h = 21.2 eV); (b) energy level diagram of the device with the structure of FTO/c-TiO2(CsBr)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
2.6 Compositional engineering
The general formulas of three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic halide perovskites is ABX3, where A is a monovalent cation such as methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA), or cesium (Cs), B is a divalent metal cation such as Pb2+, Cd2+, Sn2+, Pd2+, Mn2+ and X is a halide anion. An important aspect that makes hybrid perovskites successful is the adaptability of this structure type towards A, B or X site substitution, which allows for tailoring of properties to meet particular requirements.137,138 A central principle in the development of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites is Goldschmidt's tolerance factor (TF),139–142 which can evaluate ionic size mismatches which the perovskite structure will tolerate until a different structure type is formed. The equation for TF is  with ri being the radii of ions in the perovskite ABX3, where i = A, B and X. This equation is a semi-empirical relationship that combines the idea of dense ionic packing with early estimates of ionic radii. It continues to be widely used as a guiding principle in the study of oxide perovskites. For values of TF in the range 0.9–1.0, mostly cubic perovskites are found, whereas values of 0.80–0.89 predominantly lead to distorted perovskites, which can be further classified by using Glazer's concept of octahedral tilting.143 Below ∼0.80, other structures such as the ilmenite-type (FeTiO3) are more stable due to the similar sizes of the cations A and B. Values larger than 1 lead to hexagonal structures where layers of face-sharing octahedra are introduced into the structure. In general, it is possible that hybrid perovskites could be formed for TFs between 0.8 and 1. The potential replacement of organic cations or inorganic elements is estimated by Goldschmidt's TF, as summarized in Fig. 34.144 Compositional engineering is one of the most effective ways to modify the surface morphology of hybrid perovskite films for the fabrication of highly efficient and stable HPSCs. For instance, Jeon et al. found that (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 possessed the best photoelectron properties among similar kinds of hybrid perovskites with the general form (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x, delivering HPSCs with an efficiency greater than 18%.83 They demonstrated that the incorporation of MAPbBr3 into FAPbI3 can stabilize the perovskite phase of FAPbI3 perovskites. Yao et al. incorporated polyethylenimine (PEI) cations within the layered structure of HPSCs and fabricated large-area solar devices by a one-step method with an aperture area of 2.32 cm2 under ambient humidity, and an improved PCE to 8.77% due to the improved quality of the MAPbI3 films with compact and better coverage morphology.84 In this section, we focus mainly on a change in 3D hybrid perovskite (ABX3) components to improve the surface morphology for the development of high-performance and stable hybrid perovskites.
 Fig. 34  Overview of possible compositional engineering of perovskite molecules.144 Reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The A-site cations (typically methylammonium MA = CH3NH3+) of 3D hybrid perovskites have recently concentrated on hybrid perovskites formamidinium (FA or NH2CH = NH2+), cesium (Cs) and rubidium (Rb) cations. The ionic radius of the FA cations is larger than that of the MA cations, leading to a reduced band gap (1.48 eV) of FAPbI3 compared to that of MAPbI3 (1.57 eV). In addition, compared to MA-based HPSC, FA-based HPSCs have shown improved long-term stability, making them more suitable for application in a single-junction solar cell.145 Mixed-cation perovskites have become more attractive because pure perovskite materials, such as MAPbI3, FAPbI3 and CsPbI3, come with various drawbacks.56,57 Furthermore, the combination of different cations can merge the merits of the constituents while avoiding their disadvantages in the perovskite layer. It has been shown that the enhanced photovoltaic efficiency and long-term stability of HPSCs could be achieved by introducing different cations into the crystal structure of the perovskite.123,146–149 For example, Saliba et al. used a mixture of a triple Cs/MA/FA cation to fabricate HPSCs, reaching a stabilized power output of 21.1% and ∼18% after 250 hours under operational conditions (Fig. 35), because highly monolithic grains of purer perovskite were obtained by adding small amounts of inorganic cesium in a ‘‘triple cation’’ (Cs/MA/FA) configuration.56
 Fig. 35  (a) I–V curve of triple-cation-based perovskite solar cell with only a little hysteresis and a best PCE of 21.1%; (b) comparison of PCE stability for PSC with the best component ratio with Cs and without Cs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, Saliba and his co-workers added rubidium (Rb) cations into perovskite solar cells by a one-step method and found that the photovoltaic performance of the cells was improved due to the formation of large crystals in the hybrid perovskite films. The small and oxidation-stable rubidium cation (Rb+) can be embedded into a “cation cascade” to form perovskite materials with excellent material properties, as shown in Fig. 36a–c. The open-circuit voltage reached 1.24 V with only 0.39 V loss. In addition, this kind of solar cell retained 95% of its initial efficiency at 85 °C after 500 hours under solar irradiation (Fig. 36d).86
 Fig. 36  Efficiency, open-circuit voltage, electroluminescence, and high-temperature stability of the best-performing RbCsMAFA solar cell. (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve; (b) J–V curve of the highest-VOC device; (c) EQE electroluminescence (EL) as a function of voltage; (d) thermal stability test of a perovskite solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The toxicity of lead halide perovskites remains an unavoidable issue, because low-level lead exposure still brings harmful effects to human health. The replacement of toxic lead by various non-toxic elements, including rare-earth metals, transition elements and alkali metal elements has been intensively studied to solve this environmental problem.150 Qiu et al. adopted Cs2SnI6 as a light absorbing layer to replace traditional Pb-based perovskites, as shown in Fig. 37.85 This inorganic Sn-based perovskite absorber with a bandgap of 1.48 eV shows a high absorption coefficient (over 105 cm−1 from 1.7 eV) and splendid atmospheric stability. The Cs2SnI6 thin films were prepared using a two-step sequential deposition method. The possible chemical reactions are as follows: CsSnI3 → CsI + SnI2(1) 2CsI + 2SnI2 + O2 → Cs2SnI6 + SnO2(2)
 Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of Cs2SnI6 film from CsSnI3via a two-step deposition method based on a solid-state reaction; (b) XRD pattern evolution of the B-γ Cs2SnI6 films in air after 24 h, 48 h, 6 days, and 12 days; (c) schematic illustration of the architecture for the Cs2SnI6 based perovskite solar cell; (d) J–V curves of perovskite solar cells fabricated with Cs2SnI6 of different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
The overall reaction is summarized as: 2CsSnI3 + O2 → Cs2SnI6 + SnO2(3)
However, Cs2SnI6-based HPSCs showed an optimized photovoltaic efficiency of only approximately 1% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.51 V and short-circuit current of 5.41 mA cm−2.
And then Noel et al. presented solar devices employing Sn-based hybrid perovskite, MASnI3, with a high photovoltage of over 0.88 V and power conversion efficiency of 6.4%.89 In terms of other lead-free hybrid perovskites, bismuth (Bi)-based and antimony (Sb)-based HPSCs with PCEs of 0.054% (ref. 87) and 0.46% (ref. 88) form similar chemical structures to (CH3NH3)3M2I9 (where M represents the metal element). Even though cesium germanium iodide (CsGeI3)-based HPSCs exhibited a relatively higher photocurrent density of about 6 mA cm−2 due to a smoother morphology than that of FASnI3, the rapid oxidation of Ge2+ to Ge4+ resulted in poor photovoltaic efficiency.151 To reduce the use of toxic lead, Sun et al. used density functional theory methods at different calculation levels to study the structures, and electronic and optical properties of mixed Ge/Pb perovskite light absorbers, MAGexPb(1−x)I3.152 They found that the optical absorption of mixed Ge/Pb hybrid perovskites was red-shifted to the near-infrared region with an increased proportion of Ge. According to the results of calculated short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, and theoretical power conversion efficiency, the estimated photovoltaic efficiency of mixed Ge/Pb HPSCs is superior to those of MAPbI3-based and MAGeI3-based HPSCs. The promising MAGe0.75Pb0.25I3-based HPSCs, in particular, had the highest theoretical efficiency of 24.24%.152 This discovery could probably benefit the design of non-toxic HPSCs with high photovoltaic performance and long-term stability.
The replacement of the X-anions has also been attracting more and more attention in the development of hybrid perovskites. Instead of using traditional halogens of bromide, iodide or chloride, CH3COO− and SCN− have been considered in compositional engineering for highly efficient perovskite solar cells. Zhang et al. reported that the replacement of lead halides by lead acetate could yield a pure α-phase perovskite layer at an appropriate temperature.153,154 The efficiency of CH3COO− based HPSCs has reached a PCE of 20.15% in an inverted architecture.90 Over 80% of the initial efficiency for the optimized HPSCs can be retained in dark conditions for 200 h. Tai et al. reported that a lead(II) thiocyanate (Pb(SCN)2) precursor was used to fabricate HPSCs in ambient air. The pinhole-free morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x perovskite film can be prepared under high humidity to avoid direct carrier recombination at the HTM/TiO2 interface. CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x-based HPSCs showed excellent moisture stability because of a strong ionic interactions between SCN− and adjacent Pb atoms, and the formation of hydrogen bonds between SCN− and CH3NH3+.155
2.7 Humidity control
Hybrid perovskites are extremely moisture sensitive;156–160 thus the photovoltaic performance of HPSCs rapidly degrades in moist atmosphere due to the hygroscopic nature of methylammonium (MA+, CH3NH3+) cations in hybrid perovskite materials.51 When exposed to air, the decomposition of hybrid perovskites would occur in the presence of water and light.161–164 The degradation mechanism of hybrid perovskites could be described by eqn (4)–(7). In this process, CH3NH3PbI3 could react with the water and then decompose to CH3NH3I and PbI2. The electron injection rate could be reduced in the presence of more PbI2 byproducts, but carrier recombination lifetimes could be extended upon passivation.165 Thus, more investigation is required to optimize the amount of PbI2 for the best passivation. CH3NH3PbI2 (s) ↔ CH3NH3 (aq) + PbI2 (s)(4) CH3NH3 (aq) ↔ CH3NH2 (aq) + HI (aq)(5) 4HI (aq) + O2 ↔ 2I2 (s) + H2O(6) 2HI (aq) ↔ H2↑ + I2 (s)(7)
It has been doubted that the existence of water vapor during the film deposition process has a positive influence on film formation because both perovskite precursor materials and lead halide perovskites exhibit some degree of solubility in water.166 In comparison to a film grown in dry conditions, Zhou et al. found that CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film grown under controlled humidity conditions (30 ± 5% relative humidity) exhibited improved optoelectronic properties. This is likely due to the fact that moisture could induce the reconstruction process during film formation by partial dissolution of the reactant species and an acceleration of the mass transport within the film.91 The performance of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx-based HPSCs was then boosted to a PCE of 19.3%.91 By using moisture-assisted techniques for the crystal growth of perovskite films, You et al. fabricated a perovskite layer annealed in ambient atmosphere at a relative humidity of 35% ± 5%, achieving a photovoltaic efficiency of 17.1% with a fill factor of 80% (Fig. 38b).167 Compared to a perovskite film formed in a dry nitrogen environment, the crystal size of perovskite layers annealed in a humid nitrogen chamber was increased beyond 500 nm with improved crystallinity, reduced pinholes and uniform coverage, confirming that moisture plays a dominant role in the growth of perovskite films, as a result of the enhanced diffusion length of the precursor ions and induced recrystallization process using the moisture annealing method (Fig. 38e–j). In terms of photophysical properties, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) showed that the PL intensity was intensified by utilizing the annealing method due to the inhibited non-radiative decay (Fig. 38c). Additionally, the time-resolved PL (TRPL) revealed that the PL lifetime of hybrid perovskites formed by the humidity-controlled annealing process was increased because the reduced defects suppressed the non-radiative recombination channels (Fig. 38d). Therefore, the transformation route was altered by a small quantity of atmospheric moisture to produce high-quality crystals of perovskite films.
 Fig. 38  (a) Inverted device structure using PFN as buffer layer; (b) J–V curve of the corresponding devices with the perovskite films annealed under different environments; (c) steady-state PL measurement of perovskite film annealed under different environments, including nitrogen, ambient air, and oxygen; the films are all coated on the PEDOT:PSS surface. (d) TRPL measurement for the corresponding perovskite films. SEM images of the perovskite film precursor films annealed under different conditions (e and h) in nitrogen; (f and i) in ambient air; (g and j) in oxygen environment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright 2017 AIP Publishing LLC. 
Gangishetty et al.93 studied the influence of atmospheric relative humidity (RH) during the formation of hybrid perovskite films. Fig. 39a–f shows the SEM images of both PbI2 (Fig. 39a) and perovskite films (Fig. 39b–f). The vapor-deposited PbI2 film exhibit a hexagonal flake-like morphology (Fig. 39a). With the growth of RH in the environment, the perovskite crystallites took on a less distinctive cubic shape, but provided much better connectivity. Thus it is noticeable that RH has a significant impact on the growth and crystallization of hybrid perovskite films. Fig. 39g and h shows the effect of humidity on the performance of solar devices. It is can be seen that the highest performance of a solar device prepared at 40% RH shows a PCE of 12.2%. For validation of the trends in short-circuit current density, the incident photon-to-current (IPCE) spectra were then recorded for the optimum solar device (Fig. 39h).
 Fig. 39  SEM images of (a) PbI2, and CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared at (b) 1%, (c) 20%, (d) 30%, (e) 40%, and (f) 60% RH. (g) J–V curves of the highest performance devices measured at a scan rate of 0.83 V s−1. (h) IPCE spectra of the same devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The IPCE increased with RH, in agreement with the observed trends in JSC. However, the most important differences between the spectra are the conspicuous changes in photon-to-current efficiency between 300 and 500 nm. From a quantitative analysis of light-harvesting efficiency as well as the IPEC investigation, they confirmed that the solar devices fabricated at low RH showed a low IPCE owing to charge-carrier recombination, rather than transmission losses.
Gong et al. used water as an additive during perovskite crystal growth, as shown in Fig. 40a.94 Compared with anhydrous DMF, the controllable growth of hybrid perovskites was obtained by blending suitable water additives in DMF due to the lower boiling point and higher vapor pressure of water. The surface morphology of DMF-only-based perovskite films showed many small pinholes and voids (Fig. 40c). The film defects and poor surface coverage would give rise to inefficient charge transport and weak light absorption in hybrid perovskite films. With the introduction of water additive, the average grain size of the hybrid perovskites was increased, and the voids on the surface of perovskite films surface partially dematerialized. It is noticeable that an enlarged grain size with more voids produced between the grains were found by increasing values of the H2O/DMF ratio in the range 0–10%. As shown in Fig. 40i, the SEM result of DMF + 10% H2O-based perovskite films is much more evident. Fig. 40b shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the HPSCs with different ratios of deionized H2O to DMF. The CH3NH3PbI3−xClx-based HPSCs treated with an optimized H2O ratio of 2% exhibited a remarkably enhanced PCE of 16.06% with a VOC of 0.95 V, a JSC of 21.67 mA cm−2 and an FF of 78%.
 Fig. 40  (a) Device configuration of the planar perovskite solar cells and a schematic diagram of incorporating water additive into DMF-based perovskite precursor solutions. (b) J–V curves of devices with selected ratios of water additive in precursor solutions under AM 1.5 G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films based on (c) DMF, (d) DMF + 1% H2O, (e) DMF + 2% H2O, (f) DMF + 3% H2O, (g) DMF + 5% H2O, (h) DMF + 7% H2O, and (i) DMF + 10% H2O solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The addition of a small quantity of water into methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) solution in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) could facilitate perovskite crystal growth with an enlarged grain size from sequential deposition of perovskite films.95 As displayed in the AFM images (Fig. 41a–e), the grain size of hybrid perovskite films was raised from 171 nm for 0% water (Fig. 41a) to 630 nm for 5% water (Fig. 41d) in MAI solution. When the concentration of water was further increased to 7%, the average grain size then decreased to 330 nm with the excess water, owing to the dissolution of large crystals, as indicated in Fig. 41e and f. After adding various concentrations of water into the MAI solution during the fabrication of HPSCs, the average photovoltaic performance for hybrid perovskite films deposited from 0% water in the MAI solution showed a PCE of 9.04%. By contrast, the average efficiency of 5%-water-based solar devices was improved to a higher PCE of 12.42%. According to the transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements, hybrid perovskite films prepared from 5% water in MAI solution exhibited the shortest charge transport time at 0.99 μs and the longest charge-carrier lifetime at 13.6 μs, illustrating a significant improvement in the solar cell efficiency under controlled humidity conditions.
 Fig. 41  AFM images of perovskite films prepared from (a) 0%, (b) 1%, (c) 3%, (d) 5%, and (e) 7% water in the MAI solution; and (f) average particle size vs. water concentration. (g) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics; (h) transient photovoltage; and (i) transient photocurrent of annealed perovskite solar cells prepared from 0%, 1%, 3%, 5%, and 7% water in the MAI solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3. Conclusions
In this review, we have systematically discussed recent progress in the understanding and manipulation of morphology engineering on the light absorption, exciton diffusion, charge transport, photovoltaic performance and long-term stability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells. Up to now, several methodologies related to morphology engineering methods have been reported for the formation of high-quality perovskite films, such as additive engineering, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), solvent engineering, solvent annealing, thermal engineering, compositional engineering, as well as humidity engineering. Hybrid perovskite films with larger grain sizes and fewer pinholes have been produced, on the one hand, either by producing additive-doped films or by forming chemical bonds with self-assembled monolayers or by adding a strongly coordinating solvent, improving interfacial contacts between electrode/electron transport materials (ETM) interface, ETM/perovskite interface, perovskite/hole transport materials (HTM) interface and HTM/electrode interface, thus reducing charge non-radiative recombination, simultaneously increasing the exciton diffusion length/lifetime. On the other hand, the crystallinity of hybrid perovskite layers can be increased under controlled temperature and humidity conditions, avoiding other chemical reactions and preventing the penetration of water, consequently improving the stability of hybrid perovskites.
Despite the rapid progress in the performance of hybrid perovskite solar cells, there are still many more opportunities for further improvement. Morphology engineering has the great potential to considerably enhance the efficiency and stability of hybrid perovskite solar cells. However, the interaction mechanism between the hybrid perovskite and other interface layers still remains unclear and needs to be further explored to facilitate the application of morphology engineering. Most of the techniques of morphology engineering have been limited to specific conditions during the fabrication of hybrid perovskite films. With regard to the next direction in morphology engineering, film quality could be improved by either integrating these existing techniques with different functions or by exploring new technologies to reach distinctive and goal-oriented morphology control. For example, Ji and his co-workers demonstrated the heteroepitaxial growth of MAPbI3 on KCl (100) with the resulting epitaxial films exhibiting excellent morphology, crystallinity, and carrier lifetime, because the lattice mismatch of MAPbI3 (110)/KCl (001) was calculated to be only 0.3% at room temperature, favorable for heteroepitaxy.168 In addition to experimental approaches, theoretical calculations still cannot be performed regularly in the area of morphology control, but can definitely make a significant contribution to further advances in the design of morphological techniques.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Strategic Research Grant (grant No. 7004928, 6000595, 7200525, and 9680208) at City University of Hong Kong and SZSTI Grant (grant No. R-IND12301) at Science Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality.
References
F. De Angelis, D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi, A. Petrozza, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 857–861 CrossRef .
Z. K. Wang, M. Li, Y. G. Yang, Y. Hu, H. Ma, X. Y. Gao and L. S. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6695–6703 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Sengupta, A. Habte, C. Gueymard, S. Wilbert and D. Renne, Best practices handbook for the collection and use of solar resource data for solar energy applications, National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO, United States,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Modi, F. Bühler, J. G. Andreasen and F. Haglind, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 1047–1064 CrossRef .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Guo and T. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27026–27050 RSC .
H. R. Moutinho, S. Johnston, B. To, C.-S. Jiang, C. Xiao, P. Hacke, J. Moseley, J. Tynan, N. Dhere and M. Al-Jassim, Sol. Energy, 2018, 161, 235–241 CrossRef .
I. Celik, A. B. Phillips, Z. Song, Y. Yan, R. J. Ellingson, M. J. Heben and D. Apul, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1874–1884 RSC .
T. D. Lee and A. U. Ebong, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 70, 1286–1297 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, W. Zhang, J. Ye and P. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 117–123 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. T. de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef PubMed .
K. G. Lim, H. B. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6461–6466 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-G. Lim, S. Ahn, Y.-H. Kim, Y. Qi and T.-W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 932–939 RSC .
H. Kim, K.-G. Lim and T.-W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 12–30 RSC .
K. G. Lim, S. Ahn, H. Kim, M. R. Choi, D. H. Huh and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500678 CrossRef .
L. Meng, J. You, T.-F. Guo and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 155–165 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Choi, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11842–11847 RSC .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio, M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo and I. McPherson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2572–2579 RSC .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 RSC .
J. Y. Jeng, K. C. Chen, T. Y. Chiang, P. Y. Lin, T. D. Tsai, Y. C. Chang, T. F. Guo, P. Chen, T. C. Wen and Y. J. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4107–4113 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 RSC .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 RSC .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081513 CrossRef .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Liu, G. E. Eperon, T. C. Leijtens, D. McMeekin, M. Saliba, W. Zhang, M. de Bastiani, A. Petrozza and L. M. Herz, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 315–322 RSC .
F. Wang, W. Geng, Y. Zhou, H.-H. Fang, C.-J. Tong, M. A. Loi, L.-M. Liu and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9986–9992 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef .
R. A. Goyer, Environ. Health Perspect., 1993, 100, 177 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, P. Chen, M. Hao and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602512 CrossRef .
U. Ashraf and X. Tang, Chemosphere, 2017, 176, 141–155 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. L. a. P. M. Woodward, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2001, 57, 725–738 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari and R. M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-Y. Gu, N. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Long, M. Tian, W. Chen, X. W. Sun, M. G. Kanatzidis and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7339–7344 RSC .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, eaam5655 Search PubMed .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, N. Sakai, S. van Reenen, K. Wojciechowski, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604186 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Pratyusha, G. Sivakumar, D. Gupta and A. Yella, Mater. Today Commun., 2017, 4, 6820–6826 Search PubMed .
H. Li, W. Shi, W. Huang, E.-P. Yao, J. Han, Z. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2328–2335 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053–5075 RSC .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef .
T. Salim, S. Sun, Y. Abe, A. Krishna, A. C. Grimsdale and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8943–8969 RSC .
S. Shahbazi, C.-M. Tsai, S. Narra, C.-Y. Wang, H.-S. Shiu, S. Afshar, N. Taghavinia and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3673–3679 CrossRef .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, C.-Y. Chu, Y.-C. Huang, C.-W. Huang, S.-Y. Chang, C.-A. Chen, C.-Y. Chao and W.-F. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4955–4961 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, J. Xu, S. B. Jo and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 392–398 CrossRef .
C. Sun, Q. Xue, Z. Hu, Z. Chen, F. Huang, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, Small, 2015, 11, 3344–3350 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, N. Song, L. Feng and X. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24703–24711 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606774 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, C. O. Ramírez Quiroz, S. Scheiner, W. Chen, T. Stubhan, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501056 CrossRef .
L. Liu, A. Mei, T. Liu, P. Jiang, Y. Sheng, L. Zhang and H. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1790–1793 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bai, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Shen, D. Wang, W. Wei and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12806 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Abrusci, S. D. Stranks, P. Docampo, H. L. Yip, A. K. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3124–3128 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gu, L. Zuo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, T. Ye, G. Wu, F. C. Krebs and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24254–24260 RSC .
Y. Bai, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, T. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, C. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Hu, F. Huang, K. S. Wong, H.-L. Yip and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2950–2958 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, J. Fan, J. Li, Y. Mai and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10399–10405 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, P. Liu, S. Bai, Z. Yu, W. Liu, S.-S. Guo and X.-Z. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 111–115 CrossRef .
D. Bi, J. Luo, F. Zhang, A. Magrez, E. Nefeli Athanasopoulou, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1624–1630 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Aharon, A. Dymshits, A. Rotem and L. Etgar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9171–9178 RSC .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, K. W. Tan, H. Sai, D. T. Moore, T. Scott, W. Zhang, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17171–17177 CrossRef .
D.-X. Yuan, X.-D. Yuan, Q.-Y. Xu, M.-F. Xu, X.-B. Shi, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26653–26658 RSC .
Y. Dong, W. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Xu, Q. Liu, C. Li and Z. Bo, Small, 2016, 12, 1098–1104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Min, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Hou, C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, T. Przybilla, C. Bronnbauer, F. Guo, K. Forberich, H. Azimi, T. Ameri, E. Spiecker, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 227–234 CrossRef .
L.-L. Jiang, S. Cong, Y.-H. Lou, Q.-H. Yi, J.-T. Zhu, H. Ma and G.-F. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 217–222 RSC .
W. Li, J. Li, G. Niu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11688–11695 RSC .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, X. Liu, C. C. Chueh, S. Yang and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6478–6484 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-x. Xu, F. Li and L. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3131–3138 CrossRef .
X. Qiu, B. Cao, S. Yuan, X. Chen, Z. Qiu, Y. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Wang, H. Zeng, J. Liu and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 227–234 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kong, H. Hu, L. Wan, M. Chen, Y. Gan, J. Wang, F. Chen, B. Dong, D. Eder and S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 35549–35557 RSC .
J.-C. Hebig, I. Kühn, J. Flohre and T. Kirchartz, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 309–314 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
D. Luo, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Q. Hu, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, T. Liu, K. Chen, W. Yang, W. Zhang, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604758 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef PubMed .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 105, 183902 CrossRef .
M. K. Gangishetty, R. W. J. Scott and T. L. Kelly, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6300–6307 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Li, X.-B. Shi, H. Ma, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef .
N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, E. A. Gaml, B. Vaagensmith, K. M. Reza, S. A. A. Mabrouk, S. Gu, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2693–2703 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. B. Shi, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Centeno, B. Ahmed, H. Reehal and F. Xie, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 415402 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakayama, K. Tanabe and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 121904 CrossRef .
J. Kim, J. S. Yun, X. Wen, A. M. Soufiani, C. F. J. Lau, B. Wilkinson, J. Seidel, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Ho-Baillie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11262–11267 CrossRef .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533–1554 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2376–2382 CrossRef .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 441 CrossRef .
C.-T. Tseng, Y.-H. Cheng, M.-C. M. Lee, C.-C. Han, C.-H. Cheng and Y.-T. Tao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233510 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yoon, K.-Y. Jung, J. Liu, T. Duraisamy, R. Revur, F. L. Teixeira, S. Sengupta and P. R. Berger, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 128–132 CrossRef .
T. Ohno, Y. Chen, S. Harvey, G. Kroll, J. Weaver, R. Haufler and R. Smalley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 13747 CrossRef .
M. Willenbockel, D. Lüftner, B. Stadtmüller, G. Koller, C. Kumpf, S. Soubatch, P. Puschnig, M. Ramsey and F. Tautz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1530–1548 RSC .
H. Vázquez, W. Gao, F. Flores and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 041306 CrossRef .
G. Yang, C. Wang, H. Lei, X. Zheng, P. Qin, L. Xiong, X. Zhao, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1658–1666 RSC .
H. Pan, L. Zuo, W. Fu, C. Fan, B. Andreasen, X. Jiang, K. Norrman, F. C. Krebs and H. Chen, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 797–803 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, C. O. R. Quiroz, S. Scheiner, W. Chen, T. Stubhan, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501056 CrossRef .
L. Zuo, Z. Gu, T. Ye, W. Fu, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2674–2679 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee and N.-G. Park, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 654–659 CrossRef .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yi, X. Li, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2964–2970 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Li, P. Zhang, D. Liu, X. Gu, H. Sarvari, Z. Ye, J. Wu, Z. Wang and Z. D. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19654–19661 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, X. Liu, Y. Xia, Q. Dong, K. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 321–326 RSC .
C. Liu, K. Wang, C. Yi, X. Shi, A. W. Smith, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 101–110 CrossRef .
S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, A. Solanki, H. A. Dewi, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27119–27123 RSC .
H.-Y. Hsu, L. Ji, M. Du, J. Zhao, E. T. Yu and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19890–19895 CrossRef .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak and M. B. Johnston, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
W. Li, H. Dong, L. Wang, N. Li, X. Guo, J. Li and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13587–13592 RSC .
Y. Ogomi, K. Kukihara, S. Qing, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. Pandey, H. Momose and S. Hayase, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1062–1069 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16651–16659 CrossRef .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mahmood, S. Sarwar and M. T. Mehran, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17044–17062 RSC .
Q. Xue, Z. Hu, J. Liu, J. Lin, C. Sun, Z. Chen, C. Duan, J. Wang, C. Liao and W. M. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19598–19603 RSC .
N. Tripathi, Y. Shirai, M. Yanagida, A. Karen and K. Miyano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4644–4650 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Tan, C. Li, F. Wu, L. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19024–19033 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-B. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jeong, S. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679–6683 RSC .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CrossRef .
X. Dong, X. Fang, M. Lv, B. Lin, S. Zhang, J. Ding and N. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5360–5367 RSC .
J. Xiong, B. Yang, C. Cao, R. Wu, Y. Huang, J. Sun, J. Zhang, C. Liu, S. Tao, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 30–35 CrossRef .
W. Li, W. Zhang, S. Van Reenen, R. J. Sutton, J. Fan, A. A. Haghighirad, M. B. Johnston, L. Wang and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 490–498 RSC .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, M. Tian, M. Eguchi and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9849–9855 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
S. C. Tidrow, Ferroelectrics, 2014, 470, 13–27 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Travis, E. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. Scanlon and R. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
A. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 1972, 28, 3384–3392 CrossRef .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Shirai, X. Yang, Y. Yue, W. Chen, Y. Wu, A. Islam and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4918–4923 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Hsu, L. Ji, M. Du, J. Zhao, T. Y. Edward and A. J. Bard, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 205–210 CrossRef .
T. Krishnamoorthy, H. Ding, C. Yan, W. L. Leong, T. Baikie, Z. Zhang, M. Sherburne, S. Li, M. Asta and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23829–23832 RSC .
P.-P. Sun, Q.-S. Li, S. Feng and Z.-S. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14408–14418 RSC .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber and A. Abate, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, A. Sadhanala and W. Li, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Hsu, L. Ji, H. S. Ahn, J. Zhao, E. T. Yu and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14758–14764 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. van Franeker, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9380–9393 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 7727–7730 CrossRef .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y.-B. Cheng, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15016 CrossRef .
I. Hwang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17330–17336 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 RSC .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Schwanitz, U. Weiler, R. Hunger, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 849–854 CrossRef .
L. Wang, C. McCleese, A. Kovalsky, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12205–12208 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Egger, E. Edri, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 279–282 CrossRef PubMed .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang and G. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
L. Ji, H.-Y. Hsu, J. C. Lee, A. J. Bard and E. T. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 994–1000 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Contributing equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Three typical device structures of perovskite solar cells: (a) mesoporous, (b) regular planar structure, and (c) inverted planar structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Classification of morphology engineering technologies for hybrid perovskite solar cells.	 


Additive engineering

Perovskite film doped with AgI	12%	
53

Aluminum oxide as post-modification material	4.6%	
54

Aniline derivatives as dopant	19.2%	
33

PEG as additive into perovskite	13.20%	
55

Cesium as additive into triple perovskite	21.1%	
56

Doping HI by intramolecular exchanging process	22.1%	
57

Using TPPI as additive	13.0%	
58

Benzenamine doped perovskite	18.85%	
59

Hypophosphorous acid doped perovskite	16.2%	
17

CH3NH2 additive-based solution	20.02%	
60



Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)

WOx layer in combination with fullerene	14.9%	
61

Using silane as SAM	12.7%	
62

Crosslinkable silane-functionalized fullerene layer	19.5%	
63

C60SAM	11.7%	
64

C3-SAM	11.6%	
65

DEA as SAM	16%	
66



Solvent engineering and solvent annealing

GBL and DMSO solvent system	16.2%	
67

DMF, I− and DMSO system	19.7%	
68

DMF and DMSO system	>17%	
69

Intramolecular exchange process of DMSO	20.2%	
70

Chlorobenzene annealing during spin-coating	13.9 ± 0.7%	
71

IPA, CB or ET annealing during spin-coating	11.22%	
72



Thermal engineering

100 °C, ((FAI)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbI2)0.85(PbBr2)0.15)	19.5%	
73

95 °C, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	11.4%	
51

175 °C, mixture of FAPbI3 and MAPbI3	11.6%	
74

100 °C, MAPbI3	11.7%	
75

130 °C, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	10.7%	
76



Interface engineering

BCP as buffer layer	13.06%	
77

PFN-P2 as electron buffer layer	13.2%	
80

PCBA as modification for TiO2	17.76%	
78

PDINO as cathode interface layer	13.0%	
79

Bphen doped with Ir(MDQ)2(acac)	15.87%	
80

Cesium chloride (CsCl) as crystal seeds	16.8%	
81

Cesium bromide as buffer layer	16.3%	
82



Compositional engineering

(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15	18%	
83

PEI based perovskite with 2.32 cm2 working area	8.77%	
84

FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3	21.1%	
34

All inorganic, lead-free perovskite (Cs2SnI6)	1%	
85

Rb+ added into perovskite	21.6%	
86

(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9	0.054%	
87

(CH3NH3)3Sb2I9	0.46%	
88

Sn based HPSCs	6.4%	
89

CH3NH3PbI3−x(Ac)x	20.3%	
90

CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x	15%	
25



Humidity engineering

30% RH for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	19.3%	
91

35% ± 5% RH for CH3NH3PbI3−xCl	17.1%	
92

40% RH for CH3NH3PbI3	12.2%	
93

2% water additives in DMF for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	16.06%	
94

5% water concentration in MAI solution	12.42%	
95


 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of perovskite film deposition procedure; (b) device structure; (c–f) top-view and cross-section view for devices with and without AgI, respectively; (g) I–V curve and IPCE measurements for perovskite with and without AgI, respectively; (h) time-resolved PL decay profiles for showing the effect of interfacial charge transport caused by AgI additive on an n-type (TiO2) or a p-type (PEDOT:PSS) contact layer with excitation at 635 nm and probe at 770 nm; (i) schematic illustration of the energy levels for two cases of PSK films, the left is the n-type PSK film and the right is p-type PSK film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer with and without DIO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wenheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–d) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography images of FAPbI3 on TiO2/FTO glass deposited by gas-assisted spin-coating and with HI additive at various concentrations (a) 0, (b) 0.05, (c) 0.10, and (d) 0.20 g mL−1. The corresponding KPFM images of the same film are shown in panels (e)–(h). (i) PL decay traces at 800 nm for FAPbI3 with the above HI additive concentrations. (j) Average electroluminescence intensities as a function of applied voltage of FAPbI3 on bl-TiO2/FTO glass formed using various HI additive concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device configuration of the planar-heterojunction solar cell and the chemical structures of different organic halide salts used in this study; (b) SEM images for different molar ratio of additive-doped perovskite surface; (c) current density–voltage characteristics; (d) EQE spectra of pristine and additive-doped perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of a cross-sectional view of the perovskite solar cell architecture: ITO/WOx/SAMs/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag; SAMs molecules: pure organic spacer (left, SAMs(I-Ph-PA)) and fullerene (right, SAMs (C60-C6-PA)). (b) AFM topography of the surface of a WOx film (left) and a mixed SAMs on top of WOx (right). The size of the AFM images is 2.5 × 2.5 μm2. The measured root mean square roughness is 3.2 nm (left) and 3.9 nm (right). (c) Contact angles of water on reference WOx substrates without and with SAMs.61 Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Device structure and explanation of SAM formed by fullerene and silane; (b) J–V curve with different scanning directions and sweeping rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectra of P3HT and perovskite films with and without C60-SAMs fullerene functionalization. Inset: energy levels of the system components relative to vacuum. (b) Schematic of the device structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cell structure with C3-SAM. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image. (The direction of the extra permanent dipole is stressed with a bold arrow.) (c) UPS spectrum for the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS (black line), methanol-washed PEDOT:PSS (red line) and C3-SAM modified PEDOT:PSS (blue line). (d) The energy level alignment in fabricated PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) and (b) are schematic diagrams of perovskite solar cell device and energy level diagram; (c) and (d) are UV-vis absorption spectrum and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy for zinc oxide with and without C3-SAM, respectively; (e) and (f) are steady-state PL spectrum and transient PL spectrum for perovskite films on bare ZnO and silica with or without C3-SAM modification, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Device structure and schematic illustration of SAMs; (b) XRD data for perovskite precursor films on NiO with and without DEA modification; (c) the transient PL decay for the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer on quartz/DEA, PVK here stands for perovskite layer; (d) schematic energy levels of each layer in the perovskite solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of two kinds of solution-based methods for perovskite layer fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117, Copyright 2015 Materials Research Society. (b) SEM image and (c) photovoltaic performance of HPSCs made by a two-step method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) I–V curve and (b) IPCE measurement for the best devices through solvent engineering; (c) FTIR spectrum of DMSO (solution), PbI2·DMSO (powder), MAI·PbI2·DMSO (powder) and (d) expanded fingerprint region for the SO vibrations; (e) schematic representation of fabrication procedure and plane-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images for the MAPbI3 perovskite layers obtained by direct one-step spin-coating of the DMF solution containing (1) (3) MAI and PbI2 or (2) (4) MAI, PbI2, and DMSO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of FAPbI3 perovskite crystallization involving the direct intramolecular exchange of DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). (b) The comparison of FESEM surface images of the FAPbI3-based layer formed on mp-TiO2 by IEP and conventional method. (c) Representative J–V curves for FAPbI3-based cells fabricated by IEP and conventional process. (d) XRD patterns of as-formed and annealed films for FAPbI3-based layers formed by IEP (red line) and conventional (blue line) process. #, and * denote the identified diffraction peaks corresponding to the FAPbI3 perovskite phase, PbI2, and FAI, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2015 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite layer fabrication process including a process of toluene dripping as modification for perovskite; (b) scheme for the formation of the perovskite material via the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase; (c) FTIR spectrum on left and a description of the cell structure on the right; (d) XRD data for the intermediate phase of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO. (e) Device architecture of the bilayered perovskite cell. (f) The J–V curve shows little hysteresis in the devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the solvent engineering process by DMSO and DMF mixed solution.69 Reprinted with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite deposition process and conventional spin-coating process for fabricating perovskite films. Device structure and photovoltaic characterization. (b) TEM characterization of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite grain structures. (c) Photocurrent density and PCE as a function of time for the same cell. The cell was placed in the dark prior to the start of the measurement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a–c) Schematics of the interdiffusion approach and solvent-annealing-induced grain size increase. SEM images of the thermally annealed (TA) perovskite films with thicknesses of 250 nm (d), 430 nm (g), and 1015 nm (j), and solvent-annealed (SA) perovskite films with thicknesses of 250 nm (e), 430 nm (h) and 1015 nm (k); the scale bars in the SEM micrographs are 2 μm. (f, i and l) Grain-size distributions of the SEM images to the left. (m) Average grain size versus annealing time for the 300 nm thick perovskite films. (n) XRD patterns of the thermally annealed and solvent-annealed 300 nm thick perovskite films. (o) Single-path absorption of the perovskite films with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematics of two-step sequential deposition process (a) without solvent treatment, and (b) with solvent (IPA, CB, or ET) treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Top-view SEM images of perovskite films under different annealing temperatures; (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of the films deposited on meso-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO glass substrates after annealing at various temperatures for 90 min; (c) influence of annealing temperature on photovoltaic parameters of the fabricated solar cells. JSC (blue), VOC (red), FF (green), and PCE (black) measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of perovskite compositions at various annealing temperatures (100 °C, 175 °C and 230 °C). The white scale bar is 5 m and the orange scale bar (inset) is 1 m. (a) MAPbI3 annealed at 100 °C. (b) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 100 °C. (c) FAPbI3 annealed at 100 °C. (d) MAPbI3 annealed at 175 °C. (e) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 175 °C. (f) FAPbI3 annealed at 175 °C. (g) MAPbI3 annealed at 230 °C. (h) MAPbI3:FAPbI3 = 1:1 annealed at 230 °C. (i) FAPbI3 annealed at 230 °C. (j) Pictures of the samples of MAPbI3 or FAPbI3 on glass after annealing at various temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  SEM images of mTiO2 films with deposited perovskite solution heat treated at (a) 60 °C, (b) 80 °C, (c) 100 °C, (d) 120 °C, (e) 150 °C, (f) 175 °C, and (g) 200 °C. (h) Cross-sectional image of sample annealed at 150 °C. Black scale bars correspond to (a) 5 μm, (b–g) 1 μm, and (h) 200 nm. (i) X-ray diffraction patterns of perovskite samples annealed at different temperatures. (j) UV-vis absorption spectra for mTiO2 films with perovskite annealed at different temperatures. (k) J–V characteristics taken under standard AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (solid) and in the dark (dashed) for devices made using different annealing temperatures for the perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 24  Plan-view and cross-sectional SEM micrographs of perovskite films on (a–d) NP-Al2O3, (e–h) BCP-Al2O3, and (i–l) planar silicon substrates prepared by the respective thermal annealing procedures as indicated. (m) NP-Al2O3 MSSC and (n) planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells measured under stimulated AM 1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Interpretation for buffer layers in conventional perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Device structure of MAPbI2.4Br0.6 based perovskite solar cells. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MAPbI2.4Br0.6 based perovskite solar cells measured under AM 1.5 G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Perovskite formation by using a successive spin-coating method with PFN-P1. CB: chlorobenzene; IPA: isopropyl alcohol; (b) schematic of device configuration. (c and d) Chemical structures of PFN-P2 and PFN-P1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The degradation trend of PCEs for PHJ-PSC devices with and without a TiO2 NPs interface layer. (b) The cathode electrode of PSC device easily peeled off from the devices, leading to complete loss of efficiency after only 1 h exposure to air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138, Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic representation of the typical full-device structure. (b) J–V curves measured under AM 1.5 G illumination. (c) Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films fabricated on the bare c-TiO2 and c-TiO2/PCBA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2015 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Device structure; (b) the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the perovskite solar cells made from Ag, ZnO/Ag, and PDINO/Ag cathodes measured under illumination of an AM 1.5 G solar simulator (100 mW cm−2) in air; (c) schematic representation of the band energy diagrams for the p–i–n configuration of pero-HSCs; (d) EQE spectra of the pero-HSCs with different cathodes measured in air.79 Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic view of the CsCl modification of perovskite thin films in different atmospheres. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing device with CsCl modification measured at a scan rate of 0.10 V s−1 under simulated sunlight irradiance and in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Device architecture of perovskite solar cells employing a Bphen:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) interlayer. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of the PSCs with different modification layers under illumination of AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2. (c) Photoluminescence response for a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite film and those coated with PCBM, PCBM/Bphen, and PCBM/Bphen-Ir(MDQ)2(acac) thin films. (d) Nyquist plots at V = VOC for PSCs. EIS was measured in the dark and the equivalent electrical circuit is shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) UPS spectra of c-TiO2 with (w) and without (w/o) CsBr modification. The light source of UPS is a He1 discharge lamp (h = 21.2 eV); (b) energy level diagram of the device with the structure of FTO/c-TiO2(CsBr)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  Overview of possible compositional engineering of perovskite molecules.144 Reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) I–V curve of triple-cation-based perovskite solar cell with only a little hysteresis and a best PCE of 21.1%; (b) comparison of PCE stability for PSC with the best component ratio with Cs and without Cs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  Efficiency, open-circuit voltage, electroluminescence, and high-temperature stability of the best-performing RbCsMAFA solar cell. (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve; (b) J–V curve of the highest-VOC device; (c) EQE electroluminescence (EL) as a function of voltage; (d) thermal stability test of a perovskite solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
CsSnI3 → CsI + SnI2	(1)
2CsI + 2SnI2 + O2 → Cs2SnI6 + SnO2	(2)

 	Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of Cs2SnI6 film from CsSnI3via a two-step deposition method based on a solid-state reaction; (b) XRD pattern evolution of the B-γ Cs2SnI6 films in air after 24 h, 48 h, 6 days, and 12 days; (c) schematic illustration of the architecture for the Cs2SnI6 based perovskite solar cell; (d) J–V curves of perovskite solar cells fabricated with Cs2SnI6 of different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.	 
2CsSnI3 + O2 → Cs2SnI6 + SnO2	(3)
CH3NH3PbI2 (s) ↔ CH3NH3 (aq) + PbI2 (s)	(4)
CH3NH3 (aq) ↔ CH3NH2 (aq) + HI (aq)	(5)
4HI (aq) + O2 ↔ 2I2 (s) + H2O	(6)
2HI (aq) ↔ H2↑ + I2 (s)	(7)

 	Fig. 38  (a) Inverted device structure using PFN as buffer layer; (b) J–V curve of the corresponding devices with the perovskite films annealed under different environments; (c) steady-state PL measurement of perovskite film annealed under different environments, including nitrogen, ambient air, and oxygen; the films are all coated on the PEDOT:PSS surface. (d) TRPL measurement for the corresponding perovskite films. SEM images of the perovskite film precursor films annealed under different conditions (e and h) in nitrogen; (f and i) in ambient air; (g and j) in oxygen environment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright 2017 AIP Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 39  SEM images of (a) PbI2, and CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared at (b) 1%, (c) 20%, (d) 30%, (e) 40%, and (f) 60% RH. (g) J–V curves of the highest performance devices measured at a scan rate of 0.83 V s−1. (h) IPCE spectra of the same devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Device configuration of the planar perovskite solar cells and a schematic diagram of incorporating water additive into DMF-based perovskite precursor solutions. (b) J–V curves of devices with selected ratios of water additive in precursor solutions under AM 1.5 G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films based on (c) DMF, (d) DMF + 1% H2O, (e) DMF + 2% H2O, (f) DMF + 3% H2O, (g) DMF + 5% H2O, (h) DMF + 7% H2O, and (i) DMF + 10% H2O solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 41  AFM images of perovskite films prepared from (a) 0%, (b) 1%, (c) 3%, (d) 5%, and (e) 7% water in the MAI solution; and (f) average particle size vs. water concentration. (g) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics; (h) transient photovoltage; and (i) transient photocurrent of annealed perovskite solar cells prepared from 0%, 1%, 3%, 5%, and 7% water in the MAI solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Contributing equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
