Intelligent wearable devices based on nanomaterials and nanostructures for healthcare  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR04551F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR04551F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 405-433Intelligent wearable devices based on nanomaterials and nanostructures for healthcare

        
          
            Liping 
            Xie
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zelin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiushuo 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuxuan 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gaotian 
            Mi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Renqiao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong-bin 
            Sun
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Zhao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yanan 
            Du
          
        
      b
aCollege of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, 110169, China. E-mail: xielp@bmie.neu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
cDepartment of Chemistry, Northeastern University, Shenyang, 110819, China
Received 
      19th August 2022
    , Accepted 17th November 2022First published on 18th November 2022AbstractEmerging classes of flexible electronic sensors as alternatives to conventional rigid sensors offer a powerful set of capabilities for detecting and quantifying physiological and physical signals from human skin in personal healthcare. Unfortunately, the practical applications and commercialization of flexible sensors are generally limited by certain unsatisfactory aspects of their performance, such as biocompatibility, low sensing range, power supply, or single sensory function. This review intends to provide up-to-date literature on wearable devices for smart healthcare. A systematic review is provided, from sensors based on nanomaterials and nanostructures, algorithms, to multifunctional integrated devices with stretchability, self-powered performance, and biocompatibility. Typical electromechanical sensors are investigated with a specific focus on the strategies for constructing high-performance sensors based on nanomaterials and nanostructures. Then, the review emphasizes the importance of tailoring the fabrication techniques in order to improve stretchability, biocompatibility, and self-powered performance. The construction of wearable devices with high integration, high performance, and multi-functionalization for multiparameter healthcare is discussed in depth. Integrating wearable devices with appropriate machine learning algorithms is summarized. After interpretation of the algorithms, intelligent predictions are produced to give instructions or predictions for smart implementations. It is desired that this review will offer guidance for future excellence in flexible wearable sensing technologies and provide insight into commercial wearable sensors.
1. Introduction
With the advancement of the fourth industrial revolution, a wave of new industries and interdisciplinary research, such as the Internet of Things, Big Data, and Artificial Intelligence, is breaking out.1–4 Wearable sensors as the key elements for data acquisition have attracted much attention and exhibited promising applications in personalized healthcare,5 human–computer interaction,6 and clinical diagnosis.7 Monitoring physiological health parameters is the key to disease prevention and diagnosis.8 Currently, the monitoring of clinical physiological signals still uses traditional rigid sensors. However, they are only suitable for plane measurement, and cannot adapt to the curved surface characteristics of human skin due to their poor flexibility, resulting in large errors in measuring human physiological signals and uncomfortableness. The great demand for wearable medical devices is driving the rapid innovation of flexible electronics. They can be arbitrarily bent or even folded, adapting to the measurement of physiological signals of complex curved surfaces.9,10 Ultra-thin, portable, and flexible sensors help people to monitor health and exercise information anytime and anywhere, which is conducive to timely diagnosis, disease prevention, and medical rehabilitation.
Significant advances have been made in flexible wearable sensor technology, which has been widely used in the detection of pulse waves, motion, temperature, and biochemical parameters (e.g. glucose).11 Various conductive materials, such as carbon-based nanomaterials,12 metal nanomaterials,13 liquid metals,14 and conductive polymers15 have been developed to improve the electromechanical performance of flexible sensors. In addition to the use of advanced sensing materials with excellent inherent electromechanical properties, unique microstructures are commonly employed to construct high-performance flexible sensors.16 Micro/nano-structures of the sensors are employed to adjust the detection limit, sensitivity, stretchability, response time, and reproducibility. Common microstructures include microcrack,17 wrinkled,18 serpentine,19 horseshoe,20 zigzag,21 mesh,22 island–bridge,23 kirigami,24 3D helical,25 and textile fiber structures.26
Various fabrication methods have been reported for constructing flexible sensors, such as inkjet printing,27 3D printing,28 transfer printing,29 screen printing,30 and electrospinning.31 However, it remains difficult to simultaneously achieve large-scale, low-cost, high-performance flexible sensors.9 Although research on wearable sensors has increased substantially, their development is still considered to be in the early stages.2 Multifunctional, biocompatible, and self-powered wearable devices show great promise for practical clinical applications. The interference between signals still needs to be overcome for multi-parameter and multi-functional measurements.
With the rapid development of wearable sensors, devices, and intelligent algorithms, a great number of reviews have been devoted to a specific topic, including types of sensors,32–34 advanced materials,12,35,36 and machine learning algorithms for stretchable sensing.37,38 However, a systematic summary, from mechanisms, sensors and algorithms to intelligent multifunctional devices, has not yet been presented. In this review, we present a comprehensive overview of wearable devices for smart healthcare (Fig. 1). Strategies for constructing high-performance electromechanical sensors from nanomaterials and nanostructures are discussed. Then, the review focuses on how to improve the performance of stretchability, biocompatibility, and self-power supply. The construction of flexible devices with high integration, high performance, and multifunctionality for multiparameter healthcare is discussed in depth. Machine learning algorithms endowing stretchable sensing with powerful sensing functions benefiting from intelligent analytics are also summarized. Finally, we highlight the existing bottlenecks and give our perspectives on the prospects for this exciting research area.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the intelligent wearable devices for healthcare. 
2. Mechanism and manufacture of electro-mechanical sensors
Electromechanical sensors can be achieved through five main sensing mechanisms, including resistive sensors, capacitive sensors, piezoelectric sensors, triboelectric sensors, and field-effect transistors (FETs). Table 1 provides a summary of these sensors in terms of mechanism and performance. Generally, most resistive sensors possess large stretchability and high sensitivity, while suffering from large hysteresis due to irreversible change of resistance.39 Capacitive sensors are simple in structure and exhibit low hysteresis and fast response. However, the signal output of resistive and capacitive sensors requires a complicated signal conversion circuit.12 Piezoelectric sensors, triboelectric sensors, and field-effect transistors need a relatively simple readout circuit. Piezoelectric sensors display good stability, low power consumption, fast response, and self power, but limited stretchability.40 Most triboelectric sensors exhibit low cost, simple structure, and multiple working modes. However, the low durability and high impedance of triboelectric sensors limit their commercialization. FETs possess excellent signal amplification and high array uniformity, which bring a new way to tackle the weak stimulus, but FETs require slightly more complex manufacturing processes.41
Table 1 Summary of main characteristic parameters of electro-mechanical sensors




Electro-mechanical sensors
Mechanism
Stretchability (%)
Sensing range
Stability (cycles)
Limit of detection
Response time (ms)
Sensitivity
Ref.




Resistive



Bending angle: 60°
0.25 Pa–60 kPa
1000
0.25 Pa
75
383665.9 kPa−1 (0–1.6 kPa)

44



700
0.0075%–400%
10000
0.0075%
—
—

47



—
0–100 kPa
5000
—
12
4015.8 kPa−1 (0–4 kPa)

48



Capacitive



14.1
0.4 Pa–120 kPa
5000
0.4 Pa
40
1.194 kPa−1 (0–0.5 kPa)

49



60
0.14–600 Pa
5000
0.14 Pa
50
44.5 kPa−1 (0–100 pa)

50



—
10 Pa–4.5 MPa
1000
10 Pa
60
0.201 kPa−1 (0 Pa–50 kPa)

51



Piezoelectric



Bending angle: 90°
0–40 N
5000
—
14
1.23 V N−1 (0–9 N)

52



Bending angle: 90°
0.25–6 N
4500
0.25 N
70
7.91 V N−1 (0–1 N)

53



Bending angle: 90°
1–50 N
300
<1 N
19
3.31 V kPa−1 (0–10 N)

54



Triboelectric



—
0.1–60 kPa
8000
0.1 kPa
40
7.989 V kPa−1 (0–2 kPa)

55



Bending angle: 30°
2.5–710 Pa
40000
2.5 Pa
<5
45.7 mV Pa−1 (0–0.71 kPa)

56



121
0.1–1 N
6000
0.1 N
—
1.76 V N−1 (0–1 N)

57



Field-effect transistor



Bending angle: 60°
0–200 g
—
175 Pa
150
5.17 kPa−1 (0–200 g)

58



—
0–1.4 kPa
—
0.04 N
5–7
9.4 × 10−3 kPa−1 (0–1400 Pa)

59



Bending angle: 90°
10–1.5 kPa
10000
10 Pa
1.8
514 kPa−1 (0–250 Pa)

60





2.1 Resistive sensor
A resistive sensor is a device that converts the measured quantity into resistance. The performance of the sensor can be optimized by designing the microstructure of the conductive layer. Zhang et al. prepared a double-layer resistive sensor with a microsphere array by a template method based on polystyrene (PS) microspheres.42 When the sensor is deformed due to external pressure, the contact area of the conductor with the microsphere structure changes, which converts the pressure into the resistance change of the sensor. The sensitivity of the sensor can be adjusted by changing the diameter of the PS microspheres. Pu et al. developed an electronic skin with the ability of pressure sensing and electromagnetic shielding by imitating the structure of the epidermis and dermis of human skin.43 They used sandpaper as a template to form a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film with a rough surface, and then deposited silver nanowires on the surface of the rough PDMS film via spin-coating. The silver nanowires-modified PDMS film was annealed to obtain a conductive sensing layer. At the same time, a PDMS film modified with silver nanowires serving as the protective layer was prepared by the transfer method. The multifunctional piezoresistive sensor was composed of the silver nanowire sensing layer and the silver nanowire protective layer. It is worth noting that the sensor achieves accurate detection of pressure and plays the role of electromagnetic shielding. Li et al. developed a pressure sensor with a unique pyramid-wall-grid microstructure, achieving super sensitivity in a broad pressure range.44 As shown in Fig. 2a, a PDMS sensor film with dome-topped pyramids and crossed strengthening walls was prepared via twice-molding processes. The PDMS film was gold-sputtered to generate conductive Au-PDMS sensor film. The supersensitive sensor was constituted of the two pieces of conductive film stacked face-to-face. The hierarchical microstructure endowed the sensor with ultra-high sensitivity across a very broad pressure range. Designing the microstructure of the conductive layer of the resistive sensing layer can improve the sensitivity of the sensor,45 but there are also some disadvantages. The pressure will cause direct contact with the microstructure of the sensing unit. Multiple contact frictions will cause the instability of the device and the reduction of the sensing performance, which will reduce the service life of the sensor. Nie et al. prepared a flexible resistive sensor by filling carbon nanotubes into micro-grids of PDMS film.46 The optical transparency of the strain sensor was as high as 87% and the gauge factor (GF) was up to 1140, which did not change significantly after 2000 cycles. However, the measurable strain range was only 8.75%. Most flexible resistive sensors show a large hysteresis effect. In the measurement process, the hysteresis effect will cause large errors, resulting in inaccurate pressure measurement. Chen et al. fabricated a flexible stress sensor by embedding liquid metal (LM) eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn) into a wavy microchannel elastomer matrix.61 The microfluidic sensor could withstand strain up to 320%, and its hysteresis was reduced from 6.79% to 1.02%. LM has been widely used in the preparation of sensors due to its excellent electrical conductivity and tensile properties. However, the application of LM is greatly limited due to the insufficient resistance change of LM under deformation. Feng et al. designed a highly sensitive strain sensor based on LM inspired by the nacreous layer.62 The sensor was composed of Cr/Cu at the bottom and LM regularly attached at the top as the ‘brick’, and silver film as the ‘mortar’ attached between the ‘brick’ joints (Fig. 2b). Because the modules of the LM were separated from each other, the formation of coherent paths was prevented and the electric sensitivity of the LM was enhanced. Cr in the substrate changed the strain of the sensor and retarded the crack propagation, avoiding the formation of continuous cracks and improving the working range of the sensor. The performance of resistive sensors can not only be regulated by microstructures but also be enhanced by conductive materials. Yang et al. constructed a strain sensor based on a Ti3C2Tx (MXene) nanoparticle–nanosheet hybrid conductive network.63 They cleverly designed the structure of nanoparticles (NPs) and nanosheets to form a cooperative conductive network, which maintains the connectivity of conductive paths in a large strain range. The sensor achieved high sensitivity (GF > 178.4) over a wide working range (0–53%). However, MXenes easily reached the limit of pressure bearing in two-dimensional space, which greatly limits the function of the sensors. Gao et al. proposed a flexible resistive microchannel sensor based on fingerprint-like array constraints.64 Due to the elastic limitations of the microchannels formed by the microstructure, MXenes formed a three-dimensional folded structure, which enabled the material to detect weak forces more easily and possess great space for extension. The designed sensor achieved high sensitivity (99.5 kPa−1) and fast response time (4 ms), allowing simultaneous detection of various physiological parameters. Wang et al. reported a double-layer pressure sensor that was composed of vertically arranged gold nanowires film.65 The film could be stretched to about 800% deformation while maintaining stable conductivity.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of engineering structure in resistive sensor. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for a supersensitive pressure sensor. Step I is for the fabrication of PDMS working mold, step II is for PDMS sensor film, step III is for the formation of Au-PDMS sensor film, and step IV is for the fabrication of sensor device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. (b) The fabrication process of a liquid metal-based strain sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. 
By carefully designing the conductive materials and structures, the performance of resistive sensors will be improved, including low hysteresis, large sensing range, good stretchability, and high sensitivity.
2.2 Capacitive sensor
Flexible capacitive sensors have received extensive attention due to their potential application in wearable systems, robotics, electronic skin, and medical detection.66–68 Capacitive sensors are usually composed of multi-layer structures with a dielectric layer and two parallel electrodes.69 When an external force is applied to the sensors, the parameters of the capacitive sensors will be altered, such as the distance between electrodes, the dielectric layer, or the relative area between electrodes, resulting in the variances of the capacitance.69,70 Flexible capacitive sensors are acknowledged for their simple structure, limited cost, low energy consumption, high stretchability, and stability in the application of wearable devices.70 However, the high viscoelasticity and surface adhesion between polymer elastomer materials increase the hysteresis and the response time. Moreover, efforts to improve the sensitivity have largely been limited to the dielectric layer, which is only a small proportion of the volume in the system.71 Two determining factors should be considered to enhance the sensitivity performance, including a compressible patterned and microstructured dielectric layer, and the materials of the electrodes. Currently, the design of the micro/nano-structure of the dielectric layer is often employed to improve the sensitivity of sensors.69 The dielectric layers with microstructures, including micropyramid, microneedle, microdome, microporous, microhair, micropillar array, rough surface, and natural plant-based structures,68,69,72 are employed to enhance the sensitivity of capacitive flexible sensors.71,73 Pang et al. developed a capacitive pressure sensor for detecting jugular venous pulses in the neck.72 The micropyramid PDMS structure of the sensor significantly improved the sensitivity. A microhair-structured biocompatible polymer attached to the sensor was employed to improve adaptability and conformity on skin (Fig. 3a). Liu et al. reported a capacitive sensor that consisted of a porous polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film filled with ionic liquid sandwiched between two transparent silver nanowires (AgNWs) electrodes.49 The ionic liquid with nearly the same refractive index as PVDF provides migratory ions to form an electric double layer (EDL) at the dielectric–electrode interfaces (Fig. 3b) together with the equivalent circuit. The signal intensity as well as the stretchability of the sensor were greatly improved, benefiting from a plasticization effect. A dielectric elastomer with microstructure provides voids that allow the microstructure surfaces to elastically deform and reform when external pressures are applied or released, reversibly deforming and reforming, which minimizes the problem related to viscoelastic behavior.73 Kang et al. developed a capacitive pressure sensor with a sponge-like structure.74 They prepared PDMS film with uniform porous structure as dielectric layer using polystyrene (PS) as templates. The porous PDMS layer, indium tin oxide (ITO), and poly(ethylene glycol phthalate) (PET) film constituted a highly sensitive capacitance sensor. The aperture of the porous structure affected the sensitivity and the compressible thickness of the dielectric layer. He et al. fabricated a capacitive pressure sensor utilizing low-cost elastic nylon net.75 The flexible single electrode plate was composed of a nylon net, a graphene thin layer, and PDMS film. The sensitivity of the capacitive sensor could be adjusted by changing the density of the nylon mesh grids. The sensor achieved high sensitivity for small pressure detection. Li et al. utilized a natural lotus leaf as a template to design capacitive sensor.76 The device was composed of a PS layer as middle dielectric layer, with micropatterned PDMS/Au substrate serving as electrodes. The PDMS with uniform caves benefited from the replication of microstructures of the lotus leaf. The microcaves of the flexible substrates are extended under external pressure, resulting in an enlarged relative electrode plate area and a decrease in the distance, which significantly improves the performance of the sensor. Capacitive sensors are simple in structure and easily fabricated; however, the signal output of capacitive sensors requires a complicated signal conversion circuit.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the capacitive sensors with microstructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the capacitive sensor for detecting pulse on a human neck. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of the sensor and its equivalent circuit. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. 
2.3 Piezoelectric sensor
A piezoelectric sensor is a device that generates a detectable charge signal based on the piezoelectric effect of piezoelectric materials in responding to applied pressure. Most piezoelectric sensors are based on the positive piezoelectric effect. An external force applied to a piezoelectric material in a certain direction will result in electric polarization of the crystal inside the material; meanwhile, negative and positive piezoelectric potential is generated on the two surfaces of the piezoelectric materials. When the external force is removed, the positive and negative charges are neutralized with no potential difference. Common piezoelectric materials include inorganic piezoelectric materials (e.g. lead zirconate titanate (PZT), aluminum nitride (AlN), zinc oxide (ZnO), quartz, barium titanate (BTO), lithium niobate (LiNbO3)), organic piezoelectric materials (e.g. PVDF and its copolymers), and composite piezoelectric materials.77 PZT-based flexible sensors commonly generate high sensitivity and fast response due to their high piezoelectric property and high electromechanical coupling. Zhu et al. presented a piezoelectric sensor based on PZT by a transfer-free laser lift-off technique.78 The device exhibited excellent multifunctional capabilities of sensing dynamic pressure and temperature stimuli. However, PZT contains more than 60% lead, which will result in toxic and harmful gases at high temperatures and environmental pollution.79 Zinc oxide is a good candidate for the construction of functional devices due to its advantages of good biocompatibility, thermal stability, and electrical transport.80 However, because of its poor piezoelectric performance, the sensitivity of the ZnO-based sensor is low. The piezoelectric properties can be improved by changing the structure of the material. Mahmood et al. prepared a two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal ZnO at the metal-melt/air interface in a self-limiting manner.81 The piezoelectric value of the 2D ZnO was 8 times higher than the bulk ZnO. Generally, inorganic piezoelectric materials possess a variety of merits, including high strength, large piezoelectric coefficients, and excellent applicability to micro miniaturization; however, these inorganic piezoelectric materials suffer from high rigidity and brittleness, and are unsuitable for flexible devices that require excellent flexibility.82 Many piezoelectric polymer materials display excellent flexibility, good formability, biocompatibility, electroactive properties, low processing cost, and environmental friendliness.83,84 Therefore, piezoelectric polymer materials are widely used in piezoelectric sensors due to their good stretchability. Polymer nanomaterials, especially PVDF, PVDF copolymer, and PVDF nanocomposites, are the most promising piezoelectric materials85 which meet the requirements of dynamic sensing in flexible wearable electronic devices. Li et al. reported a high-performance PVDF/dopamine core/shell piezoelectric nanofiber for the early prevention and diagnosis of cardiovascular disease.86 The in vitro cellular assays and in vivo tests demonstrated the excellent biocompatibility of the piezoelectric sensors. Park et al. employed copolymerized polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene (PVDF-TrFE) as the piezoelectric active layer, which was sandwiched between two elastomer sheets with sputtered Au to construct a piezoelectric sensor.87 The device could detect deformation as low as 1 μm, realizing the detection of the radial artery pulse. Although organic piezoelectric polymers have intrinsic flexibility and biocompatibility, their low piezoelectric coefficient limits their wide application. To improve the piezoelectric performance of PVDF, the number of electrically active crystal phases must be increased, especially the β phase with the largest spontaneous polarization. The electrospinning method provides effective control over the piezoelectric properties of PVDF. The β phase content in electrospun PVDF nanofibers (NFs) can be obtained by controlling the parameters of electrospinning.88 The orientation of the polymer chain and polarized fibers induced by an electric field can effectively improve the crystallinity and the β phase of PVDF NFs.89 Another strategy to improve the piezoelectric response of PVDF NFs is to incorporate nanofillers. PVDF nanocomposites prepared by electrostatic-spinning, such as PVDF/Ag,90 PVDF/carbon nanotubes,91 and PVDF-TrFe,92 have significantly improved piezoelectric properties. The flexible nanocomposite material is composed of organic piezoelectric polymer and inorganic crystal, which can be used to improve the mechanical and electrical properties of the piezoelectric sensor, overcome the brittleness of inorganic materials and structural instability when combined with organic materials, and improve the flexibility and conductivity of the device.93 Due to the high piezoelectric property of inorganic crystals and the elasticity of the matrix, piezoelectric sensors based on composite materials are sensitive to the applied force. BTO, as a kind of inorganic piezoelectric material, has been widely used in piezoelectric sensors due to its strong piezoelectric properties, simple and convenient preparation, and low cost. Zhao et al. prepared a high-output piezoelectric nanocomposite by combining BTO NPs with PVDF,95 achieving short-circuit current of 1500 nA and open-circuit voltage of 150 V under a stress of 10 MPa. Yang et al. prepared a flexible piezoelectric sensor based on the combination of BTO NPs modified with polydopamine (PDA) and PVDF.96 Due to the modification of BTO with PDA, the gap between BTO and PVDF was reduced, which enables the sensor to achieve a fast response of 61 ms and an extremely high output voltage. They further improved the fabrication method.94 As shown in Fig. 4a, PDA was applied to the electrospun BTO/PVDF nanofibers (NFs) to improve the interfacial adhesion, mechanical strength, and piezoelectric properties. The PDA@BTO/PVDF NFs were employed as the building blocks to form a nonwoven light-weight piezoelectric textile, achieving outstanding sensitivity (3.95 V N−1) and long-term stability. Stannum-doped BTO ferroelectric ceramics BaTi0.88Sn0.12O3 (BTS) have the highest piezoelectric coefficient in lead-free piezoceramics and a low Curie temperature of ∼40 °C. Yu et al. prepared a highly sensitive and wearable self-powered piezoelectric sensor composed of BTS-glass fiber fabrics (GFF)/PVDF.52 The low-cost glass fiber fabrics endowed the sensor with good flexibility and durability, and BTS with low Curie temperature contributed to the high sensitivity due to large changes in polarization induced by a small alteration of force. The sensor made of silver electrodes, BTS-GFF/PVDF, and biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP) tape was applied to monitor human motion (Fig. 4b). The results demonstrate great application prospects in the fields of human motion sensing, rehabilitation, and intelligent robots. Piezoelectric sensors display some advantages over other types of pressure sensors, such as good stability, biocompatibility, low power consumption, fast response, self-powering, and a relatively simple readout circuit. However, the limited tensile property of piezoelectric materials limits their wide application.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the piezoelectric sensors with microstructures and applications. (a) Fabrication and structure design of the muscle fiber-inspired piezoelectric textile, scale bar is 1 cm. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. (b) A self-powered piezoelectric sensor for human motion. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2021. 
2.4 Triboelectric sensors
Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) display great prospects in self-powered mechanical sensing by the coupling of the triboelectrification effect and electrostatic induction, due to their light mass, cost-effectiveness, and high scalability.97 Generally, TENG-based pressure sensors usually employ ultrathin films as flexible substrates, which have a small volume of natural air gaps, resulting in low sensitivity. Various microstructures, such as eardrums,98 wavy-shaped structures,99 hierarchical tapered microstructures,55 and hollow hemisphere structures,100 have been proposed to achieve a large gap for high sensitivity and wide sensing range. Chen et al. proposed a flexible hierarchical self-powered pressure sensor (HSPS) with both high sensitivity (7.989 V kPa−1) and a wide pressure range (0.1–60 kPa).55 As shown in Fig. 5a, the hierarchical elastomer microstructure with a two-stage tapered PDMS structure was used as a supporting layer to generate a highly tunable gap for achieving a large sensing range and high sensitivity. In comparison with common self-powered pressure sensors (SPS), HSPS displayed outstanding comprehensive performance in the sensing sensitivity and pressure range. The device has been applied to monitor multi-cardiovascular signals, which shows a promising application in mobile healthcare. Meng et al. developed a flexible weaving-constructed self-powered sensor based on a frictional nanogenerator for pulse and blood pressure measurements.56 As shown in Fig. 5b, the sensor used polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) strips with interlaced woven structure and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as electrification layers, and indium–tin oxide (ITO) as an electrode. Vertically aligned polymer nanowires formed onto the PTFE surface by plasma treatment resulted in an improvement of the intimate contact area and high frictional charge density. The sensor achieved a limit of detection of 2.5 Pa and no performance degradation after 40000 cycles. Fu et al. proposed a fibrous stretchable TENG-based sensor with a core–sheath structure.101 The polyurethane (PU)/carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/Dragon Skin multi-laminate fiber was used as the core structure, and the micro-structured rGO/PDMS layer was employed as the sheath layer. The performance of the TENG sensor was highly enhanced by constructing microstructure on the triboelectric materials and introducing conductive particles. Due to the elastic substrates and stretchable electrodes, the output voltage of the sensor remained stable under 60% strain extension. He et al. developed a sensor inspired by the trampoline.102 The self-powered sensor with high tensile strength is shown in Fig. 5c. The outermost layer of the sensor is covered with a layer of AgNWs as a shielding layer to realize the shielding of other signals. The PDMS on the top layer not only acts as the encapsulation material but also increases the contact area with the electrode layer by setting the microstructure. The underlying PDMS has good affinity for serving as the contact layer with the skin. The middle electrode is a trampoline design that achieves high sensitivity and stretchability through the combination of sculpted lines and islands formed by polyimide (PI) and copper in the middle.
 Fig. 5  Schematic structure of self-powered flexible sensors. (a) (i) Schematic diagram of HSPS with hierarchical elastomer microstructures with two-stage conical PDMS. (ii) Voltage signal of HSPS and SPS-0 at the pressure of 10 kPa. (iii) Output voltage signal of HSPS and SPS-0 based sensor changes with pressure changes. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Schematic illustration of a flexible and self-powered sensor with weaving structure. The insert illustrated the scanning electron microscopy of plasma-etched polytetrafluoroethylene film and the actual photo of the sensor. Cross-sectional diagram of a single unit. The right is the illustration showing the electrical signal generation process of the self-powered sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018. (c) Structure and composition of self-powered sensor inspired by trampoline. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (d) Component and structure of hybrid piezoelectric triboelectric sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (e) Representation of the applicability of the hybrid power sensor on human skin and the schematic illustration of the working principle of the sensor: triboelectric coupling with human skin and piezoelectric/triboelectric hybrid contact. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. 
TENG-based sensors exhibit promising applications due to their flexibility, low cost, and self-powered property.103 Good sensitivity and sensing range can be achieved by carefully designing the structure of TENG. Besides, materials’ selection also plays a significant role in improving their performance. Continuous monitoring of physiological parameters always requires adhesive electrodes. The adhesive tape on the electrode is not conductive, which can reduce the movement of the charge and decrease the output performance of the electrode. Compared with the bulk conductive layer, an electrode made of conductive nanomaterials has better performance. Zhang et al. provided MXene-based TENG using a facile vacuum-assisted filtration method.104 The TENG sensor composed of MXene-PEDOT:PSS composite electrode and polytetrafluoroethylene triboelectric layer exhibited good performance for human body sensing. Transparency is also highly desired to adapt to human skin.105 Commonly, nontransparent conductive fillers are added to transparent polymers to form flexible electrodes, and the transparency deteriorates because of the inherent color of the conductive fillers. Transparent elastic conductive materials endow sensors with good transparency. Zhao et al. proposed a fully transparent, highly stretchable, and self-powered TENG sensor by using a patterned PDMS film with a fringe structure sandwiched with two ion gel films.57 Due to the high conductivity and mechanical properties of the ionic gel, as well as the prominent triangular fringe of PDMS, the performance of the sensor is relatively stable. Because the materials used are relatively transparent, the sensor has high transparency (83%), good tensile strength (121%), and good pressure sensitivity (0.39–1.46 V N−1). Environment-friendly materials can not only reduce the environmental burden but also increase biocompatibility. Huang et al. proposed a self-powered flexible sensor based on biomass for motion detection.108 The sensor employed bacterial cellulose/chitosan film (BC/CSM) as the positive layer and copper NPs-doped polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS/Cu) film as the negative layer. The excellent tensile property and tensile strength of BC/CSM endow high output performance of the sensor, which shows high potential for monitoring the movement of individual joints during movement.
The pressure from the human body during routine physical activity generally ranges from 0.1 to 100 kPa and mainly spans 0.1–50 kPa.109 However, most self-powered sensors cannot simultaneously realize the combination of high sensitivity and wide measurement range. Some researchers noted that electrification and piezoelectricity can occur at the same time, and the pressure and friction can be detected together through the mechanism of mixed force detection, thus improving the sensitivity and pressure range of the sensor.110 Yu et al. developed a flexible hybrid piezoelectric–triboelectric sensor with high sensitivity and a wide measuring range as shown in Fig. 5d.106 The working mechanism of the sensor was based on the interaction between polarized lead zirconate titanate-modified polydimethylsiloxane composite film with a micro-frustum array structure (m-PZT-PDMS) and Cu film for generating friction electrification via the contact-separation mode, and piezoelectric effect induced by the deformation of polarized m-PZT-PDMS thin films. The piezoelectricity-enhanced triboelectric sensor exhibits high sensitivity (18.96 V kPa−1) and a wide measuring range (0–1300 kPa) due to the combination of the piezoelectric effect and friction electrification. The piezoelectricity/friction-based hybrid overcomes the limitations of a single component, achieving a skin sensor with improved sensitivity, wide detection range, and enhanced applicability. The hybrid mechanism allows the best compromise between the mechanical resistance of piezoelectricity and the high flexibility of triboelectricity, allowing the sensor to adapt to all parts of the body. Mariello et al. proposed a biocompatible hybrid piezoelectric–triboelectric sensor for multilocation and multifunctional conformal detection of human motion.107 As shown in Fig. 5e, the piezoelectric sensor was formed by depositing a thin-film aluminum nitride on a flexible substrate, whereas the triboelectric sensor consisted of a metalized porous ultra-soft patch based on an elastomeric blend of PDMS and Ecoflex sandwiched between parylene C friction films. The hybrid sensor achieves high sensitivity and a wide pressure range through a combination of piezoelectric, skin-contact actuation, and piezo–tribo hybrid contact. Zou et al. developed a self-powered pulse sensor with a self-arched structure based on the hybrid triboelectric and piezoelectric effects.111 Compared with that of the triboelectric and piezoelectric parts, the signals obtained by the hybrid modes based on triboelectric and piezoelectric effects were more precise and stable. However, there are still some problems with hybrid mechanisms. The mix of detections needs to allow components to be coupled to produce better performance, without making the composition of the sensor too complex or degrading the performance of the individual components.112 The stability and durability of flexible sensors with hybrid mechanisms are relatively poor. Under repeated human movement, the performance of the self-powered sensor will be greatly reduced due to the wear or destruction of the surface micro/nano-structure. In practical application, the self-powered sensor may be affected by various external factors, such as temperature, humidity, etc., which will greatly affect the power generation performance and stability of the sensor.113 Most TENG manufacturing techniques are expensive, multi-step, time-consuming, and unsuitable for mass production, which is a major obstacle to accomplishing the efficient and cost-effective commercialization of TENGs.
2.5 Field-effect transistor
FET sensors have drawn wide attention due to their excellent signal amplification, high array uniformity, fast response time, easy manipulation, relatively low noise, and facile integration with electrical circuitry,114 showing great potential in physical, chemical, and biological applications. A typical FET is composed of three component parts, including three terminals (i.e., gate, source, and drain terminals), a dielectric as the insulating layer, and sensing channel materials that connect the source and the drain terminals.114 Generally, the working mechanism of FET sensors can be classified into two types: charge-modulated mechanism and dielectric-modulated mechanism.115 The principle of charge-modulated FFT sensors is based on the interactions between targets and sensing channel material, which influence the property of the channel by charge induction effect or charge transfer. The principle of dielectric-modulated FET sensors is based on the changes in the dielectric constant of the gate which will cause variations in the threshold voltage for operating the FET.116
FETs can be classified into metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) and organic field effect transistors (OFETs). The MOSFET exhibits many merits including rapid speed, low power consumption, and low operating voltage. However, high static power consumption is one of the issues for MOSFETs.117 Compared with the conventional brittle and rigid semiconductor MOSFET, OFET exhibits good stretchability because organic semiconductor (OSC) materials with intermolecular conjugated π-bonds possess less tensile modulus.118,119 OFET consists of three terminals, a dielectric layer, and OSC as sensing channel materials.120 Since the OSC layer is formed by organic compounds which transport electric charges using intermolecular conjugated π-bonds,121 the electric charges can form conducting current from the source to the drain electrode with high sensitivity to external stimulus. OSC materials play an important role in the determination of flexibility and stretchability.122 Two methods have been applied to improve the stretchability of OFET. The first one is to integrate low tensile modulus materials to achieve improvement in stretchability. The second method is to apply flexible structures to improve the strain of the materials, then increase the stretchability. OFET exhibits compelling potential for applications in wearable devices due to its cost effectiveness, light weight, ultrathin film, and good flexibility.120,121,123
The sensing performance of the FET sensor can be improved by optimizing any individual component of the FET (e.g. gate, source and drain electrode, dielectric layer, and sensing channel materials). Wang's group reported a 2D ZnO ultrasensitive piezotronic transistors array by directly converting exterior mechanical into electrical signals without gate voltage.127 The integration of piezoelectric effect and FET devices can directly detect external stimuli.58 Based on the concept, Wang et al. investigated a novel two-terminal tactile sensor with piezoelectric material and OFET device to detect surrounding pressure with high sensitivity.58 The sensor is composed of PVDF nanowire arrays and an OFET on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate (Fig. 6a). The transformation from external pressure to piezoelectric voltage enables PVDF nanowire arrays to drive OFET devices for amplifying the signal. The sensor exhibits pressure sensitivity of 5.17 kPa−1, limit detection of 175 Pa, and a response time of 150 ms. Modification of sensing channel materials is widely used to optimize the performance of FET sensors,128 including altering the thickness of sensing channel materials, introducing micro or nano structures to the sensing layer, and modifying receptors or functional groups.121,128–130 Li et al. reported an efficient synaptic transistor with 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1] benzothiophene (C8-BTBT) as the channel material.124 The flexible OFET shown in Fig. 6b was constituted of indium tin oxide (ITO) as the bottom electrode, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as the barrier layer, Al2O3 and ZrO2 as the tunneling dielectric layer, and C8-BTBT as the organic semiconductor channel layer. The device was fabricated using a unique low-temperature process and provided robust and repeatable synaptic functions. Li et al. presented transparent MoS2 FET arrays on PET substrates with four-inch wafer scale as shown in Fig. 6c.125 The device consisted of MoS2 monolayers serving as the semiconductor layer, ITO as the back-gate electrode, and aluminium oxide (Al2O3) as the dielectric layer on PET substrate, exhibiting excellent device-to-device uniformity, good stability, and strong tolerance under strain. FET devices are also extensively applied in biosensing. Currently, FET biosensors have achieved improvements in the detection of different biomolecules, such as glucose, cholesterol, uric acid, urea, hormones, proteins, and nucleotides.131 Du et al. developed a FET based on indium gallium zinc oxide for the noninvasive detection of glucose. The FET sensor was functionalized with aminosilane groups which were specifically cross-linked to glucose oxidase, achieving sensitive and selective detection of subtle changes in glucose concentrations.132 Dai et al. designed a FET by integrating a hydrogel stamp as biometric module with graphene FETs as a sensing module.133 The sensor was demonstrated to detect penicillin and urea using penicillinase and urease-encoded polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel as biometric module. Besides, FET has also been applied to the detection of the weak nerve action potential by the signal amplification of FET at low power consumption. Jiang et al. developed an InSe FET composed of flexible PMMA/HfO2 double-layer gate dielectric and together with PMMA back-channel encapsulation (Fig. 6d).126 The device exhibited field-effect mobility of 1200 cm2 V−1 S−1 and excellent electrical ability with the hysteresis at 0.4 V under normal conditions for a month. The device was applied to detect the biphasic action potential of the sciatic nerve of a frog by connecting the middle part of the nerve with gate and source electrodes, and recording the source–drain current IDSvia semiconductor parameter analyzer. The source–drain current is produced when the gate electrode senses the action potential produced by the sciatic nerve. The excellent signal amplification and high array uniformity of FET sensor bring a new way to tackle the weak stimulus.
 Fig. 6  Working mechanism and application of the transistors. (a) Schematic of a piezoelectric transistor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Schematic of flexible organic field-effect transistor arrays. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (c) Illustration of large-scale flexible MoS2 transistor arrays with integrated circuits. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic of PMMA/InSe/PMMA-HfO2 FET and the detection of nerve signal with and without the FET device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. 
3. Typical microstructure of stretchable sensors
Wearable and flexible electronic devices usually withstand large deformation for application in human motion detection and human–machine interaction. Thus, high stretchability of the sensor is essential to obtain real data. The stretchability of the sensor depends on the synergistic effect of the conductive network and the flexible substrate.6 Advanced sensing materials with excellent inherent electromechanical properties and unique conductive network structures are important for obtaining high-performance flexible sensors.16 Unique structural design will effectively solve the problems of the contact area between materials decreasing at high strain and the conductivity decreasing with the applied strain.32 Conductive networks with unique microstructures can improve the sensitivity, response time, and detection range of flexible wearable sensors, and also increase the stretchability and stability of the sensors.134 Different conductive network structures yield different sensor performances.135Table 2 summarizes several conductive network structure sensors and their performance.
Table 2 Conductive network structure for improvement of sensor performance




Structure
Materials
Mechanism
Conductive structure
Max strain [%]
Ref.





a PUA: polyurethane acrylate.
b PI: polyimide.
c PET: poly(ethyleneterephthalate)polyimide.
d PEDOT: poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate.
e PSS: poly(styrene sulfonate).
f PDMS: poly(dimethylsiloxane).
g LMs: liquid metals.
h cPI: colorless-polyimide.
i PAA: polyacrylamide.





Micro-crack structure
PUAa/Pt
Resistive



2

17



Wrinkle structure
Ecoflex/PIb/Au
Resistive



185

18



Serpentine structure
PETc/Ag
Capacitive



70

19



Horseshoe structure
Textile/PEDOTd:PSSe
Capacitive



30

142



Zigzag structure
PEDOT:PSS/ionic gel
Resistive



200

21



Mesh structure
PDMSf/Ag
Resistive



35

143



Island–bridge structure
Ecoflex/Ag-LMsg
Resistive



800

23



Kirigami structure
cPIh/AgNWs
Resistive



400

24



3D helical structure
PAAi-alginate/LMsg
Resistive



300

144



Textile fiber structure
Fibers/LMsg
Capacitive



150

26





Microcrack structure inspired by the slit organ of spiders has been applied to increase the performance of flexible sensors.17 Yang et al. fabricated an ultra-sensitive strain sensor with cracked gold thin film.136 Weak interfacial interactions were introduced between the metal and the polymer to form both straight-through fracture geometry and reversible electrical response. The sensor had high sensitivity, good cyclability, and fast dynamic response, achieving GF of 2000 for 2% strain and detecting amplitudes of about 10 nm. However, the microcrack structure of the sensor is susceptible to damage when large deformations occur, leading to the problem that the conductive layer on the surface tends to fall off within a limited detection range. A novel nanopile interlocking strategy solved the critical adhesion problem of metals and polymers, which reduced the problem of easy peeling of the conductive layer. Chen's group fabricated a highly adherent stretchable electrode using a novel nanopile interlocking strategy.137 The nanofiber electrodes enabled simultaneous monitoring of myoelectric signals and mechanical deformation. Wrinkle structures are generally achieved by depositing conductive thin films with high modulus or metal electrodes on a pre-strained elastic substrate; these are inspired by the texture of human skin or fabric surfaces.138 Atalay et al. reported a capacitive sensor with a wrinkled structure.139 A silicon elastomer with a wrinkle pattern was prepared by direct writing of a laser grating and a pre-stretching method. Aluminum and silver were sputtered on the substrate with a wrinkle pattern to form a conductive network, which greatly improved the stretchability of the sensor. The electrodes maintained their conductivity at a strain up to 250%, and the capacitive sensor possessed a linear output at a strain up to 85%. The method of fabricating wrinkled microstructures using spontaneous flexion of polymer films is simple and inexpensive. However, the wrinkle structure only improves the stretchability in the folded direction, which limits its application. The serpentine structure allows biaxial strain and the electrodes maintain their conductive properties during deformation.140 Zhao et al. developed a flexible multifunctional electronic skin based on a serpentine microstructure.19 The sensor array consisted of PET-based Ag serpentine electrodes that enabled dynamic and static mapping under large-scale contact, pressure, or strain. The serpentine microstructure provided an accurate linear response to external pressure at strain up to 70%. Han et al. prepared a functional electrode that can be attached to electronic skin.141 A nanocomposite elastomer composed of metal nanowires and polyimide was designed with a serpentine conductive network microstructure by photolithographic patterning and dry etching. The conductive network could be stretched up to 80% and the resistance remained essentially the same at 30 ohms over 500 cycles, and the dense network resisted cracking effectively. Takamatsu et al. developed a capacitive sensor as a wearable keyboard.142 Polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) electrodes were formed on a knitted textile with a horseshoe pattern. The fabric's stretchability was increased by 30% due to the inherent horseshoe shape of the knitted fabric. This work contributes to the manufacture of stretchable devices with large areas and creates a new method for new wearable human–machine interaction. The zigzag structure shows a unique anisotropic planar structure with serrated edges and a relatively large transverse dimension. Kim et al. proposed an ultra-sensitive and stretchable ion sensor for human motion detection.21 To improve the stretchability and sensitivity of the sensor, the conductive ionic gel layer was patterned in a zigzag structure. The stretchability and sensitivity of the sensor could be controlled by varying the number and length of the zigs. The optimized device maintained a GF of 50 at 200% strain. The design of the conductive network as a 2D mesh structure further increased stretchability. Zhou et al. reported a stretchable and omnidirectional strain sensor for detecting body motion.143 The conductive network consisted of porous honeycomb structure of Ag mesh films with good ductility and directional independence. The as-fabricated sensor exhibited a maximum elongation of 35% and had a GF of 14.3 within 15% strain. The stretchable mesh structure increased the conformability of the e-skin, facilitating more accurate sensing of signals on complex skin surfaces.137 The island–bridge structure provides an excellent strategy for combining rigid and flexible materials that can withstand extremely high mechanical deformations. Silva et al. introduced a novel stretchable electrochemical device based on LM island–bridge structure.23 Thanks to the highly stretchable Ag-EGaInPs serpentine ‘bridges’, excellent electrical performance under the strain of up to 800% deformation was achieved. In addition, the rigid ‘islands’ effectively disperse the strain caused by external deformation around the ‘islands’. Combining these ‘bridges’ with ‘islands’ enables the electrochemical device to withstand extreme mechanical deformation without affecting its electrical property. Conductive networks with 3D structures have been proposed to further improve the stretchability of electronic devices. Kirigami structures have shown good resistance to large deformations. Hwan Ko's group proposed a novel microstructure using the art of kirigami to obtain highly stretchable electronic devices with various shapes.24 The kirigami structure allowed the electrode to be adjustable in the strain range from 0 to 400% with constant electrical properties. Liu et al. presented a biocompatible and stretchable hydrogel electronic product.144 Thanks to the 3D helical conductive network, the sensor showed satisfactory electrical performance under 300% strain. In addition, high stretchability of the electronics was achieved, benefiting from the swelling properties of the hydrogel and the fluidity of the LM. Textile structures also have been used in the field of wearable devices due to their good ductility, softness, comfort, and ease of integration into clothes. Cooper et al. created a capacitive sensor with the capability of sensing torsion, strain, and tactility.26 They injected LM into hollow and stretchable elastic capillaries to obtain fibers integrated with fabrics and then wound the two fibers into spirals. When the fibers were twisted or stretched, the contact area between the two fibers increased, resulting in a change in the geometry of the fibers and the capacitance between them. The fiber bundles filled with LM could measure a wide range of torsion and strain (150%).
The microstructure of the conductive network improves the stretchability of the sensor and also compensates for the mechanical fit to the body, resulting in more accurate detection results. However, the fabrication processes of stretched structures are normally very complicated, costly, and low yield.145 In addition, the stretchable metal interconnects and circuits in these methods require large areas, which may lead to low device densities. In addition, some stretched structures are limited in the stretching direction and suffer from unstable conductivity and mechanical integrity under large periodic mechanical deformation.146
4. Wearable energy harvesters
Most wearable sensors connect external power sources via long conductive wires. Traditional power modules are usually bulky and rigid, attributes which are incompatible with emerging flexible electronic systems, limiting their widespread application. Flexible nanogenerators harvesting ubiquitous energy from the environment or human motion are promising alternatives. With the fast development of sensitive materials and the emergence of various stretchable strategies, flexible energy harvesting devices,147 such as thermoelectric nanogenerators (TEGs), triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), and piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs), are emerging in the field of wearable and stretchable electronics (Fig. 7). The performance of the nanogenerators is summarized in Table 3. PENGs and TENGs are far more used in biomedical applications than TEGs because TEGs unavoidably require a temperature difference. The TEG exhibits a low output voltage, high power, low flexibility, and is easy to miniaturize into wearable devices. The PENG is durable, reliable, and easy to shrink to small dimensions. Moreover, the PENG is not affected by environmental factors, such as humidity.148 However, the low stretchability of the PENG limits its wide applications. The TENG possesses diverse material selection and multiple working modes. Further, it carries several advantages, such as low cost, easy fabrication, and high output voltage, while suffering from low durability and high impedance.149
 Fig. 7  Illustration of typical nanogenerators. 
Table 3 Performance of different types of nanogenerators




Types of nanogenerators
Active materials
Open-circuit voltage
Short-circuit current
Power density
Flexibility
Ref.




Thermoelectric
Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3
0.6 V
—
0.356 mW cm−2
50%

159



Bi2Te3
0.52 V
—
11.14 mW cm−2
Bending radius: 5 mm

160



Bi2Te3
0.236 V
—
13.1 mW cm−2
Bending radius: 4.5 mm

161



Piezoelectric
(1 − x)Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3 − xPbTiO3
8.2 V
0.223 mA
—
Bending radius: 16.5 mm

162



Ba0.85Ca0.15Zr0.10Ti0.90O3 Nps
14.4 V
0.55 μA
12.82 μW m−2
Bending angle: 180°

163



PVDF
90 V
5 μA
140 mW m−2
Bending angle: 180°

164



Triboelectric
Liquid metal Nps and PDMS
268 V
12.06 μA
355 mW m−2
260%

165



Liquid metal and Ecoflex
80 V
12 μA
20 mW m−2
300%

166



Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)/BTO/MXene nanocomposite
260 V
160 mA
6.65 W m−2
60%

167





4.1 Thermoelectric nanogenerators
TEGs based on the Seebeck effect can directly convert heat energy into electric energy, and have good performance in collecting waste heat energy under the condition of temperature gradient relative to ambient temperature.150 Flexible TEGs (FTEGs) have gradually attracted increasing attention due to their light weight, small volume, portability, and low cost.151 Due to the Seebeck effect, the carriers in thermoelectric materials will move from the hot side to the cold side and gather at the cold side under the action of temperature difference, resulting in a stable potential difference on the surface of the material. Thermoelectric performance and flexibility are the key factors for evaluating the performance of FTEGs. Generally, the power generation efficiency of FTEGs based on thermoelectric materials is determined by a dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT, which is affected by the Seebeck coefficient of thermoelectric materials.152 Great efforts have been made to discover new materials with excellent thermoelectric properties and to optimize the structure of thermoelectric devices.
Traditional thermoelectric materials, such as Bi2Te3,153 PbTe,154 and SnSe,155 have high ZT values (>1) at room temperature, but their flexibilities are still limited owing to the intrinsic mechanical rigidity and brittleness of inorganic thermoelectric materials. In addition to the problem of insufficient flexibility, traditional thermoelectric materials also suffer from high price, toxicity, and instability at high temperatures.156 Polyaniline (PANI), polypyridine (PPy) conductive polymers and their derivatives are expected to be the next generation of thermoelectric materials owing to their non-toxicity, good flexibility, and low cost.157,158 However, the conductive polymers have shortcomings in electrical transmission performance. Although some progress has been made in improving the thermoelectric properties of conductive polymers through doping, the ZT value is still limited. Organic/inorganic hybrid materials can be made by filling conductive polymers with inorganic materials as fillers. These materials have both the high electrical conductivity of inorganic thermoelectric materials and the high flexibility of conductive polymers, but their working temperature range is very narrow and they cannot be used in high-temperature environments. In addition, their flexibility is weaker than that of organic materials and their thermoelectric properties are weaker than those of inorganic materials. Porous modification is often used to make inorganic thermoelectric materials flexible, although it will seriously reduce the thermoelectric properties of the materials.168 Inorganic thermoelectric materials can be patterned onto flexible substrates by physical vapor depositions,169,170 printing methods,171 and chemical methods;172,173 this is expected to make the whole TEG flexible while maintaining the excellent thermoelectric properties of inorganic materials. Zhu et al. proposed an excellent thermoelectric, recyclable, healing, and stretchable TEG (Fig. 8a).159 The TEG was assembled from Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 TE legs by employing LM as interconnects and polyimine as encapsulation. The dynamic covalent thermoset polyimine and LM endowed the TEG with healing and recycling capabilities. The TEG exhibited excellent TE performance and mechanical compliance, showing great potential for application as an energy collector to power wearable devices. Feng et al. proposed a wearable TEG made of Bi2Te3 on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film using a zone-melting and micro/nanofabrication process.160 As shown in Fig. 8b, Cu conductors with designed patterns were deposited on the PET film by magnetron sputtering. High-electrical-property thermoelectric materials Bi2Te3 were adopted as the p-type structure and n-type structure using the zone-melting method. The nickel plating on the surface made the thermoelectric properties of the material stable for a long period, which mitigates the diffusion of Cu atoms or Cu+ ions. The flexible TEG boasts impressive flexibility, high voltage up to 520 mV and output power density of 11.14 mW cm−2. Wang et al. proposed a self-powered wearable pressure-sensing device composed of a TEG and a pressure sensor for continuous healthcare monitoring.174 As shown in Fig. 8c, the skin-attachable TEG was composed of 25 pairs of Bi2Te3-based thermocouples, a highly conductive insulating film for heat absorption, and a flexible hydrogel acting as a heat sink, achieving a high temperature gradient for high power generation from harvesting body heat. The piezoresistive sensor with micro-cone surface was independent of the temperature gradient across the TEG, and could maintain stable performance under various temperature differences between human skin and the environment without external power. Although thermoelectric materials and devices display great potential in wearable self-powered devices, most TEGs are confined to the research stage in the laboratory and are far from commercial production. There is still a long way to go to achieve mass production and commercial application.
 Fig. 8  Schematic descriptions of typical TEGs. (a) Schematic diagram of recyclable, healable, and stretchable TEG (RHS-TEG) manufacturing process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. The uniformly distributed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 legs were encapsulated by polyimine. When the device is damaged, the polyimine can be completely dissolved in a recycled solution composed of 3,3′-diamino-N-methyldipropylamine, tris(2-aminoethyl) amine, from which the legs and electrodes can be separated for the production of new devices. (b) Illustration of the thermoelectric nanogenerators and working principle of a single thermocouple. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of a sensing system consisting of TEG and piezoresistive sensor attached on wrist for blood pulse monitoring. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
4.2 Piezoelectric nanogenerators
PENGs are emerging devices that can collect weak and irregular mechanical energy in the environment and convert it into electrical energy based on the piezoelectric effect and electrostatic induction.175 The piezoelectric properties of the material greatly affect the performance of the devices. Piezoelectric materials, such as ZnO, BaTiO3, PZT-based ceramic materials, and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), are commonly used in PENGs. ZnO has poor piezoelectric properties that make it unable to meet the power requirements of devices.176,177 Doping chemical elements in the material is an effective way to improve the piezoelectric properties of piezoelectric materials;178 p-type doping and n-type doping are two doping strategies for ZnO. p-Type dopants can replace a large number of carriers with holes and shrink the excess free electrons, which effectively reduces the shielding effect of free electrons generated in ZnO, thus improving the energy collection efficiency of PENGs. The common p-type dopants are lanthanum,179 lithium,180 and antimony.181 n-Type dopants can lead to static polarization of the ZnO lattice through lattice strain along the ZnO polar axis. The common n-type dopants are halogen elements182 and metal elements (e.g. iron183 and cadmium;184 BaTiO3 has the advantages of easy synthesis and low cost, and shows better piezoelectric properties than ZnO).175 Koka et al. synthesized BaTiO3 nanowire arrays using a two-step hydrothermal method.185 Their power density is about 16 times higher than that of ZnO nanoarrays. The doping method can further improve the performance of BaTiO3-based piezoelectric materials. Carbon and zirconium have been proved to be effective dopants. Barium titanate NPs can be dispersed and distributed more evenly in the polymer by doping with carbon nanotubes.186,187 The doping reduces particle agglomeration and makes the stress of the composite more uniform. In addition, carbon nanotubes can also reduce the internal resistance of PENG and reduce current loss, thus effectively improving the output performance of PENG. Doping with zirconium improves the piezoelectric coefficient of the piezoelectric composite material. The performance of PENG doped with zirconium was significantly higher than that of PENG before doping.178,188 However, BaTiO3 has poor flexibility, and it may be difficult to meet increasingly flexible design requirements in the future. PZT-based ceramic materials have excellent piezoelectric properties. However, they are toxic to humans and the environment, which limits their future development and application. PVDF exhibits relatively good flexibility, but its piezoelectric property is weaker than those of inorganic piezoelectric NPs. By doping with chemical elements and graphene oxide, the piezoelectric properties of PVDF-based organic polymer can be effectively improved.
The generation of electrical energy mainly depends on the piezoelectric potential generated by the piezoelectric material under external excitation. The resulting electromotive force can form a flow of electrons in an external load. Based on this working mode, PENGs are little affected by external environmental conditions, such as humidity and temperature.189 External mechanical movements allow PENGs to generate a stable electrical output which can be effectively used as a power supply device for self-powered systems. Selvarajan et al. designed a PENG composed of agarose and barium carbonate composite, which provides enough energy for sensors that can quickly identify cysteine in routine analysis.190 When the weight ratio of agarose to barium carbonate is 0.4% Wt V−1, the PENG shows good performance with open-circuit voltage VOC of 80 V and short-circuit current ISC of 285 nA under 2 N mechanical load. Some researchers have applied PENG to implantable medical devices as a power source. Hwang et al. reported a flexible PENG by transferring single-crystal (1 − x)Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3 − xPbTiO3 platinum (PMN-PT) film to polyester substrate (Fig. 9a), which exhibits good performance in an artificial cardiac pacemaker for charging the battery and stimulating the heart.162 Its maximum output current and voltage reached 145 A and 8.2 V, respectively, which is expected to solve the key problem of periodic battery replacement in implantable pacemakers. Li et al. reported a sweat sensor with PENG serving as the self-powering module.164 The flexible PENG fits well with joints of the human body, thus effectively converting biomechanical energy from freely movable joints into electricity and providing sustainable power for the sensor. Yang et al. successfully fabricated a kind of three dimensional interlocking PVDF/ZnO NF by epitaxial growth of ZnO NFs on the surface of PVDF NFs (Fig. 9b).191 Due to the synergistically piezoelectric effect between PVDF NFs and ZnO NFs, the electrical properties of PVDF/ZnO NFs are significantly higher than that of pure PVDF NFs. In addition, it can monitor muscle behavior through close contact with human skin, helping in gait recognition, disease rehabilitation, and quantifying muscle activity. PENG has shown excellent application potential in converting mechanical energy into electrical energy. In addition, as an energy collector, PENG can also be used as an electrical stimulator to stimulate the deep brain192 and an active sensor to detect blood pressure193 and pulse,194 which reflects that PENG has broad application scenarios in the medical field. As an energy supply device, PENGs can also be combined with energy storage devices, such as batteries or supercapacitors, to realize mechanical energy conversion and storage as chemical energy.195 Compared with other nanogenerators, piezoelectric nanogenerators are easier to shrink to the nano level, but they also have the disadvantage of relatively low stretchability.40
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of PENG nanogenerators and their applications. (a) Piezoelectric energy collector manufacturing process and its application in cardiac pacemaker. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (i) PMN-PT metal–insulator–metal (MIM) layer. (ii) Exfoliation of the top piezoelectric film from the silicon substrate. (iii) PMN-PT thin film was transferred to PET substrates to achieve conformal contact with the human body. (iv) Stimulate a living heart. (b) Schematic diagram of the three-dimensional hierarchically interlocked PVDF/ZnO NFs as a self-powered device for muscle behavior monitoring. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
4.3 Triboelectric nanogenerators
TENGs based on the triboelectric effect and electrostatic induction can efficiently collect the mechanical energy in the environment at low frequency. TENG, as one of the cost-effective and reliable devices for collecting environmental mechanical energy, is sufficient to drive small electronic devices, effectively meeting the needs of obtaining energy from a variety of mechanical motions. A typical structure of TENG consists of electrodes and triboelectric layers. Since the materials of the triboelectric layers have different abilities to attract electrons, they will have opposite polarity of charge and form potential differences during the process of relative motion, thus forming current in the external circuit. The working mechanisms of TENG can be divided into four modes: vertical contact-separation mode,196,197 sliding mode,198,199 single-electrode mode,200,201 and freestanding triboelectric-layer mode202 according to the different relative motion mode and electrode arrangement. Vertical contact-separation mode is the most basic and common working mode. Two relatively placed triboelectric layers produce current due to potential changes in the process of contact and separation. The sliding mode has the same electrode arrangement as the vertical contact-separation mode, but the two triboelectric layers move relatively in the direction parallel to the friction layer to form a potential difference that changes periodically with the contact surface area variation of TENGs. Micro-grating sliding203 has been developed based on the sliding mode. The TENG can not only obtain energy from the movement of contact sliding and transverse translation, but can also collect the energy of rotation or rolling movement, which effectively enhances the ability of TENG to collect various forms of mechanical energy. The structure of single-electrode mode consists of only one electrode, which can be regarded as a special form of one electrode grounding in vertical contact-separation mode. The single-electrode mode can generate induced current between two electrodes through electrostatic induction without contact, which effectively avoids the wear caused by the contact between moving objects and the triboelectric layer, thus improving the durability of TENG. The freestanding triboelectric-layer mode can be regarded as the development of the single-electrode mode. The difference is that the grounding electrode is replaced by the same conductive electrode. Different from the single-electrode mode, the freestanding triboelectric-layer mode can work in non-contact and contact sliding modes.202 The four basic working modes of TENG adopt different designs to adapt to the corresponding mechanical triggering conditions. Therefore, a unified standard is needed to quantify the output performance of TENG. Since both the short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage of TENG are proportional to the surface charge density, and the output power density is proportional to the square of the surface charge density, the surface charge density can be used as an important index to evaluate TENG performance.204,205 The surface charge density can be increased by changing the material type or increasing the contact intimacy, thus obtaining better TENG properties.
The parameters of the conductive composite, such as electrical conductivity and Young's modulus, significantly affect the performance of TENG. Some ionic hydrogels have good stretchability; however, they are often not suitable for executing long-term monitoring, and their poor electrical conductivity may result in low output performance. Carbon nanotubes and silver nanowires possess relatively high electrical conductivity, but always suffer from irreversible damage under large stretching deformations which will result in a sharp increase in resistance. Yang et al. proposed a stretchable energy-harvesting electronic skin based on liquid metal NPs (LM-NPs).165 A single-electrode-mode TENG was achieved by LM-NP film electrode and copper layer. The LM-NP served as a stretchable electrode layer, and PDMS layer with microstructure was used as the encapsulation and friction layer. Due to the excellent stretchability and high electronic conductivity of LM-NP, the energy-harvesting electronic skin demonstrated high stretchability (≈260%). Even if the device is bent or twisted, the resistance and charges-transferring ability remain nearly identical to the initial state. Water molecules tend to attach to the surface of the friction layer and form a layer of free water under high humidity, which will result in rapid dissipation of the friction charge on the friction surface, leading to a decrease in the productivity of TENG in a high-humidity environment. Liu et al. designed a wet-resistant TENG with a triboelectric layer using polyvinyl alcohol/lithium chloride film (PVA/LiCl), which can maintain high performance of TENG in a high-humidity environment.210 PVA, as a triboelectric layer, contains a large number of hydroxyl groups that can retain water molecules and obtain strong water absorption, which improves the friction performance by the desorption and absorption of water during the release and contact process. Unique structural design contributes to improving the performance of the TENG. A stretchable TENG composed of serpentine-patterned copper electrodes on stretchable PDMS substrates and a wavy-structured Kapton film used as triboelectric layer was developed by Yang et al., which was capable of withstanding a maximum tensile strain of 22% (Fig. 10a).206 Owing to the advanced structural designs, the as-fabricated TENG could harvest ubiquitous mechanical energy through both compressive and stretching modes. He et al. proposed a novel fiber-like TENG with copper wires convolving carbon nanotube (CNT)-modified silicon rubber fiber core (Fig. 10b).207 The continuous release and contact process between copper coils and silicon fiber enables the device to achieve good flexibility and stability with an output performance of stretching capability of up to 70%. The device also exhibits  high performance with an output voltage of 142.8 V and a maximum charge density of 61 nC. It is feasible to power a digital watch at the least time of 50 s. Yang et al. proposed a TENG device consisting of paper substrate, PTFE film, and aluminum foil.211 The device makes full use of origami 3D structures to collect mechanical energy generated by various human movements, such as stretching, lifting, and twisting. Fiber/textile-based TENGs exhibit superior energy-harvesting performance, washability, flexibility, and desirable breathability, which is suitable for harvesting energy from human activity in daily life. Wang et al. reported a tube-like TENG constructed with a helix inner electrode, dielectric layer, outer electrode, and elastomeric materials.212 The nanogenerator can be assembled into cloth or shoes and harvest energy from diverse motions to drive wearable electronic devices. Dong et al. developed a textile-based TENG, using an industrial weft knitting technique, which could be seamlessly woven into knitwear for power harvest.208 As shown in Fig. 10c, the electrode was made of conductive silver (Ag) yarn, while the triboelectric positive and negative materials were nylon66 (PA66) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), respectively. PTFE-wound Ag-plated nylon6 yarn was named PTFE-Ag yarn, and PA66-wound Ag-plated nylon6 yarn was named PA66-Ag yarn. The nanogenerator was made of two yarns with a tubular structure and generated electricity at both stretching and compression modes, showing excellent power-generation performance and good potential in comfortable garments. Qiu et al. produced tailorable and washable power-generation fabrics that effectively collect energy generated by walking and running.213 PET fabric was modified using PTFE NPs and PVDF NFs with the strongest electronegativity, which enables the nanogenerator to form a rough structure on the PET surface to increase the surface area and provide good electronegativity. The current output and voltage output of the modified PET increased to 11.6 times and 9.4 times, respectively, showing better performance in energy collection. The fiber/textile-based TENGs were integrated with a simple energy storage unit to provide an energy supply for wearable electronics.214–217 However, an additional electric circuit is usually needed to connect the TENG to an energy storage unit for large-scale textile electronics.218 Integration of the energy-harvest unit with an energy-storage unit into a smart and compact volume is of significant importance for wearable devices. Pu et al. designed a self-charging and wearable power unit, consisting of a whole-textile TENG cloth and a flexible lithium-ion battery (LIB) belt.219 The whole-textile TENG-cloth can be worn at many different positions of the human body, due to its versatility in scavenging energies of various modes of human motion. Excellent flexibility and stable electrochemical performance of the LIB belt were achieved even after the LIB belt was completely folded at 180° for 30 times. But, the bulk volume of the whole self-charging platform limits its application. It is necessary to minimize the volume of the self-powered system and make energy harvesting and storing components functional. To achieve this goal, Cho et al. reported a spontaneous self-charging hybrid compact fiber device, consisting of a supercapacitor with asymmetric coaxial structure at the core and a TENG at the outer layer.220 The system harvested surrounding mechanical energy by TENG and spontaneously stored the harvested energy by charging the fiber supercapacitor without any electrical connection. The device displays limited loss in power and capacitance when bending, knotting, and washing. In addition, the hybrid smart fiber exhibited stable output performance over 50000 cycles. Ye et al. reported an all-fabric TENG with effective energy conversion efficiency.209 As shown in Fig. 10d, the fabric TENG was composed of multilayers, including hydrophobic fabric, conductive fabric, and PET fabric. The hydrophobic fabric consisted of SiO2 NPs and poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)/perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (PVDF-HFP/FDTS), exhibiting hydrophobic self-repairing performance and displaying excellent acid and alkali resistance. With droplets continually dripping on and falling off the hydrophobic surface, current will generate in the load circuit due to the contact electrification and electrostatic induction effect. The fabric TENG showed 7-fold enhancement of output voltage compared with the conventional single-electrode mode TENG. Many advances have been achieved in TENG with merits of low cost, light weight, multiple working modes, and diverse choice of materials. However, owing to the low energy generated by the low frequency of human movement, the output power of the nanogenerator needs to be improved to meet the demand of self-powered supply.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of TENG nanogenerators. (a) Schematic of the device structure of the wavy-TENG. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. (b) Structure schematic of the fiber-like TENG. Insets show the SEM photo and magnified photo of the fiber cross-section. Zoomed-in photos of the fiber-like TENG at released state and stretched state. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. (c) Design and fabrication of textile based TENGs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic diagram of the fabric TENG and its working mechanism. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
5. Biocompatibility
Good biocompatibility between wearable sensors and the human body is the key to avoiding adverse reactions.221 The safety and long-term stability of wearable sensors are essential for continuous monitoring. Various natural (e.g. collagen,222 chitosan,223 cellulose,224 egg albumen,225 keratin,226 silk fibroin,227 pectin,228 and gelatin229) and synthetic polymers, (e.g. polylactic acid (PLA),230 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),231 polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA),232 polyacrylic acid (PAA),233 polyvinyl methylvinyl ether (PMVE)234 and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)235) are utilized in the fabrication of biocompatible devices. Physical embedding or chemical modification of non-biocompatible materials using biocompatible materials can alter the biocompatibility of the materials.236,237 The electrodes of most sensors inevitably come into contact with human tissue. However, most of the electrodes are made of metal or its oxide, which are easily degraded and corroded, resulting in instability of the electrode. To address this problem, Lee et al. demonstrated a biocompatible capacitive electrode completely encapsulated by PDMS.238 The biocompatibility testing was performed by implanting the electrodes in the back of rats for one month. Tissue samples were collected around the electrodes after 4 weeks and stained using hematoxylin and eosin for histological analysis. The results showed no infection or inflammation in the tissues in contact with PDMS. The PDMS acted as an insulating layer to prevent direct contact between tissue and metal layer, avoiding causing inflammation, and preventing electrode corrosion.
In addition to the modification of non-biocompatible materials by physical embedding or chemical modification, the use of biodegradable materials (e.g. cellulose, silk protein, and pectin) is another effective strategy to improve biocompatibility. Chitosan is one of the most studied natural materials.239 Wang et al. developed a biocompatible sensor based on multifunctional biomaterials by integrating the unique structure of natural chitosan with the good conductivity of graphene.240 The sensor exhibited good biocompatibility, high response, fast response time, and low detection limit. Bao's group designed an implantable strain and pressure sensor that was completely made of biodegradable materials.241 The sensor showed excellent biocompatibility and sensing function in a rat model, illustrating the potential application for monitoring tendon healing in real time. Biodegradability is useful in implantable biomedical devices, allowing them to disappear spontaneously after useful function without the need for a second surgery for removal. Lei et al. reported a completely decomposable and biocompatible semiconductor polymer and a fully degradable flexible circuit.242 The polymer was linked by reversible imine bonds which are susceptible to decomposition under mildly acidic conditions. They further reported a highly thermally stable film based on cellulose, which was used as a biodegradable substrate for transient and biodegradable electronics. Guo et al. demonstrated a flexible and biodegradable pressure sensor.243 The flexible sensor was composed of an MXene nanosheet sandwiched between a biodegradable PLA sheet and a PLA sheet patterned by an interdigitated conductive electrode. The flexible sensor degraded after 14 days, and would not cause any harm to the environment. Jing et al. prepared a biocompatible, self-healing, and highly stretchable hydrogel sensor made of PLA and reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite.244 The cytotoxicity of the hydrogel sensor was tested by culturing with fibroblasts differentiated from human embryonic stem cells. Cell viability was observed by live/dead assays, showing vigorous cell growth and survival rate of over 95% after 14 days. The result indicates that the hydrogel has good biocompatibility and can be widely used in the field of wearable devices. Ma et al. reported a superelastic LM fiber mat with excellent biocompatibility.245 The in vitro study using L-929 cells as model cells demonstrated low cytotoxicity of the LM fiber mat. Bright-field and fluorescent live/dead stained images showed that the cells exhibited high cell viability approaching 95% after 24 hours. LM fiber mats on the skin of rabbits did not cause erythema or oedema within 72 hours. One volunteer had no negative skin effects after a week with LM fiber pads adhered to his arm. The in vivo experiments on rabbit skin and on human skin further demonstrated that LM fiber mats are skin friendly in the long term.
Although a variety of biocompatible and degradable sensors are being developed, there remain many challenges to be solved. The diagnostic or therapeutic function of biocompatible devices needs to work without causing side effects. However, the trade-off between material degradability and device stability is of significance for biomedical applications. Instability will adversely affect the device's performance, and high stability upon implantation may cause concern about long-term side effects. In addition, the effects of heat and radiation caused by implantation or epidermal devices have not been confirmed.236 The reliability of these biodegradable devices under complex physiological environments in the human body and periodic mechanical deformation also needs to be considered.246 Although challenges remain, it is believed that biocompatible materials have great potential for the fabrication of flexible sensing devices, facilitating practical applications in wearable electronic systems, smart textiles, and medical devices.247
6. Flexible device integration and multi-functionalization
The human body is a complex living organism, and it is unreasonable to determine pathology by relying only on one or two physiological parameters. A systematic and comprehensive collection of several relevant physiological indicators of the human body, such as blood pressure, blood glucose, blood oxygen, pulse, body temperature, electrocardiogram (ECG), and other data, is required for accurate diagnosis.248 Wearable medical devices with multi-parameters and multi-functions, which can simultaneously detect multiple physical signals, are highly desired for biomedical diagnosis.249 Rogers’ team designed a wireless, battery-free, and wearable system for monitoring the vital physiological indicators of neonatal babies (Fig. 11a).250 The system consisted of ultra-thin, low-modulus measurement modules, including ECG, photoplethysmography (PPG), skin temperature, and a wireless battery-free module. The integrated system could accurately and non-invasively measure neonatal vital signs, such as heart rate, blood oxygen, temperature, respiratory rate, and pulse wave. However, the system still suffered from short wireless communication distances and brittle connections between modules. The team further improved and optimized the system to realize both the basic physiological parameters’ measurement (e.g. heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature, blood oxygen), and heart rate variability monitoring, which can be used to predict the clinical changes of an infant before the signs of disease become apparent.251 Wang et al. developed a flexible electronic skin device using flexible and transparent silk nanofiber-derived carbon fiber membranes as electroactive materials.252 The silk-based temperature and pressure sensors were integrated using a lamination strategy. The integrated devices achieved high temperature sensitivity of 0.81% per centigrade and extremely high sensitivity with GF of ∼8350 at 50% strain. Gui et al. developed a sandwich-like sensing system capable of monitoring temperature, light, and pressure signals simultaneously without mutual signal interference.255 The system used skin-like epidermal, dermal, and subcutaneous structures to achieve multi-signal sensing, including ambient temperature, body temperature, pressure, and near-infrared light. Yamamoto et al. provided a multifunctional flexible device by integrating a skin temperature sensor, an ECG sensor, and an ambient ultraviolet (UV) light sensor with a movement sensor for multiparameter healthcare monitoring.256 These multifunctional devices successfully offer a wide range of design possibilities for multiparameter healthcare monitoring. The flexible electronics typically comprise sensors,257 actuators,258 data communication systems,259 and power sources.260 Various types of noninvasive health-monitoring systems with multifunction are emerging in biomedical applications.261 Takao Someya's team proposed an ultra-flexible self-powered photonic system for PPG monitoring.262 The device consisted of a stable polymer light-emitting diode, organic photovoltaic cells, and an organic photodetector. The integrated optical sensors displayed high linearity with light intensity exponent of 0.98. However, the sensor system needs an extra data sampling circuit. Keum et al. developed a smart contact lens for noninvasive glucose monitoring and diabetic retinopathy therapy.253 The multifunctional smart contact lens integrated electrical circuits and microcontroller chips, which achieved real-time electrochemical detection, on-demand controlled drug delivery, remote radio frequency communication, and wireless energy transfer (Fig. 11b). The electrochemical sensor was employed to detect glucose in tears. The wireless energy transfer unit allowed wireless powering from an external power source via resonant inductive coupling. The application-specific integrated circuit chip with a power management unit provided the basic energy storage for the whole device. The remote communication unit enabled communication with an external controller by RF communication. The on-demand drug delivery system controlled by feedback information intelligently regulated the blood glucose level. Sweat, as an attractive alternative to blood, is rich in chemical information and holds promise for health condition monitoring, preventive medicine, and diagnosis.263 However, current sweat sensors require wired connections and bulky analysis workstations for data acquisition and processing, and external batteries to power the components, which largely limits the development of miniaturized devices. Gao's group reported a wireless self-powered wearable multiplexed sweat-sensing system driven by human motion.264 Freestanding-mode TENG extracted energy from body motion for continuously powering the wearable sensor system. A low-power Bluetooth module was used to wirelessly transmit data to the user interface. Xu et al. designed a wireless, battery-free, stretchable epidermal electrochemical device for the in situ analysis of multiple biomarkers in sweat.265 The device was integrated with two modules: a stretchable electrode array that monitors multiple biomarkers in sweat and a flexible circuit board with a near-field communication (NFC) module. The AgNWs/PDMS composites were applied as the conductive layer in multilayer electrode arrays for multiplexed electrochemical sensing, achieving high conductivity and good stretchability. The NFC module could be wirelessly linked to an NFC-enabled smartphone via inductive coupling for wireless real-time data transfer and power supply. Although many platforms use the NFC wireless power strategy, its short transmission distance greatly limits the application of wearable devices. Yu et al. reported a biofuel-powered electronic skin.266 It integrated three modules: a biofuel-powered module, a multiplexed sensing unit, and a Bluetooth communication module. The electronic skin platform provided real-time chemical sensing of NH4+, urea, glucose, and pH. The low-power Bluetooth module transmitted personalized information wirelessly to the user interface. The lactate biofuel cells (BFCs) captured lactic acid from sweat and converted bioenergy into electrons catalysed by lactic acid oxidase. The BFCs could fully power electronic skins for multiplexed sensing and wireless data transmission. Rogers’ team reported a wireless, battery-free, and soft sensor for continuous multi-point measurement of patient pressure and temperature.267 The device consisted of a near-field communication multiplexed antenna system, a temperature sensor, and a pressure sensor. The multiplexed antenna system for circuit transmission and data communication provided continuous monitoring of patient pressure and temperature at multiple points. Xu et al. reported a wearable multimodal sensing system for monitoring sleeping postures, respiration rate, and diaper moisture.254 As shown in Fig. 11c, the system consisted of a multimode flexible sensor sheet and a wireless feedback signal processing unit. The multimode flexible sensor sheet integrated tilt, stain and humidity sensors for multimode sensing. Tilt sensors based on LM could track at least 18 tilt directions. The humidity sensor composed of stacked ZnIn2S4 and porous interdigital laser-induced graphene (LIG) electrode could detect water vapor. A humidity pass filter was applied to allow water vapor permeation, avoiding the permeation of water. The strain sensor made of porous LIG and PDMS was used as a stretchable breath sensor to monitor the respiration rate. The signals from the ten channels (i.e., eight channels for the tilt sensor, two channels for the strain and humidity sensors) were transmitted wirelessly via Bluetooth to the user's mobile phone. The system provided immediate feedback to the patients or the carers of vulnerable people.
 Fig. 11  Multifunctional and integrated flexible wearable devices. (a) Flexible sensor for neonatal multi-sign monitoring. Schematic diagram of wireless battery-free epidermal electronic system (EES) for recording ECG, photoplethysmography (PPG) data and skin temperature. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of a smart contact lens composed of a biosensor, an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) chip with a wireless power transmission system, a flexible drug delivery system (f-DDS), and a remote communication system for diabetic diagnosis and therapy. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of a flexible wearable multimodal sensing system for monitoring vulnerable populations. Multi-channel of tilt, humidity, and respiration signals are transmitted wirelessly via Bluetooth to a smartphone to send alarms in specific situations. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. 
Currently, most sensor arrays that detect two or more physical quantities do not exclude the interactions between physical quantities.134 For example, temperature has a large effect on any other physical quantity. The realization of multifunctional sensors requires further developments in new materials, nanotechnology, and structure design. A complete wearable sensing system contains sensing unit, power supply unit, signal transmission, and signal processing unit. Current research in flexible electronics is mainly focused on the fabrication and optimization of sensing elements, while research on flexible electronic circuits for information processing is relatively limited.268,269 Processing data in situ and transmitting them in real time is also an important part of the future of wearable electronics.270 There are still many problems to be solved on how to integrate these excellent functional circuits into a flexible system for highly sensitive, multi-parameter, highly stable, real-time, and long-term detection. With the rapid development of electronic equipment towards high power and high frequency, electromagnetic radiation is becoming more and more serious, which may cause serious harm to the human body.271,272 Wearable materials with high electromagnetic interference shielding efficiency to protect humans from electromagnetic radiation will also be the focus of future wearable device research.273 Highly integrated and multiplexed sensing is highly attractive in the field of wearable devices for personalized healthcare. Of course, there is still room for improvement in the reliability and overall performance of the functional circuit structure.
7. Stretchable sensing assisted by machine learning
Sensors and data analysis are essential fundamental elements in the implementation of wearable intelligent systems. The blooming of machine learning (ML) promotes the development of intelligent sensor systems due to its powerful data analysis capability.274 ML can perform complex task analysis that is even better than human intelligence while fostering new and widely distributed applications.275 The powerful sensing networks benefiting from intelligent analytics and the Internet of Things are expected to offer a practical paradigm for biomedical diagnostics, haptic perception, and robots, among others.37 Flexible sensors acquire physical signals, such as temperature, pressure, pronunciation, respiration, electroencephalogram (EEG), electromyogram (EMG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and electrooculography (EOG).276–278 These data are then put into external or embedded intelligent modes for interpretation, generating the desired prediction results. Vital signs like bioelectrical signals, body temperature, and blood pressure are beneficial for assessing overall health.276 Fang et al. developed an ambulatory cardiovascular monitoring system that consists of a machine-learning-assisted textile triboelectric sensor, signal processing, wireless transmission, and signal display.279 The blood pressure from the measured pulse signal was estimated using a supervised feedforward neural network architecture, which facilitates continuous blood pressure monitoring for the prevention of cardiovascular disease. Conventional EEG set-ups suffer from extensive preparation time and bulky equipment. Mahmood provided flexible EEG electronics assisted by a deep learning algorithm for real-time EEG classification.280 The flexible smart sensing system allows for real-time diagnosis of neurological disorders. The combination of wearable devices with appropriate ML algorithms can well compress the complex big data generated by prolonged use while achieving high-precision monitoring. Zhang et al. reported degradable protein-based copolymers that can measure multidimensional physiological signals, including electrical and biochemical physiological characteristics.281 As shown in Fig. 12a, an artificial neural network (ANN) was adopted to identify human fatigue based on ECG, EMG, EOG, and electro-bacterial-graph (EBG). The ECG, EMG, and EOG signals are obtained by stretchable electrodes. EBG is monitored by the biomodified R-EDG (BR-EDG) sensor for discrimination of on-skin bacterial infection. The test confusion matrix of the post-trained ANN demonstrated more accurate and robust analysis, with optimized accuracy up to 96.9%. The multidimensional physiological signals from a human subject's daily movements over 24 h were fed into the trained ANN. The classified physiological states were vigorous, exercising, tired, stimulated, and vigorous sequentially, which was consistent with the feeling of the subject. Flexible devices with haptic perception combined with ML algorithms facilitate robots and prostheses to perform dexterous operations. Song et al. provide a fully integrated tactile sensing system. A 1D-CNN (Convolutional Neural Networks)-based recognition model enables the flexible sensing system with tactile sensation to recognize materials and textures, which empowers robots with multi-functional perceptions.282 Luo et al. reported a soft sensor array with high spatiotemporal resolution and multimodal sensing abilities assisted by machine learning for intelligent monitoring and stimuli response.283 Moin et al. developed a wearable surface EMG biosensing system for hand gesture recognition.284 EMG signals acquired by a printed flexible electrode array were analyzed using an in-sensor hyperdimensional computing algorithm. Zhou et al. provided a machine-learning-assisted wearable sign-to-speech translation system.285 Hand gesture motion statuses were recorded using TENG-based stretchable sensor arrays. The captured signals were processed using a printed circuit board which is composed of signal conditioning, processing, and wireless transmission components. The data were put into principal component analysis model for feature extraction and then classified by a multi-class support vector machine algorithm, achieving a recognition rate up to 98.63%. Chen's group adopted data fusion learning architecture to classify visual data and somatosensory data from stretchable strain sensors (Fig. 12b),286 achieving an accuracy of 100% for hand gesture recognition, which demonstrates that multimodal information integration can significantly improve the recognition accuracy. After the interpretation of algorithms, intelligent predictions are produced to give instructions for smart implementations. Integrating wearable devices with appropriate machine learning algorithms significantly improves the wearable sensing system in the application of biomedical diagnosis287,288 and human–machine interaction applications.282
 Fig. 12  Machine learning-assisted flexible sensing system. (a) ANN model analyzes the multidimensional physiological signals collected by epidermal electronic devices. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. (i) Schematic diagram of the algorithm architecture used for identifying physiological states. (ii) The test confusion matrix of post-trained ANN. (iii) The outputs of the post-trained ANN for classifying the physiological states of a subject during daily activities (run at the 1st hour–2nd hour and drink a caffeine-contained energy beverage at the 4th hour). (b) Schematic diagram of somatosensory–visual-associated learning framework for gesture recognition. (i) Schematic diagram of the human brain for processing hierarchy of visual and somatosensory information (PA, primary area; AA, association area). (ii) Schematic diagrams of the learning framework consist of three neural networks that mimic the brain process. (iii) The detailed learning framework is composed of AlexNet CNN pre-trained using the ImageNet dataset, and a five-layer sparsely connected neural network (sc) used to fuse the somatosensory–visual information (fc, fully connected neural network; 48D,48-dimensional visual vector; 5D, five-dimensional somatosensory vector). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. 
8. Conclusions and prospects
Plentiful significant achievements in wearable electronics, from innovative nanomaterials, device structures, and integrated systems to the demonstration of fascinating applications, provide new opportunities for healthcare. This review mainly introduces the latest developments in wearable devices. Electromechanical flexible sensors based on different mechanisms, including piezoresistive, capacitive, piezoelectric, triboelectric, and FET, are systematically investigated from engineering nanomaterials and micro/nanostructures. We then delve into the strategies for constructing flexible sensors in terms of biocompatibility, self-power, multifunction, and intelligent algorithms. Despite the significant progress that has been made in this burgeoning topic, there are some key challenges and technological gaps that still exist on the path toward widespread adoption of wearable sensors for practical applications.
Firstly, the sensitivity of flexible sensors has been improved to a certain extent within a limited pressure range, but it is hard to achieve linear and high sensitivity in a broad pressure range.289 Most of the sensors suffer from nonlinear response and large response lag, which will result in unrepeatable signal measurement.39 Complex microstructure improves the performance of sensors, but in the meantime the relatively complex operation process and high cost will bring an extra burden to large-scale production and commercialization.290 The coordination between production efficiency and high performance of wearable devices needs to be increased.
Secondly, sensors are greatly influenced by environmental factors. When the temperature and humidity change, the performance of the sensor may be reduced.291 For example, most triboelectric nanogenerators have different electromechanical responses at different humidity. Commonly, resistive sensors are sensitive to temperatures and humidity. Wearable sensors with high specificity to their target stimuli but negligible sensitivity to the environmental changes in daily life are necessary and urgent. It is necessary to improve the specificity of the flexible sensors and avoid the interference of other external signals to realize the effective measurement of physiological signals. Responsive materials and structures with improved stability are needed to solve the interference between different signals for obtaining highly sensitive and reliable physical sensors. During long-term service, sensing devices may face complex and changing conditions that are different from the lab environment. Obtaining high stretchability together with long-term stability of wearable electronics remains challenging for long-term physiological monitoring. The mismatch of the physical modulus between the active materials and the flexible substrate will lead to the failure of the flexible sensors under high strain. Surface modification, new materials, and surface structure design are proposed to extend the adhesion between the active materials and the flexible substrate, facilitating the reliability and stability of flexible sensors. Moreover, a wearable device for long-term health monitoring needs good biocompatibility and permeability in case of tissue inflammation.292,293
Thirdly, multifunctional sensors are desirable, as well as challenging, for more comprehensive monitoring. Multifunctional integrated sensors demand the development of new materials responding specifically to the stimuli, the judicious design of novel structures, logical layout of different units, and rational packaging to make them stable and biocompatible. In addition, advances in wireless transmission technologies will facilitate the intention of real-time data transmission, intelligent analysis, and feedback. Sophisticated analysis and measurement accuracy can be achieved by using data-processing techniques. Multifunctional integrated sensors with more powerful functions can be developed by combining with machine learning and artificial intelligence in the future. Data generated by the wearable sensing system are put into relative models for mining of information. The intelligent models combined with the data provide various perception, reasoning tasks, and multifaceted analysis, thus promoting intelligent applications, such as bioelectrical signal identification, tactile perception, and multimodal information integration.
Finally, the low volumetric energy densities of existing flexible power sources severely limit their practical application. Intelligent wearable devices usually consist of sensors, processing unit, communication unit, and power source. A flexible, lightweight, miniaturized, and stable power source is essential for wearable devices. Currently, several forms of green and renewable energy have emerged, such as solar energy,294 thermal energy,152 mechanical energy,295 and microbial chemical energy,296 which are promising applications in self-powered wearable devices.297 It is still challenging to drive an integrated multifunctional system by a self-powered source due to the integration of data processing and wireless transmission units.298 Consequently, one needs to develop integrated electronic systems with lower power consumption. Additionally, it is vital to explore energy storage units with high density, large volume, and light weight integrated with sufficient energy conversion devices via new material and device innovation.
Practical clinical applications require sensors with high sensitivity, broadband detection, stability, and scalability to a fine-pitch matrix. Recent developments in nanomaterials, flexible electronics, and micro–nano fabrication technologies open up new opportunities for wearable devices and practical clinical applications. With plenty of efforts continuously invested in new materials, structural design, advanced manufacturing, system integration, and intelligent algorithms, the integrated wearable system will be able to move from proof-of-concept prototypes to commercial products and benefit health monitoring, human disease diagnosis, rehabilitation processes, and intelligent robots.
Author contributions
L. X. conceived the theme and the outline of this review. L. X., Z. Z., Q. W., Z. G. wrote and revised the manuscript; G. M. mainly took part in the FET section; R. W., H. S., Y. Z., Y. D. participated in the discussion and revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province of China (No. 2022-MS-118, No. 2022-YGJC-64) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. N2224001-10).
References
H. S. Jo, S. An, C. Park, D. Woo, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40232–40242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Aaryashree, S. Sahoo, P. Walke, S. K. Nayak, C. S. Rout and D. J. Late, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 3669–3689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heikenfeld, A. Jajack and J. Rogers, Lab Chip, 2018, 2, 217–248 RSC .
S. Y. Chung, S. Kim, J. H. Lee, K. Kim, S. W. Kim, C. Y. Kang, S. J. Yoon and Y. S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6022–6027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Y. Kweon, S. K. Samanta, Y. Won, J. H. Yoo and J. H. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26134–26143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Ray, J. Choi, A. J. Bandodkar, S. Krishnan, P. Gutruf, L. Tian, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5461–5533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hong, H. Jeong, K. W. Cho, N. Lu and D. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808247 CrossRef .
J. Kim, A. S. Campbell, B. E. de ávila and J. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 389–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, H. Ota, D. Kiriya, K. Takei and A. Javey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Fan, S. C. Chen and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808509 CrossRef .
S. Mondal, N. Zehra, A. Choudhury and P. K. Iyer, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 47–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, P. Swetha and Y. Zhu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 760–765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lai, H. W. Lu, H. M. Wu, D. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Ma, M. Shamsi, V. Vallem and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100411 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liao, X. Liu, Y. Li, X. Xu, J. Jiang, S. Lu, D. Bao, Z. Wen and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 2060–2068 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou and C. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6246–6256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, P. V. Pikhitsa, Y. W. Choi, C. Lee, S. S. Shin, L. Piao, B. Park, K. Suh, T. Kim and M. Choi, Nature, 2014, 516, 222–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Pegan, J. Zhang, M. Chu, T. Nguyen, S. Park, A. Paul, J. Kim, M. Bachman and M. Khine, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17295–17303 RSC .
X. Zhao, Q. Hua, R. Yu, Y. Zhang and C. Pan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500142 CrossRef .
N. Qaiser, A. N. Damdam, S. M. Khan, S. Bunaiyan and M. M. Hussain, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007445 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, K. G. Cho, D. H. Cho, K. Hong and K. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010199 CrossRef CAS .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi, Y. Murase, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 12321–12325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Silva, J. Lv, L. Yin, I. Jeerapan, G. Innocenzi, F. Soto, Y. G. Ha and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002041 CrossRef CAS .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jang, K. Li, H. U. Chung, S. Xu, H. N. Jung, Y. Yang, J. W. Kwak, H. H. Jung, J. Song, C. Yang, A. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Y. Lee, B. H. Kim, J. Kim, J. Lee, Y. Yu, B. J. Kim, H. Jang, K. J. Yu, J. Kim, J. W. Lee, J. Jeong, Y. M. Song, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Cooper, K. Arutselvan, Y. Liu, D. Armstrong, Y. Lin, M. R. Khan, J. Genzer and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605630 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, S. R. A. Bhuiyan, Y. Zhu and S. Yao, Small Struct., 2022, 3, 2100131 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Gao, Q. Zhang, K. Zheng, J. Xu, W. Xu, E. Shang, J. Jiang, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1344–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Guo, J. Tang, S. Dong, J. Lin, H. Wang, J. Liu and W. Rao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800265 CrossRef .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Y. Li, Y. J. Fan, Y. H. Chen, S. Y. Kuang, Z. B. Li, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900755 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Duan, D. R. D'Hooge and L. Cardon, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 114, 100617 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, R. Peng, Z. Fan and Y. Lin, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 23, 100900 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. Jin, J. Cai, L. Xu, T. He, T. Wang, Y. Tian, L. Li, Y. Peng and C. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2103694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, Y. S. Abu-Raya and H. Haick, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700024 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, R. He, Y. Niu, F. Han, J. Li, X. Zhang and F. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 197, 113777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, T. Wang, Y. Luo, K. He, L. Pan, Z. Li, Z. Cui, Z. Liu, J. Tu and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Suresh, J. Yang, X. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2022, 4, 2100194 CrossRef .
M. Amjadi, K. Kyung, I. Park and M. Sitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1678–1698 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Pang, J. Su, F. Li, Q. Li, X. Wang, J. Wang, B. Ibarlucea, X. Liu, Y. Li, W. Zhou, K. Wang, Q. Han, L. Liu, R. Zang, M. H. Rümmeli, Y. Li, H. Liu, H. Hu and G. Cuniberti, InfoMat, 2021, 4, e12262 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602790 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, F. Han, Y. Zhu, R. Sun and C. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35968–35976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pu, X. Zha, L. Tang, L. Bai, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40880–40889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, D. Chen, C. Li, W. Liu and H. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, Z. Cui and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1336–1342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nie, X. Li, J. Shao, X. Li, H. Tian, D. Wang, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40681–40689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. Fan, Q. Zhang, L. Luo, X. Hu, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Jiang, X. Gao, L. Zheng, W. Zhao, Z. Wang, W. Ai, Y. Wei, Q. Lu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, W. Song, X. Wang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. Hang, X. Wen, M. Liu, H. Zhang, F. Yang, R. Ma, J. Wang, D. W. Zhang and H. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14136–14144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, C. Li, K. Xie, P. Zhu, B. Shao, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and C. F. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yang, J. Kim, J. Oh, S. Y. Kwon, J. Y. Sim, D. W. Kim, H. B. Choi and S. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19472–19480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shao, J. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Z. Zuo, H. Lv, M. Ying, C. P. Wong and Z. Li, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000032 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Z. Zheng, J. Liu, H. Xiao, G. Huangfu and Y. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Zhao, Z. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Wan, Y. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and L. Li, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1661–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, Z. Zheng, B. Wang and Y. Guo, Nano Energy, 2022, 99, 107400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, N. Wu, S. Lin, J. Duan, Z. Xu, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Huang, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Meng, J. Chen, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Fan, Z. Zhou, Q. He, X. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1806388 CrossRef .
G. Zhao, Y. Zhang, N. Shi, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Wu, C. Pan, H. Liu, L. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jian, A. Wang, J. B. Jianfeng, Z. A. M. S. Congcong, H. A. Shuwei, R. Z. A. L, A. Na and S. A. H. L. Dehui, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105050 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Lin, N. Luo, M. Long, N. Zhao and J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4507–4513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Guo, H. Li, B. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Xu, X. Chen, K. Wu, X. Zhang, F. Xing, L. Li and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1805630 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Su, X. Gao, Y. Li, W. Tang, C. Cao, Q. Liu, L. Wang and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22200–22211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Feng, X. Jiang, G. Zou, W. Wang, T. Sun, H. Yang, G. Zhao, M. Dong, Y. Xiao, H. Zhu and L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Shi, Z. Cao, R. Wang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807882 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, C. Yan, H. Huang, T. Yang, G. Tian, D. Xiong, N. Chen, X. Chu, S. Zhong, W. Deng, Y. Fang and W. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, D. Gómez, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8717–8722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Vijjapu, M. E. Fouda, A. Agambayev, C. H. Kang, C. Lin, B. S. Ooi, J. He, A. M. Eltawil and K. N. Salama, Light: Sci. Appl., 2022, 11, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, J. Liu and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 937–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Liang, Y. Cao, Z. Han and X. Feng, npj Flexible Electron., 2020, 4, 2 CrossRef .
R. Qin, M. Hu, X. Li, T. Liang, H. Tan, J. Liu and G. Shan, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2021, 7, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Mishra, N. El-Atab, A. M. Hussain and M. M. Hussain, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2001023 CrossRef .
J. Qin, L.-J. Yin, Y.-N. Hao, S.-L. Zhong, D.-L. Zhang, K. Bi, Y.-X. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z.-M. Dang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, J. H. Koo, A. Nguyen, J. M. Caves, M.-G. Kim, A. Chortos, K. Kim, P. J. Wang, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 634–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, B. C. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. V. H. Chen, S. Barman, B. V. O. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kang, J. Lee, S. Lee, S. Kim, J. Kim, H. Algadi, S. Al-Sayari, D. Kim, D. Kim and T. Lee, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600356 CrossRef .
Z. He, W. Chen, B. Liang, C. Liu, L. Yang, D. Lu, Z. Mo, H. Zhu, Z. Tang and X. Gui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 10, 12816–12823 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, H. Luo, L. Qin, X. Wang, Z. Xiong, H. Ding, Y. Gu, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5042–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Ma, H. Zheng and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Des., 2021, 211, 110164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, D. Guo, D. Ye, S. Jiang and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37354–37362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Panda, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 5049–5062 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wei, L. Pan and W. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 1409–1421 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahmood, H. Khan, K. Tran, P. Kuppe, A. Zavabeti, P. Atkin, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Yang, C. Xu, S. A. Tawfik, M. J. S. Spencer, J. Z. Ou, K. Khoshmanesh, C. F. Mcconville, Y. Li and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Mater. Today, 2021, 44, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Chorsi, E. J. Curry, H. T. Chorsi, R. Das, J. Baroody, P. K. Purohit, H. Ilies and T. D. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802084 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Azimi, M. Milazzo, A. Lazzeri, S. Berrettini, M. Uddin, Z. Qin, M. Buehler and S. Danti, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, e1901287 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gong, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and K. Ren, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908724 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Wang, J. M. Zheng, G. Y. Ren, P. H. Zhang and C. Xu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 45009 CrossRef .
T. Li, M. Qu, C. Carlos, L. Gu, F. Jin, T. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Xiao, T. Wang, W. Dong, X. Wang and Z. Q. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, H. B. Lee, S. M. Yeon, J. Park and N. K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24773–24781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. Xu and Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1759–1768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, F. Rault, M. Lewandowski, E. Mohsenzadeh and F. Salaün, Polymer, 2021, 13, 174 CAS .
S. M. Hosseini and A. A. Yousefi, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, M. Chou and W. Zeng, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 420 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Sun, G. Yin, Y. Wang, B. Liu and M. Dong, Sensors, 2018, 18, 330 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, X. Zhao, T. Herisson De Beauvoir, J. H. Seo, S. S. Berbano, A. L. Baker, C. Azina and C. A. Randall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801724 CrossRef .
Y. Su, C. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Yang, G. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Li, Q. Gong, G. Xie, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Tai, Y. Jiang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Liao, G. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liang, X. Liao and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Pan, G. Xie, Y. Jiang, C. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Wang and H. Tai, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 301, 111789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, J. Xuan and D. Y. C. Leung, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 166, 112410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Su, Q. Jing, Z. Li, F. Yi, X. Wen, Z. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1316–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Wei, J. Liu, J. Chen and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704112 CrossRef .
S. Chen, N. Wu, L. Ma, S. Lin, F. Yuan, Z. Xu, W. Li, B. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3660–3667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fu, J. Zhou, H. Wu and Z. Su, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106258 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Z. Xie, K. Yao, D. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Gao, W. Lu, L. Chang and X. Yu, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Guo, B. Zhang and W. Zhao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 427, 213597 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Yan, Z. Liu, X. Zhao, Z. Wang, J. Sun, Z. L. Wang, R. Wang and L. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106257 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, L. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Zhu and Z. Guo, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2021, 4, 435–450 CrossRef .
J. Yu, X. Hou, M. Cui, S. Zhang, J. He, W. Geng, J. Mu and X. Chou, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103923 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mariello, L. Fachechi, F. Guido and M. De Vittorio, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101047 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Hao, M. Zhao, H. Qiao, F. Huang, D. Li and Q. Wei, Composites, Part A, 2021, 146, 106412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, F. Zhang, C. Di and D. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 140–156 RSC .
M. Zhu, Q. Shi, T. He, Z. Yi, Y. Ma, B. Yang, T. Chen and C. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1940–1952 CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Liao, H. Ouyang, D. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Li, X. Qu, Z. Liu, Y. Fan, B. Shi, L. Zheng and Z. Li, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100699 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Z. Ren, M. Han, J. Wan and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104980 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. He, C. Boyer, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, S. Peng, D. Chu and C. H. Wang, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 5465–5486 RSC .
M. Li, S. Han and Y. Zhou, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2, 2000113 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Z. Ye, X. Wei and S. Mao, Electrochem. Sci. Adv., 2021, 1, e2100137 CrossRef .
X. Chen, C. B. Liu and S. Mao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Ratnesh, A. Goel, G. Kaushik, H. Garg, Chandan, M. Singh and B. Prasad, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 134, 106002 CrossRef CAS .
L. Janasz, M. Borkowski, P. W. M. Blom, T. Marszalek and W. Pisula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2105456 CrossRef .
H. Ling, S. Liu, Z. Zheng and F. Yan, Small, 2018, 2, 1800070 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Z. Qin, H. Gao, H. Dong, J. Zhu and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808453 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. Huang, Polym. Int., 2021, 4, 414–425 CrossRef .
F. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Duan, D. Ji and H. Yang, Small, 2021, 5, 2100676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mori, Polym. J., 2021, 53, 975–987 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, T. Wang, X. Wang, L. Chen, H. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Sun and D. W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23150–23158 RSC .
N. Li, Q. Wang, C. Shen, Z. Wei, H. Yu, J. Zhao, X. Lu, G. Wang, C. He, L. Xie, J. Zhu, L. Du, R. Yang, D. Shi and G. Zhang, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 711–717 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, J. Li, Y. Li, J. Duan, L. Li, Y. Tian, Z. Zong, H. Zheng, X. Feng, Q. Li, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, T. Ren and L. Han, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 29 CrossRef .
S. Liu, L. Wang, X. Feng, Z. Wang, Q. Xu, S. Bai, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606346 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Du, Y. Chu, S. Zhang and J. Huang, Small, 2019, 12, 1805196 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, S. Mao, J. Chen and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705642 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, D. Liu, J. Zhou, Y. Chu, Y. Chen, X. Wu and J. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700018 CrossRef .
R. Ahmad and M. M. A. Y. Tahmineh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 100, 312–325 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Du, Y. Li, J. R. Motley, W. F. Stickle and G. S. Herman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7631–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, R. Vo, H.-H. Hsu, P. Deng, Y. Zhang and X. Jiang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6658–6664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyamoto, S. Lee, N. F. Cooray, S. Lee, M. Mori, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jin, L. Yoda, T. Yokota, A. Itoh, M. Sekino, H. Kawasaki, T. Ebihara, M. Amagai and T. Someya, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 907–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Q. Li, S. Zhang, R. Yin, X. Liu, Y. He, K. Dai, C. Shan, J. Guo, C. Liu, C. Shen, X. Wang, N. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12121–12141 RSC .
T. Yang, X. Li, X. Jiang, S. Lin, J. Lao, J. Shi, Z. Zhen, Z. Li and H. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 248–255 RSC .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, D. Qi, C. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603382 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, K. Jiang, Z. Lou, D. Chen and G. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700248 CrossRef .
O. Atalay, A. Atalay, J. Gafford, H. Wang, R. Wood and C. Walsh, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700081 CrossRef .
T. Yang, D. Xie, Z. Li and H. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2017, 115, 1–37 CrossRef .
S. Han, M. K. Kim, B. Wang, D. S. Wie, S. Wang and C. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10257–10265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Takamatsu, T. Lonjaret, E. Ismailova, A. Masuda, T. Itoh and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4485–4488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Li, P. Li, J. Chen, R. Xu, S. Yao, Z. Cui, R. Booth, B. Mi, D. Wang, Y. Ma and W. Huang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800698 CrossRef .
H. Liu, M. Li, C. Ouyang, T. J. Lu, F. Li and F. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801711 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Schmitz, P. Maiolino, M. Maggiali, L. Natale, G. Cannata and G. Metta, IEEE Trans. Robot., 2011, 27, 389–400 Search PubMed .
T. Q. Trung and N. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603167 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sezer and M. Koç, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105567 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jo, I. Kim, J. Byun, N. Jayababu and D. Kim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, T. Hou, F. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 888–895 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, e1805241 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jood, R. J. Mehta, Y. Zhang, G. Peleckis, X. Wang, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-Tasciuc, S. X. Dou and G. Ramanath, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4337–4342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Liu, X. Shi, M. Hong, L. Wang, M. Li, H. Wang, J. Zou and Z. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123513 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, J. R. Sootsman, S. N. Girard, J. Zheng, J. Wen, Y. Zhu, M. G. Kanatzidis and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8669–8675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Cai, X. Hua, H. Chen, Q. Liang, C. Du, Y. Zheng, J. Shen, J. Xu, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803072 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Shi, Y. Yang and Z. Chen, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 62–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, B. Wang, J. Qiu, D. Hui and S. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2017, 122, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, M. C. Biswas, Z. Guo, J. Jeon and E. K. Wujcik, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 123, 167–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, C. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100920 CrossRef CAS .
R. Feng, F. Tang, N. Zhang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38616–38624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. You, Z. Li, Y. Shao, X. Yuan, W. Liu, H. Tang, Q. Zhang, Y. Yan and X. Tang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2022, 202, 117818 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Hwang, H. Park, J. H. Lee, S. Oh, K. I. Park, M. Byun, H. Park, G. Ahn, C. K. Jeong, K. No, H. Kwon, S. G. Lee, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4880–4887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hanani, I. Izanzar, M. B. Amjoud, D. Mezzane, M. Lahcini, H. Uršič, U. Prah, I. Saadoune, M. E. Marssi, I. A. Luk'Yanchuk, Z. Kutnjak and M. Gouné, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105661 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, T. Chang, Y. Gai, K. Liang, Y. Jiao, D. Li, X. Jiang, Y. Wang, X. Huang, H. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Li, Y. Bai, K. Geng, N. Zhang, H. Meng, D. Huang, Z. Li, X. Yu and L. Chang, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Han, J. Huang, J. Sun, Z. L. Wang, S. Seo and Q. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909652 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Zou, W. Rao, Y. Gai, J. Xue, L. Wu, X. Qu, Y. Liu, G. Xu, L. Xu, Z. Liu and Z. Li, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106715 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, J. Kim, M. P. Kim, S. Na, J. Cho, J. J. Kim and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 11415–11427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jin, W. Shi, Y. Zhao, J. Qiao, J. Qiu, C. Sun, H. Lei, K. Tai and X. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1743–1751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Le, C. Liao, C. W. Luo and J. Leu, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, 546–552 CrossRef CAS .
N. Peranio, M. Winkler, D. Bessas, Z. Aabdin, J. König, H. Böttner, R. P. Hermann and O. Eibl, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 521, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Varghese, C. Hollar, J. Richardson, N. Kempf, C. Han, P. Gamarachchi, D. Estrada, R. J. Mehta and Y. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, K. Cho, J. Yun, J. Choi and S. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 641, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yin, C. Dun, X. Gao, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, D. L. Carroll and M. T. Swihart, Small, 2018, 14, 1801949 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Zhu, Y. Deng, B. Fu, P. Zhu, Y. Yu, J. Li and J. Guo, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104773 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, M. Yao, Y. Fan, C. Ma, M. Fan and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 288–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Pham, K. Y. Lee, J. Lee, K. Kim, K. Shin, M. K. Gupta, B. Kumar and S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 841–846 RSC .
D. Jung, S. Baek, M. R. Hasan and I. Park, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 641, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baek, J. E. Wang, S. Ryu, J. Kim, C. K. Jeong, K. Park and D. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2851–2856 RSC .
L. Kang, H. An, J. Y. Park, M. H. Hong, S. Nahm and C. G. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 475, 969–973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, J. Chen, T. Yang, C. Huang, C. Chiu, P. Yeh and W. Wu, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laurenti, G. Canavese, A. Sacco, M. Fontana, K. Bejtka, M. Castellino, C. F. Pirri and V. Cauda, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4218–4223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Liu, J. Xiong, J. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Peng, A. Yu, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, T. Hu, Y. Zhao, W. Zang, L. Xing and X. Xue, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 213, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, Y. Fu, P. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Xing and X. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10856–10860 RSC .
A. Koka, Z. Zhou and H. A. Sodano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 288–296 RSC .
J. Yan and Y. G. Jeong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 144, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Alluri, B. Saravanakumar and S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9831–9840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dudem, D. H. Kim, L. K. Bharat and J. S. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 865–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Selvarajan, N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar and S. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 91, 203–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, H. Pan, G. Tian, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, Y. Gao, C. Yan, X. Chu, N. Chen, S. Zhong, L. Zhang, W. Deng and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104706 CrossRef .
G. Hwang, Y. Kim, J. Lee, S. Oh, C. K. Jeong, D. Y. Park, J. Ryu, H. Kwon, S. Lee, B. Joung, D. Kim and K. J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2677–2684 RSC .
X. Cheng, X. Xue, Y. Ma, M. Han, W. Zhang, Z. Xu, H. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xue, S. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5048–5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, C. Pan, W. Guo, C. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. Yu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4960–4965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6339–6346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Xie, Q. Jing, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2226–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, Y. Liu, P. Bai, Y. S. Zhou, Q. Jing, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2282–2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niu, Y. Liu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3332–3340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. S. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6594–6601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2818–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Y. S. Zhou, P. Bai, X. S. Meng, Q. Jing, J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3788–3796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zi, S. Niu, J. Wang, Z. Wen, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin, C. Liu, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6720–6728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, L. Lin, F. Yi, X. Li, K. C. Pradel, Y. Zi, C. Wu, J. He, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3817–3824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, Y. Zi, H. Guo, H. Zheng, Y. Xi, C. Wu, J. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604378 CrossRef .
S. Dong, F. Xu, Y. Sheng, Z. Guo, X. Pu and Y. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, D. Liu, X. Peng, Y. Jiang, R. Cheng, C. Ning, F. Sheng, Y. Zhang, K. Dong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18172–18181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Liu, M. Yang, N. Cui, H. Wang, L. Gu, L. Wang and Y. Qin, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106303 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, Z. Lin, K. C. Pradel, L. Lin, X. Li, X. Wen, J. He and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 901–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Li, F. Yi, Y. Zi, J. Lin, X. Wang, Y. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qiu, M. Zhu, Z. Li, K. Qiu, X. Liu, J. Yu and B. Ding, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 750–758 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, M. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Hu, L. Zhu, X. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiong, P. Cui, X. Chen, J. Wang, K. Parida, M. Lin and P. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4280 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kang, C. Zhao, J. Huang, D. H. Ho, Y. T. Megra, J. W. Suk, J. Sun, Z. L. Wang, Q. Sun and J. H. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903580 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, J. Deng, Y. Zi, Y. Wang, C. Xu, H. Zou, W. Ding, Y. Dai, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702648 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guan, B. Xu, M. Wu, T. Jing, Y. Yang and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105549 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, L. Li, H. Song, C. Du, Z. Zhao, C. Jiang, G. Cao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2472–2478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho, S. Pak, Y.-G. Lee, J. S. Hwang, P. Giraud, G.-H. An and S. Cha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908479 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2019, 1, 1900040 CrossRef .
K. Fujioka, M. Maeda, T. Hojo and A. Sano, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1998, 31, 247–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Khor and L. Y. Lim, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2339–2349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, S. Wang, G. Chen, W. Kong, W. Ping, J. Dai, G. Pastel, H. Xie, S. He, S. Das and L. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7707–7713 CrossRef CAS .
N. Raeis-Hosseini, Y. Park and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800553 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, S. Hao, W. Hu, M. Wang, Z. Zang, L. Zhu, J. Du and X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3315–3321 RSC .
X. Ji, L. Song, S. Zhong, Y. Jiang, K. G. Lim, C. Wang and R. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16909–16915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Xu, J. Hu, J. Ma and Y. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 1803970 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Olatunji, M. Olubowale and C. Okereke, Polym. Bull., 2018, 75, 4103–4115 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Cong, H. Zhang, T. Xu, L. Nie and J. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8062–8069 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, A. Islam, K. J. Yu and H. Tao, Science, 2011, 333, 1703 CAS .
A. L. Daugherty, J. L. Cleland, E. M. Duenas and R. J. Mrsny, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 1997, 44, 89–102 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Yan, J. Tan, D. Yang, X. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Cao and S. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808146 CrossRef .
I. A. Tekko, G. Chen, J. Domínguez-Robles, R. R. S. Thakur, I. M. N. Hamdan, L. Vora, E. Larrañeta, J. C. Mcelnay, H. O. Mccarthy, M. Rooney and R. F. Donnelly, Int. J. Pharm., 2020, 586, 119580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Delivopoulos, D. J. Chew, I. R. Minev, J. W. Fawcett and S. P. Lacour, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2540 RSC .
X. Yu, W. Shou, B. K. Mahajan, X. Huang and H. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707624 CrossRef PubMed .
H. R. Lim, H. S. Kim, R. Qazi, Y. T. Kwon, J. W. Jeong and W. H. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lee, H. J. Byeon, B. H. Kim, J. Lee, J. Y. Jeong, J. H. Lee, J. Moon, C. Park, H. Choi, S. Lee and K. Lee, BioChip J., 2017, 11, 153–163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Suginta, P. Khunkaewla and A. Schulte, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5458–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, J. H. Park, E.-L. Tan and N.-J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4019–4024 RSC .
C. M. Boutry, Y. Kaizawa, B. C. Schroeder, A. Chortos, A. Legrand, Z. Wang, J. Chang, P. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 314–321 CrossRef .
T. Lei, M. Guan, J. Liu, H. Lin, R. Pfattner, L. Shaw, A. F. Mcguire, T. Huang, L. Shao, K. Cheng, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5107–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, M. Zhong, Z. Fang, P. Wan and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1143–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jing, H. Mi, X. Peng and L. Turng, Carbon, 2018, 136, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Q. Huang, Q. Xu, Q. Zhuang, X. Zhao, Y. Yang, H. Qiu, Z. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Chai and Z. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 859–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. Qian, K. Uto, J. Chen, X. Liu and T. Minari, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 119, 237–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jian, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 38, 459–490 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, H. Lee, J. Kim, M. Lee, H. J. Choi, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805754 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Yu, Y. Cui and W. Li, Sens. Actuator A Phys., 2021, 330, 112838 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Chung, B. H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, J. Lee, Z. Xie, E. M. Ibler, K. Lee, A. Banks, J. Y. Jeong, J. Kim, C. Ogle, D. Grande, Y. Yu, H. Jang, P. Assem, D. Ryu, J. W. Kwak, M. Namkoong, J. B. Park, Y. Lee, D. H. Kim, A. Ryu, J. Jeong, K. You, B. Ji, Z. Liu, Q. Huo, X. Feng, Y. Deng, Y. Xu, K. Jang, J. Kim, Y. Zhang, R. Ghaffari, C. M. Rand, M. Schau, A. Hamvas, D. E. Weese-Mayer, Y. Huang, S. M. Lee, C. H. Lee, N. R. Shanbhag, A. S. Paller, S. Xu and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2019, 363, u780 CrossRef PubMed .
H. U. Chung, A. Y. Rwei, A. Hourlier-Fargette, S. Xu, K. Lee, E. C. Dunne, Z. Xie, C. Liu, A. Carlini, D. H. Kim, D. Ryu, E. Kulikova, J. Cao, I. C. Odland, K. B. Fields, B. Hopkins, A. Banks, C. Ogle, D. Grande, J. B. Park, J. Kim, M. Irie, H. Jang, J. Lee, Y. Park, J. Kim, H. H. Jo, H. Hahm, R. Avila, Y. Xu, M. Namkoong, J. W. Kwak, E. Suen, M. A. Paulus, R. J. Kim, B. V. Parsons, K. A. Human, S. S. Kim, M. Patel, W. Reuther, H. S. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. D. Leedle, Y. Yun, S. Rigali, T. Son, I. Jung, H. Arafa, V. R. Soundararajan, A. Ollech, A. Shukla, A. Bradley, M. Schau, C. M. Rand, L. E. Marsillio, Z. L. Harris, Y. Huang, A. Hamvas, A. S. Paller, D. E. Weese-Mayer, J. Y. Lee and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Med., 2020, 26, 418–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Xia, M. Zhang, M. Jian and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39484–39492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Keum, S. K. Kim, J. Koo, G. H. Lee, C. Jeon, J. W. Mok, B. H. Mun, K. J. Lee, E. Kamrani, C. K. Joo, S. Shin, J. Y. Sim, D. Myung, S. H. Yun, Z. Bao and S. K. Hahn, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, a3252 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Fujita, Y. Lu, S. Honda, M. Shiomi, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2008701 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Gui, Y. He, N. Gao, X. Tao and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702050 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, S. Harada, D. Yamamoto, W. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601473 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, W. J. Jeang, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 12, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Le, W. Lu, J. Zhang and T. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801584 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tian, P. M. Lee, Y. J. Tan, T. L. Y. Wu, H. Yao, M. Zhang, Z. Li, K. A. Ng, B. C. K. Tee and J. S. Ho, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 243–251 CrossRef .
S. Lu, W. Lei, L. Gao, X. Chen, D. Tong, P. Yuan, X. Mu and H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106137 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wen, T. He, H. Liu, H. Chen, T. Zhang and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105155 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinno, T. Yokota, M. Koizumi, W. Yukita, M. Saito, I. Osaka, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tricoli, N. Nasiri and S. De, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605271 CrossRef .
Y. Song, J. Min, Y. Yu, H. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Zhang and W. Gao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, y9842 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xu, C. Cheng, Z. Liu, W. Yuan, X. Wu, Y. Lu, S. S. Low, J. Liu, L. Zhu, D. Ji, S. Li, Z. Chen, L. Wang, Q. Yang, Z. Cui and Q. Liu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800658 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, J. Nassar, C. Xu, J. Min, Y. Yang, A. Dai, R. Doshi, A. Huang, Y. Song, R. Gehlhar, A. D. Ames and W. Gao, Sci. Robot., 2020, 5, z7946 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Oh, J. Kim, Z. Xie, S. Cho, H. Han, S. W. Jeon, M. Park, M. Namkoong, R. Avila, Z. Song, S. Lee, K. Ko, J. Lee, J. Lee, W. G. Min, B. Lee, M. Choi, H. U. Chung, J. Kim, M. Han, J. Koo, Y. S. Choi, S. S. Kwak, S. B. Kim, J. Kim, J. Choi, C. Kang, J. U. Kim, K. Kwon, S. M. Won, J. M. Baek, Y. Lee, S. Y. Kim, W. Lu, A. Vazquez-Guardado, H. Jeong, H. Ryu, G. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, M. S. Kim, J. Choi, D. Y. Choi, Q. Yang, H. Zhao, W. Bai, H. Jang, Y. Yu, J. Lim, X. Guo, B. H. Kim, S. Jeon, C. Davies, A. Banks, H. J. Sung, Y. Huang, I. Park and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, J. H. Koo, A. Nguyen, J. M. Caves, M. Kim, A. Chortos, K. Kim, P. J. Wang, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 634–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, T. Zhang, H. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Pu, C. Gao and S. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis and A. Javey, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. De Giudici, J. Genier, S. Martin, J. Doré, P. Ducimetière, A. Evrard, T. Letertre and C. Ségala, Environ. Res., 2021, 194, 110500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zeni, S. Romeo, A. Sannino, R. Palumbo and M. R. Scarfì, Environ. Res., 2021, 196, 110935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zong, X. Zhou, Y. Hu, T. Yang, D. Yan, H. Lin, J. Lei and Z. Li, Composites, Part B, 2021, 225, 109299 CrossRef .
M. Liu, Y. Zhang and T. H. Tao, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2022, 4, 2100280 CrossRef .
Z. Ballard, C. Brown, A. M. Madni and A. Ozcan, Nat. Mach. Intell., 2021, 3, 556–565 CrossRef .
J. Dunn, L. Kidzinski, R. Runge, D. Witt, J. L. Hicks, S. M. Schüssler-Fiorenza Rose, X. Li, A. Bahmani, S. L. Delp, T. Hastie and M. P. Snyder, Nat. Med., 2021, 27, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Kim, M. Mahmood, Y. Lee, N. K. Kim, S. Kwon, R. Herbert, D. Kim, H. C. Cho and W. H. Yeo, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900939 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Han, K. M. Bae, S. K. Hong, H. Park, J. Kwak, H. S. Wang, D. J. Joe, J. H. Park, Y. H. Jung, S. Hur, C. D. Yoo and K. J. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 658–665 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Zou, J. Xu, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Deng, X. Zhao, M. Roustaei, T. K. Hsiai and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2104178 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mahmood, D. Mzurikwao, Y. Kim, Y. Lee, S. Mishra, R. Herbert, A. Duarte, C. S. Ang and W. Yeo, Nat. Mach. Intell., 2019, 1, 412–422 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang and T. H. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1905767 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Song, J. Yin, Z. Wang, C. Lu, Z. Yang, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, J. Wang, C. Wu, J. Cheng, Y. Dai, Y. Zi, S. Huang, X. Chen, J. Song, G. Li and W. Ding, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, X. Xiao, J. Chen, Q. Li and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 6734–6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Moin, A. Zhou, A. Rahimi, A. Menon, S. Benatti, G. Alexandrov, S. Tamakloe, J. Ting, N. Yamamoto, Y. Khan, F. Burghardt, L. Benini, A. C. Arias and J. M. Rabaey, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 54–63 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, K. Chen, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhou, K. Meng, C. Sun, Q. He, W. Fan, E. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Tan, W. Deng, J. Yang and J. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 571–578 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Z. Yan, T. Wang, P. Cai, S. Gao, Y. Zeng, C. Wan, H. Wang, L. Pan, J. Yu, S. Pan, K. He, J. Lu and X. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 563–570 CrossRef .
C. M. Boutry, L. Beker, Y. Kaizawa, C. Vassos, H. Tran, A. C. Hinckley, R. Pfattner, S. Niu, J. Li, J. Claverie, Z. Wang, J. Chang, P. M. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 3, 47–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen, J. Zhang, L. Zhao, R. D. Rhoades, D. Kim, N. Wu, J. Liang and J. Chae, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 173, 112799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin and H. Wu, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2021, 3, 2000194 CrossRef .
C. Pang, C. Lee and K. Suh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 1429–1441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Souri, H. Banerjee, A. Jusufi, N. Radacsi, A. A. Stokes, I. Park, M. Sitti and M. Amjadi, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2, 2000039 CrossRef .
O. Ozioko, P. Karipoth, M. Hersh and R. Dahiya, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., 2020, 28, 1344–1352 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Yang, F. Karouta and K. Sun, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kabir, P. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. A. Adelodun and K. Kim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 894–900 CrossRef .
J. Luo and Z. L. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 617–628 CrossRef .
X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yu, Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804760 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, N. Li and N. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002646 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the intelligent wearable devices for healthcare.	 

Resistive	

	Bending angle: 60°	0.25 Pa–60 kPa	1000	0.25 Pa	75	383665.9 kPa−1 (0–1.6 kPa)	
44

700	0.0075%–400%	10000	0.0075%	—	—	
47

—	0–100 kPa	5000	—	12	4015.8 kPa−1 (0–4 kPa)	
48

Capacitive	

	14.1	0.4 Pa–120 kPa	5000	0.4 Pa	40	1.194 kPa−1 (0–0.5 kPa)	
49

60	0.14–600 Pa	5000	0.14 Pa	50	44.5 kPa−1 (0–100 pa)	
50

—	10 Pa–4.5 MPa	1000	10 Pa	60	0.201 kPa−1 (0 Pa–50 kPa)	
51

Piezoelectric	

	Bending angle: 90°	0–40 N	5000	—	14	1.23 V N−1 (0–9 N)	
52

Bending angle: 90°	0.25–6 N	4500	0.25 N	70	7.91 V N−1 (0–1 N)	
53

Bending angle: 90°	1–50 N	300	<1 N	19	3.31 V kPa−1 (0–10 N)	
54

Triboelectric	

	—	0.1–60 kPa	8000	0.1 kPa	40	7.989 V kPa−1 (0–2 kPa)	
55

Bending angle: 30°	2.5–710 Pa	40000	2.5 Pa	<5	45.7 mV Pa−1 (0–0.71 kPa)	
56

121	0.1–1 N	6000	0.1 N	—	1.76 V N−1 (0–1 N)	
57

Field-effect transistor	

	Bending angle: 60°	0–200 g	—	175 Pa	150	5.17 kPa−1 (0–200 g)	
58

—	0–1.4 kPa	—	0.04 N	5–7	9.4 × 10−3 kPa−1 (0–1400 Pa)	
59

Bending angle: 90°	10–1.5 kPa	10000	10 Pa	1.8	514 kPa−1 (0–250 Pa)	
60


 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of engineering structure in resistive sensor. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for a supersensitive pressure sensor. Step I is for the fabrication of PDMS working mold, step II is for PDMS sensor film, step III is for the formation of Au-PDMS sensor film, and step IV is for the fabrication of sensor device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. (b) The fabrication process of a liquid metal-based strain sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the capacitive sensors with microstructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the capacitive sensor for detecting pulse on a human neck. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (b) Schematic of the sensor and its equivalent circuit. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the piezoelectric sensors with microstructures and applications. (a) Fabrication and structure design of the muscle fiber-inspired piezoelectric textile, scale bar is 1 cm. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. (b) A self-powered piezoelectric sensor for human motion. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic structure of self-powered flexible sensors. (a) (i) Schematic diagram of HSPS with hierarchical elastomer microstructures with two-stage conical PDMS. (ii) Voltage signal of HSPS and SPS-0 at the pressure of 10 kPa. (iii) Output voltage signal of HSPS and SPS-0 based sensor changes with pressure changes. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Schematic illustration of a flexible and self-powered sensor with weaving structure. The insert illustrated the scanning electron microscopy of plasma-etched polytetrafluoroethylene film and the actual photo of the sensor. Cross-sectional diagram of a single unit. The right is the illustration showing the electrical signal generation process of the self-powered sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018. (c) Structure and composition of self-powered sensor inspired by trampoline. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (d) Component and structure of hybrid piezoelectric triboelectric sensor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (e) Representation of the applicability of the hybrid power sensor on human skin and the schematic illustration of the working principle of the sensor: triboelectric coupling with human skin and piezoelectric/triboelectric hybrid contact. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  Working mechanism and application of the transistors. (a) Schematic of a piezoelectric transistor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (b) Schematic of flexible organic field-effect transistor arrays. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (c) Illustration of large-scale flexible MoS2 transistor arrays with integrated circuits. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic of PMMA/InSe/PMMA-HfO2 FET and the detection of nerve signal with and without the FET device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019.	 


Micro-crack structure	PUAa/Pt	Resistive	

	2	
17

Wrinkle structure	Ecoflex/PIb/Au	Resistive	

	185	
18

Serpentine structure	PETc/Ag	Capacitive	

	70	
19

Horseshoe structure	Textile/PEDOTd:PSSe	Capacitive	

	30	
142

Zigzag structure	PEDOT:PSS/ionic gel	Resistive	

	200	
21

Mesh structure	PDMSf/Ag	Resistive	

	35	
143

Island–bridge structure	Ecoflex/Ag-LMsg	Resistive	

	800	
23

Kirigami structure	cPIh/AgNWs	Resistive	

	400	
24

3D helical structure	PAAi-alginate/LMsg	Resistive	

	300	
144

Textile fiber structure	Fibers/LMsg	Capacitive	

	150	
26


 	Fig. 7  Illustration of typical nanogenerators.	 

Thermoelectric	Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3	0.6 V	—	0.356 mW cm−2	50%	
159

Bi2Te3	0.52 V	—	11.14 mW cm−2	Bending radius: 5 mm	
160

Bi2Te3	0.236 V	—	13.1 mW cm−2	Bending radius: 4.5 mm	
161

Piezoelectric	(1 − x)Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3 − xPbTiO3	8.2 V	0.223 mA	—	Bending radius: 16.5 mm	
162

Ba0.85Ca0.15Zr0.10Ti0.90O3 Nps	14.4 V	0.55 μA	12.82 μW m−2	Bending angle: 180°	
163

PVDF	90 V	5 μA	140 mW m−2	Bending angle: 180°	
164

Triboelectric	Liquid metal Nps and PDMS	268 V	12.06 μA	355 mW m−2	260%	
165

Liquid metal and Ecoflex	80 V	12 μA	20 mW m−2	300%	
166

Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)/BTO/MXene nanocomposite	260 V	160 mA	6.65 W m−2	60%	
167


 	Fig. 8  Schematic descriptions of typical TEGs. (a) Schematic diagram of recyclable, healable, and stretchable TEG (RHS-TEG) manufacturing process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021. The uniformly distributed Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 legs were encapsulated by polyimine. When the device is damaged, the polyimine can be completely dissolved in a recycled solution composed of 3,3′-diamino-N-methyldipropylamine, tris(2-aminoethyl) amine, from which the legs and electrodes can be separated for the production of new devices. (b) Illustration of the thermoelectric nanogenerators and working principle of a single thermocouple. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of a sensing system consisting of TEG and piezoresistive sensor attached on wrist for blood pulse monitoring. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of PENG nanogenerators and their applications. (a) Piezoelectric energy collector manufacturing process and its application in cardiac pacemaker. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (i) PMN-PT metal–insulator–metal (MIM) layer. (ii) Exfoliation of the top piezoelectric film from the silicon substrate. (iii) PMN-PT thin film was transferred to PET substrates to achieve conformal contact with the human body. (iv) Stimulate a living heart. (b) Schematic diagram of the three-dimensional hierarchically interlocked PVDF/ZnO NFs as a self-powered device for muscle behavior monitoring. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of TENG nanogenerators. (a) Schematic of the device structure of the wavy-TENG. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. (b) Structure schematic of the fiber-like TENG. Insets show the SEM photo and magnified photo of the fiber cross-section. Zoomed-in photos of the fiber-like TENG at released state and stretched state. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. (c) Design and fabrication of textile based TENGs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic diagram of the fabric TENG and its working mechanism. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 11  Multifunctional and integrated flexible wearable devices. (a) Flexible sensor for neonatal multi-sign monitoring. Schematic diagram of wireless battery-free epidermal electronic system (EES) for recording ECG, photoplethysmography (PPG) data and skin temperature. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of a smart contact lens composed of a biosensor, an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) chip with a wireless power transmission system, a flexible drug delivery system (f-DDS), and a remote communication system for diabetic diagnosis and therapy. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of a flexible wearable multimodal sensing system for monitoring vulnerable populations. Multi-channel of tilt, humidity, and respiration signals are transmitted wirelessly via Bluetooth to a smartphone to send alarms in specific situations. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 12  Machine learning-assisted flexible sensing system. (a) ANN model analyzes the multidimensional physiological signals collected by epidermal electronic devices. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. (i) Schematic diagram of the algorithm architecture used for identifying physiological states. (ii) The test confusion matrix of post-trained ANN. (iii) The outputs of the post-trained ANN for classifying the physiological states of a subject during daily activities (run at the 1st hour–2nd hour and drink a caffeine-contained energy beverage at the 4th hour). (b) Schematic diagram of somatosensory–visual-associated learning framework for gesture recognition. (i) Schematic diagram of the human brain for processing hierarchy of visual and somatosensory information (PA, primary area; AA, association area). (ii) Schematic diagrams of the learning framework consist of three neural networks that mimic the brain process. (iii) The detailed learning framework is composed of AlexNet CNN pre-trained using the ImageNet dataset, and a five-layer sparsely connected neural network (sc) used to fuse the somatosensory–visual information (fc, fully connected neural network; 48D,48-dimensional visual vector; 5D, five-dimensional somatosensory vector). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
