A new ZnO nanotetrapods/SnO 2  nanoparticles composite photoanode for high efficiency flexible dye -sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C000584C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C000584C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9494-9501Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsA new ZnO nanotetrapods/SnO2 nanoparticles composite photoanode for high efficiency flexible dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongcai 
            Qiu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk
Received 
      12th January 2010
    , Accepted 5th May 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      6th July 2010
    AbstractWe report a new photoanode for flexible dye sensitized solar cells based on a judicious combination of SnO2 nanoparticles and ZnO nanotetrapods and the development of an effective low temperature fabrication technique of “acetic acid gelation–mechanical press–ammonia activation”. A 4.91% efficiency has been achieved on an ITO-coated polyethylenenaphthalate (ITO/PEN) substrate under 1 sun equivalent illumination. The peculiar symmetrical branching morphology of ZnO nanotetrapods is beneficial to charge collection of the SnO2/ZnO composite photoanode. The formation of a thin ZnO shell on SnO2 nanoparticles, after ammonia activation, is critical to boosting the open-circuit photovoltage and to improving inter-particle contacts as well as photoelectron injection. The mechanical press, apart from enhancing film durability, has also significantly improved charge collection.
Introduction
Recently, much effort has been dedicated to fabricating dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) on flexible substrates,1–7 especially on transparent conductive plastic (TCP) substrates,1,7 such as ITO-coated polyethyleneterephthalate (ITO/PET) or polyethylenenaphthalate (ITO/PEN) films. This research direction is of great importance in enhancing the practicality and feasibility of DSSCs because, compared to the normally used FTO-coated glass, TCP films have a unique lightweight advantage and are suitable for roll-to-roll type, high-throughput industrial mass production.5 However, the low temperature tolerance (<150 °C) of plastic films requires deposition and post-treatment techniques that are different from those that can be employed on glass. Although various low-temperature strategies, such as hydrothermal,8 mechanical press,7,9 microwave,10 UV11 and UV-ozone reactions,1,12 have been attempted, the reported performance of flexible DSSCs is still relatively low (< 5% in efficiency). Only in one case, systematic optimization of a hierarchical TiO2 nanoparticles film has resulted in a 7.4% efficiency.7 The main limiting factors include: (1) insufficient “necking” between TiO2 nanoparticles yields poor charge collection due to grain boundaries and defects at the contacts;5,13 (2) unwanted residue substances derived from Ti-monomer additives in the film-preparation pastes, while essential to the films’ mechanical durability and electrical connectivity between particles,5 hinder direct dye adsorption on the surface of crystalline TiO2, thus impeding effective electron injection.
Replacing TiO2 with ZnO is reasonable in approaches towards flexible DSSCs,6,14 because ZnO, being more reactive, can achieve good crystallinity under milder conditions. Recently, it has been reported that an electrochemically deposited ZnO/eosinY hybrid film, after dye desorption and re-adsorption, could yield more than 5% efficiency.6 An acetic acid (HAc) gelled ZnO nanoparticle film on a flexible plastic substrate has also achieved 3.8% efficiency after ammonia (NH3) surface activation.3 Furthermore, ZnO with a tetrapod morphology has appealed to researchers for flexible solar cell applications owing to its vectorial charge transport and excellent charge collection even when the devices are processed via low-temperature film fabrication.15–17 Till now, however, DSSCs based on the ZnO tetrapods materials still suffer from relatively lower power conversion efficiencies than those based on ZnO nanoparticles, mainly due to their lower specific surface areas. To overcome this shortcoming, it is reasonable to design a composite photoanode by imbuing small nanoparticles into the hollow nanotetrapod network.
As an important step forward from our previous work on a SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite photoanode involving a common high temperature calcination step,18 we hereby report a similar, but low-temperature processed photoanode for high efficiency DSSCs (5.16% on FTO glass, and 4.91% on ITO/PEN plastic film, under 1 sun illumination) engendered by a multiple-faceted approach of “HAc gelation-mechanical press-NH3 activation” (hereafter denoted as “AG-MP-NA”). Underlying the originality of our approach to the photoanode design for flexible DSSCs are the following notable aspects: (1) the in situ formation of a ZnO shell on SnO2 nanoparticles in a composite film, a core–shell nanostructure first introduced in flexible DSSCs, can raise the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc ≈ 700 mV) with respect to pure SnO2 based DSSCs (no more than 400 mV according to reports in ref. 19 and 20); (2) the key HAc gelation and NH3 activation steps can not only ensure the above core–shell formation but also consolidate physical and electrical contacts between SnO2 nanoparticles; (3) the one-dimensional (1-D) arms of ZnO nanotetrapods dispersed in the SnO2 nanoparticle matrix can minimize grain boundaries, facilitate directed charge transport and improve charge collection, just as we have previously demonstrated in high temperature calcined SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite photoanodes;18 (4) the branching structure of the nanotetrapods makes it apt to form network structures on a flexible substrate with good mechanical durability, which can be processed further by mechanical press.
Experimental
Preparation of composite film
For paste preparation, 0.3 g SnO2 nanoparticles (Alfa Aesar, ∼20 nm in size) were well dispersed in 3 mL n-butanol by stirring and ultrasonic treatment for 30 min. Into the resulting solution were added 0.1 g ZnO nanotetrapods (∼40 nm in arm diameter and ∼500 nm in arm length, synthesized by the metal vapor transport reaction method in our lab.21) or ZnO big particles (commercial, 500 nm in size). Then 0.5 mL diluted acetic acid in n-butanol (1% in volume) was added to the precursors and stirring was kept for another 30 min, forming homogenous pastes with suitable viscosities. Such pastes were spread onto FTO-coated glasses (14 Ω/square, Nippon sheet glass, Japan) or ITO/PEN (15 Ω/square, Kintec, Hong Kong) flexible substrates. Film thickness was controlled by a tape spacer. After drying, the freshly deposited films were subjected to a 80–100 MPa pressure by a hydrostatic machine to improve cell performance. Subsequently, the films were immersed in 0.3 M ammonia solution for 20 min., washed thoroughly with distilled water and ethanol, and finally dried in an oven at 150 °C for 30 min.
Characterization
Morphologies of the composite films were examined by SEM using a JEOL 6700F at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Diffuse reflectance spectra of the films were characterized by a Perkin Elmer UV/VIS Spectrophotometer (Model Lambda 20). Film thickness was determined by a Tencor Alpha-Step 200 surface profiler system, and confirmed by three consecutive measurements.
DSSC fabrication and measurements
Films for solar cell tests were carved into a 5 × 5 mm2 square beforehand. While the films were still warm after being removed from the oven, they were quickly immersed into a mixed acetonitrile/tert-butyl alcohol solution (1:1 in volume) containing 5 × 10−4 M N719 dye (cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) bis-tetrabutylammonium, Suzhou Chemsolarism, China) for 4 h. These dye-coated electrodes were assembled to make solar cells with Pt sputtered FTO counter-electrodes (or Pt sputtered ITO/PEN counter-electrodes for flexible solar cells) and acetonitrile electrolyte containing 0.6 M tetrabutylammonium iodide, 0.1 M lithium iodide, 0.1 M iodine, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine. The amount of adsorbed dye was determined by immersing the films in 1 mM NaOH solution (water–ethanol, 1:1, volume ratio) and monitoring the desorbed dye concentration by UV-Vis spectroscopy. J–V characteristic curves were recorded using an IM6x electrochemical workstation. The light source (Oriel solar simulator, 450 W Xe lamp, AM 1.5 global filter) was calibrated to 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using an optical power meter (Newport, Model 1916-C) equipped with a Newport 818P thermopile detector. In J–V measurements, no mask was used, but the two clips, which were employed to attach the cell onto a fixed substrate, were found to be effective in limiting possible diffuse simulated sunlight.22 IPCE was measured based on a Jobin-Yvon Triax 190 monochromator. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using an impedance analyzer (Zahner, IM6x) at open-circuit potentials under 1 sun illumination, with the magnitude and requency of the alternative signal being 10 mV and 10−1–105 Hz, respectively. Intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectra (IMPS/IMVS) were taken by the Zahner Zennium C-IMPS system with a green light-emitting diode (525 nm, LED).
Results and discussion
We start by illustrating the “AG-MP-NA” method in Scheme 1. The corresponding composite film morphologies at different stages of the operation are revealed by the SEM images in Fig. 1. Associated with step 1 is the initial spreading of a SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods paste onto an FTO-coated glass or ITO/PEN flexible substrate (Fig. 1a–c). Diluted HAc was included in the paste to partially corrode the ZnO nanotetrapods, promoting the formation of a zinc acetate (ZnAc2) shell layer on the SnO2 nanoparticles. The as-deposited film from random stacking of the binary nanomaterials contains interspaces between nanotetrapods not fully filled by nanoparticles, making the freshly deposited film look rather hollow with low connectivity (Fig. 1b,c). In step 2, an 80–100 MPa hydraulic pressure was applied to the freshly deposited film. As a result, the film thickness is decreased by nearly half (Fig. 1a,d), and the SnO2 nanoparticles and ZnO nanotetrapods in the film become much more densely stacked (Fig. 1e,f). Conceivably, the transport pathways of photoinjected electrons in the pressed film should be much shorter than those in the unpressed ones as denoted by the green arrow-lines in Scheme 1. More to the point, close packing may imply better contacts between nanostructures in the composite film as well as between the active film and the conductive substrate. For example, the large pores (interspaces) seen in the unpressed film have been filled and/or eliminated by pressing. Step 3 begins with the deposition of another layer but made of pure ZnO nanotetrapods on top of the SnO2/ZnO composite film (Fig. 1h). After mechanical press, a dense, robust network is formed (Fig. 1i). The compression ratio for this layer is about 4, namely, from 12–13 μm to 3.3 μm (Fig. 1g). Its roughness factor (RF, total inner pore surface area divided by active film area) is ∼150–200, according to our previous work,15 which is ∼1/8–1/6 that of the under-layer composite film (RF ≈ 1200 by multiplying BET surface area of 65.3 m2 g−1 to the weight of 1 cm2 area film). The main function of this layer, aside from the light absorption, lies in the light scattering in the near-infrared region. Its light scattering capability is derived from the sub-micron level pores formed of the nanotetrapods.16,18 The inimitable branching structure of our nanotetrapods has imparted this light scattering layer a certain extent of toughness to endure curvature bending on flexible substrates, a distinct advantage over other kinds of light-scattering materials such as large TiO2 particle assemblies and SiO2 sphere photonic-crystals previously applied to DSSCs.23 In the last step, the pressed film is immersed in 0.3 M NH3 solution for 20 min and then kept at 150 °C for 30 min. This procedure is intended to wash away the unwanted zinc acetate (ZnAc2) on SnO2 and promote the formation of an ultrathin ZnO shell firmly attached to SnO2, the effectiveness of which has been demonstrated by infra-red spectra of the films before and after NH3 treatment (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). Such a shell is important not only for better inter-particles connections, but also for boosting Voc of the SnO2/ZnO composite film based DSSCs by elevating the conductive band edge of SnO2 towards that of ZnO, as revealed in previous works.18,19
 Scheme 1  Schematic showing the low temperature technique of “AG-MP-NA” and its effects on films’ morphology, surface condition, as well as the resulting electron transport and light scattering properties. 
 Fig. 1  SEM images of a single-layer composite film before (a–c) and after (d–f) pressing procedure, and a double-layer-structured film (g–i). (a,d) cross-section view: the film thickness is decreased from 19.2 to 10.3 μm due to pressing procedure. (b,e) cross-section view highlighting the difference at the active film/FTO-coated glass interface. (c,f) top view showing the different porosities. (g) cross-section view: the top light scattering layer is a 3.3 μm thick ZnO nanotetrapods network. (h,i) top view showing the different packing densities of nanotetrapods before (h) and after (i) pressing procedure. 
Diffuse reflectance spectra of the film samples at different treatment stages are shown in Fig. 2. For the as-deposited thick holey film, a large fraction of visible light is multiply scattered in concurrence with the visual observation: the “H” letter under the film is barely recognizable (left of the inset). After mechanical press, however, the film becomes translucent—the “K” letter can be clearly identified (middle of the inset)—because the large pores as the light scattering centers are mostly eliminated.24 This is in keeping with the diffuse reflectance spectrum of the film with significantly reduced multiple light scattering in the visible region. By overlaying a top layer of pure ZnO nanotetrapods, the film becomes totally opaque: the “U” letter cannot be seen through the white film any more (right of the inset). The corresponding diffuse reflectance spectrum confirms that multiple light scattering in this film is the strongest of the three.
 Fig. 2  Diffuse reflectance spectra of a single-layer composite film before (■, thickness = 19.2 μm) and after (●, thickness = 10.3 μm) pressing procedure and of a pressed double-layer-structured film (▲, thickness = 10.1 + 3.3 μm). Insets are photographs of the corresponding films. 
Shown in Fig. 3a are photocurrent density-voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of representative DSSCs based on the single layer composite film (Fig. 1d) and double-layer-structured film (Fig. 1g) on FTO-coated glass and on ITO/PEN substrates. The insets in Fig. 3a are optical images of the corresponding dye sensitized films. The dark red color reflects sufficient dye-adsorbing amount which was detected to be 1.47 × 10−7 mol cm−2 at the roughness factor: ∼1200 for the single layer film on FTO-coated glass. The double layer film possesses a 1.72 × 10−7 mol cm−2 dye adsorbing amount at the total roughness factor ∼1400 on FTO-coated glass. High bending curvature images of the two films on flexible substrates indicate good mechanical adhesion, another benefit of the pressing procedure and the branching structure of nanotetrapods. This is rather similar to the case of material strengthening arising from fibrous reinforcement. The performance parameters of the DSSCs are listed in Table 1. Notably, our 4.91% efficiency at 1 sun on TCP substrate is among the highest of low-temperature-processed flexible photoanodes1,3–5,7 and the Voc is even ∼50 mV higher than that of the calcined SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite photoanode we reported previously.18 The improved Voc is mainly ascribed to the employment of an ammonium iodide (NH4I) based electrolyte instead of imidazolium iodide. While the imidazolium iodide based electrolyte is traditionally optimized with respect to TiO2 photoanodes, the NH4I based electrolyte appears to be more compatible with ZnO based DSSCs,25 presumably due to the favorable adsorption of NH3/NH4+ on ZnO surfaces and therefore the suppression of recombination kinetics. This can be appreciated from our electrochemical impedance results on SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite films with the two different electrolytes: the recombination time is 40% longer in the NH4I based electrolyte (Fig. S2, ESI†). In comparison to recorded TiO2 nanoparticle photoanodes on TCP substrates (with 7.4% efficiency), the relatively low efficiency of our composite photoanode is mainly due to the lower short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc, 12.0 versus 13.4 mA cm−2) and fill factor (FF, 0.60 versus 0.74).7 These performance gaps could be further narrowed down by optimizing the nanostructures of our composite photoanode and employing better quality plastic conductive films. It is clear that double-layer-structured films possess notably higher Jsc but slightly decreased Voc and FF in comparison with their corresponding single layer SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite films. Plausibly, the higher Jsc is mostly due to light scattering enhanced IPCE in the near-infrared region, which has been confirmed in Fig. 3b. The slight decrease of Voc and FF is likely due to the addition of the ZnO nanotetrapods scattering layer, which could modify the series resistance and shunt resistance, as well as their relationship, in the whole film. A larger series resistance and lower shunt resistance for the double layer film than the single layer film can be clearly revealed by their different impedance spectra (Fig. S3, ESI†). According to the well -documented one-diode model for DSSCs,26,27 such changes will lead to smaller Voc and FF, a result we have presented above. The relatively better performance of FTO-coated glass than that of ITO/PEN flexible substrate based DSSC is primarily due to the lower transmittance of the ITO/PEN substrate than the FTO-coated glass used in our experiment (Fig. S4, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristic curves of DSSCs based on the “AG-MP-NA” processed films on FTO-coated glasses (solid symbols) and ITO/PEN flexible substrates (open symbols). The inset show photographs of the dye sensitized films used to record J–V curves, from left to right, single-layer composite film (■) and double-layer-structured film (●) on FTO-coated glasses, and single-layer composite film (□) and double-layer-structured film (○) on flexible substrates. (b) IPCE spectra of DSSCs based on a single-layer composite film and a double-layer structured film on FTO-coated glasses in (a). 
Table 1 Performance parameters of best performance DSSCs on FTO-coated glasses (S1: single layer, D1: double layer) and ITO/PEN flexible substrates (S2: single layer, D2: double layer), corresponding to J–V characteristic curves in Fig. 3a




Samples

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
Efficiency




S1
692
11.2
0.63
4.87%


D1
688
12.6
0.59
5.16%


S2
690
10.7
0.63
4.65%


D2
684
12.0
0.60
4.91%





Fig. 4 compares typical J–V curves (Fig. 4a), electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) (Fig. 4b) and charge collection kinetics (Fig. 4c, studied by intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy, IMPS/IMVS) of a composite film at different steps of the “AG-MP-NA” technique. Clearly identified are effects of the mechanical press and NH3 activation steps on the electrical and charge collection properties of the film tied up with the cell performance. Here we use “HAc, unpressed film” and “HAc-NH3, unpressed film” to denote the as-deposited unpressed composite films (∼12 μm thick) with and without NH3 treatment, respectively. “HAc-NH3, pressed film” represents the film that has been through the complete procedure including both mechanical press and NH3 activation treatment. After pressing, the “HAc-NH3, pressed film” is thinned to ∼6.5 μm. We first compare the “HAc-NH3, unpressed film” with the “HAc-NH3, pressed film” to establish the effect of the pressing procedure. From Fig. 4a, it can be observed that in comparison to the “HAc-NH3, unpressed film”, all parameters including Jsc, Voc and FF of the “HAc-NH3, pressed film” have been improved, and the efficiency has been steadily improved by ∼13%, from 3.85% to 4.35% (Table 2).
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristic curves of composite films: black square, film treated by pressing and NH3 activation (film thickness ≈6.5 μm, Cell 1); red circle, film treated by NH3 activation but without pressing (Cell 2); blue up-triangle, as-deposited film without further treatment (Cell 3). α1 and α2 highlight different slopes of the tangents at the open-circuit voltage. (b) Nyquist plots from impedance spectra of the films together with the fitted results (solid line) based on the equivalent circuit model as shown in the inset. (c) Electron transport and recombination times of the films from IMPS/IMVS measurements. The straight lines are fitted results. 
Table 2 Performance parameters of DSSCs corresponding to J–V characteristic curves in Fig. 4a




Samples

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
Efficiency




Cell 1
712
9.9
0.62
4.35%


Cell 2
703
9.1
0.60
3.85%


Cell 3
743
7.6
0.60
3.38%




As revealed in the impedance spectra of “HAc-NH3, unpressed film” and “HAc-NH3, pressed film” in Fig. 4b, the left arc in the high frequency range (104–102 Hz) shrivels markedly. Similar results have been obtained for thinner films (Fig. S5, ESI†). Such an arc is associated with charge transport at an FTO/active film, Pt/electrolytes, as well as inter-nanostructure interfaces, denoted as impedance Z1 (resistance R1 in parallel with constant phase element CPE1) in a model for fitting the data (see the top inset in Fig. 4b). The model is simplified from the well documented “infinite transmission line model”.28 Obviously, the Pt/electrolyte interface should be little influenced by mechanical press; hence the shrinking of Z1 arc should be derived from better contacts at the FTO/active film and inter-nanostructure interfaces, as revealed by the SEM images in Fig. 1. The fitted electron transport resistance R1 at the two interfaces is decreased from 8.16 Ω to 5.61 Ω. The pressing procedure-induced reduction of R1, related to the total series resistance (Rs) of the cell, is also reflected by the tangential slopes (denoted as α1 and α2) at the open-circuit voltages of the J–V curves: a steeper tangent of the pressed film implies a smaller Rs according to the one-diode model of a solar cell.29 The smaller Rs, in turn, gives rise to a higher FF,27 which is in concurrence with the results in Fig. 4a and in Table 2. The middle arcs in Fig. 4b (denoted as Z2, R2 in parallel with CPE2, on the frequency scale of ∼101 Hz) arise from charge recombination at the active film/electrolyte interface. Because the recombination sites depend only on the total inner surface area and the nature of the active films’ surface, which appear to have no direct causality with the pressing procedure, it is no surprise to find that the recombination resistance R2 experience no press-induced change (R2 = 19.2 Ω for pressed film and 18.5 Ω for unpressed film). Charge collection efficiencies (ηcc) of the films before and after mechanical press were investigated by measuring the characteristic frequencies (ft and fr) using IMPS and IMVS, respectively. Electron transport time τt and recombination time τr were obtained via the equations τt = 1/(2πft) and τr = 1/(2πfr), which were then used to determine ηcc = 1 − τt/τr.30 As one can see from Fig. 4c, there are obvious gaps in τt between films with and without mechanical press, whereas their τr are very similar, in agreement with the result of EIS presented above. The faster electron transport in a thinner pressed film, due mainly to shorter electron transport pathways arising from more vertical nanostructural connections as illustrated in Scheme 1, has led to an enhanced charge collection efficiency, from 64% to 70%, determined by using the data (at the light intensity of 50 W m−2) in Fig. 4c. Such a decent improvement of ηcc appears to be the main cause for the increase of Jsc as described in Fig. 4a resulting from the pressing procedure.
The role of NH3 treatment is mainly to activate the nanostructured surface, which is important in balancing the transport/recombination kinetics but, more critically, appears to modulate the injection quantum efficiency for enhancing the cell performance. This point is supported by our new evidence obtained from EIS and IMPS/IMVS. In comparing the impedance spectrum (Nyquist plot) of “HAc, unpressed film” with those of the other two films treated by NH3 (Fig. 4b), one notices a significant larger middle arc associated with electron recombination at the active film/electrolyte interface (R2 = 26.1 Ω, by fitting). The characteristic frequency (fc, frequency corresponding to the maximum |Z′′| point of the middle arc) equals 44.7 Hz, which is evidently lower than those of the other two films (56.2 Hz). This implies that under the test conditions for impedance spectroscopy, i.e., at 1 sun light intensity, the recombination time of the “HAc, unpressed film” is much longer than those of the other two films, simply judging from τr = 1/(2πfc). This result tallies with the corresponding IMVS data shown in Fig. 4c: at higher light intensity in the tested range (from 1.58 W m−2 to 50 W m−2), the τr of “HAc, unpressed film” becomes gradually longer than those of the other two films. The larger recombination resistance (R2) and longer recombination time (τr) strongly suggest different surface properties of the film without NH3 treatment. In principle, such changes can be ascribed to the unwanted ZnO precursors in the non-NH3-treated film. The unwanted ZnO precursors could promote the formation of Zn–dye complexes during the dye-adsorbing process, which could hang on the surfaces of the nanostructures and act as an insulating layer, blocking the back-reaction pathway of photoinjected electrons from semiconductors to electrolyte. That could be the reason why Voc of such non-NH3-treated film (Voc = 743 mV) is even higher than those of the other two films (Voc = 712–703 mV, Table 2). Another noteworthy aspect for the “HAc, unpressed film” is that, its calculated charge collection efficiency (ηcc) equals 67% at 50 W m−2, which is even higher than that of “HAc-NH3, unpressed film” (ηcc = 64%), whereas its Jsc is much lower. Such an abnormality implies that there should be other limiting factors responsible for such low Jsc. As is well known, the key quantity determining Jsc is IPCE, which not only depends on ηcc but also depends on light harvesting efficiency (LHE) and quantum injection efficiency (Φinj): IPCE = LHE × Φinj × ηcc. LHE is determined by dye adsorbing amount and light-scattering-corrected optical length of a photoanode film. We suggest that LHE should not be influenced much by the NH3 treatment and thus cannot be responsible for the Jsc gap mentioned above, because of no detectable difference in the dye adsorbing amount and light scattering property. The only remaining factor is injection efficiency (Φinj) of the non-NH3-treated film, which can be low due to the presence of the Zn–dye complexes. Such complexes have also been reported previously as a source of obstructing an efficient electron injection in ZnO based DSSCs.31

Fig. 5 examines the effect of ZnO nanostructural morphologies on charge collection efficiencies of the SnO2/ZnO nanocomposite photoanodes and the resulting cell performance of the corresponding DSSCs. For comparison, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO big particles (∼500 nm in size, comparable to the nanotetrapod dimension19,32) composite photoanodes with the same weight ratio and treatments were also studied. Clearly, charge collection efficiencies of the SnO2/ZnO nanocomposite photoanodes are significantly improved by ∼10%, i.e., from 57.0% of the ZnO big particles containing composite photoanode to 69.1% of the ZnO nanotetrapods derived composite photoanode at a film thickness Jsc is saturated, highlighting the structural superiority of the ZnO nanotetrapods to the ZnO big particles. Consequently, the saturated Jsc and maximum efficiency are similarly elevated from 9.7 to 11.2 mA cm−2 and from 3.97% to 4.87%, respectively, while their Voc and FF are nearly the same (Fig. S6, ESI†). Referring to the high temperature calcined SnO2/ZnO composite films based DSSCs we studied previously,18 the ZnO crystalline additives in the composite films should similarly play two functional roles in “AG-MP-NA” treated films because similar features of electron transport and recombination kinetics have been found (Fig. S7, ESI†): (1) they act as a Zn source for forming a ZnO shell on SnO2 nanoparticles; (2) depending on their morphologies, they impact greatly on the electron transport kinetics in composite films. Namely, ZnO additives can locally gather electrons from the neighboring SnO2 nanoparticles and promote fast electron transport due to ZnO’s higher electron mobility (see the green arrow-lines in Scheme 1). Fundamentally, the fact that ZnO nanotetrapods support faster electron transport in composite films than ZnO big particles can be ascribed to their structural difference: the big ZnO particles are a space-filling object, whereas the ZnO nanotetrapods are a branched one dimensional (1D) material: its 1D arms ensure facile directional charge transport and its symmetrical branching structure guarantees good network forming ability and optimized contacts between the binary constituents in composite films. From the SEM images shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†), we can easily estimate the average distance for photogenerated electrons in SnO2 nanoparticles to migrate and make their way into the nearest neighboring ZnO crystalline additives for the subsequent accelerated transport in ZnO. For ZnO nanotetrapods, such distance is a few hundred nanometres; whereas it is dramatically increased to several microns for big ZnO particles, as highlighted by the yellow arrows.
 Fig. 5  Dependences of Jsc and efficiency (charge collection efficiency) on film thickness for two kinds of nanocomposite films on FTO-coated glasses: black square, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods; red circle, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO big particles. Charge collection efficiencies were calculated from the data measured by IMPS/IMVS at 70 W m−2. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a 4.91% efficiency of DSSCs on flexible plastic substrates based on SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods composite photoanodes. This is the first time that a binary core–shell nanostructure and nanoparticle/1-D nanostructure composites were introduced to fabricate flexible photoanodes. The use of these special nanostructures led to the development of a low temperature technique of “AG-MP-NA”, which has proved effective for activating nanostructured surfaces (better electron injection), shortening electron transport pathways (better charge collection), and ultimately improving cell performance. The unique characteristics of this nanocomposite photoanode design that have rendered it applicable to flexible DSSCs can be summarized here: (1) the ZnO shell on SnO2, conducive to good contacts between nanoparticles and Voc enhancement, is easily activated under the mild conditions of NH3 treatment; (2) the ZnO nanotetrapods with a symmetrically branching 1D structure not only ensure facile network formation on flexible substrates with good mechanical durability, further enhanced by mechanical press, but also have a positive bearing on electron transport resulting in an improved charge collection efficiency when compared with big ZnO particles. To conclude, this work points to a promising alternative direction for the development of flexible solar cells by exploiting the core–shell, branching and composite nanostructures.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (RGC) General Research Funds (GRF) no. HKUST 604809 and 604608.
References
D. S. Zhang, T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Furuta and H. Minoura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113 CrossRef CAS ; S. Ito, N. L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Pechy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC ; M. Durr, A. Schmid, M. Obermaier, S. Rosselli, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 607 CrossRef ; M. G. Kang, N. G. Park, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and K. J. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 574 CrossRef CAS ; Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1 .
X. Z. Liu, Y. H. Luo, H. Li, Y. Z. Fan, Z. X. Yu, Y. Lin, L. Q. Chen and Q. B. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2847 RSC .
N. G. Park, K. M. Kim, M. G. Kang, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and Y. J. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toivola, J. Halme, K. Miettunen, K. Aitola and P. D. Lund, Int. J. Energy Res., 2009, 33, 1145 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, J. B. Zhang, D. Komatsu, S. Sawatani, H. Minoura, T. Pauporte, D. Lincot, T. Oekermann, D. Schlettwein, H. Tada, D. Wohrle, K. Funabiki, M. Matsui, H. Miura and H. Yanagi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4767 RSC .
D. S. Zhang, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 814 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lindstrom, A. Holmberg, E. Magnusson, S. E. Lindquist, L. Malmqvist and A. Hagfeldt, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 97 CrossRef .
S. Uchida, M. Timiha, H. Takizawa and M. Kawaraya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 93 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami, Y. Kijitori, N. Kawashima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 1076 CrossRef CAS .
C. Longo, J. Freitas and M. A. De Paoli, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 159, 33 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5623 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS ; C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, K. W. Tan, G. Q. Lo, A. K. K. Kyaw and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92 .
W. Chen, H. F. Zhang, I. M. Hsing and S. H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Hsu, Y. Y. Xi, C. T. Yip, A. B. Djurisic and W. K. Chan, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 083114 CrossRef ; R. R. Bacsa, J. Dexpert-Ghys, M. Verelst, A. Falqui, B. Machado, W. S. Bacsa, P. Chen, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel and P. Serp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 875 CrossRef CAS ; W. Chiu, C. Lee, H. Cheng, H. Lin, S. Liao, J. Wub and W. Hsieh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 694 RSC .
M. J. Bierman and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1050 RSC .
W. Chen, Y. C. Qiu, Y. C. Zhong, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Niinobe, Y. Makari, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17892 CrossRef CAS .
B. Onwona-Agyeman, S. Kaneko, A. Kumara, M. Okuya, K. Murakami, A. Konno and K. Tennakone, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Qiu and S. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, P. Comte, R. Charvet, P. Pechy, M. Jirousek, A. Kay, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 589 Search PubMed .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Haggman, M. Ocana, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Miguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hore, P. Nitz, C. Vetter, C. Prahl, M. Niggemann and R. Kern, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2011 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS ; T. P. Chou, Q. F. Zhang, G. E. Fryxell and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2588 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba and T. Mitate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2433 CrossRef CAS ; A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba, A. Islam and T. Mitate, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 645 CrossRef CAS ; N. Koide, A. Islam, Y. Chiba and L. Y. Han, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 182, 296 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. E. Moser and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS ; F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Gratzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oekermann, D. Zhang, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2227 CrossRef CAS .
H. Horiuchi, R. Katoh, K. Hara, M. Yanagida, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2930 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Infrared spectra of composite films; impedance spectra of DSSCs using different electrolytes and photoanodes composed of single or double-layer-structured film; UV-Vis transmittance spectra of two kind conductive substrates; impedance spectra of photoanodes with and without press; dependences of photovoltage and fill factor on film thickness; dependences of transport time and recombination time on light intensity; and SEM images of two kinds of composite films. See DOI: 10.1039/c000584cThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic showing the low temperature technique of “AG-MP-NA” and its effects on films’ morphology, surface condition, as well as the resulting electron transport and light scattering properties.	 

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of a single-layer composite film before (a–c) and after (d–f) pressing procedure, and a double-layer-structured film (g–i). (a,d) cross-section view: the film thickness is decreased from 19.2 to 10.3 μm due to pressing procedure. (b,e) cross-section view highlighting the difference at the active film/FTO-coated glass interface. (c,f) top view showing the different porosities. (g) cross-section view: the top light scattering layer is a 3.3 μm thick ZnO nanotetrapods network. (h,i) top view showing the different packing densities of nanotetrapods before (h) and after (i) pressing procedure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diffuse reflectance spectra of a single-layer composite film before (■, thickness = 19.2 μm) and after (●, thickness = 10.3 μm) pressing procedure and of a pressed double-layer-structured film (▲, thickness = 10.1 + 3.3 μm). Insets are photographs of the corresponding films.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristic curves of DSSCs based on the “AG-MP-NA” processed films on FTO-coated glasses (solid symbols) and ITO/PEN flexible substrates (open symbols). The inset show photographs of the dye sensitized films used to record J–V curves, from left to right, single-layer composite film (■) and double-layer-structured film (●) on FTO-coated glasses, and single-layer composite film (□) and double-layer-structured film (○) on flexible substrates. (b) IPCE spectra of DSSCs based on a single-layer composite film and a double-layer structured film on FTO-coated glasses in (a).	 

S1	692	11.2	0.63	4.87%
D1	688	12.6	0.59	5.16%
S2	690	10.7	0.63	4.65%
D2	684	12.0	0.60	4.91%

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristic curves of composite films: black square, film treated by pressing and NH3 activation (film thickness ≈6.5 μm, Cell 1); red circle, film treated by NH3 activation but without pressing (Cell 2); blue up-triangle, as-deposited film without further treatment (Cell 3). α1 and α2 highlight different slopes of the tangents at the open-circuit voltage. (b) Nyquist plots from impedance spectra of the films together with the fitted results (solid line) based on the equivalent circuit model as shown in the inset. (c) Electron transport and recombination times of the films from IMPS/IMVS measurements. The straight lines are fitted results.	 

Cell 1	712	9.9	0.62	4.35%
Cell 2	703	9.1	0.60	3.85%
Cell 3	743	7.6	0.60	3.38%

 	Fig. 5  Dependences of Jsc and efficiency (charge collection efficiency) on film thickness for two kinds of nanocomposite films on FTO-coated glasses: black square, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO nanotetrapods; red circle, SnO2 nanoparticles/ZnO big particles. Charge collection efficiencies were calculated from the data measured by IMPS/IMVS at 70 W m−2.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Infrared spectra of composite films; impedance spectra of DSSCs using different electrolytes and photoanodes composed of single or double-layer-structured film; UV-Vis transmittance spectra of two kind conductive substrates; impedance spectra of photoanodes with and without press; dependences of photovoltage and fill factor on film thickness; dependences of transport time and recombination time on light intensity; and SEM images of two kinds of composite films. See DOI: 10.1039/c000584c

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
