 In situ UV-visible absorption during spin-coating of organic semiconductors: a new probe for organic electronics and photovoltaics   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC32077D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32077D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3373-3381
In situ UV-visible absorption during spin-coating of organic semiconductors: a new probe for organic electronics and photovoltaics†

        
          
            Maged 
            Abdelsamie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kui 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Muhammad R. 
            Niazi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kang W. 
            Chou
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Aram 
            Amassian
          
        
      *
      Materials Science and Engineering, Division of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Solar and Photovoltaic Engineering Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. E-mail: aram.amassian@kaust.edu.sa
Received 
      19th October 2013
    , Accepted 11th December 2013First published on 13th December 2013AbstractSpin-coating is the most commonly used technique for the lab-scale production of solution processed organic electronic, optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices. Spin-coating produces the most efficient solution-processed organic solar cells and has been the preferred approach for rapid screening and optimization of new organic semiconductors and formulations for electronic and optoelectronic applications, both in academia and in industrial research facilities. In this article we demonstrate, for the first time, a spin-coating experiment monitored in situ by time resolved UV-visible absorption, the most commonly used, simplest, most direct and robust optical diagnostic tool used in organic electronics. In the first part, we successfully monitor the solution-to-solid phase transformation and thin film formation of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), the de facto reference conjugated polymer in organic electronics and photovoltaics. We do so in two scenarios which differ by the degree of polymer aggregation in solution, prior to spin-coating. We find that a higher degree of aggregation in the starting solution results in small but measurable differences in the solid state, which translate into significant improvements in the charge carrier mobility of organic field-effect transistors (OFET). In the second part, we monitor the formation of a bulk heterojunction photoactive layer based on a P3HT-fullerene blend. We find that the spin-coating conditions that lead to slower kinetics of thin film formation favour a higher degree of polymer aggregation in the solid state and increased conjugation length along the polymer backbone. Using this insight, we devise an experiment in which the spin-coating process is interrupted prematurely, i.e., after liquid ejection is completed and before the film has started to form, so as to dramatically slow the thin film formation kinetics, while maintaining the same thickness and uniformity. These changes yield substantial improvements to the power conversion efficiency of solar cells without requiring additional thermal annealing, or the use of solvent additives. Through these simple examples, we demonstrate that gaining insight into the thin film formation process can inspire the development of new processing strategies. The insight into the inner workings of spin-coating may be increasingly important to improving the performance or efficiency of roll-to-roll manufactured devices.
1. Introduction
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption is one of the most commonly and routinely used techniques in science and engineering to characterize the optical properties of solids, liquids and solutions and infer structural and morphological information. In the field of solution-processed organic electronics, UV-vis absorption has been used for decades to measure the solution and solid state optical properties of organic semiconductors.1–3 The band gap and vibronic progressions of the conjugated materials strongly correlate to the presence of J and H photophysical aggregates, which thus offers a way to relate the solution and solid states of the organic semiconductor to the performance and efficiency of organic light emitting diodes (OLED), organic thin film transistors (OTFT) and organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices.4–7 In the case of conjugated polymers, such as the commonly used poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), recent efforts at modelling the absorption spectrum now makes it possible to use the simple UV-vis absorption spectra of a P3HT thin film, in order to quantify the fraction of ordered photophysical aggregates (both J and H), as well as infer the degree of backbone planarity by virtue of the excitonic bandwidth along the polymer backbone.4–6,8 A tremendous wealth of information can therefore be gained about the solution process itself, the mechanisms of aggregation and ultimately, about the resulting solid-state material properties if one has the opportunity to monitor in situ the absorption characteristics starting from the solution state all the way to the solid state, during the solution processing of organic semiconductor thin films. What is more, such a method could be implemented as an in-line process monitoring and control tool for the reproducible manufacturing of printed electronics and photovoltaics.
While the solution processing of organic semiconductors is thought of as enabling low-cost, large-area device fabrication, such as by roll-to-roll techniques,9 the fact is that the spin-coating process has been and still is, the most widely used technique for the solution processing of uniform thin films in both academia and in industrial research units for everything from material screening to device fabrication and optimization. Spin-coating also consistently yields all the world-record solar cells thus far for solution-processed OPV and colloidal quantum dot solar cell devices,10–13 making it the current benchmark solution process to understand, emulate and even improve upon in large area roll-to-roll processing and manufacturing techniques. Unfortunately, the in situ UV-vis absorption technique requires a light path through the sample which cannot be easily made compatible with commercial spin-coaters. As such, most of the absorption spectroscopy studies have historically been made on the solution before spin-coating, or on the thin film after spin-coating or subsequent post-processing.5,14–16In situ UV-vis absorption has been successfully implemented on non-rotating samples, either on the surface of a microscope slide or inside a cuvette or capillary, to monitor the kinetics and evolution of different chemical species and phases during the polymerization, reduction and doping of organic materials.17–19 UV-vis reflectometry, or ellipsometry in the reflection mode, have also been used in the past,5,16,20–25 but these are usually less sensitive to the absorption characteristics and require model definition and fitting (transfer matrix formulation) based on prior knowledge about the sample (optical properties and layer thickness), in order to extract the absorption spectra, and are usually ineffective for thick solution films. More direct measurement of the thin film crystallinity and phase separation during spin-coating can be achieved by performing in situ grazing incidence wide and/or small angle X-ray scattering during spin-coating,24,26,27 but this requires the use of a synchrotron X-ray source, making it impossible to perform on site, difficult to perform routinely, and cost-prohibitive to perform in-line during actual manufacturing. What is more, X-ray scattering probes the intermediate to long range order, whereas optical measurements are far more sensitive to small clusters, including dimers and trimers, making these techniques somewhat complementary.
Herein, we demonstrate a new spin-coater design, which integrates the hardware to perform UV-vis absorption measurements during spin-coating and thus monitor the absorption spectrum from the solution state all the way up to the solid film state. This technique yields absorption spectra without data analysis, and can thus used for robust process monitoring and to establish a feedback loop. To illustrate this novel capability, we monitor the optical properties during the solution-to-solid transformation (i) of neat poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) in toluene with different starting aggregation states of the solution for OTFT applications and (ii) blends of P3HT and {6}-1-(3-(methoxycarbonyl)propyl)-{5}-1-phenyl-6,6-C61 (PC61BM) in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV applications, whereby the kinetics of drying are modulated, such that they have a similar impact on the thin film morphology and device performance, as do thermal annealing or the use of solvent additives. These simple examples illustrate that solution processing methods – even ones as commonly used as spin-coating – have not been utilized to their full potential and that the organic electronics and other solution processing fields stand to benefit from the development and wide adoption of lab-based in situ process monitoring tools.
2. Materials and methods
Neat P3HT (445703, Sigma-Aldrich, Mw = 68 kDa) was dissolved in toluene (anhydrous, 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich) with a concentration of 0.5 wt%. The as-prepared solutions were then stirred vigorously at 65 °C for 10 min and further kept stirring overnight at 65 °C, to obtain a well-dissolved solution or at room temperature, to generate a pre-aggregated solution. The blend solution of P3HT:PC61BM (1:1 wt/wt), with a total concentration of 50 mg ml−1 in o-DCB (anhydrous, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich) is prepared and stirred overnight at 65 °C.
Highly doped n-type silicon wafers (100) with thermally evaporated 300 nm SiO2 were used for the bottom-gate top-contact OTFT fabrication. The substrates were cleaned by rinsing with acetone, isopropanol, ethanol, and deionized water, followed by Standard Clean 1 (RCA) using ammonium hydroxide (30% NH4OH), hydrogen peroxide (30% H2O2) and de-ionized water (with 1:1:5 ratio) for 15 min at 70 °C. The substrates were then blown dry with N2, heated to 100 °C for 10 min and treated with UV–ozone for 10 min. Solutions of P3HT were cast using a pipette (50 μl) onto the substrate and immediately spun, up to a speed of 900 rpm for a duration of 30 s to form a P3HT film. The samples were then moved into a high vacuum metal evaporator, where gold source-drain electrodes were evaporated through a shadow mask with a channel width (W) of 500 μm and length (L) of 50 μm. All the electrical measurements were performed with a Cascade probe station, in a nitrogen glove box and a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System.
The solar cells were fabricated on 10 Ω sq−1 (thickness: 140 nm) indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates. The substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) solution, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol, followed by UV–ozone treatment for 10 min. The PEDOT:PSS (Baytron-P 4083, used as received) solution was spin-coated onto the substrates with a spinning speed of 4000 rpm, for 30 s. The film was then baked at 130 °C, for 10 min. The P3HT:PC61BM solution was cast using a pipette (65 μl) onto the substrate in a nitrogen glove box and immediately spun up to speed with the following recipe: (i) 1200 rpm for 120 s; (ii) 900 rpm for 120 s; and (iii) 900 rpm for 45 s. The device fabrication was completed by placing the samples in a high vacuum metal evaporator in the nitrogen glove box and by depositing a 10 nm-thick Ca layer, followed by a 80 nm-thick Al electrode. The current density–voltage characteristics of the solar cells were measured in the nitrogen glove box, using a Keithley 2400, under a simulated AM 1.5 G solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using an Oriel Quantum Efficiency Measurement Kit (Newport).
The in situ absorption measurements were performed using a F20-UVX spectrometer (Filmetrics, Inc.) equipped with tungsten halogen and deuterium light sources (Filmetrics, Inc.) over the wavelength range of interest, from 400 nm to 800 nm. Most of the measurements were performed with an integration time of 0.1 s and 0.5 s per absorption spectrum for the neat P3HT in toluene and the P3HT:PC61BM in o-DCB solutions respectively, though an integration time of up to 0.05 s can be used with this instrument model, if required.
The in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE; M-2000XI, J. A. Woollam Co., Inc) measurements and in situ reflection measurements were also performed together in a separate spin-coating experiment, to monitor the thinning of the solution and thin film formation during the spin-coating process. For these reflection-mode measurements, a single crystal silicon wafer (100) with a 300 nm-thick thermal oxide was used as a substrate, in otherwise identical processing conditions. The reflection spectra were analysed using the fast Fourier transform method, which provides a first order estimate of the solution thickness over the thickness range from ∼105 to ∼103 nm, without requiring an elaborate model fit or a correction for optical non-idealities, such as the spectral bandwidth of the detector or the non-uniformity of the liquid film during the early stages of spin-coating. The SE spectra were obtained at an incidence angle of 70° from substrate normal and were analyzed in the transparent spectral range of P3HT, namely from 750 to 1700 nm. The optical properties of P3HT and P3HT:PC61BM solutions and thin films were modelled assuming a Cauchy dispersion relation and an isotropic thin film using the EASE™ and WVASE32 software packages (J. A. Woollam Co., Inc).
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments were carried out using a FEI Tecnai 12 microscope, operated at a 120 kV accelerating voltage. The samples for TEM were prepared by delaminating and floating the P3HT thin film in water and collecting it using a 300 mesh copper grid. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed using an Agilent 5400 SPM.
3. Results and discussion
In Fig. 1a, we illustrate the new spin-coater design allowing the in situ UV-vis absorption measurements to be performed during the process. The instrument is made of two main parts. The first part (left side) consists of a rotatable hollow tube mounted with a transparent (quartz) sample holder combined with a light source and a spectrometer, which allow light transmission through the sample mounted on the hollow tube to be collected by an optical fibre. The second part (right) is a motor controlled by a software program to adjust the acceleration, the top speed and the duration of spin-coating and which uses a rubber belt to transfer the motion of the motor shaft to the hollow sample holder. The inset in Fig. 1a shows a photograph of the setup. The UV-vis absorption spectra are calculated from the transmission spectra, using the following equation: Aλ = −log10(T)(1)where Aλ is the absorbance at a certain wavelength (λ) and T is the calibrated transmitted radiation.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the newly developed spin coater combined with in situ UV-vis absorption. The setup combines an electric motor driving the rotation of a hollow tube capped with a transparent sample holder via a rubber belt connected to an electrical motor [inset is the actual photo of the setup]. Lower panels (b–d) show time resolved in situ UV-vis absorption spectra obtained during spin-coating of (b) a well-dissolved solution of P3HT in warm toluene (stirred overnight at 65 °C) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 30 seconds, (c) a pre-aggregated solution of P3HT in toluene (stirred overnight at room temperature) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 30 s, (c) and a P3HT:PCBM (1:1) blend solution in o-DCB (stirred overnight at 100 °C and cooled to 65 °C prior to spin coating) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 120 s. 
In Fig. 1b–d, we show an overview of the time evolution of the UV-vis absorption spectra collected during the spin-coating of neat P3HT in toluene solutions [well-dissolved solution in (b) and pre-aggregated solution in (c)] and for P3HT:PC61BM in o-DCB solution (d). The spectra show the P3HT phase transition from the dissolved state to the solid state, starting with a continuous decrease in the intensity of the amorphous peak at ca. 460 nm, followed by an increase in the intensity of the two well-defined peaks at ca. 550 nm and 605 nm, which are designated to be intrachain (0–1) and interchain (0–0) vibronic transitions, respectively, indicating an increased aggregation of the polymer. The evolution of the absorption spectra follows three distinct stages. In the first stage, we observe a steady and dramatic reduction in the absorption intensity of the solution peak, as a result of loss of the initial volume of the solution via ejection.24 The second stage is characterized by a steady absorption of the solution peak, indicating the solvent evaporation process is underway without inducing any change in the solution state of the P3HT. The third stage corresponds to the solid state thin film formation process, whereby the P3HT absorption peaks associated to aggregation increase dramatically and subsequently reach a plateau. We look more closely at these three stages in the next two sections, both in the context of thin film transistors and solar cells.
3.1 Neat P3HT in toluene for organic thin film transistors
The aggregation state of the neat P3HT in toluene can be controlled by adjusting the solution temperature.5,28 A solution stirred at 65 °C (well-dissolved solution) appears transparent with a yellowish colour, whereas a solution stirred at 25 °C (pre-aggregated solution) appears to be dark brown in colour, as a result of significant polymer aggregation in solution. The difference between the state of the P3HT solute in these two solutions is demonstrated by the UV-vis absorption spectra at the moment of starting the spin-coating, which show clear intermolecular and intramolecular absorption peaks for the pre-aggregated solution and only the amorphous peak for the well-dissolved solution (Fig. 1b and c). As the spin-coating progresses in identical conditions, we observe differences in the kinetics of the drying and polymer aggregation from the two solutions, by monitoring the intermolecular absorption peak at 605 nm (Fig. 2a). In the well dissolved case, the aggregation peak is absent throughout the process until film formation is initiated. In the pre-aggregated solution, the aggregation peaks are always present; we observe a rapid decrease of the absorption at 605 nm during the initial seconds of the spin-coating due to loss of aggregates via ejection of the bulk solution. The absorption at 605 nm does not reach zero, indicating the remaining solution is significantly aggregated just prior to film formation. It takes ∼10 s for the pre-aggregated solution to form a dry film and only 8 seconds for the well-dissolved solution. In addition, the thin film formation kinetics – characterized by the step-like increase in the absorption at the final stages of solution drying – are drastically different in both cases, lasting ∼1.3 s in the case of the pre-aggregated solution and no more than 0.4 s for the well-dissolved solution. In Fig. 2b we observe an identical thinning behaviour in the ejection regime, followed by a deviation in the thinning behaviour of the two solutions as the solution thinning becomes dominated by solvent evaporation. Clearly, the pre-aggregated room temperature solution dries more slowly than the well-dissolved warm solution (65 °C). This can be understood to be due to the difference in the evaporation rate. Considering that both spin-coating experiments are completed with only a difference of 2 s (∼25% difference in duration), it is quite remarkable that the film formation should be approximately 3 times slower in the pre-aggregated case. However, this significant difference in the kinetics of thin film formation illustrates that small to moderate differences in the duration of the drying process can have disproportionate implications on the film formation kinetics.
 Fig. 2  (a) Time evolution of the intermolecular aggregation peak (λ = 605 nm) during spin-coating for the well-dissolved and pre-aggregated solutions. (b) Time evolution of solution and film thickness. (c) Thickness-corrected absorption spectra of the dried films (correction according to Beer–Lambert law) [inset shows the actual absorption of the dry film]. (d) Transfer characteristics of top-contact, bottom gate OFET devices [(ID)1/2–VG]. Spin coatings of well-dissolved P3HT in toluene (stirred at 65 °C overnight [black curves]) and aggregated P3HT dissolved in toluene (stirred at room temperature for two days [red curves]) were performed in identical conditions: 900 rpm for 30 s. 
In Fig. 2c, we plot the thickness-corrected absorption spectra for the final dried films. The spectra show slightly stronger intermolecular absorption for the films processed from a pre-aggregated solution. We have analyzed the absorption spectra using a variant of a method first proposed by Spano to investigate excitonic (intermolecular) coupling, exciton–phonon (EP) coupling and site-energy disorder.8 Silva6 modified this method to account for the effect of aggregation on the relative vibronic intensities. Subsequently Neher4 added a weak excitonic coupling assumption and included a correction to the transition energy, by adding half of the vibronic bandwidth. The absorption spectrum was fitted using the equation below, which has been successfully implemented and described in detail elsewhere.4–6,8 (2)
Based on this analysis, we have calculated the aggregation fraction of the P3HT crystallites in the thin films and the exciton bandwidth, W, a parameter that has been linked to the conjugation length and backbone planarity in P3HT;4,6 the fitted curves are shown in the ESI (Fig. S1).† As shown in Table 1, the values for W are ca. 128 meV and 119 meV, and the aggregation fractions are ca. 52% and 54%, respectively, for the thin films prepared from the well-dissolved and pre-aggregated solutions. Quantum-chemical calculations of excitonic coupling in aggregates of conjugated oligomers and polymers have previously revealed W to be inversely proportional to the number of interacting thiophene repeat units, N, in the limit of strong interchain interactions.4,29–33 This means that the excitonic bandwidth, W, decreases as the number of interacting thiophene repeat units, N, along the backbone increases, indicating the increased conjugation length along the backbone. We have previously observed experimentally that W decreases with an increasing lamellar thickness of P3HT fibrils obtained by ultrasonicating the high MW P3HT solution in toluene.5 The results of the current study indicate a larger fraction of photophysical aggregates and a longer conjugation length along the P3HT backbone, when thin films are processed from the pre-aggregated solution, as opposed to the well-dissolved solution. This is probably due to a combination of factors, such as the fact that some of the polymer aggregates were already present in the solution before the thin film formation, but also the fact that film formation kinetics are slower, which may have promoted more intermolecular interactions in the thin film.
Table 1 Field effect transistor performance and Spano fit parameters for neat P3HT thin films






Field effect transistor parameters
Spano model parameters


Mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]

V
TH [V]
ON/OFF
Aggregation [%]

W [meV]




P3HT (well dissolved in solution)
0.0012
54.27
34
52 ± 0.7
128 ± 2


P3HT (pre-aggregated in solution)
0.011
56.14
72
54 ± 1.3
119 ± 1




We fabricated top-contact, bottom-gate field effect transistors on a SiO2 as gate dielectric, to further investigate the influence of the aggregation state of the films on the carrier transport properties. The transfer curves for the two representative devices are shown in Fig. 2d and the associated device properties are summarized in Table 1. We found that the saturation hole mobilities are 0.011 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.0012 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the devices fabricated from the pre-aggregated and well-dissolved solutions, respectively.
The increase in the carrier mobility is quite remarkable in the case of the pre-aggregated solution, given the marginal differences detected in the fraction of the photophysical aggregates. To shed more light on the performance boost, we have evaluated the morphology and microstructure of the P3HT thin films using atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and selected area electron diffraction (SAED), as shown in Fig. 3. The AFM and TEM analyses reveal the formation of P3HT fibrils only in the case of films cast from pre-aggregated solution, indicating that the fibrils are seeded in the pre-aggregated solution. In both films, the SAED reveals the (020) diffraction ring associated to π-stacking, however the (020) intensity plotted from normalized line-scan profiles indicates a greater crystallinity in the π-stacking direction in the pre-aggregated films. We therefore believe the increased conjugation length indicated by a reduced W is due to the formation of crystalline fibrils, wherein the P3HT chains are stacked along the long axis and run along the lamellar thickness direction. The improved carrier mobility in the P3HT thin film transistors can therefore be understood to be due to the formation of thin films, with a network of interconnected fibrils. Considering the MW (68 kDa) of the P3HT used, tie molecules play an important role in linking the fibrils to their surroundings, including neighbouring fibrils. We have previously shown the bottleneck to carrier transport in this regime of high MW to be the degree of crystallinity and backbone planarity within the P3HT domains, whereas the presence of tie molecules was found to be the key bottleneck to carrier transport in low-MW P3HT, far more important than the degree of crystallinity.5 The pre-aggregation of high-MW P3HT solutions in marginal solvents therefore promotes carrier transport in thin films transistors, by forming an interconnected network of crystalline fibrils.
 Fig. 3  Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs for P3HT thin films prepared from a pre-aggregated P3HT solution (a and b) and a well dissolved P3HT solution (c and d), respectively. The insets of (b) and (c) show selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for the same samples. The normalized intensity line scans obtained from the SAED images are plotted in (e). 
3.2 P3HT:PC61BM blend in oDCB for organic solar cells
We prepared spin-cast warm P3HT:PC61BM blend solutions based on o-DCB in different processing conditions, namely varying the spin speed and duration. In doing so, we sought to compare the experiments and thin films, where the dry film formation may occur during, or after the substrate stops spinning. The time evolution of UV-vis absorption spectra collected during spin-coating are reported in Fig. 1d and in S2 [ESI].† In Fig. 4a, we plot the thickness evolution of the solutions in the different conditions explored herein. As expected, the rate of thinning is faster when the spin-coating is performed at 1200 rpm, as compared to 900 rpm. An inspection of the time-evolution of the absorption peak at 460 nm in Fig. 4b reveals this difference is partly due to more solution being ejected at 1200 rpm in the first few seconds of the spin-coating process. This is confirmed by comparing the final film thickness, which suggests more solute remains on the surface at 900 rpm (thicker film) than at 1200 rpm. An inspection of the time-evolution of the absorption at 605 nm, in Fig. 4c, reveals the film is completely formed well before the substrate stops spinning at 120 s. The spinning speed appears to influence the duration of the film formation, which lasts ∼7 s at 1200 rpm and ∼12 s at 900 rpm, an increase of 70% of the duration of phase transformation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Time evolution of solution and film thickness during spin coating of P3HT:PCBM (1:1) blends in different processing conditions. Spin coating of the solution of P3HT:PCBM (1:1) in o-DCB was performed at 900 rpm for 45 s (black), 900 rpm for 120 s (red) and 1200 rpm for 120 s (blue). (b and c) Time evolution of absorption at the solution peak (460 nm) and at the intermolecular aggregation peak (605 nm), respectively. The vertical dashed lines across (a–c) indicate the moments at which spin-coating was interrupted and are color-coded to match the data. (d) Absorption spectra of the dried films normalized to the PC61BM absorption peak (330 nm). The inset in (d) shows the actual absorption spectra of the dried films. (e) J–V characteristics of P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells fabricated according to the above recipes. (f) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for these devices. 
We utilized the insight provided by the in situ UV-vis absorption measurements about the onset and end of the film formation to halt the spin-coating process prematurely, with the aim of drastically slowing down the drying rate, without changing the total film thickness, which is determined in the first few seconds of the spin-coating process. In doing so, we reduced the evaporation rate of the solvent quite drastically, more than doubling the total process duration from ∼105 s to ∼225 s, even as both films have the same final thickness. The duration of the film formation process was more than tripled to ∼38 s. These kinetic differences appear to matter, as we observed a remarkable 25% increase in the intermolecular absorption peak of P3HT, at the end of the process.
The improvements in absorption are clearly visible in Fig. 4d, where the UV-vis absorption spectra (normalized to the PC61BM absorption peak) of the BHJ films dried overnight in the nitrogen glove box are compared to each other and to a neat PC61BM film. As expected, small gains can be made when the P3HT is prepared at a slower spin speed, but the improvements of the intermolecular and intramolecular transition peaks are most dramatic in the case where the spinning is suspended before the film drying is complete. To quantify and compare the photophysical aggregation in these samples, we subtracted the absorption spectrum of PC61BM from that of the BHJ films and then fitted the curves by using the Spano model, described above; the fitted curves are shown in the ESI in Fig. S3.† The fraction of the aggregates is lower than in the neat P3HT films and increases slightly from 38% to 40%, when reducing the spin speed from 1200 rpm to 900 rpm. We see no clear difference in the value of W, which at ∼173–175 meV is quite a bit higher than in the neat P3HT films prepared from toluene, pointing to a more twisted polymer backbone in the blended films as compared to the neat films. Suspending the spin-coating process at 45 s, instead of 120 s, results in a substantial increase of the fraction of aggregation to 44.9% and a substantial decrease of W to 112 meV, which is comparable to the outcome of neat P3HT spin-coating from a toluene solution. These results indicate that the prolonged drying induced by the premature interruption of spin-coating can yield P3HT domains within the BHJ film, with a level of photophysical aggregation and backbone planarity comparable to neat P3HT thin films prepared from a toluene solution.
Organic solar cells based on these photoactive layers were fabricated using the following standard architecture: Glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM/Ca/Al. We did not use any thermal annealing following deposition of the BHJ films, so as to evaluate only the performance differences due to variations in the spin-coating conditions. The J–V characteristics shown in Fig. 4e indicate an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE), from 2.3% to 2.6%, when reducing the spin-speed from 1200 rpm to 900 rpm, and up to 3.0% when further reducing the duration of the spin-coating from 120 s to 45 s (Table 2). The most substantial differences in the PCE stem from an increased short circuit current, from 6.25 to 6.7 and 9.1 mA cm−2. This may be due to a substantially increased phase separation and P3HT π-stacking crystallinity in the latter case, as indicated by the TEM and SAED data, in Fig. 5 and the optical analysis of the samples in Table 2. It is also noteworthy that the fill factor suffers only when spinning is stopped prematurely, decreasing from ∼62–64% for the 120 s experiments, down to 55% for the 45 s experiment. The cause of this negative difference can be partially attributed to the much higher surface roughness (∼13 nm) of the films spin cast at 900 rpm for 45 s, compared to the much smoother (∼0.5 nm) films spin cast for 120 s, as indicated by the AFM images in Fig. 5.
Table 2 Solar cell device parameters and Spano model parameters for P3HT:PC61BM (1:1) solar cells




Spin-coating conditions
Solar cell devices performance parameters
Spano model fit parameters


Speed [rpm]
Time [s]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
Efficiency [%]
Aggregation [%]

W [meV]




1200
120
6.25 ± 0.02
0.595
62 ± 0.2
2.3 ± 0.1
37.6 ± 0.3
175 ± 5


900
120
6.7 ± 0.2
0.604
64 ± 0.8
2.6 ± 0.1
39.9 ± 0.5
173 ± 4


900
45
9.1 ± 0.1
0.589
55.5 ± 0.5
3.0 ± 0.1
44.9 ± 0.4
112 ± 3




 Fig. 5  Atomic force micrographs and transmission electron micrographs, respectively, of P3HT:PCBM blend thin films spin-cast at (a and b) 900 rpm for 45 s, (c and d) 900 rpm for 120 s and (e and f) 1200 rpm for 120 s, respectively. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) showing the (020) diffraction ring of P3HT are shown as insets in the respective electron micrographs. The corresponding normalized intensity line scan profiles are shown in (g). 
We have established that decreasing the spin-speed from 1200 rpm to 900 rpm decreases the amount of solution ejected initially during acceleration, thus increasing the BHJ thickness from 208 nm to 232 nm, as verified by ellipsometry. The inset of Fig. 4d compares the raw absorption spectra of the two films and shows a significantly greater absorption across the spectrum for the films prepared at 900 rpm, as opposed to the film prepared at 1200 rpm, both below 400 nm (PC61BM contribution) and between 500 and 600 nm (P3HT contribution). The increased absorption due to the greater thickness results in only a meagre increase of Jsc by 0.5 mA cm−2 in the case of the 120 s duration and in a much larger 2.9 mA cm−2 increase in the case of the 45 s duration. The absorption spectra, normalized to the PC61BM absorption peak, are shown in Fig. 4d; these spectra better reflect the observed changes in the device performance and allow us to conclude that the PCE improvements are more closely related to the inherent structural improvement of the P3HT domains, as opposed to the overall amount of the P3HT or PC61BM absorption. To confirm this, we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) for all three cases, as shown in Fig. 4f. The EQE is strongly modulated in the spectral region, where the P3HT vibronic transitions lie, strongly affecting the EQE in the spectral range from 550 nm to 650 nm. It is noteworthy that the EQE increases only in the area of the intermolecular vibronic transition when the film thickness increases from 208 nm to 232 nm in the case of the 120 s duration. By contrast, reducing the spin-coating duration to 45 s at 900 rpm further improves the EQE significantly, this time both in the areas of the intermolecular and intramolecular vibronic transitions. This confirms that most of the performance increases achieved are due to the greater fraction of the P3HT photophysical aggregates and to the improvement of the intramolecular interactions within the P3HT domains of the bulk heterojunction film, which indicate a greater phase separation and point to an increased crystallinity. This is confirmed by the TEM and AFM measurements, indicating a substantially coarser phase separation. The SAED data also confirm a greater crystallinity in the π-stacking direction, when spin coating is interrupted prior to solution drying.
4. Conclusions
We have demonstrated a new experimental capability, combining everyday spin-coating with everyday UV-vis absorption to obtain, for the first time, time-resolved UV-vis absorption spectra during the spin-coating of organic semiconductor thin films, both for electronic and photovoltaic applications. We have used a reference conjugated polymer, P3HT, to demonstrate the ability of this technique to detect the solution-state of the solute in terms of the degree of aggregation, as well as to detect the transition from the liquid ejection regime of the spin-coating to the evaporation-dominated regime, as well as the onset, evolution and end of the solution-to-solid phase transformation process, also known as the thin film formation process.
In the context of electronics, we have demonstrated that the presence of large differences in the aggregation state of P3HT in the solution can induce small changes in the solid state UV-vis absorption spectrum, but which can still have important implications on the carrier transport in the context of OTFTs, mainly due to morphological and microstructural differences – namely fibril formation – detected by AFM and TEM.
In the context of photovoltaics, we have demonstrated the spinning conditions can select the amount of solute remaining on the substrate, as well as the film thickness and kinetics of crystallization. Using this insight, we proceeded to show that interrupting the spin-coating process in the evaporation-dominated thickness regime can lock in the desired thickness, while extending the duration of the film formation quite dramatically. This is shown to have an important positive influence on the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions in the film, and the EQE as well as the power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the technical support of the workshop team at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), namely Mr Ali Khoder Raad, Mr Meshal Abdulkareem, Mr Yang Liu and Mr Yousef I. Al Mosri, for their valuable assistance with the designing and building of the spin coater for the in-situ UV-vis absorption measurements. We would like to thank Ms Anastasia Khrenova for assistance with photography. Part of this work was funded by the Office of Competitive Research Funds (OCRF) under FIC, CRG and AEA grants.
Notes and references
C.-Z. Zhou, T. Liu, T.-T. Lin, X.-H. Zhan and Z.-K. Chen, Polymer, 2005, 46, 10952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, K. Rahimi, G. Reiter, U. Steiner and S. Ludwigs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Clark, C. Silva, R. H. Friend and F. C. Spano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206406 CrossRef .
S. T. Turner, P. Pingel, R. Steyrleuthner, E. J. W. Crossland, S. Ludwigs and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4640 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, H. U. Khan, R. Li, Y. Su and A. Amassian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 6024 CrossRef .
J. Clark, J.-F. Chang, F. C. Spano, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163306 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kourkoulos, C. Karakus, D. Hertel, R. Alle, S. Schmeding, J. Hummel, N. Risch, E. Holder and K. Meerholz, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 13612 RSC .
F. C. Spano, Chem. Phys., 2006, 325, 22 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Gupta, A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, S. Chand, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1965 Search PubMed .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C. C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ning, D. Zhitomirsky, V. Adinolfi, B. Sutherland, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, P. Maraghechi, X. Lan, S. Hoogland, Y. Ren and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1719 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. van der Poll, J. A. Love, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peet, N. S. Cho, S. K. Lee and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8655 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ullah Khan, R. Li, Y. Ren, L. Chen, M. M. Payne, U. S. Bhansali, D.-M. Smilgies, J. E. Anthony and A. Amassian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2325 CAS .
P. Santhosh, A. Gopalan and T. Vasudevan, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2003, 59, 1427 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dunsch, P. Rapta, A. Gromov and A. Stasko, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 547, 35 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Kislyuk, O. P. Dimitriev, A. A. Pud, J. Lautru and I. Ledoux-Rak, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2011, 286, 012009 CrossRef .
B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, K. Peters, F. Buss, J. Pfeifer, S. Walheim, A. Colsmann, U. Lemmer, P. Scharfer and W. Schabel, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 124501 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Smith and B. Bunnell, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 67, 429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 363 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, L. J. Richter and M. F. Toney, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. D. J. Ingle and S. R. Crouch, Spectrochemical measurements, Spectrochemical Analysis, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA,  1988 Search PubMed .
K. W. Chou, B. Yan, R. Li, E. Q. Li, K. Zhao, D. H. Anjum, S. Alvarez, R. Gassaway, A. Biocca, S. T. Thoroddsen, A. Hexemer and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, K. W. Chou, B. Yan, A. R. Kirmani, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, MRS Commun., 2013, 3, 83 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Perez, K. W. Chou, J. A. Love, T. S. van der Poll, D.-M. Smilgies, T.-Q. Nguyen, E. J. Kramer, A. Amassian and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Janssen, A. Aguirre, E. Goovaerts, P. Vanlaeke, J. Poortmans and J. Manca, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2007, 37, 287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierschner, Y.-S. Huang, B. Van Averbeke, J. Cornil, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 044105 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pingel, A. Zen, R. D. Abellón, F. C. Grozema, L. D. A. Siebbeles and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2286 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McIntire, E. S. Manas and F. C. Spano, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 8152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Manas and F. C. Spano, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 8087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, R. Silbey, P. Millie and J. L. Bredas, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 4749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc32077dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Aλ = −log10(T)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the newly developed spin coater combined with in situ UV-vis absorption. The setup combines an electric motor driving the rotation of a hollow tube capped with a transparent sample holder via a rubber belt connected to an electrical motor [inset is the actual photo of the setup]. Lower panels (b–d) show time resolved in situ UV-vis absorption spectra obtained during spin-coating of (b) a well-dissolved solution of P3HT in warm toluene (stirred overnight at 65 °C) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 30 seconds, (c) a pre-aggregated solution of P3HT in toluene (stirred overnight at room temperature) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 30 s, (c) and a P3HT:PCBM (1:1) blend solution in o-DCB (stirred overnight at 100 °C and cooled to 65 °C prior to spin coating) and spin coated at 900 rpm for 120 s.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Time evolution of the intermolecular aggregation peak (λ = 605 nm) during spin-coating for the well-dissolved and pre-aggregated solutions. (b) Time evolution of solution and film thickness. (c) Thickness-corrected absorption spectra of the dried films (correction according to Beer–Lambert law) [inset shows the actual absorption of the dry film]. (d) Transfer characteristics of top-contact, bottom gate OFET devices [(ID)1/2–VG]. Spin coatings of well-dissolved P3HT in toluene (stirred at 65 °C overnight [black curves]) and aggregated P3HT dissolved in toluene (stirred at room temperature for two days [red curves]) were performed in identical conditions: 900 rpm for 30 s.	 
	(2)


P3HT (well dissolved in solution)	0.0012	54.27	34	52 ± 0.7	128 ± 2
P3HT (pre-aggregated in solution)	0.011	56.14	72	54 ± 1.3	119 ± 1

 	Fig. 3  Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs for P3HT thin films prepared from a pre-aggregated P3HT solution (a and b) and a well dissolved P3HT solution (c and d), respectively. The insets of (b) and (c) show selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for the same samples. The normalized intensity line scans obtained from the SAED images are plotted in (e).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Time evolution of solution and film thickness during spin coating of P3HT:PCBM (1:1) blends in different processing conditions. Spin coating of the solution of P3HT:PCBM (1:1) in o-DCB was performed at 900 rpm for 45 s (black), 900 rpm for 120 s (red) and 1200 rpm for 120 s (blue). (b and c) Time evolution of absorption at the solution peak (460 nm) and at the intermolecular aggregation peak (605 nm), respectively. The vertical dashed lines across (a–c) indicate the moments at which spin-coating was interrupted and are color-coded to match the data. (d) Absorption spectra of the dried films normalized to the PC61BM absorption peak (330 nm). The inset in (d) shows the actual absorption spectra of the dried films. (e) J–V characteristics of P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells fabricated according to the above recipes. (f) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for these devices.	 


1200	120	6.25 ± 0.02	0.595	62 ± 0.2	2.3 ± 0.1	37.6 ± 0.3	175 ± 5
900	120	6.7 ± 0.2	0.604	64 ± 0.8	2.6 ± 0.1	39.9 ± 0.5	173 ± 4
900	45	9.1 ± 0.1	0.589	55.5 ± 0.5	3.0 ± 0.1	44.9 ± 0.4	112 ± 3

 	Fig. 5  Atomic force micrographs and transmission electron micrographs, respectively, of P3HT:PCBM blend thin films spin-cast at (a and b) 900 rpm for 45 s, (c and d) 900 rpm for 120 s and (e and f) 1200 rpm for 120 s, respectively. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) showing the (020) diffraction ring of P3HT are shown as insets in the respective electron micrographs. The corresponding normalized intensity line scan profiles are shown in (g).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc32077d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
