Energy loss analysis in photoelectrochemical water splitting: a case study of hematite photoanodes   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CP04021D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CP04021D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22629-22635Energy loss analysis in photoelectrochemical water splitting: a case study of hematite photoanodes†

        
          
            Zhiliang 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Miaoqiang 
            Lyu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Songcan 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lianzhou 
            Wang
          
        
      *
      Nanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: l.wang@uq.edu.au
Received 
      25th June 2018
    , Accepted 10th August 2018First published on 16th August 2018AbstractInsightful understanding of the energy loss mechanism during photoelectrochemical (PEC) processes is of vital importance for efficient solar fuel production. Potential–current features under light illumination are typically used to evaluate the effectiveness of the PEC processes. However, energy loss that leads to various shapes of measured photocurrent–potential (j–E) curves is still not well understood. Herein, based on hematite photoanodes, we systematically studied the photocurrent–potential–light intensity (j–E–I) relationships to acquire quantitative understanding of the loss mechanism during the PEC process by decoupling it into a photovoltaic (PV) and an electrocatalytic (EC) process. Both numerical simulation and experimental results have confirmed the reasonability of this analysis method. It provides comprehensive understanding of the energy loss at the semiconductor–electrolyte junction and the surface electrocatalysis process for further optimizing the PEC solar energy conversion process.
Introduction
Solar hydrogen production is one of the most promising options in achieving low-cost and sustainable production of renewable energy resources.1,2 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting on semiconductor electrodes is highly attractive for generating solar hydrogen since it can achieve a balance of efficiency and cost when compared with particulate photocatalysis (low cost, low efficiency) or solar cell driven electrolysis (high efficiency, high cost).1,3–6 Much progress has been achieved in the material development for PEC in recent years; however, the performance of PEC water splitting is still limited by serious bulk and/or surface recombination. Further optimization of this process relies on comprehensive understanding of the energy loss mechanism during the consumption of photo-generated charge.7
Principally, PEC water oxidation (or reduction) involves consumption of photo-generated holes (or electrons) via electrochemical (EC) reaction at the semiconductor–electrolyte (S–E) interface where a Schottky junction is created. Due to the photovoltaic (PV) effect of the junction, photovoltage is produced to compensate the thermodynamic requirement of water oxidation. Therefore, to understand the PEC process in a system, it is necessary to deeply understand the corresponding EC and PV process.
To characterize a PEC process, photocurrent–potential (j–E) curves are usually acquired from which we can derive some important parameters, such as the onset potential (Eonset), saturated photocurrent (jsat), and the fill factor (FF, see ESI† for the definition).8 These curves can be used to identify the energy loss mechanism, including bulk recombination loss and surface reaction kinetic loss during the solar energy conversion process.9,10 In an ideal case, the surface reaction is fast and the charge recombination in the semiconductor is negligible. Therefore, the j–E curve (type I) shows an Eonset approaching the flatband potential and jsat can be predicted by Gartner equation.11,12 It undergoes a fast increase of photocurrent at the initial potential scan, resulting in a high FF and a cross point (point i) at a high photocurrent position when combined with a solar cell (j–V curve in Scheme 1). This type of curve can be found on InP13 and Si14 based photoelectrodes. Nevertheless, the most frequently observed j–E curves show an S shape (type II) with relatively large overpotential and gentle slope on electrodes such as Fe2O315 and WO3.16 In this case, the j–V and j–E curves intersect at a point (point ii) deviating from the maximum power point of the solar cell, which leads to low conversion efficiency for the unbiased water splitting.17,18 For instance, Guruduyal et al. demonstrated that combining Fe2O3 with a perovskite solar cell (PSC) in a tandem structure could achieve unbiased water splitting with 2.4% STH efficiency.19 But there is a large energy loss compared to the 10.5% efficiency of the PSC since the operating point is not at the maximum power point of the PSC.20 Worst of all is the type III curve, which never reaches a saturated photocurrent and the FF is very low. The high over-potential and low FF result in no intersection with the j–V curve, suggesting that it is impossible to realize unbiased reactions in such a system.
 Scheme 1  The illustrated j–V curve of the PV process and j–E curves of the PEC process in different shapes denoted as I, II and III. 
In principle, the different shapes of the j–E curves are caused by different energy loss mechanisms, e.g., surface catalytic ability,21 recombination center distribution22 and charge transfer resistance.23 A traditional semiconductor/electrolyte model can provide some general information and understanding about the influence of these factors.24–26 However, it fails to explain the different shapes of the j–E curves (Scheme 1) in a quantitative way, which is significant for improving the whole PEC efficiency. In comparison, the energy loss during the PV or EC process has been clearly identified with suitable figure-of-merit. For example, during the PV process, the short-circuit current (jsc), open-circuit potential (Voc) and fill factor (FF) can reveal the charge recombination process. And for the EC process, the Tafel slope and over potential can indicate the reaction mechanism and energy barrier.
In this work, we used hematite thin films as a prototype to investigate the light intensity dependence of some key parameters including photocurrent and photovoltage in typical PEC processes. They were used to analyse the corresponding energy loss in PV and EC processes. Numerical analysis and experimental simulation were used to demonstrate how the three types of curves in Scheme 1 can be generated based on a combined PV and EC tandem system. It is hoped that this research will shed light on optimizing the PEC process by reasonably analyzing the energy loss during these complicate processes.
Experiment and characterization
Fe2O3 photoanode fabrication
The Fe2O3 electrodes were prepared by a chemical bath deposition process.15 In a typical process, the F doped SnO2 (FTO) glass was cleaned and placed vertically in a FeCl3 (0.1 M) and urea (0.15 M) aqueous solution for FeOOH deposition at 100 °C for 6 hours. Then the FeOOH electrode was immersed in an ethanol solution of 0.1 M titanium tetrabutoxide to achieve Ti modification, followed by a calcination step at 600 °C for 3 h and 880 °C for 3 min to fully convert FeOOH into Fe2O3.
Material characterization
The morphology of the as-prepared thin films was characterized by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) (JSM-7100F, JEOL) and a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) (JEM-2100, JEOL). The crystal structures of the samples were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy (D8 Advance, Bruker) with Cu Kα (λ = 0.15406 nm) radiation. UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained on a JASCOV-650 spectrophotometer.
PEC characterization
The PEC performance was measured in a 1 M NaOH electrolyte (pH = 13.6) in a 3-electrode system with a Pt wire as the counter electrode and a KCl saturated Ag/AgCl electrode (E0 = 0.197 VRHE) as the reference electrode. The potential referred to the standard reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) was calculated according to the Nernst equation:E(RHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + 0.059 × pH + E0
The light illumination was provided by a Xe lamp with an AM 1.5G filter (Newport). The light intensity was controlled by a power supply as well as the working distance between the lamp and the photoelectrode. The light intensity was calibrated by using a standard Si diode (Newport). A continuous change of light intensity from 0.2 sun (20 mW cm−2) to 1.9 sun (190 mW cm−2) was applied in this work.
Linear scan voltammetry measurements were recorded in the range of −0.6–0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Photoelectrochemical impedance spectra (PEIS) were measured in the frequency range of 10−2–104 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV. When measured under constant light intensity (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2), the potential was adjusted from 0.8 to 1.3 VRHE. When measured under constant potential (1.2 VRHE), the light intensity was varied from 0.2 to 1.8 sun. The PEC data were collected on an Ivium potentiostat (Ivium).
Results and discussion
The hematite thin films were prepared by a chemical bath deposition process. The XRD patterns and absorption spectra (Fig. S1, ESI†) of the thin films grown on FTO substrates confirm the formation of the hematite (α-Fe2O3) electrode which has a bandgap of about 2.0 eV. In a typical PEC measurement, the j–E curves represent the relationship between photocurrent (j) and applied potential (E) at certain light intensity (I, normally 1 sun which is 100 mW cm−2 with an AM 1.5G spectrum). Actually, the photocurrent also relies on the light intensity.26 According to eqn (1), we can obtain a three-dimensional (3D) pattern with varied applied biases and light intensity to reveal the j–I and E–I relationships. j = f(E, I)(1)
Under one sun light intensity, the ideal photocurrent of the as-prepared hematite electrode is calculated to be ca. 12 mA cm−2 according to the absorption in Fig. S1 (ESI†). However, the photocurrent with H2O2 to eliminate surface recombination was measured to be less than 4 mA cm−2 as shown in Fig. 1a. It suggests that there is serious bulk recombination which leads to significant loss of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. When further considering the surface recombination, that is photoresponse measured in NaOH without the hole scavenger, the photocurrent was even lower than 3 mA cm−2 (Fig. 1b). Moreover, the net photocurrent (j, current excluding the dark current; see ESI† for calculations) changes linearly when varying the light intensity (I) as shown in Fig. 1c and d. In both cases, the slopes of j–I curves increase along with the improvement of applied bias. As shown in Fig. 2a, when tested in NaOH at 1.6 VRHE, the slope is about one order of magnitude larger than that at 0.8 VRHE. On the other hand, under the same applied potential, the presence of H2O2 also greatly increases the value of the slope.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) The PEC measurements in NaOH/H2O2 and NaOH aqueous solutions with varied applied bias (E) or light intensity (I), respectively. (c and d) The photocurrent–light intensity relationship in NaOH/H2O2 and NaOH aqueous solution at different potentials. The adjacent j–I curves have 0.1 V potential difference. 
 Fig. 2  (a) The potential dependent slopes of j–I curves measured with (red) or without (black) H2O2 as scavenger. (b) The slope of j–I curves (solid dot) and IPCE (open circle) measured in NaOH aqueous solution at different potential under 460 nm illumination. The relationship between slope and IPCE is shown as an inset. 
The slope of j–I indicates how much the light intensity can affect the PEC process. A dimensional analysis of the unit of the slope can be expressed as follows: (2)
Here ne and nph are the amounts of consumed electrons and induced photons respectively. The ratio of ne/nph is actually the quantum efficiency or the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) during the PEC process. Based on the results, the slope of j–I curves indicates the degree of energy loss during PEC conversion and a steeper slope means smaller loss during photon to current conversion. Furthermore, if the photocurrent is measured under monolight illumination (λ0), the IPCE at λ0 should be proportional to the slope of the j–I curve. To verify it, we measured the photocurrent at different intensities at a wavelength of 460 nm (Fig. S2, ESI†). The slope of j–I curves and IPCE at varied potential are summarized in Fig. 2b, from which a linear relationship between IPCE and slopes can be derived (inset in Fig. 2b). This strongly suggests that the slope of j–I has a close relationship with the IPCE of the electrodes.
One step further, based on the photocurrent recorded in NaOH and NaOH/H2O2, the charge injection efficiency can be calculated to evaluate the surface recombination loss15,27 as shown in Fig. 3. From the nearly flat curves in Fig. 3a, it is clear that the increase in light intensity would not affect the surface charge injection process. Very interestingly, this behaviour is drastically different from bias dependent charge injection efficiency presented Fig. 3b. It clearly indicates that although increasing the bias or light intensity can lead to an improved photocurrent, the PEC process should be governed by different mechanisms in the two cases.
 Fig. 3  (a) The charge injection efficiencies under different light intensities. (b) The charge injection efficiency at different bias. 
To better understand the promotion of the PEC process by increasing bias or light intensity, we further used photoelectrochemical impedance spectra (PEIS) to analyse the charge transfer in the photoelectrodes.28 For the PEIS measured under different potentials (Fig. 4a) or light intensities (Fig. 4b), the Bode plots show two peaks, suggesting that at least two charge transfer processes exist during the PEC. The peak at the low frequency region is attributed to the surface reaction and the peak at the high frequency region can be assigned to the charging of the space charge layer.29 For the low frequency peak, increasing bias or light intensity leads to a decreased peak, indicating a decreased surface reaction resistance (|Z|), that is to say, an improved surface reaction process. This is further confirmed by the increased photocurrent (Fig. 1) and charge transfer capacitance (Cct, Fig. S3, ESI†) in both cases. However, for the peaks at the high frequency region, they exhibited an opposite tendency. As shown in Fig. 4c, when increasing the bias, the capacitance (Csc) of the space charge layer increases until the PEC water oxidation is triggered. It indicates a hole accumulation process in the space charge layer before the initiation of water oxidation.29 After that, Csc decreases fast when increasing the bias. However, when increasing light intensity, Csc increases linearly with light intensity as demonstrated in Fig. 4d.
 Fig. 4  (a) The Bode plots of the PEIS measured under different potentials. The light intensity is 1 sun. (b) The Bode plots of the PEIS measured under different light intensities. The potential is 1.2 V vs. RHE. In (a and b), the red curves should refer to the left axials while the grey to the right ones. (c and d) The space charge layer capacity derived from (a and b). 
Principally, the capacitance is defined as (3)
In the case of increased bias under constant light intensity, the amount of photogenerated charge remains constant (dQ), so the decreased Csc will lead to a profound increase of the built-in field potential (dU), which provides an increased driving force for charge transfer. In the case of increased light intensity (I), since the photogenerated charge is proportional to I, the linear relationship of Csc–I in Fig. 4d suggests a constant driving force (dU) during the reaction regardless of the light intensity.
For a deeper understanding of the j–I relationship, we carried out a theoretical analysis about the PEC process on hematite photoelectrodes. Note that the theory about PEC on hematite should account for the experimental fact that a linear relationship of j–I and the slope represents the quantum efficiency.
Notwithstanding the complexity of the PEC processes on hematite, it is commonly considered that the water oxidation happens via surface states (SS).22,29,30 Based on Peter's model (Fig. S4, ESI†), the surface states can capture photogenerated holes and drive Fe(III) into high valence ferrate species for H2O oxidation (charge transfer process, eqn (4)).30 The high valence ferrate species can also capture photogenerated electrons, resulting in the recombination of e−/h+ pairs (charge recombination process, eqn (5)). For hematite, the recombination process is usually non-radiative and the energy of photogenerated charges is transferred into phonons, that is, the vibration of lattice. These processes can be summarized as follows:30 (4) (5) (6)where kr and kt are the rate constants of recombination and charge transfer, respectively.
For the charge generation process, the amount of photocharge is proportional to the absorbed light intensity. And the recombination process follows a pseudo first order rate law according to the previous work by Mi and co-workers.3 In the charge transfer process, the reaction order varies from 1st to 3rd order depending on the surface hole concentration.31,32 In our case, the light intensity was varied between 0.2 and 1.9 sun where a 1st order rate law for surface reaction is expected.31 Therefore, the aforementioned three processes would happen at the rate shown below: rg = αI(7) rr = kr[e−][h+](8) rt = kt[h+][OH−](9)where [e−] and [h+] are the surface electron and hole concentrations, and [OH−] is the concentration of OH−. During the reaction process, only very little amount of OH− is consumed, so [OH−] can be considered as a constant. Similarly, [e−] is also viewed as a constant for an n-type semiconductor since the intrinsic [e−] is much greater than photogenerated electrons. Under a steady-state condition, the change of surface hole density (d[h+]) with the change of time (dt) is zero.31 Thus, we can get the following equations: (10) (11)where Kt and Kr represent kt[OH−] and kr[e−], respectively. The consumption of hole flux (rt) is equivalent to the photocurrent (j). Eqn (11) suggests that the photocurrent–light intensity should have a linear relationship. As for the slope, , it is actually the definition of kinetic efficiency of the PEC process. Consequentially, the theoretical analysis can fit with the experimental results vide supra.
In addition to the j–I relationship, we also paid attention to the E–I relationship. In the PEC process, the photovoltage provided by illumination is defined as the applied bias difference at the same current during potential scan under light and dark (Fig. S5, ESI†).19,33 Accordingly, the E–I relationship is replaced by the photovoltage (V)–I relationship. Fig. 5 indicates a linear relationship between photovoltage (V) and the logarithm of light intensity (lnI).
 Fig. 5  The relationship between light intensity and photovoltage generated at the semiconductor–electrolyte junction. 
Based on the above discussion, the linear relationships of j–I and V–lnI strongly indicate a photovoltaic (PV) process during the PEC water oxidation process.34,35 In general, the semiconductor/electrolyte junction can be considered as a Schottky junction to induce the PV effect.36 At the same time, the photoelectrode shows electrocatalytic ability under the dark, so we can treat the PEC as a combined PV and EC process (Fig. S6, ESI†). During the PV process, the generated photovoltage can compensate part of the potential or the total potential that inputs during the EC process, leading to a decrease of the applied bias for PEC. And the degree of voltage compensation during the PEC process depends on the photocurrent. At low current, the semiconductor/electrolyte junction can generate large photovoltage, so there will be a large negative shift of potential of PEC compared to the EC process. At high current, the generated photovoltage is low at the junction, as a result of which the j–E curves of PEC come close to that of the EC process.
In order to verify this assumption, we carried out a numerical simulation based on the j–V of PV and j–E of EC processes to produce different types of j–E curves of PEC. For the PV process, the j–V curve is usually characterized by the short circuit current (jsc), open circuit potential (Voc) and fill factor (FF). For the EC process, the j–E curve is characterized by the overpotential (η), Tafel slope and the exchange current (j0). The parameters of applied PV and EC curves in Fig. 6a are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). All these parameters (i.e., jsc, Voc, FF for the PV process and Tafel slope, η for the EC process) are the key features to identify the energy loss mechanism of PV and EC processes. The applied bias (Eappl) of the PEC process is the potential difference between EC and PV under the same current (Fig. S6 (ESI†) and Fig. 6a). From the simulation results in Fig. 6b, the type I j–E curves of PEC can be derived when the j–V curve of the PV process has high jsc, Voc, FF and the j–E curve of the EC process has low η and slope (black lines in Fig. 6a). On the other hand, type III j–E curves can be derived when all of them are poor. For the type II j–E curve, it is produced when either the PV or EC process is poor. Based on the simulation results, it is suggested that the saturated photocurrent of PEC is usually determined by PV. (When the EC process is very poor, it can also limit jsat.) On the other hand, the Eonset and FF of PEC are determined by both PV and EC processes.
 Fig. 6  (a) The numerical potential–current curves of the PV (I, II) and EC (i, ii) process. (b) The numerical simulation based on the potential–current curves in (a). The I-i curve (black) is derived from I and i in (a) and II-ii curve (red) is derived from II and ii in (a). (c) The current–potential curves of two perovskite solar cells (PSCs) measured during experiment (dot) and derived from the PEC test (green line) in (d). (d) The PEC test of a simulated photoelectrode by combining the PSC with the electrocatalyst. 
To further confirm the numerical simulation results of the PEC, we combined perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with different electrocatalysts, including Fe2O3 and NiFeP, to simulate the PV and EC process. The two PSCs show different jsc and FF (Fig. 6c): PSC-1 has higher short-circuit photocurrent and a little higher FF compared with PSC-2. The key parameters to identify the effectiveness of the PV process can be found in Table S2 (ESI†). For the EC part, NiFeP exhibits much better EC performance than Fe2O3 in terms of overpotential and Tafel slope (Fig. 6d and Fig. S7, ESI†). After combining with PSC, the NiFeP/PSC-2 system shows type I j–E curves with low onset potential and steep current increase with the potential scan. On the other hand, for the Fe2O3/PSC-1 system, it presents a type II curve without achieving the saturated current until a high potential. It is interesting to find that the platform photocurrent is determined mainly by the solar cell part.
According to the above results, it is reasonable to verify our hypothesis that a practical PEC system can be decoupled into a PV and an EC process. In this way, we can clarify the complex PEC process with a concise model. The energy loss mechanism of PEC can be quantitatively identified with the key parameters of EC (Tafel slope, η) and PV processes (jsc, Voc, FF). For the EC process, the surface reaction kinetic loss relies more on the chemical composition of the catalyst but for the photovoltaic effect, many factors can influence the performance of the solar cell. In a typical equivalent circuit of the PV process (Fig. S8, ESI†), it can be treated as an ideal current source parallel with a diode to simulate the junction. The shunt resistance (Rsh) is regarded to influence the fill factor of the solar cell. On the other hand, the serial resistance (Rs) will influence the output potential. The Rsh and Rs in the solar cell may come from contact resistance in the solar cell.9,34,37 But for PEC, they may originate from the surface states and the film resistance, respectively. So for a PEC process, a high FF can be expected if the surface state is well passivated (large Rsh) and the charge transfer in the electrode is excellent (low Rs). A high FF can lead to a potential high cross point (Scheme 1) when combined with a solar cell or other photoelectrode. For instance, after passivating the recombination states on the Fe2O3 photoelectrode, an unbiased water splitting system with a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of 0.91% was achieved when combined with Pt/a-Si as photocathode.34,38,39
Conclusion
In this work, we analysed the photocurrent and photovoltage dependence on light intensity to comprehensively understand the energy loss in the PEC process. A linear relationship is revealed between photocurrent and light intensity and the slope of j–I indicates the quantum efficiency of photon utilization. And the photovoltage generated in the PEC process has an exponential relationship with light intensity. We then further confirmed that different PEC processes (with different shapes of j–E curves) can be numerically and experimentally simulated with the PV process and EC process that have different energy loss mechanisms. Accordingly, the PEC process can be simplified and the energy loss of the PEC process can be well estimated via a quantitative analysis of the individual PV and EC process, which will shed light on further improving the PEC system to achieve highly efficient water splitting.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Australian Research Council through its DP and FF programs. The Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility is also appreciated. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland.
Notes and references
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Li, Y. Yan, T. Hamann, I. Shih, D. Wang and Z. Mi, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 022001 CrossRef .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2791 RSC .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 201750 Search PubMed .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 407 CrossRef .
K. Sivula and R. Van De Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef .
T. Mills, F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 148304 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, A. C. Nielander, S. A. Francis, M. T. McDowell, V. Dix, S. M. Chatman and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2886 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Qi, C. Ding, D. Fan, G. Liu, Y. Zhao and C. Li, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4391 RSC .

          H. Gerischer, Photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion, Springer,  1981, pp. 199–261 Search PubMed .
P. Cendula, S. D. Tilley, S. Gimenez, J. Bisquert, M. Schmid, M. Grätzel and J. r. O. Schumacher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29599 CrossRef .
L. Gao, Y. Cui, R. H. Vervuurt, D. van Dam, R. P. van Veldhoven, J. P. Hofmann, A. A. Bol, J. E. Haverkort, P. H. Notten and E. P. Bakkers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 679 CrossRef .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Liu, C. Ding, Z. Chen, F. Zhang, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19607 CrossRef .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824 CrossRef .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Hsu, J. Miao, L. Zhang, J. Gao, H. Wang, H. Tao, S. F. Hung, A. Vasileff, S. Z. Qiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1707261 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rothschild and H. Dotan, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 2, 45 CrossRef .
G. Liu, J. Shi, F. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Han, C. Ding, S. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7295 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, F. Fan, S. Wang, C. Ding, Y. Zhao and C. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85582 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Zong, Y. Gao, J. Han, Z. Xu, Z. Li, C. Ding, S. Wang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30696 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Soedergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552 CrossRef .
H. Gerischer, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1677 CrossRef .
D. Klotz, D. A. Grave, H. Dotan and A. Rothschild, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1466 Search PubMed .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958 RSC .
L. Bertoluzzi and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2517 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Hamann and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Peter, K. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309 RSC .
F. Le Formal, E. Pastor, S. D. Tilley, C. A. Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6629 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Mesa, A. Kafizas, L. Francàs, S. R. Pendlebury, E. Pastor, Y. Ma, F. Le Formal, M. T. Mayer, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11537 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dotan, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Graetzel and A. Rothschild, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3330 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, J. Dong, S. Lv, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li and Y. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063901 CrossRef .
P. D. Antunez, D. M. Bishop, Y. Luo and R. Haight, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 884 CrossRef .
R. Wilson, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1980, 10, 1 CrossRef .
R. E. Rocheleau and E. L. Miller, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 771 CrossRef .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yadav, M. I. Dar, N. Arora, E. A. Alharbi, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701077 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp04021dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  The illustrated j–V curve of the PV process and j–E curves of the PEC process in different shapes denoted as I, II and III.	 
E(RHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + 0.059 × pH + E0
j = f(E, I)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) The PEC measurements in NaOH/H2O2 and NaOH aqueous solutions with varied applied bias (E) or light intensity (I), respectively. (c and d) The photocurrent–light intensity relationship in NaOH/H2O2 and NaOH aqueous solution at different potentials. The adjacent j–I curves have 0.1 V potential difference.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The potential dependent slopes of j–I curves measured with (red) or without (black) H2O2 as scavenger. (b) The slope of j–I curves (solid dot) and IPCE (open circle) measured in NaOH aqueous solution at different potential under 460 nm illumination. The relationship between slope and IPCE is shown as an inset.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The charge injection efficiencies under different light intensities. (b) The charge injection efficiency at different bias.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The Bode plots of the PEIS measured under different potentials. The light intensity is 1 sun. (b) The Bode plots of the PEIS measured under different light intensities. The potential is 1.2 V vs. RHE. In (a and b), the red curves should refer to the left axials while the grey to the right ones. (c and d) The space charge layer capacity derived from (a and b).	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
rg = αI	(7)
rr = kr[e−][h+]	(8)
rt = kt[h+][OH−]	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 5  The relationship between light intensity and photovoltage generated at the semiconductor–electrolyte junction.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The numerical potential–current curves of the PV (I, II) and EC (i, ii) process. (b) The numerical simulation based on the potential–current curves in (a). The I-i curve (black) is derived from I and i in (a) and II-ii curve (red) is derived from II and ii in (a). (c) The current–potential curves of two perovskite solar cells (PSCs) measured during experiment (dot) and derived from the PEC test (green line) in (d). (d) The PEC test of a simulated photoelectrode by combining the PSC with the electrocatalyst.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp04021d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
