Perovskite fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices for wearable applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC00532H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00532H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6957-6991Perovskite fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices for wearable applications

        
          
            Andrew 
            Balilonda
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziqi 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuequn 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fatemeh 
            Zabihi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shengyuan 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xinxin 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Tao
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      *ade
aResearch Centre for Smart Wearable Technology, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, P. R. China. E-mail: weii.chen@polyu.edu.hk
bState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, International Joint Laboratory for Advanced Fiber and Low-dimension Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, People's Republic of China
cDigital Garment Engineering Center, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangdong, 510075, China
dResearch Institute for Intelligent Wearable Systems, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, P. R. China
eThe Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, P. R. China
Received 
      8th February 2022
    , Accepted 5th April 2022First published on 14th April 2022AbstractThe miniaturization of electronic devices and rapid development of fabrication technologies have promoted wearable electronics. However, the power requirement imposes a considerable energy consumption burden on the main grid. Accordingly, fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices provide a solution to self-power devices and a direct route to achieve green, sustainable, and flexible photovoltaic platforms. Moreover, due to the numerous benefits associated with the fiber geometry, such as high flexibility, ease of integration with other devices, light weight and conformability to the human body and other structural shapes, the need to develop highly efficient and stable optoelectronic fiber-shaped devices for applications such as solar energy harvesting, communication, and advanced sensing is increasing. A photoactive layer is a vital component in any optoelectronic device. Perovskite, a new photoactive material with superb energy conversion efficiency and solution processability, offers the opportunity to achieve low-cost and high-performance fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices. Herein, we summarize the recent approaches and the possible future directions in the field of perovskite fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices (solar cells, solar-batteries, photodetectors, light-emitting devices, solar-capacitors, and solar-muscles/actuators). The technical benefits of the fiber geometry accompanied by a discussion on the possible layer deposition methods on fiber substrates are also presented. Furthermore, the challenges associated with perovskite materials, the proposed solutions, and the possible recycling pathways for perovskite-powered devices are discussed.
Introduction
In the 21st century and beyond, smart living and the Internet of Things (IoT) for data sharing between devices1 and other technologies for robotics, wearable sensing, displays, and artificial intelligence have made it necessary to develop wearable, low-cost, and highly efficient energy supply sources or self-powered wearables to sustain the advances in technology.2,3 The increasing energy demand for wearable electronics has promoted the rapid development of fiber-shaped single-function and multifunctional self-powering devices, which is supported by the rapid advances in material synthesis and high-performance device architectures, further leading to miniaturization due to nanotechnology.4 Miniaturization, wearability, and multifunctionality are the significant forces behind the increasing demand for electronic devices. Consequently, between 2021 and 2026, the market for wearable electronics is expected to expand at a compound annual growth rate of 18%, lifting the industry's market value from 116.2 billion to 265.4 billion USD by 2026.5,6 Fiber-shaped structures are the basic units of textiles. Therefore, realizing highly functional fiber devices presents an excellent opportunity for combining the functionality of new devices with the vital properties of textile structures, such as being breathable, flexible, stretchable (especially knits), and ease of integration for multifunctionality through weaving, knitting, twisting, and embroidery.7
Several fiber-shaped devices for applications such as wearable communication, displays, sensing, medical applications, energy storage, and harvesting have been reported in recent years.8,9 Similarly, fabric forms and integrated multifunctional variants of these wearable devices have been demonstrated. For example, Shi et al.10 reported a large surface area display textile integrated with numerous electronic systems by weaving highly transparent and conductive melt-spun ionic-liquid-doped polyurethane as weft fibers with luminescent warp and cotton yarns to form electroluminescent units directly within the textile. This team further demonstrated that the textile display system could be integrated with a textile-based keyboard and a fiber-shaped power supply. Consequently, this system served as an all-in-one communication tool.10
Fiber-shaped devices are assembled with at least one stimuli-responsive layer sandwiched between functional layers, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. In the case of optoelectronic fiber-shaped devices, a photoactive material capable of generating charge carriers upon receiving photons should be part of their architecture. Many photoactive materials such as dyes (N719),11 quantum dots,12 organic polymers13 with high electron densities, silicon materials, perovskites, and many others have been proposed for use in optoelectronic devices. However, among them, only silicon and perovskite demonstrate economically viable energy conversion efficiencies. Silicon is a good option due to its stability exceeding 22 years with less than 10% loss in power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the process for its production is quite complex with a percentage purity requirement of >99.9%, and it is energy-consuming and not environmentally friendly.14 The highly crystalline nature of silicon, combined with the lack of technology that can facilitate its solution processing into highly flexible fiber-shaped devices, shifts the attention to perovskite materials, especially for photon to energy conversion in fiber-shaped/wearable devices. In solar devices, perovskites have proven to have the potential to compete favorably with solar silicon materials in terms of power conversion efficiency, production cost, and diversity in production.15 This is because in approximately 12 years, the PCE of perovskites solar cells has rapidly improved from 3.8%16 to the maximum reported value of ∼25.7% and beyond in flat/planar substrates.17,18 Indeed, the PCE of fiber-shaped perovskite devices was also recently reported to reach a maximum of 15.7%,19 slowly following the footsteps of their planar counterparts, as shown in Fig. 1b.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the p–i–n layer-by-layer architecture in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. (b) Variation in the power conversion efficiency with time for flat/planar and fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. Plotted data for planar/flat and fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells was extracted from ref. 18 and 34–40 and ref. 19 and 41–43, respectively. 
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites certainly appear to be the most promising low-temperature solution-processable and next-generation photovoltaics materials due to their remarkable intrinsic properties. These photovoltaic properties include low hole–electron exciton binding energies in the range of 50–150 meV,20,21 increased lifetime of the charge carriers before recombination, which goes beyond 446 ns,22 superior charge carrier transfer property (24–135 cm−2 V−1 s−1), and extended diffusion lengths >175 μm.23 Perovskites also possess exceptional interfacial charge transfer ability,24 shallow point surface defects, and outstanding structural defect tolerance due to the ionic bonds holding their molecules together.25–27 Furthermore, perovskites exhibit large absorption coefficients due to their s–p antibonding orbitals28 and beneficial narrow band gaps, which decrease with an increase in dimensionality from 2D to 3D perovskite material configurations.29 With the exception of crystalline silicon solar cells, perovskites present the lowest internal energy loss among photovoltaic technologies.30 These enticing features have led to substantial research into this emerging class of materials in solar cells and other applications such as light-emitting diodes,31 light-emitting transistors,32 and photo-memories.33
Herein, we present the developments in fiber-shaped perovskite-based photo-operated devices, including the advances in their fabrication methods, photoactive material modification, and design variations. A comprehensive discussion on the benefits of miniaturization to the fiber geometry and the current perovskite layer deposition methods on fiber substrates are included. In addition, potential future directions due to the technical capabilities of the fiber shape and perovskite materials together with the potential recycling pathways are examined. Herein, we also reveal the potential, rapid development, and current critical challenges facing perovskites as a new class of highly efficient photovoltaic materials.
1. Technical benefits of the fiber geometry in solar cells and optoelectronics
The fiber geometry is increasingly adopted in the three main classes of electronic devices, namely, energy storage,46 energy harvesting,47 and devices for functional purposes, due to its numerous benefits, as summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic showing the breakdown of different fiber assemblies and their associated benefits in optoelectronic devices. In this illustration, the single and twisted yarn images were extracted from ref. 44 and the fabric image from ref. 45 with permission. 
The high length to diameter ratio of fiber-shaped optoelectronics results in favorable mechanical properties such as enhanced bending/flexibility, a characteristic that suits these devices for wearable and textile applications. The bending rigidity in a specific direction of any given geometry is directly proportional to the fourth power of its radius in that direction along its cross-section, as expressed by eqn (1).48 Therefore, the reduced length to diameter ratio in fiber-shaped perovskite devices (FSPD), which is roughly equivalent in all directions along the circular cross-section through the central axis of the device, guarantees the minimum bending rigidity (ensures increased flexibility) in all directions, a very important property for wearable devices (Fig. 3a, top). Alternatively, planar/flat optoelectronics have different radius measurements from their central axis, as demonstrated in Fig. 3a, bottom. Consequently, they are stiffer along the axis with diameter D2 than along the axis with diameter D1. Bending as a mechanical property of fiber-shaped devices determines the physical properties such as curl, crimp, and skew of fabric optoelectronic devices and dictates their formability, crease recovery, drapability, and tailorability.48 I ∝ r4(1)where I is the bending rigidity and r is the radius in a given direction along the cross-section.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped and planar devices, demonstrating the effect of diameter on the minimum force required to cause bending. (b) Multifunctional integration achievable with fabric and textile structures.64 (c) Schematic diagrams illustrating the interaction of light rays with (i) fabric devices and (ii) flat/planar all-solid devices. 
For solar cells and other optoelectronic devices, the available surface area for light exposure is highly influential in determining and boosting their output power density and overall performance.49
Due to the fact that FSPDs possess a circular cross-section, these devices provide a very sizeable photoactive surface area, which can be mathematically expressed as (πDL), where D is the diameter of the device and L is its photoactive length. However, during exposure to uni-directional light, approximately half of the FPSC surface area is exposed to light and the remaining photoactive half is not illuminated; hence, the effective active area is drastically reduced to almost half, i.e., (πDL)/2. Nevertheless, weaving and knitting optoelectronic fiber devices by interlacing and intermeshing fiber devices, respectively, result in convoluted fabric surfaces formed by curved yarns. Technically, the curved FSDC sections on the surface of fabric optoelectronic devices increase their available photoactive surface area for uni-directional light compared with their flat counterparts. As illustrated in Fig. 3b, woven or knitted fabric optoelectronic devices simplify integration due to their loose structures. Fabric structures also have the advantage of presenting double photoactive sides, i.e., both the technical face and technical back of the fabric are photoactive,41,50 and hence, these textile structures demonstrate the potential of harvesting light from multiple directions, as demonstrated in Fig. 3c. However, the loopy and convoluted nature of the surface of fabric results in a rough texture, which technically minimizes instant surface reflections of the incident light by enabling successive inter-yarn light reflections. This increases the chances for photon energy absorption by the photoactive materials incorporated in optoelectronic yarns (see Fig. 3c). The advantage of enhanced optical interaction/absorption in the uneven fabric surface topography (fabric texture) is similar to the technique of surface texturization in silicon solar cells through etching, which was reported to reduce surface reflection, increase incident light-harvesting capability, and enhance the ultimate efficiency of the devices.51,52
Converting fiber-shaped devices into knitted structures increases their stretchability, in either the warp or weft directions, depending on the knitting technique employed.53,54 The stretchability of a knitted fabric originates from the relaxed loops in its structure, which easily offer their length to allow changes in the dimensions of the fabric when tensile force is applied. The property of stretchability in the field of textile and wearable devices is of high importance and necessary to achieve an extended fit, increased durability, and comfort to the wearer of the device.
The ability of fiber-shaped optoelectronics to be knitted,53 woven, and twisted with other fiber-shaped devices further broadens the scope of their integration with other fiber-shaped devices to form integrated multifunctional structures. For example, Zhang et al.55 presented a photo-rechargeable fabric by weaving fiber-shaped solar cells with fiber-shaped batteries, demonstrating the ease of integration achievable with the fiber geometry. In addition, Zhang et al.56 also reported the integration of a polymer solar cell as a photovoltaic component (PC) with a supercapacitor as the energy storage component (ES) through a common electrode to realize a self-charging system capable of charging in a short time and with the ability to discharge for a reasonable period of time. Chen et al. also reported a hybrid textile for multi-sourced energy harvesting by weaving fiber solar cells and triboelectric nanogenerator yarns to realize a lightweight energy textile.45
Similarly, several fiber-shaped devices have been identified with features that suit their integration in hybrid devices. For example, Wang et al.57 designed a fiber-shaped Ni//Bi battery with high energy density, high power density, and high cycle life (96% capacity retention over 10000 cycles). Teng et al.58 also assembled a high-performance supercapacitor, and Chen et al.59 also developed an autonomous soft actuator fiber. However, the reported fiber-shaped devices lack an immediate energy supply. This issue can be overcome by integrating fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells through twisting, weaving, and knitting techniques.
Fiber-shaped solar cells have been reported to have the capacity to maintain an almost constant photon to energy efficiency with a change in the angle of incidence of incoming light. Qui et al.60 and Balilonda et al.53 both investigated the change in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells with a variation in the angle of incidence of the incident light. It was concluded that by varying the incident angle of light from 0–180°, the PCE of the fiber devices remained almost constant, revealing that there is a negligible relationship between the incident angle of light and photovoltaic performance, which is a promising indicator of the performance of self-powered textiles. A slight exception was observed at 90° with a sudden rise in PCE because the light source at this angle technically illuminated almost all the fiber surfaces.
The global garment output is estimated to be between 80–150 billion pieces per year annually, resulting in an average of 20 pieces per person.61 To overcome the energy supply problem in wearable devices, a prospective idea is to make use of this vast output by merging textile manufacturing and energy harvesting to produce autonomous energy-generating textiles. This approach can reduce the energy burden posed by mobile and wearable electronics (3416.4–10249.2 GW per annum),49 thus saving energy on the main grid principally meant for production in various economies globally. The growth of energy-harvesting textiles, together with the increasing necessity for several wearable and electronic systems to inter-operate in a network infrastructure of connected devices, which is known as the Internet of Things (IoT),62 is anticipated to significantly influence the convergence of textiles and electronics to form e-textiles and smart textiles.63 Accordingly, besides serving as conventional textiles, e-textiles and smart textiles can be applied in high-end technological applications.
2. Perovskite crystal structure and photocurrent conversion mechanism
Perovskites are photoactive materials with a chemical structure similar to that of CaTiO3.65–67 The specific crystal structure of these materials is often simplified with the ABX3 formula (X = oxygen and halogen).68,69 The A-cation is stabilized in a cubo-octahedral position with twelve X anions. In contrast, the smaller B-cation is in an octahedral site with six X-anions, as shown in Fig. 4a. Perovskites with halogen anions70 and pseudohalide groups such as thiocyanates71,72 allow monovalent and divalent cations to fulfill charge neutrality in the A and B sites, respectively. The A-site cation in CH3NH3PbI3 is CH3NH3+, while the B-site cation is Pb2+.29,73
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the crystal structure of an organic–inorganic perovskite, where the central A-atom can either be (CH3NH3+, Cs+, and FA+), while the B atom can be (Sn+, Pb+, Ge+, etc.) surrounded by six halogen atoms. (b) Energy diagram representation and charge transfer pathway in a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell under illumination. (c) Planar device structure demonstrating the generation and flow of charge carriers in solar cells based on 3D perovskite materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. 
Electron–hole pairs are excited and disintegrated when the photon energy received by the perovskite layer exceeds its bandgap energy, resulting in quasi-Fermi splitting. The released charge carriers drift through the entire photoactive layer to their corresponding charge selective layers, eventually accumulating at the electrodes. Charge carrier movement is achieved because perovskites are ambipolar light absorbers, which exhibit balanced electron and hole transporting behavior.74,75 The intrinsic electric field generated by the p–n junction significantly influences the separation of electron-hole pairs and their migration in opposite directions, as shown in Fig. 1b. In general, for any perovskite photovoltaic device, the inbuilt electric field is the main force to guide the movement of the charge carriers towards the corresponding electrodes to avoid their recombination.49,76,77 Therefore, an insufficient electric field force due to the improper selection of the adjacent layers (ETL and HTL) causes the carriers to either be captured in the trap sites or accumulate at the interfaces due to the insufficient driving force.78,79 The introduction of an external electric field in the photoactive layer in photovoltaic systems to boost charge separation force and inhibit carrier recombination at trap locations has been confirmed as a strategy to improve the efficiency of perovskite solar cells.80–82
Alternatively, in layered films of 3D perovskites, the coexistence of 2D layered phases (where n = 1, 2, and 3 in (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1) and 3D-like perovskite phases (n = α) in the photoactive layer induces energy transfer from the layered to 3D-like perovskites and charge collection through the 3D-like perovskite network. The photons absorbed by the layered perovskite phases can contribute to the photocurrent by energy transfer from the larger bandgap layered phases to the smaller 3D-like phases. Excitons are generated in 3D-like perovskites, which later dissociate into free charges quickly due to the very small exciton binding energy in 3D-like perovskites. The carrier transport in the perovskite layer occurs mainly through the 3D-like phase, which forms a percolating network across the vertical direction of the solar cell device, as shown in Fig. 4c.29
3. Perovskite solar architecture, materials, and general progress
A typical perovskite solar cell is made up of multiple layers, including a photoactive layer (perovskite) sandwiched between an electron transport layer (ETL) and a hole transport layer (HTL), plus a transparent electrode on one end and a counter electrode on the other end, regardless of its geometry. Indium tin oxide (ITO) and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) are the most common conducting metal oxides on glass (TCO) substrates used in transparent electrodes.83 In the case of fiber-shaped perovskite solar devices, the transparent conductive materials are usually thin translucent layers of gold,42,84 transparent CNT yarn,41,85 and in some cases the primary yarn is twisted with non-transparent silver53 or carbon yarn86 as the top electrode.
The electron and hole transport layers in planar rigid solar cells have always been TiO2 and spiro-OMETAD (2,2′,7,7-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′spiro-bifluorene).87,88 Researchers have used various organic composites and co-polymers, carbon allotropes, and alternative metal oxides, as detailed in Table 1, to alter the architecture and formulation of perovskite devices to improve their stability, cost-effectiveness, and efficiency.
Table 1 Perovskite solar cell materials and their possible applications in solar cells and estimated energy bands




Layer function
Material nature
Example
LUMO (eV)
HOMO (eV)
Ref.




Back electrodes


FTO
−4.7



89



ITO
−4.4



90



Electron transport layer
Metal oxides
ZnO
−4.4
−7.8

91



TiO2
−4.1
−7.3

92



SnO2
−4.5
−7.8

93



Conjugated polymer
PCBM
−4.33
−6.16

94



Perovskites
Methylammonium based
MAPbI3
−3.93
−5.43

95



Formamidinium based
FAPbI3
−4.0
−5.4

96



Bromine based
MAPbBr3
−3.36
−5.58

97



Cesium based
CsPbIBr2
−3.93
−6.0

91



CsPbI3
−3.6
−5.69

98



Hole transport layer (HTL)
Small molecules
Spiro-OMeTAD
−2.3
−5.2

99



Pm-spiro-OMeTAD
−2.3
−5.3

100



Po- Spiro-OMeTAD
−2.2
−5.2

100



TTF-1
−1.98
−5.05

101



Polymer materials
P3HT
−3.0
−5.0

101



PTTA
−1.8
−5.1

102



PEDOT:PSS
−2.0
−5.2

103



Inorganic materials
NiOx
−1.80
−5.2

104



CuSbS2
−3.85
−5.25

95



CuSCN
−1.5
−5.3

105



CuI
−2.2
−5.3

106



Cu2O
−3.2
−5.37

107



Top electrode


Carbon
−5.1



108



Metallic electrodes
Gold
−5.1






Cupper
−5.1






Silver
−4.5








The use of perovskite materials in light harvesting was first experimented in dye-sensitized solar cells. The adsorption of methylammonium lead halide perovskite on a nanocrystalline TiO2 surface proved to generate a photocurrent with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 3.8% in the initial study in 2009.16 Using a similar approach, Park et al.109 optimized the TiO2 electron transport layer thickness and treated it with (PbNO2)2, and the resulting solar cell exhibited a PCE of ∼6.51%. However, due to the rapid breakdown of perovskite materials in liquid electrolytes, research on first-generation liquid-based perovskite solar cells gradually stopped. In 2012, Kim et al.110 developed a solid-state, relatively stable perovskite solar cell, exhibiting an efficiency of ∼9.7%. The revolutionary architecture was achieved by introducing a solid-state hole transporter (spiro-OMeTAD), with solid-state halide and mixed halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) as the photoactive layer coated on a thin film of TiO2, which served as the electron transport layer. Zhang et al.111 developed pinhole-free perovskite films in 2015, using a one-step coating method followed by annealing to achieve a PCE of 15.2% using non-halide (PbAc2). By altering the band alignment of the HTL/ETL, Zhou, et al.112 developed perovskite devices and achieved a high PCE of 19.3%. In 2016, Bi et al. used poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a template to control nucleation and crystal development.37 This method was employed to produce high-quality perovskite films, yielding a cell with a certified PCE of 21%. Shin et al. (2017)113 studied the superoxide colloidal solution route for preparing an LBSO electrode under very mild conditions (below 300 °C). The steady-state PCE of the perovskite solar cells produced with LBSO and methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) was 21.2%. Since 2017, the efficiency of planar devices has been increasing slowly but steadily to a current champion efficiency of 25.5% and above39 (refer to efficiency graph in Fig. 1b).
Although numerous breakthroughs have been reported in planar perovskite solar devices in the past decade, especially in terms of PCE, stability, and use of low-temperature solution-processable materials, there are still underlying challenges arising from the constraints of the conventional planar structure, material toxicity, and rapid material degradation.114,115
4. Fiber devices and multi-functions
4.1 Fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells
Unlike the current dominant energy sources such as fossils fuels, solar energy is abundant in nature, almost inexhaustible, and its generation is environmentally friendly.116 Therefore, developing highly efficient solar cells that suit a wide range of applications is one of the viable options for solving the global energy crisis and counteracting the growing challenge of global warming. In this section, we summarize the key developments in fiber perovskite solar cells.
Fiber-shaped solar cells are a possible development path for next-generation solar fabrics and self-powered wearable electronic devices.117,118 The increased performance in terms of power conversion efficiency (PCE) demonstrated by flat/planar multi-junction perovskite solar cells, accompanied with affordable low-temperature and solution processing techniques, have attracted attention by researchers to change the geometry of PSCs to other forms such as fiber shape/yarns to suite various applications. However, due to the high PCE in flat geometry perovskite solar cells, advancing research in fiber-shaped devices is seen as the best alternative for replacing/outcompeting dye-sensitized solar yarns, which are still locked at a maximum PCE of 10%,119 in addition to other issues such as packaging challenges and leakage of their liquid electrolyte.120 Therefore, the development of efficient fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells has become a hot topic. As shown in Fig. 1a, fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells (FSPSCs) are fabricated by coating photoactive and conducting materials onto a flexible cylindrical substrate such as carbon yarn, steel yarn, and silver yarn.
Qiu et al.41 developed a pioneering fiber-shaped perovskite cell using a thin stainless-steel fiber as the base and positive electrode. To achieve a compact n-type coating of TiO2, they first dipped the steel fiber in TiO2 solution and subjected it to annealing at 400 °C. Subsequently, it was dipped a second time in the TiO2 nanoparticle solution, leading to the formation of a mesoporous TiO2 layer. CH3NH3PbI3 was then deposited on the mesoporous titanium layer through a simple dip-coating procedure, which effectively infiltrated the mesopores of the nanocrystal TiO2. The hole-transport layer was then coated on top of the perovskite layer. Fig. 5a(i) shows the pioneering perovskite solar cell, which was finally obtained by twisting the structure with transparent multi-walled carbon nanotubes with an average diameter of 10 nm. The scanning electron microscopy analysis, as shown in Fig. 5a(ii), confirmed the above-mentioned layer arrangement. The fiber device exhibited a PCE of 3.3%, VOC of 0.664 V, ISC of 10.2 mA cm2, and FF of 0.487, and it could be woven into a perovskite solar cell fabric. The resulting yarn geometry promoted the application and ease of integration of the device. However, the stainless metal core of the yarn limited the flexibility and increased the cost.41 Subsequently, the deposition of a thick layer of compact TiO2 material was described by the authors to cause several challenges, such as increasing the series resistance to charge carrier movement and reducing the fill factor of the solar yarn, leading to a low PCE. Furthermore, thicker films are more prone to the formation and propagation of cracks, and thus break into several pieces, especially when the fiber is twisted multiple times. Alternatively, ultrathin TiO2 films have a high number of defects, which cause shunts, reduce the carrier lifetime, and reduce the photovoltaic performance. Consequently, obtaining compact perovskite layers with large crystal sizes on the curved surfaces of fiber electrodes remains a challenge.41,121
 Fig. 5  (a) Steel core pioneering fiber solar cell. (i and ii) SEM images showing the arrangement of various layers and the yarn cross-section, respectively. Images reprinted from ref. 41. (b) Schematic of an Ag nano wall-based perovskite yarn as the transparent top electrode with (i and ii) cross-section and surface SEM images showing the arrangement of the various layers in the solar yarn. Reprinted from ref. 122. (c) Schematic of a highly flexible and double-twisted perovskite yarn based on double-twisted carbon nanofibers. (i and ii) SEM images showing the bent solar yarn and the arrangement of the various layers, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 86. (d) Schematic layer structure and surface SEM images of the highly elastic perovskite solar yarn reported by Li et al. (i) Top view of aligned TiO2 nanotubes, (ii) top view of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, (iii) top view of the hole transport layer, and (iv) elastic perovskite solar fiber solar cell with a pitch distance of 1.25 mm. Reprinted from ref. 60. (e) Schematic layer structure, cross-section, and surface SEM images of the fiber-shaped perovskite solar yarn reported by Hu et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. (f) Schematic layer structure of the solar yarn introduced by Qui et al. (i) yarn cross-section and (ii) SEM images of (a and b) TiO2 nanotube array showing top and side views and (c and d) PbI2 nanoplate array showing top and side views, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. 
In previous reports, the major hurdles included achieving a continuous compact layer of TiO2 and depositing uniform m-TiO2 on the photoanode. Lee et al.122 reported the preparation of a novel dimple compact TiO2 layer and the suitability of Ag nanowires as transparent electrodes in solar yarns to address numerous challenges, shown in Fig. 5b(i and ii). As a compact layer, the dimple structure was essential for depositing additional mesoporous-TiO2, retention of the fiber structure after annealing, and bending robustness. Furthermore, Ag nanowires were fabricated with ease via solution process engineering. The solution-processed solar yarn exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 3.85%.122
Li et al.86 developed a carbon fiber-based double-twisted solar yarn with good bending stability to improve the flexibility and bending stability. In this attempt, twisted carbon nanotubes were coated with two layers of TiO2, i.e., compact and mesoporous layers. The mesoporous layer acted as a scaffold for the deposition of the photoactive perovskite layer, while the compact TiO2 layer served as an electron transport/hole blocking medium. A composite mixture of P3HT and single-walled carbon nanotubes was added on top of the perovskite layer to serve as the hole transport layer. Silver (Ag) nanowires were coated on top of the HTL layer to enhance the charge transfer to the carbon nanotube twisted electrodes. To complete the double-twisted structure, as illustrated in Fig. 5c, the Ag-coated yarn was twisted with the CNT-yarn outer electrode. Subsequently, the completed device was encapsulated with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) to minimize the degradation due to ambient conditions such as moisture. The resulting solar yarn demonstrated a champion PCE of 3.03%, fill factor of 56.4%, and the ability to endure bending (Fig. 5c(i)). The encapsulated solar yarn could sustain up to 89% of its PCE after being exposed to ambient conditions for 96 h.86
Elasticity is one of the vital characteristics of wearable devices because it determines their mechanical performance and durability, especially in applications involving changes in size and rapid and frequent body movements. In 2015, Deng et al.60 reported the preparation of an elastic perovskite solar yarn, as illustrated in Fig. 5d, assembled on a working electrode of aligned TiO2 nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 5d(i). After immersing a spring-like titanium wire in diluted titanium di-isopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution, it was subjected to high-temperature sintering and dip-coating in TiO2 nanoparticles dispersed in ethanol after treatment in TiCl4 aqueous solution. The titanium wire coated with TiO2 was dipped twice in perovskite solution, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C to form a uniform perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. 5d(ii), and then dip-coated in Spiro-OMeTAD solution to form a uniform HTL layer, as shown in Fig. 5d(iii). The solar yarn was finished by inserting an elastic silicone conductive yarn to render it elastic in nature. The front electrode was created by twisting another CNT sheet around the outside surface, as shown in the SEM image in Fig. 5d(iv). The device efficiency was 5.22%, but without the outermost CNT sheets, it decreased to 0.6%.60
To further improve the performance of perovskite solar yarns, Hu et al.42 designed a perovskite solar yarn, as shown in Fig. 5e, with a titanium wire core electrode and mixed-halide perovskite. The wire was first dip-coated in TiO2 solution, and then electrically heated at a high temperature in the presence of air to generate a compact TiO2 layer. A mesoporous layer was added to the compact layer by dipping it in a TiO2 colloidal solution. Subsequently, a mixed halide perovskite layer (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and a hole conductive layer composed of spiro-OMeTAD were successively coated through a solution processing strategy. The above-mentioned device architecture was verified via SEM analysis, as shown in Fig. 5e(i). Magnetron sputtering was used to add an outer gold back contact and a flexible gold wire was twisted around the fiber as the lead electrode (as shown in Fig. 5e(ii)). The optimized device exhibited an open-circuit voltage of 0.714 V, short circuit current density of 12.32 mA cm−2, fill factor of 60.9%, and PCE of 5.35%.42
The promising PCE demonstrated by materials in planar devices further motivated research on fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. In 2016, Qui et al.85 reported the preparation of a solar yarn with a PCE of 7.1%. Through anodization, an array of TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 5f-ii(a and b)) was outwardly grown on a titanium wire, serving as the core and anode electrode, creating a mesoporous configuration. PbO porous scaffolds were coated over the TiO2 nanotubes, followed by the addition of hydroiodic acid to generate PbI2 crystalline plates (Fig. 5f-ii(c and d)) and dip-coating with CH3NH3I to form CH3NH3PbI3 grains, which partially infiltrated the mesoporous TiO2 by cathodic deposition. Subsequently, the whole structure was wrapped with transparent CNT with 80% transmittance in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm and electrical conductivity of 500 S cm−1, which served as the outer electrode for electron collection, as shown in Fig. 5f. The fiber-shaped coaxially aligned PSC attained a champion PCE of 6.8%, equal to an open-circuit voltage of 0.852 V and short-circuit current density of 16.1 mA cm2. When the outer layer (CNT) was covered with a 5 nm-thick silver coating, the conductivity of the contact electrode improved from 1000 S cm−1 to 7.1%, with a matching fill factor of 56% and short-circuit current density of 14.5 mA cm−2.
Hu et al.84 reported a new lead source (lead acetate) as a precursor material in perovskite solar fibers to improve the shape of the perovskite lattice formed on curved surfaces. The core electrode in this method was a titanium wire, on which a compact and mesoporous TiO2 layer was grown by dip coating and electrical heating. The wire was dipped in perovskite solution, produced according to eqn (R1), and then heated at 100 °C in a nitrogen environment to deposit the photoactive layer. The hole-transport layer was generated by dipping the resultant fiber in spiro-OMeTAD precursor solution, followed by the deposition of a gold front electrode via magnetron sputtering to construct the final device, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. Under AM1.5 illumination, the solar device yielded a PCE of 7.53% and open-circuit voltage of 0.96 V.84 Pb(CH3COO)2 + CH3NH3I + DMF → (CH3NH3I)x–PbI2–(DMF)y + CH3NH2↑ + DMF↑ + CH3COOH↑(R1) (CH3NH3I)x–PbI2–(DMF)y → CH3NH3PbI3 + DMF↑ + CH3NH3I↑(R2)Achieving high-quality perovskite photoactive layers and maximizing their surface area for light exposure on curved/cylindrical geometries are key challenges reported in previous studies. Accordingly, to overcome these issues, Qiu et al.43 introduced a technique for improving the perovskite layer quality by growing high-quality perovskite crystals on flat flexible strips of polyethylene naphthalate coated on indium tin oxide by varying the concentration of CH3NH3I. The flexible strip-shaped substrate served as the transparent electrode and the light was lit from this side. The flat surface of the strip enhanced the uniform coverage of perovskite crystals and minimized defects in the photoactive layer (see SEM image in Fig. 6b(i)). Perovskite crystals in the micrometer size range were grown on the flat interface after the material was deposited continuously and uniformly over a flat one-dimensional substrate (see Fig. 6b). Finally, a continuous carbon nanotube (CNT) sheet was laid on top of the perovskite layer. This layer was flexible, mechanically strong, and electrically conductive. The device with the dimensions (1 × 5) mm2 demonstrated a PCE of 9.49%. Upon bending and twisting to a curvature radius of 7.5 mm, the device could maintain 90–93% of its original PCE after 500 cycles (Fig. 6b(ii)).43
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic presentation and cross-sectional SEM image of the fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell based on the lead acetate precursor. Reprinted from ref. 84. (b) Schematic layer structure of the rectangular cross-section perovskite solar yarn with (i) SEM image of the perovskite layer and (ii) graph presenting the variation in energy conversion efficiency with the number of twisting cycles. Inset is a photograph of an electric watch powered by the fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell. Images reprinted from ref. 43. (c) Schematic layer-by-layer structure of fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell assembled via vapor-assisted deposition: (i) cross-section SEM image showing the device layers and (ii) surface SEM image of a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell. Reprinted from ref. 123. 
In previous findings on fiber-shaped solar cells, dip-coated perovskite film layers displayed poor coverage, inferior crystal quality, and inadequate carrier transport performance. Thus, Dong et al.123 presented a vapor-assisted deposition approach for creating a perovskite photoactive layer on a cylindrical substrate to generate high-quality perovskite films to enhance the efficiency of fiber-shaped solar cells. As illustrated in Fig. 6c, the device was assembled on titanium metal wire. The following layers were deposited in succession, as follows: TiO2 compact layer, TiO2 mesoporous layer, perovskite layer, spiro-OMeTAD layer, and thin gold film from the inside to outside. The titanium wire was heated electrically to 500 °C to generate a dense TiO2 layer on the surface, which acted as the electron transport layer during the actual preparation procedure. To obtain the mesoporous TiO2 layer, the titanium wire was dip-coated in TiO2 nanoparticle colloid numerous times with the help of electric heating at 100 °C, and then annealed at 500 °C. The photoactive layer was deposited in two steps. The first step was the horizontal coating of PbI2 at room temperature, followed by a solid-gas reaction with CH3NH3I, which took 4 h to complete and produce good-grade perovskite crystals. Thermal annealing was used to efficiently remove the residual CH3NH3I. The perovskite crystals generated using this method were sufficiently large with minimal grain boundaries, facilitating increased charge carrier mobility. Subsequently, a spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer was deposited, followed by a thin gold electrode layer. The optimized device demonstrated a power conversion efficiency of 10.79%, with an open-circuit voltage, short circuit current, and fill factor of 0.95 V, 15.14 mA cm−2, and 0.75, respectively.123
Due to the highly crystalline nature of perovskite photoactive films deployed in the early solar yarn projects, the devices were highly prone to the formation and propagation of cracks caused by bending, stretching, and twisting. Therefore, this drawback constrained their bending and flexing abilities, thus significantly reducing their efficiency and performance lifetime and limiting their application. Accordingly, to address this issue, Li et al.19 proposed the use of CH3NH3PbI3–PVP composite nanofibers as the photoactive layer in a perovskite fiber solar cell. The cell was assembled on a flexible silver yarn, which doubled as the core support and the negative electrode, on which a uniform layer of the hole-selective material poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) was dip-coated. A homogenous layer of perovskite–PVP photoactive nanofibers was directly electrospun around the P3HT-coated Ag yarn at an ideal electrospinning voltage of 18 kV and relative humidity of 75%. An independent electrode was produced to fabricate a complete device by depositing a PCBM–SnO2 composite onto a carbon fiber yarn and twisting together with the perovskite yarn. The resulting device exhibited a maximum PCE of 15.7% and could maintain 99% of its original PCE after 750 cycles of bending. Coating the solar yarn with PMMA polymer was found to extend the service lifetime of the solar device to a period >216 h.19
Despite breakthroughs in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells, the toxicity of their lead (Pb) constituent limits their use in the wearable and textile industries. Balilonda et al.53 reported a pioneer lead-free and perovskite solar yarn to overcome the toxicity issue in perovskite fiber solar cells. Composite nanofibers of methylammonium tin mixed halide-polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) doped with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) were integrated into the yarn architecture. The composite perovskite lead-free nanofibers served as the photoactive layer in the solar yarn. The yarn was assembled on a pristine substrate, which also served as the cathode. The carbon yarn was dip-coated in P3HT (HTM) to form carbon–P3HT yarn, followed by direct electrospinning of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx–C61–PVP composite nanofibers at 75% RH and 18 kV electrospinning voltage for 3 min. Subsequently, the trio-stacked yarn was twisted with pure silver yarn to fabricate a complete solar yarn device. The photoactive nanofiber layer of the solar yarn featured an optical bandgap of 1.65 eV, with an impressive light absorption capacity in the wavelength range of 300–550 nm. The best lead-free solar yarn showcased an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.52 V, short circuit current (Jsc) of 4.75 mA cm2, fill-factor of 72.5%, and maximum PCE of 7.49% at a PCBM doping level of 0.17% (Table 2).
Table 2 A summary of the photovoltaic performance, photoactive material configuration, and the corresponding figures of the reported fiber-shaped perovskite solar devices




Perovskite material configuration (photovoltaic layer)
Fill factor (%)
Short circuit current density (Jsc, mA cm−2)
Open circuit voltage (V)
PCE (%)
Corresponding fig. and ref.




CH3NH3PbI3
48.7
10.2
0.667
3.3
5a41


CH3NH3PbI3
44.0
11.97
0.731
3.85
5b122


CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x
56.4
8.75
0.615
3.03
5c86


CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x


3.50
0.630
5.22
5d60


CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x
60.9
12.32
0.714
5.35
5e42


CH3NH3PbI3
56.0
14.20
0.85
7.1
5f85


CH3NH3PbI3
66.0
14.18
0.96
7.53
6a84


CH3NH3PbI3
0.656
15.9
0.91
9.49
6b43


CH3NH3PbI3
0.75
15.14
0.95
10.79
6c123


CH3NH3PbI3−xClx–C61–PVP
72.5
4.75
1.52
7.49
53


CH3NH3PbI3–PVP
54.2
11.94
1.92
15.7
19




In summary, we reviewed the recent progress in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells (FSPSCs). The observed gradual improvement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.3% to 15.7% in a period of just 7 years indicates that the PCE trend of FSPSCs is following that of their planar counterparts. Considering that these devices are mainly intended for wearable applications, the latest reports have emphasized toxic-free materials (tin-based perovskites), even though many of the initial reports were focused on lead (Pb) perovskite materials, with the aim of proving the fiber geometry concept in perovskite solar cells. To realize the successful scalability and industrialization of FSPSCs, more emphasis should be placed on enhancing the perovskite material stability to prevent its degradation, eliminating material toxicity, improving the solar yarn bending stability, and further adopting and developing cheap solution processing methods such as dip-coating, and electrospinning. By satisfying these requirements, realizations such as product end-user satisfaction, solar yarn/fabric durability, safety requirement fulfillment, and favorable cost-benefit relationship between perovskite solar yarns and fabrics will be achieved.
4.2 Fiber-shaped hybrid perovskite devices
Multifunctional fibers are expected to play a more prominent role in future miniaturized technology.124,125 Smart textiles have evolved from simple electrical integration and mounting of small electronic devices to textiles constructed entirely from smart multi-functional fibers that can harvest and store energy and provide additional functionality.126–128

4.2.1 Wearable perovskite solar-battery systems. 
Wearable electronics have witnessed a rapidly expanding market because of their great application potential in personalized healthcare and fitness monitoring.129,130 Smartwatches and bracelets, in particular, are very popular because they have appealing features such as flexibility and light weight.131 Alternatively, built-in batteries have the disadvantages of weight, rigidity, potential safety issues, and the requirement for periodic external charging or replacement. Consequently, integrating flexible and extremely safe batteries with flexible solar cells to create flexible self-powered systems is a viable option. Zhao et al.132 combined flexible defective MnO2−x nanosheet-based zinc-ion batteries with wearable perovskite solar cells to create a self-sustaining power bracelet. Six flexible PSCs (active area of 0.07 cm2) were connected in series and attached to the outside surface of three flexible MnO2−x@CC/Zn@CC batteries (ultrahigh mass-loaded MnO2−x nanosheet-grown carbon cloth (MnO2−x@CC)-based quasi-solid-state), which were also connected in series to power a smart bracelet (Fig. 7a(i)). The integrated smart bracelet could be worn comfortably on the wrist due to the great flexibility of the integrated battery-solar cell system. The photovoltaic characteristics of the wearable PSC employed in the battery integration were as follows: under the light intensity of air mass (AM) 1.5, the PSC exhibited a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 22.44 mA cm−2 and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V. Under room light (∼1.2 mW cm−2), the Jsc and Voc were 0.27 mA cm−2 and 0.85 V, respectively. In addition, a comparison was made between the photo-charge and the battery power supply charge. The photo-charge (green lines) and galvanostatic discharge (red lines) curves in Fig. 7a(ii) show a high level of stability across all cycles. The photo-charge curves were also similar to the workstation-charge curves (purple lines), demonstrating the strong energy collecting and storage capabilities of the integrated self-sustaining system. The self-powered smart bracelet could be charged up to 5.01 V in 2.5 h under outdoor sunlight, as illustrated in Fig. 7a(iii). The full system could constantly function for 22 h, whereas the smart bracelet took around 3 h to charge up to 4.66 V under room light, and the whole system could run continuously for around 2 h (Fig. 7a(iv)). The above-mentioned findings suggest that the as-integrated smart bracelet can perform self-powered functions in both indoor and outdoor settings, indicating its high potential for reliable all-weather operation.132
 Fig. 7  (a) Digital photographs demonstrating the integration process of the self-powered smart bracelet. (ii) V–t curves of the PSC-ZIB device (the purple and red lines correspond to the 1st–3rd cycles, galvanostatic charging and discharging at 2 mA with a power supply and the green and red lines correspond to the 4th–6th cycles, charging at around 2 mA with flexible PSC and discharging at 2 mA with a power supply, respectively). (iii) Charging curve of the self-powered smart bracelet under outdoor sunlight and the discharging curve in the subsequent running process. (iv) Charging curve of the self-powered smart bracelet in room light and the discharging curve in the subsequent running process. Reprinted from ref. 132. (b) (i) Schematic layer presentation of a carbon nanofiber-based perovskite photo-detector yarn. (ii) Energy band diagram of wire-shaped perovskite photodetector. (iii) Responsivity and detectivity of wire-shaped perovskite photodetector at 585 and 617 nm wavelength. Extracted from ref. 136. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the process for the fabrication of the fiber-shaped photo-detector. (ii) Graph demonstrating the variation of photo-response with a change in wavelength (iii) energy-level diagram of a photodetector. Reprinted from ref. 137 with permission. 


4.2.2 Self-powered fiber-shaped perovskite photodetectors. 
In a photodetector, the incident light is converted into voltage or current, and the device is mainly made-up of a p–n junction.133 An electron–hole pair is generated when a photon of sufficient energy is made incident to a photodetector. The charge carriers are swept away from the connection by the built-in electric field of the depletion region. Consequently, holes and electrons move in opposite directions toward the respective electrodes, resulting in a photocurrent.134 Applications such as image sensing, optical communication, and environmental monitoring use photodetectors to transform light into electrical signals. To address the demands of next-generation portable and wearable nanodevices, self-powered fiber-shaped photodetectors that do not require an external power source are being widely investigated. Several materials have been used to fabricate photodetectors recently, including GaN, ZnO, Si, InGaAs, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, and polymers.135 However, hybrid organic–inorganic light-sensitive perovskite materials are considered potential candidates for the fabrication of highly capable, self-powered, and cost-effective fiber-shaped photodetectors due to their superior photovoltaic properties, solution processability, and ease of layer deposition on fibers and flexible substrates. Adams et al.136 reported a pioneering photodetector using perovskite as the light-absorbing material, and simultaneously adopting the joule heating strategy to ensure uniform crystallization of the perovskite crystals on the surface of carbon nanotube yarn (CNY). Fig. 7b(i and ii) show that CNY was used as the core support and electron transport layer to prepare a perovskite-based fiber-shaped photodetector. It was comprised yarn spun using four individual carbon nanotube yarn strands, which provided sufficient mechanical stability. The joule heating method achieved post crystallization of the deposited perovskite layer. An indium gallium top electrode was added to finish the device. Although gold and silver are popular electrode materials, indium gallium provided the most constant contact on the curved surface, while maintaining a work function almost identical to silver. Smooth perovskite crystalline films were achieved using the joule heating method for uniform temperature control on the CNY surface, and thus the self-powering photodetectors demonstrated high responsivity (10.2 A W−1) and detectivity (1.76 × 1011 J). The device also demonstrated incredible changes in responsivity with a variation in the wavelength of the incident light.
Sun et al.137 designed a self-powered fiber-shaped perovskite photodetector. The photodetector device was assembled using the atomic layer deposition approach to encapsulate a highly flexible commercial carbon fiber with a thin layer of compact TiO2. Subsequently, the TiO2 layer was crystallized by annealing at 500 °C for 120 min in an argon atmosphere. Subsequently, compact and large-sized perovskite crystals were synthesized using a simple one-step synthetic technique (CH3NH3PbI3). Subsequently, a simple annealing process was employed to form a CuO nanowire/Cu2O compact layer on a flexible Cu wire, which was double twisted with perovskite-coated carbon fiber to produce the final device (Fig. 7c(i)). Without an external power supply, the photodetector displayed broad sensitivity from 350 nm ultraviolet (UV) to 1050 nm near-infrared (NIR) light, together with a quick response speed (Fig. 7c(ii)). Fig. 7c(iii) shows the energy band diagram of the reported perovskite photodetector yarn, suggesting that the fiber is completely capable of photodetection. The on/off ratio, detectivity, and responsivity were measured at 800 nm light and found to be 393, 2.15 × 1013 Jones, and 562.9 mA W−1, respectively. The TiO2 layer served as an electron transport and hole block layer on the anode, minimizing charge recombination. Because of its narrower bandgap and suitable valence band level, CuO was chosen to allow holes to be successfully transferred and the light response range to be extended to 1050 nm.137


4.2.2 Fiber-shaped perovskite light-emitting/detecting bifunctional devices. 
Realizing a wearable light fidelity (LIFI) system with the merits of portability, conformability, and safe and high-speed wireless communication will have boundless prospects in the Internet of Things terminals.138,139 In terms of the data transmission part in wearable LiFi, electroluminescent (EL) fibers based on materials such as organics,140 inorganic phosphors,141 and polymer materials142 have been reported for the construction of LiFi systems. However, all these materials show numerous shortcomings, making them less suitable for LIFI systems.139 For example, to achieve electroluminescence, EL fibers based on inorganic phosphors require an alternating current (AC) field to induce polarization currents. These devices also have inhomogeneous emissions and high operating voltage, making their safe and convenient integration in fabrics difficult. Given that fiber technology is shifting towards multifunctional and cheap, and easy to manufacture fibers, the concept of integrating light detection and electro-luminescence in a single fiber has been highlighted as a necessary step and a hot topic.
Recently, rigid substrates with light-emitting/detecting capabilities, including ZnO:Ga microwire/p-Si heterojunction by incorporating Ag nanowires,143 bilayer MoTe2 p–n junction,144 and SnO2 microwire/p-GaN heterojunction, have been investigated on flat/planar substrates. However, due to the inflexible nature of these materials, most of these device structures and materials are not suitable for wearable light-emitting/detecting bifunctional fibers. Alternatively, polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells, which can meet the flexibility requirements of the proposed light-emitting/detecting wearables, have a slow turn-on process. This is because their p–i–n junction formation requires time for mobile ion diffusion, which is not suitable for data transmission.145
Thus, to overcome the issues associated with the earlier reported devices to realize a fiber-shaped light-emitting/detecting multifunctional device, Shan et al.146 proposed the use of hybrid perovskite quantum dots (QD) as the emitting layer. Perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) were considered due to their easily photogenerated charges, solution processability, and adjustability of the perovskite ink components. Therefore, the challenges of the conflicting process between carrier separation and recombination and highly dynamic film-forming process for constructing light emitting/detecting bifunctional fibers can be overcome. In this case, a hybrid quantum dot ink system consisting of poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,5,6-trimethylphenyl)amine poly(triarylamine) (PTAA), 1,3,5-tri[(3-pyridyl)-phen-3-yl]benzene (TmPyPB), and perovskite QDs was used as the emitting layer of the fiber-shaped device. The green emission turned blue after adding PTAA and TmPyPB to the pure perovskite QD ink and exposing it to UV light. The coaxial flexible multifunctional fiber was assembled using a transparent PET fiber as the base. The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) fiber was then dip-coated with a transparent electrode before being covered with quantum dots. The improved film-forming method of the hybrid QD ink is likely responsible for the successful fabrication of the super-smooth perovskite hybrid QD film. Briefly, the fiber was first dipped into and wetted with QD ink, and then vertically withdrawn, as shown in Fig. 8a.
 Fig. 8  (a) (i) Schematic of the hybrid strategy of QD inks. (ii) Schematic illustration of the dynamic dip-coating process. (b) (i) Schematic illustration of the multiple dip-coating stages for the transparent electrodes and QDs in the fabrication of a perovskite fibre. (ii) Schematic of the structure of a perovskite EL fiber. Inset: Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite fibre. (iii) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism (LED mode) of the light-emitting/detecting bifunctional perovskite fibre. (c) (i) Electroluminescence spectra of green and a red electroluminescent perovskite fibre (inset: photograph of the green electroluminescent perovskite fibers and chromaticity coordinates of the green and electroluminescent perovskite fibers). (ii) Current density–voltage–luminance characteristics of an electroluminescent perovskite fibre. Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 146. 
Through a series of dip-coating, layers such as the PTAA, TPBi, and Liq/Al were added to the PET substrate to serve as the hole transport layer (HTL), the electron transport layer (ETL), and cathode, respectively.146 The energy band diagram of the proposed perovskite electroluminescent fibre is shown in Fig. 8b, which illustrates that the fiber is capable of photodetection. The current density–voltage–luminance curves of the perovskite EL fibers are shown in Fig. 8c. The fiber-shaped device exhibited a considerable luminance of ∼100 cd m−2 at 7 V after being bent dozens of times. Due to their high defect tolerance, quantum efficiency, and small full width at half maximum, quantum dots continued to prove that they are better luminance materials for next-generation high-resolution displays in this report. By applying perovskite QDs as emitting materials in the electroluminescent fibre, the green electroluminescence perovskite yarn was reported to exhibit a narrow FWHM of 19 nm with chromaticity coordinates of (0.09, 0.76) (Fig. 8c), which is the narrowest FWHM among the reported fiber-shaped electroluminescent devices to date.146


4.2.3 Fiber-shaped perovskite solar-capacitors. 
The energy output of perovskite solar cells is totally dependent on their exposure to photon energy from light stimuli. Therefore, the absence of light in the environment renders solar systems and other perovskite optoelectronic devices nonfunctional. Accordingly, to solve the intermittence problem in power supply in the operation of perovskite-based fiber-shaped optoelectronics, Zhu et al.49 proposed a blueprint for integrating a perovskite solar system with a super-capacitor system into a single fiber-shaped device via the appropriate layer arrangement and common electrode sharing. The proposed two-in-one fiber consists of a carbon nanofiber simultaneously serving as the core support and an electrode to the fiber capacitor. The CNT wire is then coated with a solid or hydrogel dielectric material, and finally wrapped inside a titanium wire to complete the capacitor component of the integrated device. A mesoporous TiO2 layer is then added on top of the Ti-wire, followed by the deposition of the perovskite layer, spiro-OMeTAD, for hole transportation, and finally a thin gold layer as the back contact, as illustrated in Fig. 9a. The hollow titanium wire serves as the shared electrode to harvest electrons from both systems. Thus, the integrated perovskite-based fiber is capable of both photoelectric conversion and charge storage.49 The concept of integrating perovskite solar and capacitor systems has already been realized and reported in flat/planar geometry devices.147,148
 Fig. 9  (a) Cross-section and alignment of suggested layout for a perovskite fiber solar capacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. (b) (i) Schematic of a PVC gel actuator before and after applying an electric field. The electrically induced creep deformation and structural modulation after the electromechanical transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (ii) Proposed schematic for a solar-muscle system. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the proposed sunflower-like solar cells. (ii) Schematic mechanism of the LDPE/PP actuator in its original and bending state, which can be attached to a solar cell to realize a solar actuator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. (d) Function mechanism of suggested photo-piezoelectric fiber perovskite device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. 


4.2.4 Solar-actuators/solar-muscles. 
Smart systems that can sense many inputs, while remaining flexible, stretchable, and wearable have been successfully demonstrated by several research groups.149,150 Physical sensors are one of the main fiber-shaped sensing devices based on electrical signal detection. For example, a PVC gel actuator is formed when enough plasticizer is added to PVC material. The formed actuator demonstrates characteristics of flexibility and electrical response.151–153 When the PVC gel actuator is connected to an external power source, the synthetic muscle appears to bend towards the anode. The PVC gel immediately returns to its original shape when the electric field is discharged, as shown in Fig. 9b(i).151 This example justifies the need to integrate synthetic wearable muscles with fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells to form self-powered solar muscles. However, to the best of our knowledge, this type of system has not been reported to date.
Herein, the concept of integrating actuators with perovskite fiber-shaped solar cells to operate in an interdependent type of relationship is proposed to be achievable, solving multi-problems and presenting a straight path to sunflower-like solar cells and energy sufficient actuators. In this prediction, transparent polymeric actuators that are highly flexible and with phototaxis behavior154–156 can be used as outer electrodes or protective coatings on the surface of fiber-shaped (flexible) perovskite solar cells and solar fabrics. The resulting solar-actuator device will have a photoactive surface that can passively detect and bend towards the direction of the sun for maximum solar energy harvesting throughout the day. This development is based on the fact that for maximum power output from a solar panel, the tilt angle towards light should fall in the range of 35–60°.157 However, the sun keeps changing its overhead position, where the higher the tilt angle, the less the exposure time of the solar device photoactive area to light during the day. This serious issue can be mitigated by integrating phototaxis-capable actuators and fiber-shaped (flexible/fabric) perovskite solar cells, as shown in Fig. 5c. In planar devices, Qi et al.158 reported the integration of a planar flexible perovskite solar cell (indium tin oxide (ITO)/SnO2 (ETL)/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au-electrode with an actuator made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) and polypropylene(PP) polymers. When the LDPE/PP actuator is deformed at a specific temperature, the LDPE crystals melt and lose micromorphology. Simultaneously, the original amorphous molecular chain is lengthened (unfolded), resulting in macro-morphology expansion. The lengthy PE chain maintains connection in the melted microphase areas, leaving many unorganized tiny LDPE crystals. The microstructure of PP does not change significantly, resulting in an unchanged macroscopic performance. The LDPE/PP actuator bends as a result of the interaction between its components. The LDPE chains reform a physically cross-linked network via structured tiny crystals after cooling without releasing the PP load, which can restore the actuator to its previous state (see Fig. 9c(ii)). As a low-temperature flexible solar cell, the device demonstrated a high walking speed of 10 mm per minute, outstanding mechanical strength (the ability to move an object 15 times its weight), and high photoelectric efficiency with a power conversion efficiency of 17.75%.158
Similarly, Zhu et al.49 proposed integrating solar and piezoelectric systems into a single fiber to boost the output voltage and current, as schematically shown in Fig. 5d. In their proposed strategy, electrospun PVDF nanofibers doped with either CNT, ZnO, or TiO2 are suitable bottom layers to serve as both the ETL and piezoelectric layer in a fiber-shaped device. With this integration in fiber form, the resulting textiles can exhibit the ability to harvest both biomechanical and solar energy, and energy supply from the device is guaranteed even in the absence of sunlight.
In conclusion, various hybrid fiber-shaped perovskite devices (HFSPDs) have been developed and researched. Other devices have been proposed for future research to solve prevailing challenges, with significant differences in their working principles and mechanisms. Although HFSPDs have attracted considerable attention from researcher in the last decade and significant work has been done in this area, the toxicity of the perovskite material, lack of long-term stability, low stretchability, and low efficiency remain barriers to their commercialization. Nevertheless, based on the current development rate in this area of research, especially focusing on solving the above-mentioned challenges, HFSPDs appear to be one of the most promising next-generation self-powered and suitable energy supply technologies for wearable applications.

5. Perovskite layer deposition methods on fiber substrates
As discussed earlier, fiber-shaped core substrates (yarns, tubes, and wires) are the basis for layer deposition to form a fiber-shaped device. However, due to their complex geometry especially yarns, resulting from twisting hundreds of fibers together, and the highly curved curvature surfaces of the wires on which the perovskite layers have to be deposited, depositing non-adhesive and crystalline layers such as perovskite uniformly with good crystal quality and minimum grain boundaries and defects on their intricate surfaces is still challenging, rarely researched and poorly documented. Consequently, the performance and mechanical stability of fiber-shaped photovoltaic devices lag behind that of planar/flat substrate devices. To some extent, the inadequate performance of fiber-shaped devices is due to the inability to perfect the uniformity and overall quality of the photovoltaic layer and other functional layers on flexible and fiber-shaped substrates/core electrodes. Thus, in contrast to the standard active materials chemically bonded to electrodes159 or possessing high film-forming ability,160 depositing perovskite layers with uniform coverage and minimum defects is still a big challenge due to the poor film-forming ability of materials. The most studied and well-optimized methods for perovskite layer deposition are doctor-blade,159 spin-coating,160 printing,161 and spray coating.162 However, the nature of the procedures involved in these methods are only appropriate for the deposition of perovskite photoactive layers on planar/flat substrates.
In the perovskite photoactive layer, large crystals are required for high carrier mobility, extended lifetime, and diffusion length, while a high degree of coverage is necessary for the effective generation and separation of excitons. The stability, homogeneity, and charge trap site density of the layer during bending are all determined by the effectiveness of the layer deposition method. Therefore, choosing a suitable deposition method and optimization and perfection are critical strategies in improving the photovoltaic performance and mechanical stability of fiber-shaped perovskite device. Furthermore, the layer deposition methods employed in the fabrication of fiber-shaped perovskite devices play a crucial role in determining their cost and scalability. In this section, we discuss the various layer deposition approaches on a fiber-shaped geometry together with their relative merits and disadvantages using specific examples.
5.1 Dip-coating method (one-step dip-coating and sequential)
The dip-coating method is the most widely used technique to deposit functional and photoactive layers in fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronic devices.41,47 One step dip-coating involves mixing the necessary precursors such as lead iodide and methylammonium iodide plus all the intended additives to form one solution in which the fiber-shaped substrate is dipped to deposit the perovskite layer.163,164 This method is associated with advantages such as simplicity and rapid deposition. However, it is associated with disadvantages such as lack of control of the layer thickness and uniformity, and high wastage of the precursor solution.165,166 Also, given that the photoactive layer deposited by this method is purely crystalline, there is the probability of the rapid formation and propagation of cracks upon bending and twisting of fiber-shaped perovskite devices.163
The sequential dip-coating method, as illustrated in Fig. 10a, involves dipping the fiber-shaped core substrate into different precursor solutions sequentially. Consequently, the precursors react on the curved surface to form the perovskite layer, which later crystallizes. In many reported scenarios,167 the two-step sequential dip-coating process has been proven to be effective in forming a good-quality photoactive layer. The two-step process of forming CH3NH3PbI3 involves firstly dip-coating the substrate in PbI2, followed by dipping it into a CH3NH3I solution. For instance, Qiu et al.43 reported good perovskite crystal growth (crystal size ≥1000 nm) when a solution of PbI2/N,N-dimethylformamide (concentration from 200 to 450 mg mL−1) was coated onto a TiO2 layer, dried at 80 °C, followed by dipping the coated substrate in CH3NH3I/isopropanol solution (concentration in the range of 7 to 70 mg mL−1), and finally annealing at 90 °C for 30 min. By varying the concentration of CH3NH3I from 70 mg mL−1 to 10 mg mL−1, the perovskite crystal size changed from 250 nm to ≤1000 nm. Consequently, the larger crystals exhibited a longer charge carrier lifetime, and in particular, the lifetime was lengthened by 360% when the crystal size increased from 250 to 1200 nm.43 This method is preferred because of its simplicity and quick production speed. However, using the sequential method, it is hard to perfectly control the ratio of the reacting precursors forming the perovskite. Furthermore, other difficulties such as controlling the layer thickness and uniform coverage, ensuring crack-resistant layers upon bending, 23,168 and challenges in ensuring complete reaction between the precursors with minimum unreacted materials still need to be addressed.86
 Fig. 10  (a) Summary of the steps involved in the sequential dip-coating method. Flow chart developed based on the information provided in ref. 43. (b) Presentation of the cathode deposition method results. (i and ii) SEM images of the porous PbI2 layer and perovskite crystal formed after reacting with CH3NH3I. (iii and iv) XRD graphs comparing the crystal quality of the electrodeposition and spin-coated samples. Images extracted from ref. 85. (c) Presentation of vapor-assisted deposition method. (i) SEM images of the dense and porous PbI2 layers synthesized at 70 °C and room temperature, respectively. The directional arrows indicate the resultant crystal SEM images after CH3NH3I vapor deposition on each PbI2 layer. The corresponding XRD trends (S1–S4) show the effect of the nature of the PbI2 layer (porous and compact) and their resultant complete crystallization times. Images extracted from ref. 123 with permission. 
5.2 Cathodic deposition method
The cathode deposition method (CDM) is one of the latest approaches for electrochemically adding perovskite photoactive layers on cylindrical substrates. This method is straightforward, cost-effective, and rapid compared to the other well-known deposition methods.169,170 It is also reported to provide good coverage, quality, and uniform thickness of the perovskite layer on fiber substrates, despite challenges such as poor crystal quality, which lead to low efficiency in the fiber-shaped solar cells based on this method. Qui et al.85 pioneered cathodic deposition methods for the fabrication of fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. The perovskite layer was created via the cathodic deposition of PbO using an electrolyte solution containing Pb(NO3)2 and 0.2 M H2O2 at a constant current density of 5 mA cm2 on oxidic titanium wire as the cathode and a platinum plate as the anode. The titanium wire was annealed at 200 °C for 30 min to complete the transition to a porous PbO layer, as illustrated in Fig. 7b(i). PbO was immersed in a 0.1 M hydroiodic acid aqueous solution and dried for 60 min at 80 °C to eliminate the traces of water. PbO reacted with hydroiodic acid to produce PbI2, which displayed a perfect crystal structure, as shown in Fig. 10b(ii). The porous structure is beneficial for solution infiltration and formation of PbI2 crystal plates. This PbI2-coated wire was dipped into a CH3NH3I/isopropanol solution (concentration of 10 mg mL−1) for 60 s and annealed at 80 °C for 30 min after cooling to room temperature to create the light-harvesting perovskite layer. Compared with the conventional PbI2 layers formed through the spin-coating and dip-coating processes, the designed porous PbI2 plate array provided more voids for the infiltration of CH3NH3I solution and resulted in the complete formation of perovskite. In contrast, the dense PbI2 layer deposited from the previous spin-coating process prevented the complete reaction with CH3NH3I.85
X-ray diffraction was used to compare the evolution of the perovskite layers from two PbI2 layers formed via electrochemical deposition and spin-coating (Fig. 10b(iii and iv)), respectively. According to the XRD spectral trends, the PbI2 crystal demonstrated prominent peaks at 12.6°, 25.5°, 38.5°, and 52.2°. Alternatively, CH3NH3PbI3 displayed peaks at 14.08°, 28.41°, 31.85°, and 43.19°, corresponding to the (110), (220), (310), and (314) planes, respectively. The peaks corresponding to PbI2 were observed at the 2θ value of 12.6° with a similar intensity to the peak at 14.08°, which corresponded to CH3NH3PbI3 in the perovskite layer obtained from a dense and compact PbI2 layer manufactured via the spin-coating process. In strong contrast, the lowest PbI2 intensity was detected in the perovskite layer synthesized through the electrochemical deposition of the porous PbO layer and its subsequent reactions to form CH3NH3PbI3.85 The unreacted PbI2 can be detrimental to the performance of photovoltaic devices due to its slow charge transport behavior.171
5.3 Vapor-assisted deposition (VAD)
The VAD method combines liquid- and gas-phase film formation. This technique is attracting attention due to its advantages, such as its suitability for perovskite layer deposition on a wide range of geometries. Its high-quality film-forming ability shows great potential for use even on fiber-shaped substrates.172,173 In previous reports on the use of the vapor-assisted deposition method in planar-type perovskite solar cells, the PbI2 solution was first spin-coated onto a flat substrate at 70 °C, followed by evaporating the solvent at 100 °C to form a PbI2 film layer. It was reported that the PbI2 film layers obtained via spin coating at 70 °C demonstrated porous morphologies, which facilitated the gas-phase reaction with CH3NH3I to achieve high-quality perovskite film layers.172,174
However, the spin-coating method is not practically applicable for the preparation of perovskite layers on fiber-shaped/curved and other intricate-shaped substrates. Hence, the preparation of the initial PbI2 layer cannot be accomplished on fiber-shaped substrates via spin-coating. In the reports where vapor-assisted deposition was used to deposit perovskite layers on fiber-shaped substrates,123 the first layer of PbI2 film was fabricated via horizontal coating several times at 70 °C. However, the obtained PbI2 film was too dense and unsuitable for gas-phase reaction with methyl iodide vapor in the next stage of perovskite layer formation. In the subsequent gas-phase reaction, CH3NH3I vapor could only react with PbI2 on the surface to form CH3NH3PbI3 and could not penetrate deep inside the substrate. Furthermore, the horizontal coating of the fiber-shaped substrate with PbI2 at room temperature resulted in a porous and less compact PbI2 layer (Fig. 10c(i)), which could easily be infiltrated by CH3NH3I vapor during the gas-phase reaction process. Besides, the slow precipitation process at room temperature resulted in an increase in the crystallinity of PbI2, slowing the subsequent gas-phase reaction with CH3NH3I and leading to poor perovskite crystal formation (Fig. 10c(ii)). Furthermore, it increased the typical duration time for the conventional vapor-assisted deposition method from 2 h (see XRD spectrum in Fig. 10c(S2–S5)) to 4 h (PbI2 peak disappears in Fig. 10c(S5)) for complete conversion from PbI2 to perovskite.123 PbI2 could be sufficiently transformed into perovskite after 4 h of gas-phase reaction. However, CH3NH3I invariably remained on the perovskite surface. When the reaction time was increased to 4 h, the problem of residual CH3NH3I became more acute. Dong et al. further solved this problem by directly sublimating the residual CH3NH3I on the surface by heating it at 120 °C for 30 min under inert gas protection.123
5.4. Joule heating approach on fiber
The inadequate performance of fiber-shaped perovskite solar yarns is mainly attributed to the inability to perfect the crystal quality on flexible and fiber-shaped substrates. Given that heat energy is crucial in initiating nucleation and rapid crystal growth,175,176 in principal, applying uniform heating on a perovskite-coated fiber-shaped substrates can guarantee crystal growth and uniform quality. Accordingly, one of the suitable heating methods suggested for this application is joule heating. Joule heating, also known as ohmic or resistive heating,177 involves directly converting electric energy to heat, as shown in eqn (2). It vividly indicates that every joule of electrical energy supplied produces one joule of heat, which is significant because it enables quick heating or cooling of the substrate, providing the user a great amount of control. Q = I2Rt(2)With a DC power supply, Q is heat (joules), I is current (amps), R is resistance (ohms), and t is time (s).178
Adams et al.136 used joule heating in the perovskite layer deposition procedure on a fiber-shaped substrate. As illustrated in Fig. 8a, a slide was designed to elevate the carbon nanotube yarn (CNY) off the glass surface during the annealing process to achieve total coverage of the perovskite material. The heating current, amount of perovskite solution, and number of coating times all influenced the quality and thickness of the perovskite layer. The heating current was tuned at 0.6 A and 2 V to produce the best film quality, generating 95 °C and using 10 μL of perovskite solution per 2 cm carbon nanotube yarn (CNY).136
To compare joule heating and other heating methods used in layer deposition on fiber substrates, CNY samples were coated with 10 μL per 2 cm of CNY yarn, mounted on a glass slide, and heated using the hot plate method at 95 °C for 10 min. The surface (SEM) images of the layers prepared using both methods indicated that the sample prepared using the joule heating method (Fig. 11a(i)) displayed a uniform, compact, and dense perovskite crystals with sizes ranging from 0.75 to >2 μm. In contrast, the SEM image of the hot plate-prepared sample (Fig. 11a(ii)) revealed unsatisfactory surface coverage with uncontrolled morphological changes, fissures, and small cavities on the surface of the perovskite layer. Large crystalline surfaces were generated in the case of the hot plate-prepared perovskite layer, but there were sections with large pockets where the crystal size dropped to 100 nm, and the perovskite grains were discontinuous. According to the authors, this observation is attributed to the nonuniform distribution of heat supplied to the substrate during the annealing process, resulting in differential solvent evaporation over the substrate. The direct conversion of electrical energy to heat energy delivered uniformly on CNY is responsible for the temperature homogeneity in the joule heating method. Compared to the nonuniform temperature obtained by the hot plate method, the joule heating method offers a uniform temperature throughout the CNY wire for the deposition of the perovskite solution. The Bragg peaks at 14.08° and 28.41° attributed to the (110) and (220) planes of CH3NH3PbI3, respectively, were seen in the XRD patterns of the MAPbI3-coated CNY utilizing joule heating and hot plate annealing (Fig. 11a). The highly crystalline tetragonal crystal structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite corresponds to these configurations. The perovskite phase had the greatest (110) peak in the joule-heated samples, which also had a lower full-width half maximum (FWHM) value of 0.09, indicating its improved crystallinity. This shows that joule heating promotes perovskite film crystallization, even on curved surfaces, with grain formation preferentially in the (110) plane. Because nucleation events increase with a high and uniform temperature throughout the surface, the level of surface-induced nucleation is affected by the surface temperature of the substrate during film formation.136
 Fig. 11  (a) Single CNY yarn coated with perovskite and connected to a power source for joule heating application. SEM images of MAPbI3-coated CNY using (i) Joule heating and (ii) hot plate annealing method. The XRD spectral trends on the sides demonstrate the difference in crystal quality produced by these two techniques. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. (b) Electrospinning setup for direct spinning on a yarn substrate. (i and ii) SEM images of electrospun perovskite–PVP photoactive nanofibers, displayed at different magnifications. (iii) Cross-section image of a silver yarn substrate after wrapping it up with photoactive nanofibers. (iv) XRD crystallography demonstrating the quality of the crystal phase of the nanofibers.53 
5.5 Electrospinning
Electrospinning continues to demonstrate significance and versatility in nanoscience as a reliable method for the fabrication of nanofibers.179 Recent studies on solar cells have revealed that under various conditions of electrospinning voltage and humidity, and using the setup in Fig. 11a, this method is an effective technique for controlling the crystal size, quality, and distribution of perovskite on PVP nanofibers. Under the optimal fabrication conditions, the resulting CH3NH3PbI3–PVP19 and CH3NH3SnI3−xClx–PVP53 composite nanofibers prepared with this technique thus far exhibit a continuous phase of perovskite crystals on the exterior of the PVP polymer nanofibers, as shown in Fig. 11b(i and ii). With electrospinning, a relatively uniform photoactive layer of nanofibers can be wrapped around a fiber-shaped substrate, as shown in the SEM image in Fig. 8b(iii), in a faster way compared to other layers deposition methods. Also, the quality of the perovskite crystals from this method was satisfactory based on XRD crystallography, as shown in Fig. 11b(iv). Hence, the nanofiber photoactive layer possessed enhanced characteristics, which supported its outstanding photovoltaic performance, such as improved charge carrier lifetime and enhanced UV/vis absorption coefficient.19,53 Thus, these outstanding properties favored the use of perovskite-polymer composite nanofibers as the photoactive layer in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. The PVP nanofiber core of the composite nanofibers also offered extra mechanical properties such as flexibility and bending stability to the solar yarn. Besides, electrospinning as a layer deposition method on fiber-shaped substrates ensures reproducibility and speed in layer deposition. However, this method is only applicable to polymer-based and polymer composite solutions.
Li et al.19 reported the electrospinning of CH3NH3PbI3–PVP solution at 18 kV, 75% relative humidity, and 25 °C electrospinning chamber temperature using a one-step uniaxial electrospinning method. During electrospinning, the authors found that increasing both the electrospinning voltage and relative humidity simultaneously or separately improved the quality of the perovskite crystals on the surface of PVP nanofibers. Increasing the electrospinning voltage has a direct impact on the crystal quality because an electric field can enhance or decrease the free energy required for nucleation according to the classical theory of nucleation and thermodynamics.180,181 An externally applied electric field can affect the free energy of formation for a crystalline cluster in solution. Electrical fields can influence primary nucleation (germination), secondary nucleation (crystal development), and crystallization. This is due to electron bombardment, which alters the surface potential and polarity of the solid phase during nucleation and growth. According to this hypothesis, a high electrical field may produce changes in relative crystallinity, crystallization half time, crystallization rate constant, and the Avrami exponent, among other factors.81,182,183
The influence of relative humidity on the electrospinning of perovskite composite nanofibers may be explained by the fact that DMF, the solvent utilized in these studies, is an aprotic polar with a high affinity for water.184 It has been conceptualized that as the nanofibers fly from the spinning needle to the collector, DMF residue is washed away, resulting in the rapid crystallization of perovskite grains.185 Also, at a high electrospinning voltage (18 kV) and relative humidity, the electrolysis of water molecules (oxidation) is most likely to occur at the anode, which in this case is the nozzle tip (eqn (R3)). Similarly, the reduction of hydrogen ions occurs at the cathode side (at the collector) (eqn (R4)), as follows: 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + H+(aq) + 4e−(R3) 2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(l)(R4)Another possible method for layer deposition on fiber substrates include spray coating, although, to the best of our knowledge, this technique has not been used before to deposit perovskite layers on a fiber-shaped substrate. Compared with the other methods discussed above, spray coating exhibits substantial advantages such as increased speed in layer deposition.186 The advantages and disadvantages of the practically reported layer deposition methods on fiber substrates are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of the different perovskite layer deposition methods on fiber-shaped substrates




Layer deposition method
Principle of operation
Advantages
Disadvantages




Electrospinning19,53
Electrohydrodynamic
• Uniform layers
• High voltage requirement


• Ease of control of perovskite crystal size by varying voltage and relative humidity
• Polymeric composition effects


• High deposition speed


• Crystal size ≥275 nm


• Bending stable layers


Dip-coating165,166
Electrostatic adsorption
• Simple and fast
• Solution wastage


• Good crystal quality (Sequential dip-coating)
• Hard to achieve uniform coating and layer thickness of the fiber


• Crystal size ≤1000 nm


Cathodic deposition method85
Electrochemical deposition
• Possibility of using recycled materials
• Slow process


• Highly uniform layers
• It may not apply to continuous length fibers


• Crystal size ≥300 nm
• Low crystal quality


• Unreacted PbI2 precursor accumulation


Vapor-assisted deposition172,173
Atomization and air force-enhanced layer assembly
• High-quality films
• High-temperature requirement


• All geometries/intricate surfaces
• Slow process


• Crystal size ≥1 μm
• Unreacted PbI2 precursor residue




6. The role of nanofibers and nanomaterials in perovskite solar yarns
Nanofibers are flexible, can withstand significant mechanical stress, and thus promising candidates for replacing films and other bulk forms of material layers in wearable and flexible devices due to their 1D geometry and increased length-to-diameter ratios (usually between 20 nm and 1 m).187,188 Therefore, electrospun perovskite composite nanofibers (of polymer–perovskite) have been identified as suitable replacements for the highly rigid, crystalline, and crack-vulnerable solution-coated perovskite layers in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells, as shown in Fig. 8b(i–iii).19,53
On both the bulk and crystal scales, reducing the size and dimensions of materials leads to a proportional decrease in the density of intrinsic defects.189,190 Consequently, continuous nanofibers potentially possess an enhanced weight-to-strength ratio and increased electrical and thermal conductivity compared with their bulk counterparts. Accordingly, Bessaire et al.191 prepared and compared electrospun PEDOT:PSS nanofiber mats with solution-coated thin films, and their results indicated that the electrospun mats possessed superior electrical conductivity compared to the thin films (fiber mats exhibited a surface resistance of 12 kΩ, whereas the spin-coated substrates showed no conductivity at all), making electrospun PEDOT:PSS nanofibers the appropriate replacement for PEDOT:PSS dip-coated films in fiber-shaped and flexible optoelectronic devices. A single polymeric nanofiber with a diameter of less than 350 nm has an elastic modulus of approximately 10.2 GPa, depending on the material composition. Alternatively, nanofibers are commonly spun in thousands of webs, giving them amazing mechanical and other properties.19
Nanofiber mats have also been revealed to have superior transmittance and low reflectance.192,193 In the case of perovskite-composite nanofibers, high UV/Vis absorption has been reported compared to the UV/Vis absorption obtained with thin films deposited via the spin/dip-coating methods.19,53 When light is incident to a nanofiber web, the rays enter the inter-nanofiber spaces of the web. With time, these rays become trapped in the web (in a maze of nanofibers), and consequently they undergo numerous successive reflections on the surfaces of the nanofibers until they successfully exit the web. Because the openings of the inter-nanofiber spaces characterize the surfaces of nanofiber mats, in principle, they are rough with a low reflection capacity compared to smooth solution-coated films. Li et al.19 suggested that the increased UV/Vis absorption in the perovskite composite nanofiber layers is due to the multiple inter-nanofiber light reflections and sequential absorption as light traverses in the optical cavities of the photoactive nanofiber webs.19,53 In addition, compared to their thin-film counterparts, the topology of the nanofiber web surface minimizes surface light reflections. Similar theoretical results have been reported with silicon wire194 and simulations on perovskite nanorod geometries.195
The transmittance of a nanofiber mat can be theoretically assessed and compared with that of a thin film using a simple model and by assuming that specular transmittance is mostly due to fiber coverage surface fraction and transmittance through the fiber mat.191,196 Therefore, discrete dipole approximation calculations can estimate light scattering from the fiber network. Considering a surface of area S covered by a fiber of total length L and diameter D, surface coverage is given by . For fibers having an absorption coefficient α, the specular transmittance %Tspe is equal to the surface fraction not covered by fibers %Tvoid = (1 − Φ) and transmittance through the fibers %Tfibers = Φ10−αD.
If we consider that a fiber is made of N = L/l section of fibers of length l with a scattering cross-section σscat, then transmission due to scattered light is given by eqn (3), as follows: (3)Thus, the specular transmission will be lowered due to light scattering, as given by (eqn (4)). (4)Therefore, the relationship between surface coverage and transmittance can be deduced according to eqn (5).191 (5)According to (eqn (3) and (4)), it can be concluded that electrospun fiber mats technically present better transmittance than coated films of the same material and thickness, and thus they are better alternatives as transparent electrodes and charge selective layers (HTL or ETL) in flexible and fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices. Similarly, due to the increased surface area and minimum void distribution, PEDOT:PSS nanofiber webs were reported to have superior conductivity than a coated thin film of the same material.191
Electrospun photoactive nanofibers in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells have been reported to exhibit enhanced mechanical stability. Balilonda et al.53 fabricated and compared the bending stability of perovskite solar yarns based on CH3NH3SnI3−xClx–PVP nanofibers as the photoactive layer and solar yarns based on dip-coated CH3NH3SnI3−xClx. The results indicated that the nanofiber-based solar yarn maintained over 98% of its original PCE after 1000 complete cycles of bending and twisting compared with its dip-coated counterpart, which dropped to less than 95% after the same bending cycles. The bending stability of the nanofiber-based solar yarn was attributed to the highly flexible polymer nanofibers, which act as scaffolds for perovskite crystallization, particularly during the electrospinning process.53 Hong et al.197 investigated mixed-halide mixed-cation perovskite solar cells composed of rGO–TiO2 composite nanofibers. To fabricate mixed-cation lead mixed-halide (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite solar cells, this team used electrospun reduced graphene oxide titanium oxide composite nanofibers as the electron-transporting materials. The PCE of 17.66% was induced by the optimized rGO4–TiO2 composite nanofiber-based electron-transporting material. In 2016, Qui et al.85 investigated an array of TiO2 nanotubes as the electron transport layer in a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell. This strategy achieved an increase in surface area, reduction in flow resistance for charge extraction, and ultimately increased the performance of the solar cell. Given that larger nanotubes favored the infiltration of the active materials to cover them both inside and outside entirely, the diameter of 100 nm was considered appropriate, with the average length of the tubes ranging between 350–1100 nm. When the length of the TiO2 nanotubes was approximately 400 nm, the best photovoltaic performance was achieved and the fill factor values declined with an increase in the length of the TiO2 nanotube.85 The an increase in thickness of the electron transport layer increased the resistance and charge recombination, resulting in a lower performance.198 Lu et al.199 also reported the use of electrospinning to create a polymer-based CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite composite nanofiber film. The PAN/CH3NH3PbI3 nanofibers had a diameter of roughly 500 nm, and the UV/Vis absorption spectra revealed that they had good light-harvesting properties. With the good flexibility due to the polymer nanofiber core, in conjunction with the good absorption and other photovoltaic properties, the composite nanofibers are suitable candidates for use in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells as the photoactive layer.
7. Challenges limiting the commercialization of perovskite optoelectronics
Fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronics are suitable for alleviating the increasing energy demand, particularly in the wearable and portable electronic sector. The challenges in layer deposition on fibrous and high-curvature surfaces have made it challenging to improve fiber-shaped perovskite devices in terms of efficiency. Several of these devices have been reported, as discussed in the previous chapters. However, the reported fiber devices have been identified to have several shortcomings, which need to be addressed for perovskite fiber technology to be successfully industrialized and accepted in the market. Some of the identified limitations include their material toxicity, low power conversion efficiency (PCE) and fill factor (FF) compared with their planar analogues, increased degradation, reduction in PCE after several cycles of bending and twisting, reduced flexibility, technical difficulties in controlling their thickness, and quality of different layers, including the perovskite layer and limited surface area for unidirectional light exposure.
7.1 Perovskite material toxicity
The toxicity of key perovskite elements such as lead (Pb) and others highlighted in the periodic table (Table 4) and the strain it imposes on the public perception and acceptance of perovskite devices are well known in the photovoltaic community. The toxicity of lead is attributed to its detrimental interactions with proteins, which cause alterations in protein folding, resulting in decreased activity and function. Consequently, lead is toxic to all living organisms.200 Therefore, Sn is being highlighted and researched as the best alternative for wearable and clothing integrate-able solar cells. However, although Sn is being promoted as a safer and more environmentally friendly alternative to Pb, it can negatively impact the environment and human health.201 Even though these metallic key perovskite elements are used in minute quantities (a few milligrams) per unit length of fiber-shaped perovskite solar yarn,49,53 the possibility of occupational and non-occupational exposure connected with the widespread application of this technology should be addresses. In the case of wearable perovskites (yarns and fabrics), the use of lead as a photoactive material is even riskier because upon moderate exposure to environmental conditions such as humidity, oxygen, and elevated temperature, most perovskites tend to disintegrate into harmful compounds, bringing heavy metals into contact with the users of these perovskite-based photoelectric wearable devices.
Table 4 Periodic table, highlighting the various elements used in photovoltaically useful perovskite material configurations (ABX3) and their level of toxicity (summarized from ref. 218–222)











When accidentally exposed to Pb-containing substances, there are three intake routes, i.e., digestive, respiratory, and skin uptake.202,203 After absorption, this heavy metal can be transported by the blood to organs such as the liver, nervous system, and kidney. Finally, the largest percentage (∼90%) of metal is deposited in the skeleton, where its half-life is between 20–30 years.204,205 Lead can cause severe damage because it can pose as an essential element in the body such as Ca, Fe, and Zn, thus resulting in impaired functionality of receptors and enzymes, while simultaneously interfering with the haem-activity of the blood.206,207
Recently, the concept of using Sn to replace Pb in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells has attracted attention and a lead-free perovskite solar yarn was reported.53 However, due to the low redox potential of Sn(II), it is rapidly oxidized to the more stable Sn(IV) under ambient conditions.208,209 Consequently, Sn-based perovskites are commonly synthesized in a low-oxygen, dry environment in laboratories, where the conversion to Sn(IV) is retarded under these conditions. Similar to Pb, tin is also absorbed and distributed through the systematic transport systems of the body, and a reasonable percentage of it is deposited in the skeleton. Furthermore, 95% of ingested Sn is excreted in the faeces almost immediately, and the remaining 5% is eliminated within 400 days.210
The synthesis of Pb-free and environmentally acceptable perovskite alternative materials has become a prime objective.211 To mitigate the toxicity of Pb in perovskites but simultaneously retain the photovoltaic competitiveness of this new class of photoactive materials, the concept of replacing Pb2+ with less toxic cations that have similar outer shell electron configurations and relatively close ionic radii to that of Pb, such as Sn2+, Ge2+, Bi3+, Sb3+, and Sr2+ has been considered and investigated.212,213 The ionic radius of strontium is very close to that of lead, as presented in Table 5, and both metals exist in a valence state of +2. However, Sr is not preferred for photovoltaic applications due to its high chemical reactivity together with its narrow absorption range in the UV/Vis spectrum. The outer electron shell structures of Pb, Sn, and Ge possess similar outer-most electron structures but with different ionic radii.214,215 Nevertheless, among the available options, Sn demonstrates a relatively outstanding UV/Vis light absorption coefficient over a wide range of wavelengths.216 Also, among the lead-free perovskite solar cells, Sn-based devices have been reported to present the highest PCE since the research on substituting Pb in perovskite was introduced in 2014.216,217 According to the tolerance factor calculation in eqn (1), a decrease in the ionic radius of the influential metallic element in a perovskite molecule rapidly reduces the geometric tolerance factor of the chemical stability of the perovskite material configuration.
Table 5 Ionic radius and electronic configuration of the possible replacements of Pb in photoactive perovskite material configurations




Metal cation
Ionic radius (Å)
Electronic configuration




Pb2+
1.19
6s2


Sr2+
1.12
5s2


Bi3+
1.03
6s2


Sn2+
1.02
5s2


Ge2+
0.73
4s2


Cu2+
0.73
3d9




7.2 Perovskite material decomposition/instability
Many achievements in terms of power conversion efficiency have been made in planer and fiber-shaped perovskite devices. However, the technology of perovskite solar cells has not entered widespread commercial scale up due to the vital concern of the lifetime of the performance of these products. Exposure to ambient elements such as humidity, temperature, air, and UV radiation results in the degradation of perovskite materials. Previous studies have demonstrated that the most common semiconductor perovskites decompose at a relative humidity of 55%, and hence a color change to bright yellow can be observed.223
Moist air degradation of typical perovskite materials occurs through a reversible reaction to methylammonium iodide and lead iodide, as demonstrated by eqn (R5). Due to the solubility of methylammonium halide in water,224 moisture induces the decomposition of methylammonium-based perovskites. CH3NH3PbX3 breaks partially in trace water to form an intermediate chemical, which then further breaks down to form HI, CH3NH2, gases, and PbI2, as shown in eqn (R6). Excess water in the system further degrades it by dissolving HI and CH3NH2, leaving PbI2 as a bright yellow residue.225 All the above-mentioned reactions are reversible, allowing CH3NH3I, HI, and CH3NH2 to coexist in the system with the insoluble PbI2. CH3NH3PbI3(s) ↔ PbI2(s) + CH3NH3I(aq)(R5) CH3NH3I(aq) ↔ CH3NH2(aq) + HI(aq)(R6)Oxidation and ultraviolet radiation may induce the further degradation of HI to form bi-products such as hydrogen gas, iodine gas, and water molecules, as shown in (eqn (R7) and (R8)). 2HI(aq) ↔ H2(g) + I2(s)(R7) 4HI(aq) + O2(g) ↔ 2I2(s) + 2H2O(R8)At the normal solar cell operating temperature of 40–80 °C, the reversible and irreversible perovskite degradation reactions in moist air and UV-light are shown by (eqn (R9)).226,227 CH3NH3PbI3(aq) → NH3(aq) + CH3I(aq) + PbI2(s)(R9)
7.3 Degradation mechanism of Sn-based perovskite materials
Similar to Pb-based perovskites, Sn perovskite materials also undergo degradation when exposed to ambient conditions. However, unlike Pb, the degradation of Sn-based perovskite materials is mainly initiated by oxygen.228 The rapid degradation rate of Sn-perovskites compared to their Pb counterparts has been reported to be mainly attributed to the facile oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, which is also known to introduce p-type self-doping in perovskites.229,230 However, more elaborate studies and supporting concrete evidence for the degradation pathway of Sn perovskites remain limited compared to their Pb-based counterparts.231,232 Recent studies revealed that some Sn-based perovskites such as ASnX3 (A = Cs+, MA+ and FA+ and X = I− and Br−) can decompose in air to yield vacancy-ordered double perovskite (A2SnX6)233 and SnO2.234 Other reports disclosed that FASnI3 and (PEA)2SnI4 (where PEA refers to phenylethyl ammonium) degrade in the presence of oxygen to SnI4, SnO2, and FAI/PEAI.
One of the most interesting recent studies indicated that oxygen initiates the degradation of Sn-based perovskites to yield SnO2, AI, and SnI4.228 Then, two products of this reaction can react to yield the vacancy-ordered double perovskite A2SnI6. The third stage of the degradation of Sn-based perovskite materials involves the reactions of SnI4 with moisture to form more SnO2 and HI. The formed hydrogen iodide reacts with the ambient oxygen in the fourth stage of degradation to form gray-black iodine and more H2O molecules in the system. The formed iodine has been reported to have the potential to react with the pristine Sn-perovskite molecules to cause degradation into AI and SnI4 in the fifth stage of decomposition.
In addition to the above discussion, it should also be considered that the crystal formability and structural stability of perovskite mainly depend on its geometric tolerance factor (Gt), which can be estimated using (eqn (6)) and determined by the ionic radii of the crystal-forming ions, considering a perovskite molecule ABX, with ionic radii r1, r2, and r3 for ions A, B, and X, respectively.235 (6)For alkali metal halide perovskite, its formability and relative stability can be achieved with a Gt in the range of 0.813 < Gt < 1.107.236 For perovskites composed of transition metal cation oxides, an ideal cubic perovskite crystal is formed when Gt = 1. Simultaneously, octahedral distortion is expected when Gt < 1. Consequently, if the geometric tolerance factor decreases such that Gt < 1, the symmetry of the crystal also decreases, which affects the electronic properties of the material.237
7.4 Perovskite material modification for stability
Stabilizing perovskite devices to give them a convincing performance lifetime and a competitive levelized cost of electricity compared to that of the dominant silicon is now the remaining part of the puzzle for perovskite solar technology to enter the industrialization stage. Thus, to address the stability issue, several approaches have been proposed.
2D/3D hybrid perovskite junctions such as (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites have been reported to result in more stable perovskite material configurations with minimal compromise in the photovoltaic efficiency of the material. 2D perovskites have been described as effective surface defect passivates and good protective layers from ambient conditions such as moisture due to their excellent film-forming ability and increased stability to degradation compared to the highly unstable 3D perovskites. In this approach, the 2D perovskite material layer is deposited on top or mixed with a 3D material configuration.238,239 Given that 3D perovskites are unstable under most ambient conditions, they decompose to release methylammonium cations. The small cations resulting from the decomposition of the 3D materials are blocked at the interface, and later incorporated into the 2D architecture to form the 2D/3D-(R2(MA)n−1PbI(3n+1) material junction (shown in Fig. 13a(i)). The formed junction exhibits improved stability greater than that possible with pure 3D materials and good photon to energy conversion characteristics greater than that of pure 2D materials. In addition to the XRD peak at 14°, corresponding to the (110) diffraction signal from 3D perovskites, and the peak at 6°, corresponding to the (002) diffraction signal of 2D perovskites, an additional new peak is formed at ∼4°, which is assigned to the new mixed phase of 2D/3D perovskite material, as shown in Fig. 12b(ii).240 The 2D/3D approach for stabilizing perovskite materials has been reported to be one of the most successful techniques for stabilizing perovskite solar devices, with a record stability time of >10000 h with zero loss in efficiency when aminovaleric lead iodide (2D) and methylammonium lead iodide (3D) perovskite were used in a solar cell.241
 Fig. 12  Cyclic degradation mechanism of tin iodide perovskite under ambient air exposure, as proposed by ref. 228. 
 Fig. 13  (a) (i) Sketch of the derived 2D/3D interface. (ii) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns showing peaks at various diffraction angles due to the use of different 2D precursor materials.240 (b) Variation in power conversion efficiency of heterojunction solar cells based on MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (x = 0, 0.06, 0.20, and 0.29) stored in air at room temperature without encapsulation with time. The humidity was maintained at 35%, and the cells were exposed to a humidity of 55% for one day on the fourth day to investigate their variation in performance at high humidity.223 (c) Degradation scheme of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells during light exposure test: (i) (TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3) and (ii) (TiO2/Sb2S3/CH3NH3PbI3).244 (d) Crystal structures of (i) CH3NH3PbI3 and (ii) CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x. The hydrogen bond between SCN− and CH3NH3+ (dash line) is highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission.245 
Noh et al.223 reported the use of mixed halides in perovskites as a practical approach for achieving extended stability in perovskite solar cells. In this approach, MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 and MAPbI3 materials were studied under various relative humidity with an increase in aging time, while varying the ratio of halogen atoms (x = 0.06, 0.2, and 0.29) in the perovskite material configuration. As shown in Fig. 13b, it was observed that for the perovskite materials without and with a low bromine content (x = 0 and 0.06, respectively), their power conversion efficiencies were very unstable with time at 35% relative humidity and above. With a high content of Br in the perovskite materials (x ≥ 0.2), the small bromine atoms partly replaced, and simultaneously occupied the interstices of the large bromine molecules, making the structure compact with low moisture sensitivity; hence, a stable PCE was observed with time despite the increase in relative humidity from 35% to 55%. In mixed halide perovskite materials, replacing iodine with smaller bromine atoms decreases the lattice constant and causes a transition to the cubic phase.223 The solar cells assembled with a higher bromine concentration (x > 0.2) exhibited a minimal loss in PCE for more than 20 days. However, using high bromine concentrations can reduce the photon to energy efficiency due to the large bandgap of bromine materials.242
TiO2 is an efficient and one of the most preferred ETLs due to its low work function.243 However, this material is a photocatalyst known for oxidizing organic materials. Thus, when used as an electron transport layer in perovskite solar cells, it extracts electrons from 2I−, resulting in the formation of I2, which combines with 3H+ and more iodine ions in the system to form hydrogen iodide, which vaporizes from the system. Given that the bi-products of perovskite decomposition are consumed in the system to form HI and CH3NH2 gases, decomposition proceeds faster. The use of antimony sulfide (Sb2S3) between the mesoporous TiO2 layer and the perovskite layer, as reported by Ito et al.,244 is believed to deactivate the conversion of I−/I2 at the surface of TiO2 and also helps create a shift in electrons from the conduction band of CH3NH3PbI3 to TiO2, hence making the perovskite layer stable upon exposure to light. This process is summarized in Fig. 13c.
Tai et al.245 reported the use of lead(II) thiocyanate precursor to form relatively stable iodine thiocyanate mixed perovskites. Perovskite layers formed from pure iodine precursors are known for their increased trap sites compared to other halogen-based perovskites. A thiocyanate is a pseudohalide group with an ionic radius ranging between 0.215–0.22 nm, which is very close to that of iodine (0.22 nm), and thus the SCN− ion can suitably replace some of the iodine in perovskite materials. In the perovskite molecule, the SCN− ions form a hydrogen bond with CH3NH3+, as shown in Fig. 13d, resulting in a stable structure, which requires more energy to break. Because the SCN− group tends to align along the same direction as CH3NH3+, the stabilized CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x has a pseudo-orthorhombic structure, resulting in a tilt in the crystal lattice.245
8. Recycling of perovskite solar cells
Recycling the materials that make up fiber-shaped perovskite devices is a crucial point to address. This strategy will lower the cost of perovskite devices, prevent the disposal of toxic waste such as lead (Pb) into the environment246 and counteract the increasing scarcity of some elements such as Sn and Au used as crucial components in perovskite optoelectronics. At the end of the working cycle, the fiber-shaped perovskite devices must be strictly handled following international electronic waste disposal guidelines.247,248 However, although the standard recycling protocols for other solar technologies are well stipulated due to their well-developed industries, this is not the case for perovskites.249 Considering the recycling of other PV technologies, their processes involve fragmentation of the devices as the first procedure, followed by the removal of the metallic components through various procedures including chemical dissolution, mechanical separation, precipitation and electrodeposition.250,251 During a sequence of the above-mentioned procedures, toxic elements are isolated before they can be recycled or disposed.248 Recycling hazardous waste is becoming a necessity due to the increasing disposal costs of ∼$1.10 per kg and the rapidly reducing quantities of some of these rare elements in nature.252 For an effective, environmentally friendly, and economical recycling process for perovskite devices, many authors have suggested approaching and accomplishing the task through the strategy of layer-by-layer stripping of the device, with the use of solvents capable of selective dissolution.
8.1 Multiple-solvent-assisted perovskite recycling
Binek et al.253 proposed a recycling pathway (Fig. 14a(i)) in which the first step involves the removal of the gold contact (top electrode) using adhesive tape. This is followed by immersing the solar cell in chlorobenzene to selectively dissolve the hole-transport layer based on spiro-OMeTAD without removing the perovskite structure. The authors also demonstrated that the first and second procedures can be combined by delaminating the gold electrode with ethyl acetate, followed by filtration to recover the gold. The authors further experimented and confirmed that the brief dissolution of the perovskite layer in double distilled water converts it into PbI2 and methylammonium iodide (MAI). MAI is directly extracted into the water, with traces of lead at a concentration of approximately 4 g mL−1. The low Pb content in the water is attributed to the short immersion time and the low solubility of PbI2 in water. In the last step, the remaining PbI2 on the substrate is removed by immersing the sample for a short time in dimethylformamide (DMF). The TiO2 layer is removed by soaking the device in DMF for an extended period, resulting in a clean core substrate. Reclaiming PbI2 from the perovskite layers of solar cells reduces their toxicity burden, while reusing this material further minimizes its chances of entering the environment by disposing of it. Therefore, the recycling procedure suggested by Binek et al.253 allows the rest of the device components to be recycled, including the Ti-wire substrate, MAI, spiro-OMeTAD, and gold layers. PbI2 was extracted from the substrate during the recycling process using DMF extraction. Binek et al.253 further prepared perovskite films from the recycled PbI2 and compared their quality with that prepared using fresh PbI2via XRD (Fig. 14a(ii)). No changes in the XRD patterns were observed for the recycled PbI2 and the resulting perovskite film. The observed reflections also correspond to the theoretical reflections of PbI2 and MAPbI3.253 Finally, a negligible difference between the PCE of the fresh and recycled device was registered, as presented in Fig. 14a(iii).
 Fig. 14  (a) Multiple solvent-assisted recycling procedures for perovskite solar cells using ethyl acetate, distilled water, and DMF solvent. (ii) XRD patterns comparing the crystal quality of the fresh and recycled perovskite films. (iii) Current–voltage curves comparing the performance of the recycled and fresh solar cells.253 (b) Schematic process for multiple-solvent perovskite solar cell recycling involving chlorobenzene, ethanol, and DMF. (ii) XRD patterns of substrates after each processing step. Blue: the original device stripped from gold and the HTM layer. Green: the device stripped from gold, the HTM layer, and CH3NH3I. Red: FTO substrate was covered with compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers. Characteristic peaks originating from the crystalline FTO substrate are denoted by #, PbI2 by *, and CH3NH3PbI3 by ‡. (iii) Current–voltage device characteristics before and after recycling and reference devices were prepared from new materials.254 (c) Single solvent perovskite solar cell recycling using DMF solvent. Schematic for the interaction of perovskite and DMF. Current density–voltage (J–V) curve for the fresh device and the device recycled 10 times.184 
Kadro et al.254 also reported a recycling route (Fig. 14b(i)) for perovskite solar cells. As part of their planned route, the solar cell was first immersed in chlorobenzene to remove both the gold counter electrode and the hole transport layer. Decanting was used to extract and separate the gold suspension in the solvent, which was then washed briefly with acetone, followed by an aqueous solution of 20% HCl and distilled water. After removing the gold cathode and the organic HTM, the substrates were fully immersed in ethanol to dissolve CH3NH3I. A vivid color change from black to bright yellow could be observed as CH3NH3I dissolved in ethanol, leaving PbI2 behind embedded on a TiO2 layer. This was followed by removing PbI2 by dripping controlled amounts of DMF solvent on the surface of the substrate, leaving only the TiO2 layer on the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate. The remaining FTO substrate was then washed with ethanol to remove any remaining solvent and allowed to dry. Finally, the TiO2-coated FTO component of the solar cell was treated with UV/O3 for 10 min, a strategy that allowed its reuse without heating. To recover the lead and other materials from the solvent solutions for reuse, methods such as electrode-positioning of lead on lead using ethylene glycol with choline chloride as the solvent were proposed by the authors. The other proposed recovery methods include using ion exchange resins such as Amberlite IR 120 to purify the solvents and recover various components for reuse.255 The XRD pattern in Fig. 14b(ii) was used to analyze the quality of the recycled materials, and the solar cells assembled using these materials demonstrated a PCE ranging from 14.0–16.0%, close to the maximum PCE of 16.1% demonstrated by the fresh solar cells (Fig. 14b(iii)).
8.2 Single-solvent-assisted perovskite recycling
Kim et al.184 reported the use of a selective dissolution approach to break down the perovskite layer in a perovskite solar cell using polar aprotic solvents such as DMF (Fig. 14c(i)). Soaking the solar cell in a polar aprotic solvent caused the deposited metal electrode to peel off, and simultaneously dissolved the perovskite and hole transport layers, leaving only the TiO2 electron transport layer-coated substrate. Because of the resonance structure of the DMF solvent, the partially negative oxygen atom in the solvent can bond with the perovskite metal cations. This interaction leads to the dissociation of the PbI6 octahedral framework, which forms the skeleton of organic–inorganic perovskite materials, resulting in high solubility of the perovskite materials in polar aprotic solvents, as shown in Fig. 14c(ii). Recovering Pb and other materials for reuse from the solvent solution is crucial. The authors considered electrodialysis, solvent extraction, ion exchange, and biosorption. After rinsing and drying the remaining solar cell substrate (mp-TiO2 coated glass), the perovskite layer, HTL, and gold electrode were re-deposited to yield a recycled solar cell. The recycled solar cells exhibited an average of 15% PCE, similar to that reported from solar cells prepared from pristine materials (Fig. 14c(iii)).184
The above-mentioned proposed layer-by-layer solvent-based method proved to be an efficient chemical approach for disintegrating perovskite devices to create solutions and suspensions from which reusable materials could be extracted using the above-mentioned approaches. Given that fiber-shaped perovskite devices use almost the same materials as their planar/flat counterparts, we believe that the methods discussed herein can be directly used to recycle fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronics or as a foundation for developing a standard method for recycling fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronics (Table 6).
Table 6 Various solvents used to recycle perovskite solar cells and their dipole moments and suitable layers of dissolution




Solvent
Chemical formula
Dipole moment
Decomposed layer




Non-polar solvents


Toluene
C6H5–CH3
0.375
• Hole transport layers (spiro-OMeTAD)254


Diethyl ether
CH3–CH2–O–CH2–CH3
1.15


Dichloromethane
CH2Cl2
1.60


Chlorobenzene
C6H5–Cl
1.69


Polar protic solvents


2-Propanol
CH3–CH(–OH)–CH3
1.58
• Extraction of CH3NH3I and traces of PbI2 from perovskite layer184,254


Ethanol
CH3–CH2–OH
1.69


Methanol
CH3–OH
1.7


Water
H–O–H
1.85


Polar aprotic solvents


Acetone
CH3–C(O)–CH3
2.88
• PbI2 from perovskite


Dimethylformamide
H–C(O)N(CH3)2
3.82
• TiO2 layer, if used in excess


Acetonitrile
CH3–CN
3.92
• Spiro-OMeTAD (HTL), if used in excess layer184


Dimethyl sulfoxide
CH3–S(O)–CH3
3.96






In summary, the above-reviewed reports reveal two approaches for perovskite recycling, i.e., the layer-by-layer multiple-solvent approach and single polar aprotic solvent approach. The recycling efficiency of the single solvent approach may not be as high compared to the multiple solvent approaches, but this method is cheaper, simpler, faster, and the solvent can be easily recovered. The recycled materials can be reclaimed from solvent solutions via methods such as electrolysis, ion exchange, evaporation, and filtration, and reused with minimum loss in power conversion efficiency. Most importantly, the toxic PbI2 and other rare and expensive solar cell components such as gold, ITO, and FTO glass substrate can be recycled and reused to minimize the disposal of toxic elements in the environment, and also to reduce the cost of raw materials and the overall cost of producing perovskite solar cells.
9. Why does the fiber geometry still lag behind its planar counterpart?
Generally, the performance in terms of efficiency of fiber-shaped devices still lags behind that of their planar counterparts, where a perfect example of this can be demonstrated using perovskite solar cells. As summarized in Fig. 1b, it has been demonstrated that the reported maximum energy conversion efficiency in planar devices is almost twice that of fiber-shaped devices. The huge difference between the maximum PCE values of these two architectures has been proposed to be instigated by factors such as the reduced surface area to unidirectional light exposure on the fiber geometry in solar cells, the low-quality films formed on curved fiber geometries, leading to the formation of defects, and thus inefficient charge carrier transport, and rapid photoactive layer degradation. Fiber-shaped devices are intended for bending and flexing. However, some photoactive and functional layers incorporated in fiber-shaped devices are crystalline, and thus highly vulnerable to cracks. Thus, these layers undergo exfoliation, resulting in a limited-service lifetime of fiber-shaped devices.
Accordingly, fiber-shaped devices with excellent flexibility, robustness, and the ability to maintain a constant efficiency with increasing bending and twisting cycles have not been fully achieved. Another issue is the scalability of fiber-shaped devices and the possible approaches for their mass and continuous production. Currently, only a few centimeters of these yarns can be fabricated in conventional laboratories using the available limited technology at a low production speed. However, some textile processes such as weaving, knitting, and embroidery, which are the popular candidates for post-yarn processing, require sufficient yarn lengths.
Furthermore, to assemble a fiber-shaped device, a core substrate with a fiber shape is required to serve as the starting point, support, and sometimes one of the electrodes in the device. In many reports, different types of substrates, such as silver yarn, carbon yarn, stainless steel, and titanium wire, have been employed for this purpose despite their many challenges such as reduced flexibility, especially for the metallic types such as silver and steel yarns, and increased internal resistance, especially in non-metallics such as carbon yarn. High-performance devices have been reported in most cases, especially in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells (FSPC) using metallic core electrodes. However, when metals are utilized in wearable electronics, they can give the impression of rigidity and stiffness. Therefore, for this technology to be fully considered for its intended applications, highly conductive, flexible, stretchable, and strong fiber-shaped core substrates need to be developed to replace the metallic electrodes.
In the twisted form, the fiber devices possess a low effective contact area, which sometimes affects their overall efficiency. For example, to enhance the charge transfer from the main perovskite yarn to its twisted carbon fiber electrode, Li et al.86 employed silver nano-wires to achieve a considerable charge transfer effect between the two twisted components of the solar yarn. However, when two yarns are twisted, part of the surface of the stimuli-responsive yarn becomes obstructed. This obstruction reduces the sensitivity, leading to a low energy conversion efficiency compared with the untwisted devices. Furthermore, the friction between the yarns in the twisted and fabric forms of electronic devices, and also the frictional wear and tear associated with the industrial/conventional fabric-forming methods such as weaving not only affect the efficiency of single-function and integrated fiber-based devices but also have a negative effect on the industrialization of this technology. For instance, Li et al.19 attributed the low power density of their reported perovskite woven solar fabric to the weaving friction, which severely damaged both the warp and weft yarns.
10. Conclusion and outlook
Fiber-shaped electronic devices are among the most promising technologies for next-generation wearable electronics because they endow textiles with incredible versatility. Wearable electronics are rapidly evolving, and consequently their applications are expanding. Therefore, the concept of utilizing the highly efficient perovskite photoactive material in the engineering of fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices has attracted increasing interest from academics and the industry. However, the research on fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronics is still in its infancy. This field encompasses solar yarns, fiber-shaped solar batteries, solar capacitors, photodetectors, light-emitting fibers, solar muscles, and solar actuators, but there is room for integrating perovskite solar systems with other fiber devices to extend their multifunctionality and self-powering in many fields.
Previous reports focused on the feasibility of innovative device designs that allow multifunctional integration and advanced materials research to achieve material stability, increased efficiency, and reduced toxicity, and research should continue in this direction. The synthesis of lead-free, efficient, and stable perovskite materials for fiber-shaped optoelectronics should be emphasized. Perovskite fiber optoelectronics can be further improved by focusing on strategies such as 2D/3D stable perovskite materials, replacing Pb with other elements to eliminate toxicity, and adopting functional nanofiber layers to enhance their flexibility and performance. Other strategies such as adopting advanced yarn encapsulation techniques to minimize material degradation due to open-air conditions and counteract friction-inspired damage should be considered. Additional effort should be devoted to devising and optimizing the layer deposition methods on fiber geometry, realizing bending stable functional layers, minimizing material wastage during layer deposition, allowing continuous production for increased length, and lowering the cost of fabricating fiber-shaped perovskite optoelectronics to further the industrialization of this technology.
Lastly, future research efforts should be directed towards achieving the most efficient recycling methods for fiber-shaped perovskite devices, maximizing the recovery of both reusable and non-reusable materials, with a negligible effect on the environment and the human operator, while keeping the cost of recycling in an affordable range. Recycling and reusing the materials from devices are the best strategies for minimizing the disposal of toxic elements such as lead (Pb) in the environment and easy methods for obtaining raw materials to avoid an increase in the cost of raw materials due to scarcity. Lastly, the field of perovskite-powered fiber-shaped devices is quite promising with increasing efficiency and great strides in other performance parameters. With further advancements in the synthesis of perovskite materials for stable and high-performance materials, together with more efficient and integration-friendly architectures, fiber-shaped devices powered by perovskite materials will be realized for practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macao Science and Technology Plan Project (Category C, Grant No. ZGCP), Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Grant No. 15302121), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21975214), National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFC2000900), Seed Fund of Research Institute of Intelligent Wearable Systems (Grant No. CD45), Start-up Fund of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Grant No. BE1H), Departmental General Research Fund of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Grant No. UAME).
References
S. Yadav, Internet of things for smart living, J. Innov. Electron. Commun. Eng., 2019, 9(1), 10–12 Search PubMed .
M. Wehner, M. T. Tolley, Y. Mengüç and Y.-L. Park, 
            et al., Pneumatic energy sources for autonomous and wearable soft robotics, Soft Robot., 2014, 1(4), 263–274 CrossRef .
Y. Ling, T. An, L. W. Yap and B. Zhu, 
            et al., Disruptive, soft, wearable sensors, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(18), 1904664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Hasan, S. Sahlan, K. Osman and M. S. Mohamed Ali, Energy harvesters for wearable electronics and biomedical devices, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6(3), 2000771 CrossRef .
A. Papa, M. Mital, P. Pisano and M. Del Giudice, E-health and wellbeing monitoring using smart healthcare devices: An empirical investigation, Technol. Forecase. Soc., 2020, 153, 119226 CrossRef .
F. Masoodi and B. A. Pandow, Internet of things: Financial perspective and its associated security concerns, Int. J. Electron. Finance, 2021, 10(3), 145–158 CrossRef .
B. Kelly, N. Abidi, D. Ethridge and E. F. Hequet, Fiber to fabric, Cotton, 2015, 57, 665–744 Search PubMed .
Z. Gong, Z. Xiang, X. OuYang and J. Zhang, 
            et al., Wearable fiber optic technology based on smart textile: A review, Materials, 2019, 12(20), 3311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ando, M. Sugimoto and T. Maeda, Wearable moment display device for nonverbal communications, IEICE Trans. Inform. Syst., 2004, 87(6), 1354–1360 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Zuo, P. Zhai and J. Shen, 
            et al., Large-area display textiles integrated with functional systems, Nature, 2021, 591(7849), 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, N. Gao, D. Liu and J. Liu, 
            et al., Structure and photoelectrical properties of natural photoactive dyes for solar cells, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8(9), 1697 CrossRef .
X. Gao, X. You, X. Zhao and W. Li, 
            et al., Flexible fiber-shaped liquid/quasi-solid-state quantum dot-sensitized solar cells based on different metal sulfide counter electrodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113(4), 043901 CrossRef .
D. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Chu and Z. Lv, 
            et al., Fiber-shaped flexible solar cells, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254(9-10), 1169–1178 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Dunlop and D. Halton, The performance of crystalline silicon photovoltaic solar modules after 22 years of continuous outdoor exposure, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14(1), 53–64 Search PubMed .
L. Meng, J. You and Y. Yang, Addressing the stability issue of perovskite solar cells for commercial applications, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(17), 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .

National Renewable Energy Laboratory BR-CEC, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed: November 2021).
Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani and C. Xiao, 
            et al., Efficient tandem solar cells with solution-processed perovskite on textured crystalline silicon, Science, 2020, 367(6482), 1135–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, A. Balilonda, A. Ali and R. Jose, 
            et al., Flexible solar yarns with 15.7% power conversion efficiency, based on electrospun perovskite composite nanofibers, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4(9), 2000269 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. Alcocer and A. R. S. Kandada, 
            et al., Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–6 Search PubMed .
I. Koutselas, L. Ducasse and G. C. Papavassiliou, Electronic properties of three-and low-dimensional semiconducting materials with Pb halide and Sn halide units, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1996, 8(9), 1217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Lyu and Q. Wang, 
            et al., Composition-dependent photoluminescence intensity and prolonged recombination lifetime of perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx films, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(79), 11727–11730 RSC .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao and P. Mulligan, 
            et al., Electron–hole diffusion lengths > 175 μm in solution-grown CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, Science, 2015, 347(6225), 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich and M. Kunst, 
            et al., Unravelling the mechanism of photoinduced charge transfer processes in lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(3), 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, The role of intrinsic defects in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(8), 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Present status and future prospects of perovskite photovoltaics, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(5), 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Perovskites: The emergence of a new era for low-cost, high-efficiency solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(21), 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang and Y. Yan, 
            et al., Halide perovskite materials for solar cells: A theoretical review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(17), 8926–8942 RSC .
Y. Lin, Y. Fang, J. Zhao and Y. Shao, 
            et al., Unveiling the operation mechanism of layered perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Leong, Z. E. Ooi, D. Sabba and C. Yi, 
            et al., Identifying fundamental limitations in halide perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(12), 2439–2445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-K. Liu, W. Xu, S. Bai and Y. Jin, 
            et al., Metal halide perovskites for light-emitting diodes, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20(1), 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin and A. Bruno, 
            et al., Lead iodide perovskite light-emitting field-effect transistor, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, Y. C. Chiu, Y. T. Li and C. C. Chueh, 
            et al., Nonvolatile perovskite-based photomemory with a multilevel memory behavior, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(33), 1702217 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, Z. Yu, K. Liu and X. Zheng, 
            et al., Grain engineering for perovskite/silicon monolithic tandem solar cells with efficiency of 25.4%, Joule, 2019, 3(1), 177–190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan and R. Uchida, 
            et al., Ultrahydrophobic 3D/2D fluoroarene bilayer-based water-resistant perovskite solar cells with efficiencies exceeding 22%, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5(6), eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gharibzadeh, I. M. Hossain, P. Fassl and B. A. Nejand, 
            et al., 2D/3D heterostructure for semitransparent perovskite solar cells with engineered bandgap enables efficiencies exceeding 25% in four-terminal tandems with silicon and CIGS, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(19), 1909919 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo and J.-D. Décoppet, 
            et al., Polymer-templated nucleation and crystal growth of perovskite films for solar cells with efficiency greater than 21%, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(10), 1–5 Search PubMed .
M. K. Assadi, S. Bakhoda, R. Saidur and H. Hanaei, Recent progress in perovskite solar cells, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 2812–2822 CrossRef CAS .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, B.R.-C.E.C., https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed: November 2021).
M. Powalla, S. Paetel, E. Ahlswede and R. Wuerz, 
            et al., Thin-film solar cells exceeding 22% solar cell efficiency: An overview on CdTe−, Cu (In, Ga) Se2−, and perovskite-based materials, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2018, 5(4), 041602 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu and Z. Yang, 
            et al., Integrating perovskite solar cells into a flexible fiber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(39), 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, K. Yan, M. Peng and X. Yu, 
            et al., Fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells with 5.3% efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(10), 3901–3906 RSC .
L. Qiu, S. He, J. Yang and F. Jin, 
            et al., An all-solid-state fiber-type solar cell achieving 9.49% efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(26), 10105–10109 RSC .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Z. Huang and H. Li, 
            et al., An overview of fiber-shaped batteries with a focus on multifunctionality, scalability, and technical difficulties, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(5), 1902151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang and H. Zou, 
            et al., Micro-cable structured textile for simultaneously harvesting solar and mechanical energy, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(10), 1–8 CAS .
G. Shao, R. Yu, X. Zhang and X. Chen, 
            et al., Making stretchable hybrid supercapacitors by knitting non-stretchable metal fibers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(35), 2003153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiang, N. Zhang and X. Fan, From fiber to fabric: Progress towards photovoltaic energy textile, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2021, 3(2), 76–106 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Park and A.-G. Oh, Bending rigidity of yarns, Text. Res. J., 2006, 76(6), 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balilonda, Q. Li, M. Tebyetekerwa and R. Tusiime, 
            et al., Perovskite solar fibers: Current status, issues and challenges, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2019, 1(2), 101–125 CrossRef .
A. Satharasinghe, T. Hughes-Riley and T. Dias, An investigation of a wash-durable solar energy harvesting textile, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28(6), 578–592 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, W. Chen and J. Wu, 
            et al., Regulation of surface texturization through copper-assisted chemical etching for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 461–468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, S. Ma, Y. Lv and Z. Li, 
            et al., Optimization of rear surface roughness and metal grid design in industrial bifacial PERC solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 216, 110712 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balilonda, Q. Li, X. Bian and R. Jose, 
            et al., Lead-free and electron transport layer-free perovskite yarns: Designed for knitted solar fabrics, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Liang and Z. Yin, 
            et al., Weft-knitted fabric for a highly stretchable and low-voltage wearable heater, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3(9), 1700193 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, F. Huang, S. Zhao and X. Lv, 
            et al., Photo-rechargeable fabrics as sustainable and robust power sources for wearable bioelectronics, Matter, 2020, 2(5), 1260–1269 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen and G. Guan, 
            et al., Integrated polymer solar cell and electrochemical supercapacitor in a flexible and stable fiber format, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(3), 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. Xie, C. Tang and Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Making fiber-shaped Ni//Bi battery simultaneously with high energy density, power density, and safety, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(3), 1905971 CrossRef CAS .
W. Teng, Q. Zhou, X. Wang and H. Che, 
            et al., Hierarchically interconnected conducting polymer hybrid fiber with high specific capacitance for flexible fiber-shaped supercapacitor, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124569 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Chang, Y. Hu and M. Huang, 
            et al., An autonomous soft actuator with light-driven self-sustained wavelike oscillation for phototactic self-locomotion and power generation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(15), 1908842 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Lu and Z. Yang, 
            et al., Elastic perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(42), 21070–21076 RSC .
Wicker, A., 2020, Jan 31. Vox, 2020: Fashion has a misinformation problem, that is bad for the environment.
J. Wei, How wearables intersect with the cloud and the internet of things: Considerations for the developers of wearables, IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., 2014, 3(3), 53–56 Search PubMed .
T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, Towards the Internet of smart clothing: A review on IoT wearables and garments for creating intelligent connected e-textiles, Electronics, 2018, 7(12), 405 CrossRef .
S. Seyedin, T. Carey, A. Arbab and L. Eskandarian, 
            et al., Fibre electronics: Towards scaled-up manufacturing of integrated e-textile systems, Nanoscale, 2021, 13(30), 12818–12847 RSC .
A. Bhalla, R. Guo and R. Roy, The perovskite structure—A review of its role in ceramic science and technology, Mater. Res. Innov., 2000, 4(1), 3–26 CrossRef CAS .
T. Atou, H. Chiba, K. Ohoyama and Y. Yamaguchi, 
            et al., Structure determination of ferromagnetic perovskite BiMnO3, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 145(2), 639–642 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lemanov, A. Sotnikov, E. Smirnova and M. Weihnacht, 
            et al., Perovskite CaTiO3 as an incipient ferroelectric, Solid State Commun., 1999, 110(11), 611–614 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Katz, Perovskite: Name puzzle and German-Russian odyssey of discovery, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2020, 103(6), e2000061 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ekanayake, J. C. M. Lim, T. Meyer and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Perovskite solar cells, Sci. Bruneiana, 2017, 16, 1 Search PubMed .
S. Mahesh, J. M. Ball, R. D. Oliver and D. P. McMeekin, 
            et al., Revealing the origin of voltage loss in mixed-halide perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(1), 258–267 RSC .
M. K. Kim, T. Jeon, H. I. Park and J. M. Lee, 
            et al., Effective control of crystal grain size in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells with a pseudohalide Pb(SCN)2 additive, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18(32), 6090–6095 RSC .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang and Z. Liu, 
            et al., Efficient and stable perovskite solar cells prepared in ambient air irrespective of the humidity, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
P. Schouwink, M. B. Ley, A. Tissot and H. Hagemann, 
            et al., Structure and properties of complex hydride perovskite materials, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–10 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung and T.-Y. Yang, 
            et al., A fluorene-terminated hole-transporting material for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(8), 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Canicoba, N. Zagni, F. Liu and G. McCuistian, 
            et al., Halide perovskite high-k field effect transistors with dynamically reconfigurable ambipolarity, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1(6), 633–640 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun and S. S. Lim, 
            et al., Long-range balanced electron- and hole-transport lengths in organic-inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342(6156), 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini and C. Menelaou, 
            et al., Electron–hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber, Science, 2013, 342(6156), 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chung, Y.-M. Kim, J.-G. Kim and Y.-J. Kim, Multiphase transformation and Ostwald's rule of stages during crystallization of a metal phosphate, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5(1), 68–73 Search PubMed .
Y. Yuan, T. J. Reece, P. Sharma and S. Poddar, 
            et al., Efficiency enhancement in organic solar cells with ferroelectric polymers, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10(4), 296–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, X. Zheng, M. Yang and Y. Zhou, 
            et al., Interface band structure engineering by ferroelectric polarization in perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Zhang, Z.-K. Wang, M. Li and Z.-Y. Liu, 
            et al., Electric-field assisted perovskite crystallization for high-performance solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(3), 1161–1170 RSC .
C. C. Zhang, Z. K. Wang, S. Yuan and R. Wang, 
            et al., Polarized ferroelectric polymers for high-performance perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(30), 1902222 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Way, J. Luke, A. D. Evans and Z. Li, 
            et al., Fluorine doped tin oxide as an alternative of indium tin oxide for bottom electrode of semi-transparent organic photovoltaic devices, AIP Adv., 2019, 9(8), 085220 CrossRef .
H. Hu, B. Dong, B. Chen and X. Gao, 
            et al., High performance fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells based on lead acetate precursor, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(1), 79–84 RSC .
L. Qiu, S. He, J. Yang and J. Deng, 
            et al., Fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells with high power conversion efficiency, Small, 2016, 12(18), 2419–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, X. Xiang, X. Tong and J. Zou, 
            et al., Wearable double-twisted fibrous perovskite solar cell, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(25), 3831–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Hua, B. Xu and L. Yang, 
            et al., The role of 3D molecular structural control in new hole transport materials outperforming spiro-OMeTAD in perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(19), 1601062 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Wu, Y. Yang and X. Liu, 
            et al., High performance and stable perovskite solar cells using vanadic oxide as a dopant for spiro-OMeTAD, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(21), 13256–13264 RSC .
W. Zhu, W. Chai, D. Chen and H. Xi, 
            et al., Recycling of FTO/TiO2 substrates: route toward simultaneously high-performance and cost-efficient carbon-based, all-inorganic CsPbIBr2 solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(4), 4549–4557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, R. Jin, Z. Xiong and S. Wu, 
            et al., Hexagonal-tiled indium tin oxide electrodes to enhance light trapping in perovskite solar cells, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1(11), 6159–6167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Cao, B. Yang and H. Li, 
            et al., NH4Cl-Modified ZnO for high-performance CsPbIBr2 perovskite solar cells via low-temperature process, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4(1), 1900363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ebrahimi, A. Kermanpur, M. Atapour and S. Adhami, 
            et al., Performance enhancement of mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with GQDs-doped TiO2 electron transport layer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 208, 110407 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and J. You, SnO2: A wonderful electron transport layer for perovskite solar cells, Small, 2018, 14(31), 1801154 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, X. Zhang, K. Wang and C. Wu, 
            et al., Stable efficiency exceeding 20.6% for inverted perovskite solar cells through polymer-optimized PCBM electron-transport layers, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(5), 3313–3320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Raoui, H. Ez-Zahraouy, N. Tahiri and O. El Bounagui, 
            et al., Performance analysis of MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cells employing diverse charge selective contacts: Simulation study, Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 948–955 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, W. Zi, Z. Yang and D. Yang, Photoelectric performance and stability comparison of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2018, 174, 933–939 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mehdi, A. Mhamdi, R. Hannachi and A. Bouazizi, MAPbBr3 perovskite solar cells via a two-step deposition process, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(23), 12906–12912 RSC .
Z. Qiu, N. Li, Z. Huang and Q. Chen, 
            et al., Recent advances in improving phase stability of perovskite solar cells, Small Methods, 2020, 4(5), 1900877 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, M. M. Menamparambath, J. Y. Hwang and S. Baik, Hierarchically structured hole transport layers of spiro-OMeTAD and multiwalled carbon nanotubes for perovskite solar cells, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8(14), 2358–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim and J. Seo, 
            et al., o-Methoxy substituents in spiro-OMeTAD for efficient inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(22), 7837–7840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin and X. Yang, 
            et al., A dopant-free hole-transporting material for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(9), 2963–2967 RSC .
S. Tsarev, S. Y. Luchkin, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride as organic electron transport layer for nip perovskite solar cells, Synth. Met., 2020, 268, 116497 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Reza, S. Mabrouk and Q. Qiao, A review on tailoring PEDOT:PSS layer for improved performance of perovskite solar cells, Proc. Nat. Res. Soc., 2018, 2(1), 02004 CrossRef .
Z. Li, B. H. Jo, S. J. Hwang and T. H. Kim, 
            et al., Bifacial passivation of organic hole transport interlayer for NiOx-based p–i–n perovskite solar cells, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6(6), 1802163 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jung, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon and W. S. Yang, 
            et al., Thermal stability of CuSCN hole conductor-based perovskite solar cells, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(18), 2592–2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takahashi and Y. Suzuki, Perovskite solar cells with CuI inorganic hole conductor, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56(8S2), 08MC04 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Q. Xi, G. Gao and W. Yang, 
            et al., Cu2O particles mediated growth of perovskite for high efficient hole-transporting-layer free solar cells in ambient conditions, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 937–942 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Liu, W. Li and L. Zhu, 
            et al., Inorganic perovskite solar cells based on carbon electrodes, Nano Energy, 2020, 25, 105160 CrossRef .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee and S.-W. Park, 
            et al., 6.5% efficient perovskite quantum-dot-sensitized solar cell, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(10), 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im and K.-B. Lee, 
            et al., Lead iodide perovskite sensitized all-solid-state submicron thin film mesoscopic solar cell with efficiency exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore and S. K. Pathak, 
            et al., Ultrasmooth organic–inorganic perovskite thin-film formation and crystallization for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–10 CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li and S. Luo, 
            et al., Interface engineering of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Science, 2014, 345(6196), 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang and S. Hur, 
            et al., Colloidally prepared La-doped BaSnO3 electrodes for efficient, photostable perovskite solar cells, Science, 2017, 356(6334), 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue and J. Liu, 
            et al., Efficient and stable large-area
perovskite solar cells with inorganic charge extraction layers, Science, 2015, 350(6263), 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh and T. N. Mandal, 
            et al., Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7(6), 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mostafaeipour, M. Alvandimanesh, F. Najafi and A. Issakhov, Identifying challenges and barriers for development of solar energy by using fuzzy best-worst method: A case study, Energy, 2021, 226, 120355 CrossRef .
M. H. Kumar, N. Yantara, S. Dharani and M. Graetzel, 
            et al., Flexible, low-temperature, solution processed ZnO-based perovskite solid state solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49(94), 11089–11091 RSC .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, 
            et al., Low-temperature solution-processed perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and flexibility, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, H. Sun, S. Xie and J. Zhang, 
            et al., A fiber-shaped solar cell showing a record power conversion efficiency of 10%, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(1), 45–51 RSC .
D. Wang, S. Hou, H. Wu and C. Zhang, 
            et al., Fiber-shaped all-solid state dye sensitized solar cell with remarkably enhanced performance via substrate surface engineering and TiO2 film modification, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(17), 6383–6388 RSC .
S. He, L. Qiu, X. Fang and G. Guan, 
            et al., Radically grown obelisk-like ZnO arrays for perovskite solar cell fibers and fabrics through a mild solution process, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(18), 9406–9410 RSC .
M. Lee, Y. Ko and Y. Jun, Efficient fiber-shaped perovskite photovoltaics using silver nanowires as top electrode, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(38), 19310–19313 RSC .
B. Dong, J. Hu, X. Xiao and S. Tang, 
            et al., High-efficiency fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell by vapor-assisted deposition with a record efficiency of 10.79%, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4(7), 1900131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, J. Ren, X. Fang and H. Peng, Integration: An effective strategy to develop multifunctional energy storage devices, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(4), 1501867 CrossRef .
J. Han, C. Xu, J. Zhang and N. Xu, 
            et al., Multifunctional coaxial energy fiber toward energy harvesting, storage, and utilization, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(1), 1597–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, B. Dong and D. Zou, Three dimensional photovoltaic fibers for wearable energy harvesting and conversion, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27(3), 611–621 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Sun, 
            et al., Energy harvesting and storage in 1D devices, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(6), 1–12 CAS .
C. Li, F. Jiang, C. Liu and P. Liu, 
            et al., Present and future thermoelectric materials toward wearable energy harvesting, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 543–557 CrossRef .
C.-W. Kan and Y.-L. Lam, Future trend in wearable electronics in the textile industry, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11(9), 3914 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Fu, J. He and X. Shi, 
            et al., Application challenges in fiber and textile electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(5), 1901971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Angelini, M. Caon, S. Carrino, L. Bergeron, et al., Designing a desirable smart bracelet for older adults, in Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct publication,  2013 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Xu, Z. Zhou and S. Xi, 
            et al., A safe flexible self-powered wristband system by integrating defective MnO2–x nanosheet-based zinc-ion batteries with perovskite solar cells, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(6), 10597–10608 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Cao and J. Wang, A review on solution-processed perovskite/organic hybrid photodetectors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9(16), 5302–5322 RSC .
F. Cao, X. Xu, D. Yu and H. Zeng, Lead-free halide perovskite photodetectors spanning from near-infrared to X-ray range: A review, Nanophotonics, 2020, 10(8), 2221–2247 CrossRef .
P. K. Yadav, B. Ajitha, Y. A. K. Reddy and A. Sreedhar, Recent advances in development of nanostructured photodetectors from ultraviolet to infrared region: A review, Chemosphere, 2021, 1(12), 130473 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Adams, N. Adhikari, H. Parker and O. Okoli, Flexible wire-shaped perovskite photodetector via joule heating for improved crystallization and performance, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(15), 1800082 CrossRef .
H. Sun, W. Tian, F. Cao and J. Xiong, 
            et al., Ultrahigh-performance self-powered flexible double-twisted fibrous broadband perovskite photodetector, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(21), 1706986 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sharma, V. K. Jethani, A. Sharma and A. Kapoor, 
            et al., Light fidelity technology (LiFi): An overview and its application, Ann. Romanian Soc. Cell Biol., 2021, 25(6), 11762–11767 Search PubMed .
M. Cinquino, C. T. Prontera, M. Pugliese and R. Giannuzzi, 
            et al., Light-emitting textiles: Device architectures, working principles, and applications, Micromachines, 2021, 12(6), 652 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Hwang, S. Kwon, J. B. Shin and H. Kim, 
            et al., Bright-multicolor, highly efficient, and addressable phosphorescent organic light-emitting fibers: Toward wearable textile information displays, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(18), 2009336 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Qiao and Z. Xia, Learning from mineral structures toward new luminescence materials for light-emitting diode applications, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33(4), 1083–1098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Z. Qin, S. Gong and L. Qin, 
            et al., White light emitting nanofibers constructed by electrospinning: Advances and perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9(15), 5036–5054 RSC .
Y. Liu, R. Dai, M. Jiang and K. Tang, 
            et al., Enhanced luminescence/photodetecting bifunctional devices based on ZnO: Ga microwire/p-Si heterojunction by incorporating Ag nanowires, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3(19), 5605–5617 RSC .
Z. Wang, F. Wang, L. Yin and Y. Huang, 
            et al., Electrostatically tunable lateral MoTe2 p–n junction for use in high-performance optoelectronics, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(27), 13245–13250 RSC .
Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang and Y. Yang, 
            et al., Polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells, Science, 1995, 269(5227), 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shan, C. Wei, Y. Jiang and J. Song, 
            et al., Perovskite light-emitting/detecting bifunctional fibres for wearable LiFi communication, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Du, X. Hu, C. Yi and H. C. Liu, 
            et al., Self-powered electronics by integration of flexible solid-state graphene-based supercapacitors with high performance perovskite hybrid solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(16), 2420–2427 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Shen, 
            et al., A power pack based on organometallic perovskite solar cell and supercapacitor, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), 1782–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-y. Dong, X.-l. Zhang and T. Liu, Artificial muscles for wearable assistance and rehabilitation, Front. Inform. Technol. Electron. Eng., 2018, 19(11), 1303–1315 CrossRef .
T. Noritsugu, D. Sasaki, M. Kameda and A. Fukunaga, 
            et al., Wearable power assist device for standing up motion using pneumatic rubber artificial muscles, J. Robot. Mechatron., 2007, 19(6), 619–628 CrossRef .
M. Ali, T. Ueki, D. Tsurumi and T. Hirai, Influence of plasticizer content on the transition of electromechanical behavior of PVC gel actuator, Langmuir, 2011, 27(12), 7902–7908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Li and M. Hashimoto, Low-voltage planar PVC gel actuator with high performances, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 282, 482–489 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Park, E.-J. Shin, Y. Yoo and S. Choi, 
            et al., Soft haptic actuator based on knitted PVC gel fabric, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2019, 67(1), 677–685 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, E. Bilotti, C. W. Bastiaansen and T. Peijs, Transparent semi-crystalline polymeric materials and their nanocomposites: A review, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2020, 60(10), 2351–2376 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. A. Bhatti, E. Bilotti, H. Zhang and S. Varghese, 
            et al., Ultra-high actuation stress polymer actuators as light-driven artificial muscles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(29), 33210–33218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Won, K. K. Kim, H. Kim and J. J. Park, 
            et al., Transparent soft actuators/sensors and camouflage skins for imperceptible soft robotics, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33(19), 2002397 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hanif, M. Ramzan, M. Rahman and M. Khan, 
            et al., Studying power output of PV solar panels at different temperatures and tilt angles, ISESCO J. Sci. Technol., 2012, 8(14), 9–12 Search PubMed .
J. Qi, L. Li, H. Xiong and A. C. Wang, 
            et al., Highly efficient walking perovskite solar cells based on thermomechanical polymer films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(45), 26154–26161 RSC .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao and Z. Xiao, 
            et al., Scalable fabrication of efficient organolead trihalide perovskite solar cells with doctor-bladed active layers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(5), 1544–1550 RSC .
B. Gao and J. Meng, High efficiently CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells fabricated by multi-step spin coating method, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 1223–1229 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dou, J. B. Whitaker, K. Bruening and D. T. Moore, 
            et al., Roll-to-roll printing of perovskite solar cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(10), 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bishop, J. A. Smith and D. G. Lidzey, Development of spray-coated perovskite solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(43), 48237–48245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Ahmadian-Yazdi, F. Zabihi, M. Habibi and M. Eslamian, Effects of process parameters on the characteristics of mixed-halide perovskite solar cells fabricated by one-step and two-step sequential coating, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Huang, Q.-H. Liu, H. Tsai and S. Shrestha, 
            et al., A simple one-step method with wide processing window for high-quality perovskite mini-module fabrication, Joule, 2021, 5(4), 958–974 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, C. Li, X. Sun and R. Xu, 
            et al., Efficient and hysteresis-less pseudo-planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells fabricated by a facile and solution-saving one-step dip-coating method, Org. Electron., 2017, 40, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adnan, Z. Irshad and J. K. Lee, Facile all-dip-coating deposition of highly efficient (CH3)3NPbI3−xClx perovskite materials from aqueous non-halide lead precursor, RSC Adv., 2020, 10(48), 29010–29017 RSC .
M. Adnan and J. K. Lee, All sequential dip-coating processed perovskite layers from an aqueous lead precursor for high efficiency perovskite solar cells, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8(1), 1–10 Search PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin and M. Yuan, 
            et al., Low trap-state density and long carrier diffusion in organolead trihalide perovskite single crystals, Science, 2015, 347(6221), 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Seo, Y. Choi, B. Koo and A. Jang, 
            et al., Robust nano-architectured composite thin films for a low-temperature solid oxide fuel cell cathode, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(24), 9394–9402 RSC .
H. Kim, H. G. Seo, Y. Choi and D.-K. Lim, 
            et al., Cathodic electrochemical deposition: A new strategy to enhance the activity and stability of silver cathodes for thin-film solid oxide fuel cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(29), 14491–14497 RSC .
Y. Lei, L. Gu, W. He and Z. Jia, 
            et al., Intrinsic charge carrier dynamics and device stability of perovskite/ZnO mesostructured solar cells in moisture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(15), 5474–5481 RSC .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat and A. Mishra, 
            et al., Vapor-assisted deposition of highly efficient, stable black-phase FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, Science, 2020, 370(6512), eabb8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sheng, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang and S. Chen, 
            et al., Methylammonium lead bromide perovskite-based solar cells by vapor-assisted deposition, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(7), 3545–3549 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong and S. Luo, 
            et al., Planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells via vapor-assisted solution process, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(2), 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Wang, Y. Lei and Z. Ci, 
            et al., Crystallization kinetics in 2D perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(43), 2002558 CrossRef CAS .
A. Günzler, E. Bermudez-Ureña, L. A. Muscarella and M. Ochoa, 
            et al., Shaping perovskites: In situ crystallization mechanism of rapid thermally annealed, prepatterned perovskite films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(5), 6854–6863 CrossRef .
V. Baheti and Y. Wang, Ohmic heating and mechanical stability of carbon fabric/green epoxy composites after incorporation of fly ash particles, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 26, 101710 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghandi, M. Shamanian, M. R. Salmani and J. Kangazian, Improvement of the microstructural features and mechanical properties of advanced high-strength steel DP590 welds, Int. J. Min., Metall. Mater., 2021, 28(6), 1022–1029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moshfeghian, H. Azimi, M. Mahkam and M. Kalaee, 
            et al., Effect of solution properties on electrospinning of polymer nanofibers: A study on fabrication of PVDF nanofibers by electrospinning in DMAC and (DMAC/acetone) solvents, Adv. Appl. NanoBio-Technol., 2021, 2(2), 53–58 CAS .
D. Gebauer and H. Cölfen, Prenucleation clusters and non-classical nucleation, Nano Today, 2011, 6(6), 564–584 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Tournier, Homogeneous nucleation of phase transformations in supercooled water, Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 2020, 579, 411895 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Wei and Y. Du, 
            et al., Preparation of ordered MAPbI3 perovskite needle-like crystal films by electric field and microdroplet jetting 3D printing, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 20(3), 1405–1414 CrossRef .
Z. Hammadi and S. Veesler, New approaches on crystallization under electric fields, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 2009, 101(1–3), 38–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, S. L. Kwon and S. Y. Park, 
            et al., Selective dissolution of halide perovskites as a step towards recycling solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, H. Cho and T.-W. Lee, Metal halide perovskite light emitters, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113(42), 11694–11702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. McRae, C. J. Firby and A. Y. Elezzabi, Rechargeable aqueous electrochromic batteries utilizing Ti-substituted tungsten molybdenum oxide based Zn2+ ion intercalation cathodes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(15), 1807065 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. I. Kim, E. Samuel, B. Joshi and M.-W. Kim, 
            et al., Highly efficient electrodes for supercapacitors using silver-plated carbon nanofibers with enhanced mechanical
flexibility and long-term stability, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Wang, N. Wu and C. Han, 
            et al., Multi-phase SiZrOC nanofibers with outstanding flexibility and stability for thermal insulation up to 1400 °C, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128304 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Troncoso, P. Aguado-Puente and J. Kohanoff, Effect of intrinsic defects on the thermal conductivity of PbTe from classical molecular dynamics simulations, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 32(4), 045701 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao and L. Li, 
            et al., Chemical reduction of intrinsic defects in thicker heterojunction planar perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(23), 1606774 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Bessaire, M. Mathieu, V. Salles and T. Yeghoyan, 
            et al., Synthesis of continuous conductive PEDOT:PSS nanofibers by electrospinning: A conformal coating for optoelectronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(1), 950–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Davis, H. J. Walls, K. C. Mills and K. Guzan, 
            et al., Optical properties of electrospun nanofiber substrates, MRS Online Proc. Library, 2009, 1240, 1240-WW10-05,  DOI:10.1557/PROC-1240-WW10-05 .
M. El-Nahass and E. El-Menyawy, Thickness dependence of structural and optical properties of indium tin oxide nanofiber thin films prepared by electron beam evaporation onto quartz substrates, Mater. Sci. Eng.: B, 2012, 177(2), 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alaeian, A. C. Atre and J. A. Dionne, Optimized light absorption in Si wire array solar cells, J. Opt., 2012, 14(2), 024006 CrossRef .
O. A. Abdelraouf and N. K. Allam, Towards nanostructured perovskite solar cells with enhanced efficiency: Coupled optical and electrical modeling, Sol. Energy, 2016, 137, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chung, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and R. Zhu, 
            et al., Solution-processed flexible transparent conductors composed of silver nanowire networks embedded in indium tin oxide nanoparticle matrices, Nano Res., 2012, 5(11), 805–814 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali, A. P. Patil and P. S. Patil, 
            et al., Highly efficient mixed-halide mixed-cation perovskite solar cells based on rGO–TiO2 composite nanofibers, Energy, 2019, 189, 116396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Solution chemistry engineering toward high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(23), 4175–4186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, L. Zhang, C. Peng and L. Rao, 
            et al., Preparation and characterization of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite deposited onto polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofiber substrates, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45(3), 312–314 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Toscano and T. R. Guilarte, Lead neurotoxicity: From exposure to molecular effects, Brain Res. Rev., 2005, 49(3), 529–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Winship, Toxicity of tin and its compounds, Adverse Drug React. Acute Poisoning Rev., 1988, 7(1), 19–38 CAS .
T. Florence, S. Lilley and J. Stauber, Skin absorption of lead, Lancet, 1988, 332(8603), 157–158 CrossRef .
M. Mohammadyan, M. Moosazadeh, A. Borji and N. Khanjani, 
            et al., Exposure to lead and its effect on sleep quality and digestive problems in soldering workers, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2019, 191(3), 1–9 Search PubMed .
D. R. Smith, J. D. Osterloh and A. R. Flegal, Use of endogenous, stable lead isotopes to determine release of lead from the skeleton, Environ. Health Perspect., 1996, 104(1), 60–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. Puzas and B. F. Boyce, Chapter 22 – Metal ion toxicity in the skeleton: Lead and aluminum, in Principles of Bone Biology (Fourth Edition), ed. J. P. Bilezikian, T. J. Martin, T. L. Clemens and C. J. Rosen,  2020, Academic Press, pp. 527–537 Search PubMed .
K. Dedecker and G. Grancini, Dealing with lead in hybrid perovskite: A challenge to tackle for a bright future of this technology?, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(31), 2001471 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Virgolini and M. Aschner, Molecular mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity, Adv. Neurotoxicol., 2021, 5, 159 Search PubMed .
Y. El Ajjouri, F. Locardi, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda and M. Prato, 
            et al., Mechanochemical synthesis of Sn(II) and Sn(IV) iodide perovskites and study of their structural, chemical, thermal, optical, and electrical properties, Energy Technol., 2020, 8(4), 1900788 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ricciarelli, D. Meggiolaro, F. Ambrosio and F. De Angelis, Instability of tin iodide perovskites: Bulk p-doping versus surface tin oxidation, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(9), 2787–2795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Toxicity of organometal halide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15(3), 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Pan, F. Zhou and G. Niu, 
            et al., Lead-free halide perovskites: Review of structure–property relationship, and applications in light emitting devices and radiation detectors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(20), 11931–11943 RSC .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate and C. Wehrenfennig, 
            et al., Lead-free organic–inorganic tin halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(9), 3061–3068 RSC .
B. W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang and H. Rensmo, 
            et al., Bismuth based hybrid perovskites A3Bi2I9 (A: methylammonium or cesium) for solar cell application, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(43), 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Liang, X. Wang and X. Cui, Lead replacement in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1(10), 1500089 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, W. Liu, R. Li and M. Zhang, 
            et al., Lead-less mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with enhanced photovoltaic performance by strontium chloride substitution, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44(15), 18863–18870 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zhu, Z. Liang, Z. Huo and W. K. Ng, 
            et al., Low-bandgap methylammonium–rubidium cation Sn-rich perovskites for efficient ultraviolet-visible-near infrared photodetectors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(16), 1706068 CrossRef .
S. F. Hoefler, G. Trimmel and T. Rath, Progress on lead-free metal halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications: A review, Mon. Chem.-Chem. Mon., 2017, 148(5), 795–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. I. Al-Muhimeed, A. Shafique, A. A. AlObaid and M. Morsi, 
            et al., New lead-free double perovskites X2GeI6 (X = K, Rb, Cs) for solar cells, and renewable energy as an alternate of hybrid perovskites, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45(13), 19645–19652 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Lee, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Lead-free all-inorganic halide perovskite quantum dots: Review and outlook, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2020, 57(5), 455–479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Pan, F. Zhou and G. Niu, 
            et al., Lead-free halide perovskites: Review of structure-property relationship, and applications in light emitting devices and radiation detectors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11931–11943 RSC .
I. Zeba, R. Kiran, M. Shakil and M. Rafique, 
            et al., Study the effect of magnesium doping concentration on structural and optoelectronic response of NaCa1−xMgxF3 fluoro-perovskite: First-principles computation, Optik, 2020, 218, 164990 CrossRef CAS .
R. Castillo, J. Cisterna, I. Brito and S. Conejeros, 
            et al., Structure and properties of (CH3NH3)3Tl2Cl9: A thallium-based hybrid perovskite-like compound, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59(14), 9471–9475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo and T. N. Mandal, 
            et al., Chemical management for colorful, efficient, and stable inorganic–organic hybrid nanostructured solar cells, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(4), 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tenuta, C. Zheng and O. Rubel, Thermodynamic origin of instability in hybrid halide perovskites, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
B.w. Park and S. I. Seok, Intrinsic instability of inorganic–organic hybrid halide perovskite materials, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 1805337 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini and D. J. Slotcavage, 
            et al., Mapping electric field-induced switchable poling and structural degradation in hybrid lead halide perovskite thin films, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(20), 1500962 CrossRef .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Understanding degradation mechanisms and improving stability of perovskite photovoltaics, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119(5), 3418–3451 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lanzetta, T. Webb, N. Zibouche and X. Liang, 
            et al., Degradation mechanism of hybrid tin-based perovskite solar cells and the critical role of tin(IV) iodide, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong and P. P. Boix, 
            et al., Lead-free halide perovskite solar cells with high photocurrents realized through vacancy modulation, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(41), 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Marshall, M. Walker, R. Walton and R. Hatton, Enhanced stability and efficiency in hole-transport-layer-free CsSnI3 perovskite photovoltaics. Nature, Energy, 2016, 1(12), 1–9 Search PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina and X. Bu, 
            et al., Fast oxygen diffusion and iodide defects mediate oxygen-induced degradation of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lanzetta, N. Aristidou and S. A. Haque, Stability of lead and tin halide perovskites: The link between defects and degradation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(2), 574–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rahim, A. Cheng, C. Lyu and T. Shi, 
            et al., Geometric analysis and formability of the cubic A2BX6 vacancy-ordered double perovskite structure, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(22), 9573–9583 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, E. Salager and A. Rakhmatullin, 
            et al., Local structure and dynamics in methylammonium, formamidinium, and cesium tin(II) mixed-halide perovskites from 119Sn Solid-state NMR, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(17), 7813–7826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Goldschmidt, Crystal structure and chemical correlation, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1927, 60, 1263–1296 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding and L. Feng, 
            et al., Formability of ABX3 (X= F, Cl, Br, I) Halide Perovskites, Acta Crystallograph. Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64(6), 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rini, N. Dean, J. Itatani and Y. Tomioka, 
            et al., Control of the electronic phase of a manganite by mode-selective vibrational excitation, Nature, 2007, 449(7158), 72–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, A. Bruno, G. Han and T. M. Koh, 
            et al., Efficient and ambient-air-stable solar cell with highly oriented 2D@ 3D perovskites, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(30), 1801654 CrossRef .
X. Chen, M. Ding, T. Luo and T. Ye, 
            et al., Self-assembly of 2D/3D perovskites by crystal engineering for efficient air-processed, air-stable inverted planar perovskite solar cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(3), 2975–2982 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Sutanto, N. Drigo, V. I. Queloz and I. Garcia-Benito, 
            et al., Dynamical evolution of the 2D/3D interface: A hidden driver behind perovskite solar cell instability, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(5), 2343–2348 RSC .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann and E. Mosconi, 
            et al., One-year stable perovskite solar cells by 2D/3D interface engineering, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, Z. Li and R. Crisp, 
            et al., Comparison of recombination dynamics in CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films: Influence of exciton binding energy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(23), 4688–4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kashiwaya, J. Morasch, V. Streibel and T. Toupance, 
            et al., The work function of TiO2, Surfaces, 2018, 1(1), 73–89 CrossRef .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, Effects of surface blocking layer of Sb2S3 on nanocrystalline TiO2 for CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(30), 16995–17000 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang and Z. Liu, 
            et al., Efficient and stable perovskite solar cells prepared in ambient air irrespective of the humidity, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
I. R. Benmessaoud, A.-L. Mahul-Mellier, E. Horváth and B. Maco, 
            et al., Health hazards of methylammonium lead iodide based perovskites: Cytotoxicity studies, Toxicol. Res., 2016, 5(2), 407–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ilankoon, Y. Ghorbani, M. N. Chong and G. Herath, 
            et al., E-waste in the international context – A review of trade flows, regulations, hazards, waste management strategies and technologies for value recovery, Waste Manage., 2018, 82, 258–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Fthenakis, End-of-life management and recycling of PV modules, Energy Policy, 2000, 28(14), 1051–1058 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Y. Lin, C. Tai and R. Sivakumar, 
            et al., A novel approach for recycling of kerf loss silicon from cutting slurry waste for solar cell applications, J. Cryst. Grow., 2008, 310(15), 3403–3406 CrossRef CAS .
E. Klugmann-Radziemska, P. Ostrowski, K. Drabczyk and P. Panek, 
            et al., Experimental validation of crystalline silicon solar cells recycling by thermal and chemical methods, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94(12), 2275–2282 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Fernández, R. Ferrer, D. Aponte and P. Fernandez, Recycling silicon solar cell waste in cement-based systems, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95(7), 1701–1706 CrossRef .
V. Fthenakis and P. Moskowitz, Photovoltaics: Environmental, health and safety issues and perspectives, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2000, 8(1), 27–38 CAS .
A. Binek, M. L. Petrus, N. Huber and H. Bristow, 
            et al., Recycling perovskite solar cells to avoid lead waste, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(20), 12881–12886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Kadro, N. Pellet, F. Giordano and A. Ulianov, 
            et al., Proof-of-concept for facile perovskite solar cell recycling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(10), 3172–3179 RSC .
G. W. Bodamer and R. Kunin, Behavior of ion exchange resins in solvents other than water-swelling and exchange characteristics, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1953, 45(11), 2577–2580 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the p–i–n layer-by-layer architecture in fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. (b) Variation in the power conversion efficiency with time for flat/planar and fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells. Plotted data for planar/flat and fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells was extracted from ref. 18 and 34–40 and ref. 19 and 41–43, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic showing the breakdown of different fiber assemblies and their associated benefits in optoelectronic devices. In this illustration, the single and twisted yarn images were extracted from ref. 44 and the fabric image from ref. 45 with permission.	 
I ∝ r4	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped and planar devices, demonstrating the effect of diameter on the minimum force required to cause bending. (b) Multifunctional integration achievable with fabric and textile structures.64 (c) Schematic diagrams illustrating the interaction of light rays with (i) fabric devices and (ii) flat/planar all-solid devices.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the crystal structure of an organic–inorganic perovskite, where the central A-atom can either be (CH3NH3+, Cs+, and FA+), while the B atom can be (Sn+, Pb+, Ge+, etc.) surrounded by six halogen atoms. (b) Energy diagram representation and charge transfer pathway in a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell under illumination. (c) Planar device structure demonstrating the generation and flow of charge carriers in solar cells based on 3D perovskite materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29.	 

Back electrodes	
	FTO	−4.7	
	
89

ITO	−4.4	
	
90

Electron transport layer	Metal oxides	ZnO	−4.4	−7.8	
91

TiO2	−4.1	−7.3	
92

SnO2	−4.5	−7.8	
93

Conjugated polymer	PCBM	−4.33	−6.16	
94

Perovskites	Methylammonium based	MAPbI3	−3.93	−5.43	
95

Formamidinium based	FAPbI3	−4.0	−5.4	
96

Bromine based	MAPbBr3	−3.36	−5.58	
97

Cesium based	CsPbIBr2	−3.93	−6.0	
91

CsPbI3	−3.6	−5.69	
98

Hole transport layer (HTL)	Small molecules	Spiro-OMeTAD	−2.3	−5.2	
99

Pm-spiro-OMeTAD	−2.3	−5.3	
100

Po- Spiro-OMeTAD	−2.2	−5.2	
100

TTF-1	−1.98	−5.05	
101

Polymer materials	P3HT	−3.0	−5.0	
101

PTTA	−1.8	−5.1	
102

PEDOT:PSS	−2.0	−5.2	
103

Inorganic materials	NiOx	−1.80	−5.2	
104

CuSbS2	−3.85	−5.25	
95

CuSCN	−1.5	−5.3	
105

CuI	−2.2	−5.3	
106

Cu2O	−3.2	−5.37	
107

Top electrode	
	Carbon	−5.1	
	
108

Metallic electrodes	Gold	−5.1	
	

Cupper	−5.1	
	

Silver	−4.5	
	


 	Fig. 5  (a) Steel core pioneering fiber solar cell. (i and ii) SEM images showing the arrangement of various layers and the yarn cross-section, respectively. Images reprinted from ref. 41. (b) Schematic of an Ag nano wall-based perovskite yarn as the transparent top electrode with (i and ii) cross-section and surface SEM images showing the arrangement of the various layers in the solar yarn. Reprinted from ref. 122. (c) Schematic of a highly flexible and double-twisted perovskite yarn based on double-twisted carbon nanofibers. (i and ii) SEM images showing the bent solar yarn and the arrangement of the various layers, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 86. (d) Schematic layer structure and surface SEM images of the highly elastic perovskite solar yarn reported by Li et al. (i) Top view of aligned TiO2 nanotubes, (ii) top view of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, (iii) top view of the hole transport layer, and (iv) elastic perovskite solar fiber solar cell with a pitch distance of 1.25 mm. Reprinted from ref. 60. (e) Schematic layer structure, cross-section, and surface SEM images of the fiber-shaped perovskite solar yarn reported by Hu et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. (f) Schematic layer structure of the solar yarn introduced by Qui et al. (i) yarn cross-section and (ii) SEM images of (a and b) TiO2 nanotube array showing top and side views and (c and d) PbI2 nanoplate array showing top and side views, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85.	 
Pb(CH3COO)2 + CH3NH3I + DMF → (CH3NH3I)x–PbI2–(DMF)y + CH3NH2↑ + DMF↑ + CH3COOH↑	(R1)
(CH3NH3I)x–PbI2–(DMF)y → CH3NH3PbI3 + DMF↑ + CH3NH3I↑	(R2)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic presentation and cross-sectional SEM image of the fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell based on the lead acetate precursor. Reprinted from ref. 84. (b) Schematic layer structure of the rectangular cross-section perovskite solar yarn with (i) SEM image of the perovskite layer and (ii) graph presenting the variation in energy conversion efficiency with the number of twisting cycles. Inset is a photograph of an electric watch powered by the fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell. Images reprinted from ref. 43. (c) Schematic layer-by-layer structure of fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell assembled via vapor-assisted deposition: (i) cross-section SEM image showing the device layers and (ii) surface SEM image of a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell. Reprinted from ref. 123.	 

CH3NH3PbI3	48.7	10.2	0.667	3.3	5a41
CH3NH3PbI3	44.0	11.97	0.731	3.85	5b122
CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x	56.4	8.75	0.615	3.03	5c86
CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x	
	3.50	0.630	5.22	5d60
CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x	60.9	12.32	0.714	5.35	5e42
CH3NH3PbI3	56.0	14.20	0.85	7.1	5f85
CH3NH3PbI3	66.0	14.18	0.96	7.53	6a84
CH3NH3PbI3	0.656	15.9	0.91	9.49	6b43
CH3NH3PbI3	0.75	15.14	0.95	10.79	6c123
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx–C61–PVP	72.5	4.75	1.52	7.49	53
CH3NH3PbI3–PVP	54.2	11.94	1.92	15.7	19

 	Fig. 7  (a) Digital photographs demonstrating the integration process of the self-powered smart bracelet. (ii) V–t curves of the PSC-ZIB device (the purple and red lines correspond to the 1st–3rd cycles, galvanostatic charging and discharging at 2 mA with a power supply and the green and red lines correspond to the 4th–6th cycles, charging at around 2 mA with flexible PSC and discharging at 2 mA with a power supply, respectively). (iii) Charging curve of the self-powered smart bracelet under outdoor sunlight and the discharging curve in the subsequent running process. (iv) Charging curve of the self-powered smart bracelet in room light and the discharging curve in the subsequent running process. Reprinted from ref. 132. (b) (i) Schematic layer presentation of a carbon nanofiber-based perovskite photo-detector yarn. (ii) Energy band diagram of wire-shaped perovskite photodetector. (iii) Responsivity and detectivity of wire-shaped perovskite photodetector at 585 and 617 nm wavelength. Extracted from ref. 136. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the process for the fabrication of the fiber-shaped photo-detector. (ii) Graph demonstrating the variation of photo-response with a change in wavelength (iii) energy-level diagram of a photodetector. Reprinted from ref. 137 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) (i) Schematic of the hybrid strategy of QD inks. (ii) Schematic illustration of the dynamic dip-coating process. (b) (i) Schematic illustration of the multiple dip-coating stages for the transparent electrodes and QDs in the fabrication of a perovskite fibre. (ii) Schematic of the structure of a perovskite EL fiber. Inset: Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite fibre. (iii) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism (LED mode) of the light-emitting/detecting bifunctional perovskite fibre. (c) (i) Electroluminescence spectra of green and a red electroluminescent perovskite fibre (inset: photograph of the green electroluminescent perovskite fibers and chromaticity coordinates of the green and electroluminescent perovskite fibers). (ii) Current density–voltage–luminance characteristics of an electroluminescent perovskite fibre. Figure reprinted with permission from ref. 146.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cross-section and alignment of suggested layout for a perovskite fiber solar capacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. (b) (i) Schematic of a PVC gel actuator before and after applying an electric field. The electrically induced creep deformation and structural modulation after the electromechanical transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (ii) Proposed schematic for a solar-muscle system. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the proposed sunflower-like solar cells. (ii) Schematic mechanism of the LDPE/PP actuator in its original and bending state, which can be attached to a solar cell to realize a solar actuator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. (d) Function mechanism of suggested photo-piezoelectric fiber perovskite device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Summary of the steps involved in the sequential dip-coating method. Flow chart developed based on the information provided in ref. 43. (b) Presentation of the cathode deposition method results. (i and ii) SEM images of the porous PbI2 layer and perovskite crystal formed after reacting with CH3NH3I. (iii and iv) XRD graphs comparing the crystal quality of the electrodeposition and spin-coated samples. Images extracted from ref. 85. (c) Presentation of vapor-assisted deposition method. (i) SEM images of the dense and porous PbI2 layers synthesized at 70 °C and room temperature, respectively. The directional arrows indicate the resultant crystal SEM images after CH3NH3I vapor deposition on each PbI2 layer. The corresponding XRD trends (S1–S4) show the effect of the nature of the PbI2 layer (porous and compact) and their resultant complete crystallization times. Images extracted from ref. 123 with permission.	 
Q = I2Rt	(2)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Single CNY yarn coated with perovskite and connected to a power source for joule heating application. SEM images of MAPbI3-coated CNY using (i) Joule heating and (ii) hot plate annealing method. The XRD spectral trends on the sides demonstrate the difference in crystal quality produced by these two techniques. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. (b) Electrospinning setup for direct spinning on a yarn substrate. (i and ii) SEM images of electrospun perovskite–PVP photoactive nanofibers, displayed at different magnifications. (iii) Cross-section image of a silver yarn substrate after wrapping it up with photoactive nanofibers. (iv) XRD crystallography demonstrating the quality of the crystal phase of the nanofibers.53	 
2H2O(l) → O2(g) + H+(aq) + 4e−	(R3)
2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(l)	(R4)

Electrospinning19,53	Electrohydrodynamic	• Uniform layers	• High voltage requirement
• Ease of control of perovskite crystal size by varying voltage and relative humidity	• Polymeric composition effects
• High deposition speed
• Crystal size ≥275 nm
• Bending stable layers
Dip-coating165,166	Electrostatic adsorption	• Simple and fast	• Solution wastage
• Good crystal quality (Sequential dip-coating)	• Hard to achieve uniform coating and layer thickness of the fiber
• Crystal size ≤1000 nm
Cathodic deposition method85	Electrochemical deposition	• Possibility of using recycled materials	• Slow process
• Highly uniform layers	• It may not apply to continuous length fibers
• Crystal size ≥300 nm	• Low crystal quality
• Unreacted PbI2 precursor accumulation
Vapor-assisted deposition172,173	Atomization and air force-enhanced layer assembly	• High-quality films	• High-temperature requirement
• All geometries/intricate surfaces	• Slow process
• Crystal size ≥1 μm	• Unreacted PbI2 precursor residue
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)




Pb2+	1.19	6s2
Sr2+	1.12	5s2
Bi3+	1.03	6s2
Sn2+	1.02	5s2
Ge2+	0.73	4s2
Cu2+	0.73	3d9
CH3NH3PbI3(s) ↔ PbI2(s) + CH3NH3I(aq)	(R5)
CH3NH3I(aq) ↔ CH3NH2(aq) + HI(aq)	(R6)
2HI(aq) ↔ H2(g) + I2(s)	(R7)
4HI(aq) + O2(g) ↔ 2I2(s) + 2H2O	(R8)
CH3NH3PbI3(aq) → NH3(aq) + CH3I(aq) + PbI2(s)	(R9)
	(6)

 	Fig. 12  Cyclic degradation mechanism of tin iodide perovskite under ambient air exposure, as proposed by ref. 228.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) (i) Sketch of the derived 2D/3D interface. (ii) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns showing peaks at various diffraction angles due to the use of different 2D precursor materials.240 (b) Variation in power conversion efficiency of heterojunction solar cells based on MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (x = 0, 0.06, 0.20, and 0.29) stored in air at room temperature without encapsulation with time. The humidity was maintained at 35%, and the cells were exposed to a humidity of 55% for one day on the fourth day to investigate their variation in performance at high humidity.223 (c) Degradation scheme of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells during light exposure test: (i) (TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3) and (ii) (TiO2/Sb2S3/CH3NH3PbI3).244 (d) Crystal structures of (i) CH3NH3PbI3 and (ii) CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x. The hydrogen bond between SCN− and CH3NH3+ (dash line) is highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission.245	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Multiple solvent-assisted recycling procedures for perovskite solar cells using ethyl acetate, distilled water, and DMF solvent. (ii) XRD patterns comparing the crystal quality of the fresh and recycled perovskite films. (iii) Current–voltage curves comparing the performance of the recycled and fresh solar cells.253 (b) Schematic process for multiple-solvent perovskite solar cell recycling involving chlorobenzene, ethanol, and DMF. (ii) XRD patterns of substrates after each processing step. Blue: the original device stripped from gold and the HTM layer. Green: the device stripped from gold, the HTM layer, and CH3NH3I. Red: FTO substrate was covered with compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers. Characteristic peaks originating from the crystalline FTO substrate are denoted by #, PbI2 by *, and CH3NH3PbI3 by ‡. (iii) Current–voltage device characteristics before and after recycling and reference devices were prepared from new materials.254 (c) Single solvent perovskite solar cell recycling using DMF solvent. Schematic for the interaction of perovskite and DMF. Current density–voltage (J–V) curve for the fresh device and the device recycled 10 times.184	 

Non-polar solvents
Toluene	C6H5–CH3	0.375	• Hole transport layers (spiro-OMeTAD)254
Diethyl ether	CH3–CH2–O–CH2–CH3	1.15
Dichloromethane	CH2Cl2	1.60
Chlorobenzene	C6H5–Cl	1.69
Polar protic solvents
2-Propanol	CH3–CH(–OH)–CH3	1.58	• Extraction of CH3NH3I and traces of PbI2 from perovskite layer184,254
Ethanol	CH3–CH2–OH	1.69
Methanol	CH3–OH	1.7
Water	H–O–H	1.85
Polar aprotic solvents
Acetone	CH3–C(O)–CH3	2.88	• PbI2 from perovskite
Dimethylformamide	H–C(O)N(CH3)2	3.82	• TiO2 layer, if used in excess
Acetonitrile	CH3–CN	3.92	• Spiro-OMeTAD (HTL), if used in excess layer184
Dimethyl sulfoxide	CH3–S(O)–CH3	3.96	


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
