A PCBM-assisted perovskite growth process to fabricate high efficiency semitransparent solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA04790D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04790D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11648-11655A PCBM-assisted perovskite growth process to fabricate high efficiency semitransparent solar cells†

        
          
            Chao 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Joseph 
            Sleppy
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nitesh 
            Dhasmana
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mikhael 
            Soliman
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Laurene 
            Tetard
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jayan 
            Thomas
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA. E-mail: Jayan.Thomas@ucf.edu
bNanoScience Technology Center, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32826, USA
cCREOL, The College of Optics and Photonics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
dDepartment of Physics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
Received 
      7th June 2016
    , Accepted 8th June 2016First published on 8th June 2016AbstractDeveloping highly efficient perovskite solar cells in a simple and rapid fashion will open the window for their potential commercialization. Semi-transparent devices are of great interest due to their attractive application in building integrated photovoltaics (BIPVs). In this study, efficient perovskite solar cells with good transparency in the visible wavelength range have been developed by a facile and low-temperature PCBM-assisted perovskite growth method. This method results in the formation of a perovskite-PCBM hybrid material at the grain boundaries which is observed by EELS mapping and confirmed by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, transient photocurrent (TP) measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The PCBM-assisted perovskite growth method involves fewer steps and therefore is less expensive and time consuming than other similar methods. The semitransparent solar cells developed using this method exhibited power conversion efficiency (PCE) ranging from 12% to 4% depending on the average visible transmittance (AVT) ranging from 3% to 35%. The as-fabricated semitransparent perovskite solar cell with an active layer thickness of only about 150 nm, which is only less than half the active layer thickness of a typical perovskite solar cell, provided a PCE as high as 9.1% with an AVT of 18% and more than 12% with an AVT of 3%.
Introduction
Organometallic trihalide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a promising solar cell technology due to their high efficiency and low fabrication cost.1,2 The competitiveness of perovskite solar cells is attributed to their outstanding opto-electronic properties, such as their wide band gaps,3–5 long charge diffusion length,6–8 and high absorption coefficients.9–11 Compared with crystalline Si solar cells, the simple and easy solution-based processing of perovskite solar cells offers considerable promise for the future renewable energy generation. Due to these exceptional characteristics, perovskite solar cells have attracted significant attention over the past few years.12–15 Despite being an emerging type of solar cell, perovskite solar cells have reached a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20% due to the rapid and continuous progress in research thus making them a competitive alternative to the traditional silicon solar cell.13,16,17 Along with considerable efforts dedicated to pursuing high PCE devices, semitransparent perovskite solar cells have also received a great deal of attention not only because of their high PCE and transmittance but also for their potential applications in tandem solar cells,18 building integrated photovoltaics19,20 and smart glasses.21 Since these applications require high voltage to operate, semitransparent perovskite solar cells with high output voltage (∼1 V) are favored: more cells connected in series would be required if low Voc silicon solar cells (∼0.5–0.6 V) were used.22
Recently, considerable effort has been dedicated to developing semitransparent perovskite solar cells with high PCE by inserting an extra buffer layer in addition to an existing electron transport/hole transport layer in between the respective electrodes and the active perovskite layer. The typical materials used are zinc oxide (ZnO), molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) in addition to the existing electron transport layer, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), and hole transport layer, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD). This additional layer is used to enhance the transmittance and contact between the electrode and the buffer layer. With a 170 nm thick active layer, Guo et al. reported a PCE of 8.49% for mixed halide (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) semitransparent solar cells composed of indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/ZnO/Ag nanowires.23 In this work, an additional thin layer of ZnO was introduced for two reasons: (1) to keep good ohmic contact between PCBM and AgNWs and (2) to protect the perovskite layer from the damage due to the presence of AgNWs. Gaspera et al. also reported semitransparent solar cells comprised of F-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiOx/CH3NH3PbI3 (150 nm)/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3–Au–MoO3 exhibiting an efficiency of 9.3% with an average visible transmittance (AVT) of 16%.24 Compared with our architecture ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au, they require high temperature (500 °C) treatment and complicated processing for the TiOx layer as well as two additional layers of MoO3. You et al. reported semitransparent solar cells with a structure: FTO/TiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/graphene,25 in which D-sorbitol doped PEDOT:PSS was used as an adhesion layer to laminate the spiro-OMeTAD and graphene electrode. With this adhesion layer, the PCE of the device with a 170 nm thick perovskite layer improved from 4% to 7.5%.
All of the above devices require multiple electron or hole transport layers to reach PEDOT:PSS layers; the performance of the device without additional buffer layer dropped more than 1% from the original value. It is important to note that these additional buffer layers require more steps, longer time and higher cost to fabricate the semitransparent devices. Recently, Huang et al. reported a conventional fabrication procedure in which a conformal layer of PCBM is made on the surface of a perovskite layer.26,27 However, the thermal annealing requires 60 minutes or more for infiltration into any considerable depth of the perovskite layer, and required an additional C60 layer to reach the maximum PCE of about 12%.
In the present work, we discuss the development of a perovskite-PCBM hybrid material obtained by a simple PCBM-assisted growth technique, which resulted in the production of high performance semitransparent perovskite solar cells. We also show that this method eliminates the need for an extra buffer layer. The novel PCBM-assisted perovskite growth technique involves spin coating of perovskite precursor solution on a substrate, immediately followed by exposing the wet film to chlorobenzene based PCBM solution to induce crystallization. We present evidence that PCBM-assisted growth results in a perovskite-PCBM hybrid crystal structure at the grain boundaries by PCBM diffusion while the film grows in size.28 Moreover, devices fabricated by this method required no additional buffer layer on the electron collector electrode to accomplish high performance. A film consisting of a perovskite-PCBM hybrid solid of about 150 nm thickness was successfully used to make a semitransparent planar heterojunction solar cell yielding a superior PCE of 9.1%, compared to a PCE of 4.33% for a control cell. The control sample was prepared using a conventional growth method. Overall, we show that this facile method enables the fabrication of highly efficient semitransparent perovskite solar cells by a simpler and shorter fabrication procedure.
Results and discussion
The schematic illustration of the PCBM-assisted growth process and conventional growth process for the perovskite-PCBM layer is shown in Fig. 1. The PCBM-assisted growth method for preparing the perovskite-PCBM hybrid layer is illustrated in process 2 of Fig. 1. The substrate consists of a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS on top of ITO glass. A DMF-based perovskite solution was then spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 3000 rpm. After a few seconds, PCBM dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) was quickly added to the above film. This PCBM-assisted growth improves the performance because (1) the CB solvent quickly decreases the solubility of CH3NH3PbI3 in the mixed solvent and promotes rapid nucleation and growth of the crystals29 and (2) at the interface of the perovskite and PCBM, an intimate mixing of perovskite and PCBM takes place to form a hybrid structure, which reduces the recombination loss and promotes electron extraction.28 In contrast, for a conventional method where a PCBM layer is spin coated after perovskite growth is completed and heat treated, a less transparent and inferior quality perovskite film is generated. Moreover, compared to Xu et al. who fabricated a heterojunction hybrid perovskite-PCBM layer by mixing perovskite and PCBM solution together with TiOx and a Spiro-OMeTAD layer,28 our PCBM-assisted method provides a continuous PCBM layer on top of the hybrid perovskite-PCBM layer, which significantly simplifies the fabrication process. In both methods, the addition of PCBM is followed by annealing at 100 °C for 15 min to remove the residual solvent and to promote any further crystallization. In the nucleation and growth process of the PCBM-assisted growth method, PCBM should be able to fill in between perovskite grain boundaries and form a continuous hybrid perovskite-PCBM structure after post-annealing. Therefore, this new method saves one annealing step, compared to that necessary for a conventional preparation method.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the process flow for devices: (1) conventional growth resulting in perovskite and PCBM separate layers and (2) PCBM-assisted growth resulting in a perovskite-PCBM hybrid structure. 

Fig. 2a illustrates the schematic of the device structure fabricated by the PCBM-assisted growth method and Fig. 2b shows its cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image. Using this PCBM-assisted growth process, a perovskite-PCBM hybrid material was formed at the interface between the perovskite and the fullerene layer, as schematically represented in the zoomed-in region of Fig. 2a. In this hybrid layer, PCBM diffuses throughout the film at the perovskite grain boundaries, which in turn is an efficient electrically networked structure for electron transport. To monitor the quality of the perovskite films, we recorded the SEM image of the as-grown perovskite film (Fig. 2c). Since there is always a thin layer of PCBM on top of the perovskite layer in a PCBM-assisted growth process, it is difficult to see the perovskite crystal grains from the top of the film. In order to assess the quality and grain size of the perovskite film formed by the PCBM-assisted growth process with respect to that made by a conventional process, we inspect the top view SEM image (Fig. S1†) of the CB assisted growth film prepared under the same experimental conditions since PCBM dissolved CB is always used for this growth. The film obtained by the PCBM-assisted method exhibits considerably larger crystal grains (∼1 μm) and almost full coverage on the substrate with the absence of pinholes. The X-ray pattern of the as-prepared perovskite film on ITO/PEDOT:PSS is shown in Fig. S2.†
 Fig. 2  Perovskite solar cell structure: (a) schematic architecture of the perovskite solar cell; the zoomed-in schematic represents the hybrid material formed. (b) TEM cross-section view of the perovskite solar cell prepared by the PCBM-assisted growth process. Scale bar: 100 nm. (c) Top-view SEM image of the as-grown perovskite film prepared by the CB-assisted process under similar conditions to those of the PCBM-assisted growth process. Scale bar: 1 μm. 

Fig. 3a and b show the J–V and external quantum efficiency (EQE) plots of semitransparent perovskite solar cells prepared by PCBM-assisted growth. Devices resulting from the PCBM-assisted growth procedure exhibited substantial improvement in the short circuit current density (Jsc) from 10 to 14.33 mA cm−2 along with a higher fill factor (FF) and Voc. We infer that the superior performances are due to the effective enhancement of charge transport and the reduction of charge recombination by the introduction of hybrid PCBM-perovskite material. The enhancement of charge transport is likely due to better conductivity near grain boundaries because of the hybrid material formation. It provides a continuous network of electron transport medium (PCBM), which extends all the way to the electron collector (top Au) electrode. The inset in Fig. 3b shows the evolution of our best PCE as a function of average visible transmittance (AVT) for the PCBM-assisted growth devices and a comparison with other recently reported semitransparent PSCs.24,30,31 In Fig. 3c, the AVT (calculated between 370 nm and 740 nm) shows increased transmission for the devices prepared by PCBM-assisted growth compared to the one obtained by conventional growth. Moreover, the devices prepared by PCBM-assisted growth show an average PCE of 8.6 ± 0.5% (AVT = 18%), while the conventionally grown devices exhibit only 4.03 ± 0.3% average PCE (AVT = 13.3%) for a 150 nm thick perovskite active layer. This process is highly repeatable with average efficiencies of 8.6% across 20 devices. Therefore, a better transmittance and power conversion efficiency are obtained by the PCBM-assisted growth method. A small hysteresis of PCBM-assisted growth devices is observed in Fig. 3d, where there is only a fill factor (FF) difference of 2% between forward and reverse scans. Meanwhile, a large hysteresis of conventionally grown devices was observed, as shown in Fig. S3.†
 Fig. 3  Characterization of PSCs: (a) current–voltage characteristics. (b) EQE of PSCs with PCBM-assisted growth, the inset is a plot of PCE as a function of AVT (370–740 nm) in comparison with other semitransparent PSCs. (c) Transmittance spectra of complete PSCs with PCBM-assisted growth and conventional growth. (d) J–V curve of the PCBM-assisted growth device with small hysteresis. 
The photovoltaic parameters of the devices using perovskite films prepared by different methods like conventional growth of semitransparent devices, chlorobenzene-assisted growth and PCBM-assisted growth are shown in Table 1. If a thin (10 nm) Au layer is deposited directly on top of the devices fabricated by a conventional growth method, a very poor performance of 4.03% was obtained. The perovskite crystalline grains with sizes up to 300 nm (Fig. S1a†) are obtained using this method.32 Devices with CB-assisted growth exhibited much improved performance, which may result from good perovskite films consisting of large crystalline grains with sizes up to one micron. SEM images of the surface morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared by both the conventional growth method and CB-assisted growth method are shown in Fig. S1.† Devices prepared by the CB-assisted growth method showed better charge separation and transport, which resulted in a better PCE of 6.85%. Furthermore, when the PCBM-assisted growth technique was used, further improvement of the performance was accomplished. Devices fabricated by the PCBM-assisted growth method yield the best performance with the help of larger crystal grains and the perovskite-PCBM hybrid structure. However, when a thicker Au layer was coated on top of this perovskite-PCBM hybrid structure, a higher efficiency was achieved due to the improved conductivity and efficient charge collection by the thick continuous coating. In addition, better light utilization is achieved by the reabsorption of the reflected light from the thicker Au electrode layer. The performance of the devices using a thicker Au cathode exceeds 12%. It is to be noted that the thickness of the perovskite layer for all the devices was about 150 nm. In the ESI, Table S1† provides the performance of opaque PSCs (with 100 nm Au) prepared using different growth methods. Compared to PSCs with a PCE of 4.33% prepared using a thin Au electrode, the one prepared by the conventional growth method showed a higher PCE (7.68%) mainly attributed to a better Jsc (∼15 mA cm−2) due to the thicker Au electrode. This thicker Au layer also acts as a light reflector, resulting in a higher Jsc. Meanwhile, the FF is also enhanced from 46% to 55% due to the efficient charge collection through the thicker Au electrode.
Table 1 Device parameters for solar cells using perovskite films prepared by conventional growth, chlorobenzene-assisted growth and PCBM-assisted growth




Cell

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
AVT (%)




Conventional growth with high AVT
0.930
10.02
46.43
4.33
14


CB-assisted growth with high AVT
0.958
13.43
53.28
6.85
15


PCBM-assisted growth with high AVT
1.017
14.56
61.42
9.10
18


PCBM-assisted growth with low AVT
1.017
17.50
68.10
12.2
3




To further investigate the film formation process using PCBM-assisted growth, delay times of 2 s, 6 s and 8 s before dropping PCBM in CB solution onto the perovskite precursor solution were tested to study the effect of processing on the resulting device efficiency and transmission. Fig. S4† shows the J–V and transmittance plots of a semitransparent solar cell using the PCBM-assisted growth for different delay times. The average photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table S2.† The best performing device was found to be one prepared with a 6 s delay time between the beginning of the perovskite layer spinning and dropping of PCBM solution. The outstanding performance is obtained by applying the CB solution of PCBM onto the spinning wet films of perovskite at the time of nucleation and crystal growth. A current density of 12.82 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 7.13% were obtained when a delay time of 2 s was used. This comparatively lower current density and PCE may be explained by the insufficient time to remove the excess precursor solution, which is a dominant process for high nucleation density. Applying PCBM in chlorobenzene at this stage may result in only a partial surface coverage since perovskite solution is not supersaturated.33 Nonetheless, a high open circuit voltage of 1.031 V was obtained since more PCBM was mixed with the perovskite during this stage. To demonstrate the application of this high Voc device, the voltage output from two of these devices connected in series (in Fig. S5a and b†) was adequate to power a red-light emitting diode (LED). With a 6 s delay, evaporation of the residual solvent promotes the concentration of the perovskite solution and introduction of PCBM results in the formation of a dense and uniform perovskite film and a hybrid perovskite-PCBM structure.29 However, with an 8 s delay, the device had a considerably lower current density of 11.87 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 5%, which we attribute to the fact that the perovskite film began to dry and crystallize before the PCBM solution was added. The addition of PCBM into CB at this stage resulted in the formation of a perovskite film with grains in the micrometer range, as can be seen in Fig. S6b.†
To verify the formation of this hybrid structure, we performed TEM in combination with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) on the cross-section of these devices (Fig. 4). A thin cross-section of the solar cell was prepared by using a focused ion beam (FIB) for TEM and EELS studies. In order to analyze the penetration of PCBM into the perovskite grain boundaries to form the hybrid layer, we selected certain elements which are known to be present in one material, but not in the other. PCBM contains the element oxygen (O) while the perovskite does not. Perovskite contains lead (Pb) and iodine (I) elements while PCBM does not. For devices fabricated by the PCBM-assisted growth method, the elemental mapping in Fig. 4a shows the presence of O in the perovskite layer. It is to be noted that due to the small thickness of the FIB cut samples, we can see the distribution of O all around instead of just in the grain boundary region. However, the elemental mapping of the PCBM unassisted sample (Fig. 4b) shows the presence of O only in the top PCBM layer and not in the perovskite layer. The distribution of O in the perovskite layer validates the formation of a hybrid material in perovskite solar cells fabricated by the PCBM-assisted method which is similar to the hybrid material reported by Xu et al.28 As discussed earlier, while spin-coating the PCBM, the interface between perovskite and PCBM forms the hybrid structure. The additional PCBM layer on top of the perovskite layer eliminates the direct contact between the perovskite crystals and top electrode by providing a smooth surface for top electrode deposition (Fig. 4a). In addition, it helps in filling up the pinholes in the perovskite layer. Since bonding of PCBM to defective halides is thermodynamically favoured, it can reduce the possibility of the formation of defects which can act as recombination centres for electrons and holes. However, this hybrid formation may not take place when PCBM is spin coated after annealing in a conventional growth method. To further investigate this hybrid structure formation, we used XPS to compare the carbon and lead contents between conventional growth and PCBM-assisted growth films, both post-washed with chlorobenzene solvent to remove only the top PCBM layer (Fig. 5c and d). Therefore, after washing, only PCBM that penetrated into the perovskite layer (i.e. between the perovskite crystals) should be left in the perovskite-PCBM film. A similar approach has been followed by Xu et al. for monitoring carbon and lead contents.28Fig. 5c and d show C1s and Pb4f XPS spectra of the perovskite film by the conventional and PCBM-assisted growth methods, respectively. These figures reveal that the perovskite-PCBM hybrid film (red) contains more carbon content and less lead content as PCBM exists in between perovskite crystals. Along with small hysteresis in the hybrid perovskite-PCBM device, a significant voltage enhancement (∼0.1 V) and a higher FF were also observed as given in Table 1. Since PCBM can promote electron extraction at the grain boundaries, hybrid perovskite-PCBM forms a continuous network for electron transport, which reduces hysteresis and improves photovoltaic performance.28 This is further supported by the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra presented in Fig. 5a. The enhanced PL of the devices fabricated by PCBM-assisted growth indicates that non-radiative decay is significantly suppressed, which should result from the PCBM-perovskite hybrid structure.34 In order to compare the charge trapping and the role of PCBM in the device, we performed transient photocurrent (TP) measurements where the impulse response of the PCBM-assisted growth device and conventionally grown device was recorded. Fig. 5b shows the TP measurements of the two devices. As shown in the plot, the transit time for the electrons is much less for the PCBM-assisted growth device. The values of transit time constants are 0.46 μs and 0.26 μs for the conventional and PCBM-assisted samples, respectively. These results suggest that the PCBM-assisted growth device has better charge transfer properties. It is also worth noting that the rise time of the photocurrent is slightly slower for the PCBM-assisted growth device in contrast to that for the layer by layer growth device. The slower rise time and faster decay time suggest the passivation of deep trap states and introduction of shallow traps due to the introduction of PCBM as discussed by Dr Xu et al., using density functional theory analysis.28 This confirms the presence of a hybrid perovskite-PCBM phase which is in tandem with the argument that PCBM penetrates into perovskite grain boundaries to form a hybrid phase.26
 Fig. 4  TEM cross-sectional image of the device: (a) with PCBM-assisted growth and (b) conventional growth. EELS mapping clearly shows the elemental distribution of I, Pb, and O. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum as a function of wavelength showing significantly lower amplitude of the PL peak for the sample prepared by conventional growth. Note that the discontinuity at 780 nm results from the limitation of the range of the detector of the system used. (b) Transient photocurrent as a function of time for samples prepared by PCBM-assisted growth and conventional growth. (c) An XPS comparison of the surface carbon content between conventional growth (black) and PCBM-assisted growth (red) films post-washed with chlorobenzene solvent to remove only the top PCBM layer. 
Experimental
Materials and methods

Materials. 
PbAc2 (99.98%, obtained from Sigma Aldrich) and CH3NH3I (purchased from Dyenamo) mixed in a molar ratio of 1:3 were dissolved in dimethyl formamide at a concentration of 40%. The precursor solution was stirred at room temperature inside a N2-filled glovebox before use. Prior to spin coating, the solution was filtered using a PTFE syringe filter (0.2 μm). PCBM (99.5%, Nano-C, 30 mg) was dissolved in chlorobenzene (1 mL) and stirred at 40 °C for 4 hours before use.


Device fabrication. 
The patterned ITO substrates were subsequently cleaned in an ultrasonicator with DI water, acetone and isopropanol for 15 minutes each. On the cleaned ITO substrate, a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP AI 4083) was deposited by spin coating and annealed at 120 °C for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the substrates were transferred into a glove box for the deposition of the perovskite absorber and PCBM layers. Perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing CH3NH3I and PbAc2 in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide at a 3:1 molar ratio with a final concentration of ∼40 wt%. For a conventional device, the filtered perovskite precursor was spin-cast at 3000 rpm for 45 seconds. The crystallization of the perovskite was performed by annealing the as-deposited film at 100 °C for 10 minutes. The thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer is approximately 150–200 nm. PCBM solution was then spin-cast onto the CH3NH3PbI3 layer at 1000 rpm for 45 seconds. For the PCBM-assisted process, PCBM solution was spin-cast while the perovskite precursor was spreading. The resulting film was annealed at 100 °C for 15 min. Finally, a 10 nm thick Au was deposited on the PCBM through a shadow mask under a vacuum of 10−6 torr.


Device characterization. 
For the evaluation of the PSC performance, a solar simulator with a 300 W xenon lamp and AM1.5G global filter was used. The light intensity, 100 mW cm−2, was calibrated using a silicon photovoltaic reference cell (Newport, 91150V). Current–voltage characteristics were measured with a Keithley 2635A source measurement unit. The EQE spectra were measured using a Newport model QE-PV-SI coupled with a lock-in amplifier and a calibrated silicon photodetector. During device characterization, a shadow mask with an opening of 7.5 mm2 was used. Cross-sections of the samples were prepared using a FIB (FEI 200 TEM) operating at 30 kV accelerating voltage. Surface morphologies were characterized by means of a scanning electron microscope (SEM, ZEISS Ultra 55) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, TECNAIF30) equipped with an energy-dispersive electron energy loss spectrometer. Transmittance of semitransparent devices was measured using an UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer (Cary 300 Bio). PL measurements were performed on a Witec alpha 300 RA confocal Raman system equipped with a Zeiss 20× objective and a 600 lines per mm grating. The samples were excited with 532 nm laser light (∼10 μW) in ambient air environment at room temperature. The measurements were carried out for an integration time of 0.05 s. A Raman map of 10000 spectra from each sample was acquired, and the spectra were averaged to present a representative signature. To investigate the chemical compositions of the sample surface, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, PHI 5400) was performed. For the transient photocurrent measurement, a 532 nm Q-switched, frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser (Minilite I, Continuum) was used to generate 5 ns pulses. Light pulses with energy less than 1 uJ were used. Photocurrent was measured using a Tektronix MDO3012 Oscilloscope via a Keithley Model SC-9 low noise Coaxial cable connected to the two electrodes.

Conclusions
In conclusion, a fast and low temperature PCBM-assisted growth method has been developed for making high performance semitransparent perovskite solar cells, which allows the penetration of PCBM into perovskite grain boundaries, and provides a hybrid perovskite-PCBM material. This hybrid material enables a continuous network for the electron transport to the overlying PCBM layer and then to the electron collector electrode. EELS elemental mapping reveals the formation of a perovskite-PCBM hybrid at the interface of the perovskite and PCBM layers. This is confirmed by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and transient photocurrent (TP) measurements. This method leads to a high PCE of 9.1% and a good AVT of 18%. These results present a simple method to fabricate high efficiency and high transparency solar cells for building integrated photovoltaics and other opto-electronic applications.
Acknowledgements
J. T. acknowledges the National Science Foundation (CAREER: ECCS-1351757) for the financial support. The authors thank the Materials Characterization Facility (MCF), University of Central Florida for the nanostructure characterization and Dr Winston V. Schoenfeld for quantum efficiency measurements. The authors thank Yanan Wang and Dr Yajie Dong from NSTC of UCF for the discussion and Dr James J. Hickman and Mark Schnepper for recording XPS.
References
S. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 378–405 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Hanusch, E. Wiesenmayer, E. Mankel, A. Binek, P. Angloher, C. Fraunhofer, N. Giesbrecht, J. M. Feckl, W. Jaegermann, D. Johrendt, T. Bein and P. Docampo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 Search PubMed .
C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401616 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum and J. E. Moser, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591–597 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hsu, C. Battaglia, C. Pahud, Z. Ruan, F. J. Haug, S. Fan, C. Ballif and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 628–633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, B. Liu, Y. Xia, J. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Shen, Z. Xu and C. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 200–204 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Gratzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2013, 8, 591–598 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Huang, C.-W. Hu, H.-C. Liu, C.-Y. Hsu, C.-H. Chen and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Y. Li, X. Wang, J. Ding and N. Yuan, J. Sol. Energy, 2015, 116, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, S. D. Stranks, M. B. Johnston, T. Watson, D. A. Worsley and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 6, 129–138 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Richter, S. Spallek, I. Litzov, G. J. Matt, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1711–1717 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-F. Xu, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. L. Zhu, H.-M. Su, J. Liu, K. S. Wong, L.-S. Liao and W. C. Choy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14424–14430 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04790dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the process flow for devices: (1) conventional growth resulting in perovskite and PCBM separate layers and (2) PCBM-assisted growth resulting in a perovskite-PCBM hybrid structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Perovskite solar cell structure: (a) schematic architecture of the perovskite solar cell; the zoomed-in schematic represents the hybrid material formed. (b) TEM cross-section view of the perovskite solar cell prepared by the PCBM-assisted growth process. Scale bar: 100 nm. (c) Top-view SEM image of the as-grown perovskite film prepared by the CB-assisted process under similar conditions to those of the PCBM-assisted growth process. Scale bar: 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characterization of PSCs: (a) current–voltage characteristics. (b) EQE of PSCs with PCBM-assisted growth, the inset is a plot of PCE as a function of AVT (370–740 nm) in comparison with other semitransparent PSCs. (c) Transmittance spectra of complete PSCs with PCBM-assisted growth and conventional growth. (d) J–V curve of the PCBM-assisted growth device with small hysteresis.	 

Conventional growth with high AVT	0.930	10.02	46.43	4.33	14
CB-assisted growth with high AVT	0.958	13.43	53.28	6.85	15
PCBM-assisted growth with high AVT	1.017	14.56	61.42	9.10	18
PCBM-assisted growth with low AVT	1.017	17.50	68.10	12.2	3

 	Fig. 4  TEM cross-sectional image of the device: (a) with PCBM-assisted growth and (b) conventional growth. EELS mapping clearly shows the elemental distribution of I, Pb, and O.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum as a function of wavelength showing significantly lower amplitude of the PL peak for the sample prepared by conventional growth. Note that the discontinuity at 780 nm results from the limitation of the range of the detector of the system used. (b) Transient photocurrent as a function of time for samples prepared by PCBM-assisted growth and conventional growth. (c) An XPS comparison of the surface carbon content between conventional growth (black) and PCBM-assisted growth (red) films post-washed with chlorobenzene solvent to remove only the top PCBM layer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04790d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
