Hexaazatriphenylene (HAT) derivatives: from synthesis to molecular design, self-organization and device applications   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00181A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00181A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6850-6885Hexaazatriphenylene (HAT) derivatives: from synthesis to molecular design, self-organization and device applications†

        
          
            José L. 
            Segura
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rafael 
            Juárez
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mar 
            Ramos
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Carlos 
            Seoane
          
          
        
      a
aDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, E-28040 Madrid, Spain. E-mail: segura@ucm.es;  Fax: +34-91-394103;   Tel: +34-01-3945142
bDepartment of Environmental and Technological Chemistry, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid 28933, Spain
Received 
      28th February 2015
    First published on 13th July 2015AbstractDipyrazino[2,3-f:2′,3′-h]quinoxaline also known as 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (HAT) is an electron deficient, rigid, planar, aromatic discotic system with an excellent π–π stacking ability. Because it is one of the smallest two-dimensional N-containing polyheterocyclic aromatic systems, it has been used as the basic scaffold for larger 2D N-substituted polyheterocyclic aromatics. Furthermore, it is the building block of choice in a plethora of molecular, macromolecular and supramolecular systems for a variety of applications. This review is aimed to critically review the research performed during the almost three decades of research based on HAT from the synthetic, theoretical and application points of view. The design principles and synthetic strategies towards HAT derivatives will be established and their use in n-type semiconductors, sensors, nonlinear optical chromophores, liquid crystals, microporous polymers for energy storage and nano and microstructures will reveal the relevance of HAT as a basic scaffold in the areas of organic materials and nanoscience.
José L. Segura
José L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry from the UCM in Madrid working in Organic materials. After a stay in W. Dailey's group (Univ. Pennsylvania) he performed postdoctoral stays in the groups of M. Hanack (Univ. Tübingen), F. Wudl (UCSB, USA), and P. Bäuerle (Univ. Ulm). In 1995 Prof. Segura joined the faculty at the Complutense University in Madrid where he is leading the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials. His current research interests involve synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of molecular and macromolecular electroactive systems for optoelectronics. His results have been published in more than 140 scientific contributions.
Rafael Juárez
Rafael Juárez obtained his degree in Chemistry in 2004 from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain. After a short stay in the Spanish Research Council he enrolled in 2006 in the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos where he obtained his PhD in 2011. He has made research stays under the direction of Dr Matthias Lehmann in Chemnitz in 2008 and Prof. René Jannsen in Eindhoven in 2011. His research interest includes the study of nitrogenated acenes (specially hexaazatriphenylene derivatives) from both, the experimental and the theoretical point of view. Currently he teaches Chemistry in the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos in Spain.
Mar Ramos
Mar Ramos is an Associate Professor at Rey Juan Carlos University. She received her BSc degree in Chemistry from the Complutense University of Madrid and obtained her PhD from the same institution. She has developed her research career in the Organic Chemical Department of the Complutense University of Madrid (1986–1998). In 1998, she joined Rey Juan Carlos University as a teaching assistant. She joined the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials of the Organic Chemistry Department of the Complutense University of Madrid in 2004. Her current research interest is focused on design and characterization of organic materials for optoelectronics.
Carlos Seoane
Carlos Seoane obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the Universidad de Santiago, Spain in 1975 and obtained a tenured Assistant Professorship at Universidad Complutense (1978) and a Full Professorship in 1988, first at Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha and then at Universidad Complutense, where he has been the Vice-rector. His research interests include heterocyclic synthesis and reactivity, industrial research projects in medicinal chemistry, as well as new organic materials. He was inducted to the Royal Academy in 2004. He has published some 220 scientific papers. He is a general editor for the “Síntesis” collection of Chemistry books. He chairs the British-Hispanic Foundation.
1 Introduction
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been attracting a great deal of attention in materials science and nanoscience due to their tailorability and the appealing features of their electronic structure.1 Those composed of laterally fused benzene rings, the so called linear PAHs (Fig. 1), have received particular attention2,3 because of their highly desirable electronic properties, including remarkable charge-carrier mobilities.4–6 It has been found that the increased conjugation length enhances electronic coupling and reduces reorganization energies in the solid state thus leading to several linear acenes with high charge-carrier mobilities.3,7 Nevertheless, it has also been observed that linear acenes longer than five rings are not stable due to their low ionization potentials (IPs) and narrow band gaps.8
 Fig. 1  Selected examples of linear polycyclic aromatics, N-substituted polycylic aromatics, 2D-acene analogues and the structure of 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (HAT). 
Among the different approaches used for the stabilization of higher linear PAHs,9 it has been found that (i) replacing CH atoms by heteroatoms such as nitrogen and (ii) annealing aromatic rings onto two neighboring rings, thus creating two-dimensional (2D) acene analogues10 (Fig. 1) are efficient routes towards more stable compounds. Thus, N-substituted polycyclic aromatic analogues of PAHs (Fig. 1) are less susceptible to degradation through oxidation or dimerization than their non-N-containing equivalents.11 In contrast, 2D compounds that represent various fragments of graphene have large, planar π surfaces that can provide increased intermolecular surface overlap and effectively increase electron delocalization.12
In the frame of this research field, one of the smallest 2D N-containing polyheterocyclic aromatic systems is dipyrazino[2,3-f:2′,3′-h]quinoxaline or 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (HAT, Fig. 1). HAT is an electron deficient, rigid, planar, aromatic discotic system with an excellent π–π stacking ability which has been used not only as a basic scaffold for larger 2D N-substituted polycyclic aromatics but also as a building block in a plethora of molecular, macromolecular and supramolecular systems for a variety of applications.
This review summarizes the design principles and synthetic strategies for HAT derivatives and their use as basic scaffolds in n-type semiconductors, magnetic materials, sensors, nonlinear optical chromophores, liquid crystals, nano and microstructures and microporous polymers for energy storage.
Besides the above important applications of HAT derivatives as organic materials, for many years the main application of HAT was its use as a ligand with three chelating sites. In this respect, the extensive literature related to metal complexes of HAT and its derivatives were already reviewed by Kitagawa and Masaoka13 and therefore, in order to avoid duplication of these aspects, the readers interested in this particular use of HAT derivatives are referred to this comprehensive review.
In the present review (i) we will start with a description of the main characteristics of the hexaazatriphenylene moiety including its electron deficient character, D3h symmetry, planarity and tendency for π-stacking. (ii) We will continue with a section dedicated to the synthesis of HAT derivatives including those with trigonal D3h symmetry as well as those with non-trigonal symmetry (no D3h symmetry). We will also describe methods for the synthesis of 2D-HAT derivatives with extended π-conjugation and for the post-synthesis functionalization of HAT derivatives. (iii) The next section will cover aspects related to the self-assembly of HAT derivatives. This section starts with the study of the supramolecular aggregation properties of HAT derivatives in solution. It will continue with the self-assembly in the bulk including many examples of their liquid crystal behavior and the relationship with the charge transport properties. We will also review selected examples of the self-assembly of HAT derivatives on solid surfaces and finally the building of nano and microstructures by self-assembly. (iv) Different applications found for HAT derivatives will also be reviewed, including their use for the investigation of energy transfer processes, their nonlinear optical properties and their use as multiphoton-absorbing materials, their use for molecular recognition and sensors, their role as photoinitiators in polymerization reactions and their incorporation as scaffolds for microporous frameworks. (v) Hexaazatriphenylene hexacarbonitrile (HAT-CN) will be treated as a special case of study and one section will be dedicated to this particular HAT derivative with a strong electron-deficient discotic character and a deep-lying LUMO level which has been proved to be an interesting molecular material. (vi) In the last section, the main conclusions will be discussed, stressing the fact that the HAT moiety is a widely tunable and highly stable platform for developing materials in a broad spectrum of applications. We will critically comment the strengths and weaknesses for the use of HAT derivatives in the different areas outlined in the review, finishing with the current challenges in the field.
2 Structural and electronic characteristics of HAT
HAT is a symmetric molecule that belongs to the symmetry point group D3h and is constituted by three fused pyrazine rings.
The molecule contains six nitrogen atoms with sp2 hybridization giving to the molecule an electron deficient character in agreement with the computational study performed for several hexaazatriphenylene derivatives.14 The structure of naked HAT has been investigated by using a B3LYP functional and a 6-31G** level of theory (Fig. 2) showing that the HOMO in HAT is doubly degenerate with E′ [E′′] symmetry, separated by 0.16 [0.19] eV from the A1′ [A1′′] HOMO−1 orbital. In contrast, the LUMO in HAT is a non-degenerate orbital with A2′′ symmetry, very close in energy (0.02 eV) to the E′′ degenerate LUMO+1 orbitals. Thus, the HOMO–LUMO gap calculated for HAT is of 4.73 eV.15
 Fig. 2  Theoretical electronic structure of HAT frontier orbitals. B3LYP/6-31G**. 
From the structural point of view, while theoretical calculations predict that HAT is completely flat in the gas phase, the resolved crystal structure of HAT shows that the molecule deviates, if only slightly, from planarity.16 Thus, a maximum atomic deviation of only 0.07 Å is observed in the needle-like formed light beige crystals prepared from recrystallization of HAT in a mixture of chloroform/acetonitrile (4:1) at 5 °C. HAT crystallizes in the orthorhombic system, space group Pca21 with a = 18.187 Å, b = 9.2576 Å and c = 6.9672 Å parameters (Fig. 3). The HAT molecules pack in columns with an average interplanar distance of 3.29 Å that is shorter than the expected van der Waals distance (3.54 Å)17 and comparable to the separation quoted for aromatic π-donor/acceptor molecules.18 This short distance is indicative of an effective π-stacking of the HAT molecules. Additionally, water molecules in the crystal provide links between the columns of stacked molecules through hydrogen bonds.
 Fig. 3  HAT·2H2O packing viewed from a: a axis, b: b axis and c: c axis. 
Comparison between experimental16 and theoretical data14 shows a good agreement in bond lengths (Fig. 4) and bond angles for which discrepancies between predicted and experimental data are less than 2°. These slight differences could be due to the fact that the theoretical calculations performed do not take into account intermolecular interactions.
 Fig. 4  Experimental16 and theoretical14 bond distances (all values in Å) determined for HAT. 
On the other hand, the molecular aggregation of HAT has also been theoretically explored by QM/MM calculations on a dimer model, thus showing that an antiparallel π-stacking interaction is the most stable conformation of HAT. Electrostatic interactions are responsible for the stabilization of the antiparallel cofacial arrangement with respect to the parallel one.15
Owing to its D3h symmetry, HAT gives very simple NMR spectra. For example, in the 13C-NMR spectrum there is one signal at 147.0 ppm for the six hydrogen-bearing carbons and one signal at 142.3 ppm for the six quaternary carbons.19 The absorption spectra of HAT have a main peak at 4.77 eV (260 nm) with a broad unresolved band at around 4.13 eV (300 nm). This is in good agreement with excited-state TD-DFT/B3LYP/6-31G** calculations, which predict the greatest oscillator strength for HAT at 4.86 eV (f = 1.14). On the other hand, HAT presents a very low fluorescence quantum yield which can be related to: (1) the fact that the S0 → S1 transition has a forbidden character; and (2) the significant contribution of n–π* character in these excitations imparted by the lone electron pairs of the nitrogen atoms, which is known to quench the fluorescence emission.15
The electrochemical behavior of HAT has been investigated by using cyclic voltammetry measurements. They show several reduction processes of the HAT core (E1RED = −1.44 V, E2RED = −1.64 V and E3RED = −2.10 V) which are attributed to the consecutive reduction of the three pyrazine rings.20 This good electron acceptor ability of HAT is in agreement with the ionization energy (IE) and electron affinity (EA) values deduced from the UPS/IPES spectra of HAT deposited on gold substrates by vacuum evaporation. Thus, an EA value of −2.12 eV and an IE value of 7.23 eV were obtained by means of these experimental methods and are in good agreement with the values obtained from gas phase DFT calculations.15
The electron deficient, rigid, highly symmetric, planar character of HAT together with its excellent π–π stacking ability make it a basic building block for the synthesis of a variety of organic materials. In the next section we will summarize the main synthetic strategies toward different types of HAT derivatives.
3 Synthesis of HAT derivatives
3.1 A historical approach
The synthesis of 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (HAT) was not reported until 1981 which was first reported by Nasielski-Hinkens et al. by using a three step reaction sequence (Scheme 1) in the search of new metal ligands for low valent transition metals. The synthetic route starts with the amination of nitroderivative 1 to yield intermediate 2, which was subsequently reduced with hydrazine to afford diamine 3. This was finally reacted with glyoxal to afford the target HAT with an overall yield of 34% based on nitroderivative 1.21
 Scheme 1  Top: The first synthesis of HAT; bottom: the first synthesis of a HAT derivative, HATNA. 
Despite this late synthesis of basic HAT, research on π-deficient polycyclic aromatic compounds containing the HAT moiety started as early as 1888 when Nietzki and Schmidt reported the reaction between the sodium salt of the rhodizonic acid (4) and o-phenylenediamine from which they isolated what they called benzenetriphenazine.22 In 1962 Eistert et al. reinvestigated this reaction between rhodizonic acid (4) with o-phenylenediamine and isolated the same compound to which they assigned the structure of 5,6,11,12,17,18-hexaazatrinaphthyl-ene (HATNA) (Scheme 1).23 The structure of this condensation product was postulated almost entirely on the basis of analytical data. It was not until 1969 that the first spectroscopic and structural evidence for the structure of HATNA was reported.24,25
The first systematic synthesis of functionalized HAT derivatives was reported in 198526 and consisted in the condensation between different α-diketones (5a–i) and hexaaminobenzene (6) (Scheme 2). This efficient synthesis provided a general protocol for the synthesis of functionalized HAT derivatives. At that time, the synthesis of hexaaminobenzene involved the reduction of explosive aromatic nitrocompounds with different hidrazynes which prevented the production of 6 on a large scale. This problem was resolved by Rogers who reported the synthesis of hexaaminobenzene (6) in large amounts and high yields using sodium in liquid ammonia to reduce 1,3,5-triamino-2,4,6-trinitrobenzene (TATB, 8, Scheme 2).27
 Scheme 2  Top: First systematic synthesis of a series of HAT derivatives. Bottom: Rogers' synthesis of HAT. 
Although TATB (8) is used as an explosive, it is perhaps the most thermostable and insensitive explosive known because of its low sensibility to shock that makes it stable enough for laboratory handling and can be produced and stored on a multigram scale.28
In order to avoid the use of 8, a multistep synthetic route towards unsubstituted HAT was also developed. This synthetic procedure starts with the reaction of hexaketocyclohexane (9) with 2,3-diaminomaleonitrile (10) to yield 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexacyanoHAT (HAT-CN, 11), which can be subsequently used to obtain hexaazatriphenylene-2,3,6,7,10,11-hexacarboxylic acid (14). This can be finally decarboxylated to afford pristine HAT (Scheme 3).29,30 However, in order to obtain this basic HAT, the synthetic route depicted in Scheme 3 requires 15 days of work in contrast with Rogers' method (Scheme 2)27 with which HAT or other HAT derivatives can be obtained on a multigram scale in less than a week.
 Scheme 3  Multistep synthetic route for the production of HAT from hexaketocyclohexane (9). 
In 1969 it was already shown that the use of hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material for the synthesis of HAT derivatives is effective not only for the condensation with diaminomaleonitrile, as shown in Scheme 3, but also with a variety of o-phenylenediamine derivatives.24 Thus, the condensation of hexaketocyclohexane (9) with unsaturated 1,2-diamines has become a good alternative for the general synthesis of differently functionalized HAT derivatives as is depicted in Scheme 4 for a family of HATNA derivatives (16a–h) with a variety of substituents.31,32 Introduction of rigid acetylenes with bulky silyl substituents in positions that force the aromatic core to deviate from planarity leads to twisted-HATNA derivatives 16f–h (Scheme 4).32 Interestingly, it has been observed that modifying the size of twist angles in HATNA derivatives allows tuning their emission characteristics and electrochemical potentials.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of a family of HATNA derivatives using hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material. 
By using hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material, Hsu and coworkers have synthesized a series of HATNA derivatives 17a–d (Fig. 5) as electron deficient liquid crystal materials,33 and Marder and coworkers have synthesized unsubstituted HATNA and HATNA derivatives 18a–c (Fig. 5) in which the solid state ionization potentials and electron affinity can be tuned by means of the different substitution pattern.34 Wang and coworkers also started from hexaketocyclohexane to synthesize a series of film-forming low-bandgap chromophores with a HATNA skeleton and multiple electron-donating groups at the appropriate positions of the acceptor core (19a,b, Fig. 5).35
 Fig. 5  Selected examples of HATNA derivatives synthesized using hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material. 
Piglosiewicz et al. reported in 2005 a new synthetic procedure for the synthesis of HATNA which consists of the dehydroaromatization reaction of quinoxaline (20) using a Ti complex for the activation of the C–H bonds followed by a reaction with iodine to afford the pristine HATNA (Scheme 5).36 Nevertheless, this last approach has not been widely studied or used as a common synthetic way to HATs.
 Scheme 5  Metal mediated synthesis of HATNA. 
Thus, the synthetic strategies for the production of the HAT skeleton used to date are summarized in Scheme 6. The most extensively used strategies involve (i) the condensation of hexaketocyclohexane (9) with unsaturated 1,2-diamines and (ii) the condensation of hexaaminobenzene (6) with α-diketones. The other, less general, route which has been used for the synthesis of HATNA is based on the cyclodehydrogenation of quinoxaline (20) mediated by titanium complexes.
 Scheme 6  Synthetic approaches to trigonal HAT derivatives. 
It is worth mentioning that these approaches led to the synthesis of trigonal HAT derivatives with D3h symmetry containing a C3 symmetry axis perpendicular to the HAT plane (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Some samples of trigonal and non-trigonal symmetries of HATs. 
In the meantime, the need of synthesizing other non-trigonal HAT derivatives for specific applications was brought into play. It has been necessary to develop other synthetic strategies in order to obtain these kinds of non-trigonal derivatives. Thus, HAT derivatives that present a C2 (usually in the same plane of the HAT ring) or lower symmetry axis (Fig. 6) have been synthesized and the synthetic procedures used for their synthesis will be summarized in the following section.
3.2 Synthesis of non-trigonal HATs
Most of the HAT derivatives synthesized so far have a trigonal symmetry, probably because of the lack of selective methods for the synthesis of non-trigonal analogues. Until recently, the only way to obtain non-trigonal derivatives was an aleatory method based on the condensation of hexaaminobenzene (6) with more than one α-diketone at a time thus providing inevitably a complex mixture of products. For example, the reaction of one equivalent of 6 with one or two equivalents of benzil (5e) followed by two or one equivalents, respectively, of glyoxal (5a)37 yields a complex mixture of products (HAT, 21–23, Scheme 7) that is difficult to purify.
 Scheme 7  Aleatory method for the synthesis of non-trigonal HATs. 
Thus, in recent years the need to develop synthetic strategies that allow the synthesis and investigation of non-trigonal HATs has become clear.
In 1997, Moucheron reported an easy access to pyrazino[2,3-f]quinoxaline-5,6-diamine (3) in a single step by condensation between hexaaminobenzene (6) and glyoxal (5a) under stoichiometric control in a mixture of ethanol and water (Scheme 8).38 This easy access to the diaminoderivative 3 paved the way for the synthesis of nontrigonal HAT derivatives by reaction with other α-diketones. Thus, condensation between 3 and 1,10-phenanthroline-5,6-dione 24 yields the nontrigonal HAT derivative 25 selectively (Scheme 8).38
 Scheme 8  First controlled synthesis of non-trigonal HATs. 
We have employed this synthetic strategy in order to obtain donor–acceptor materials for nonlinear optical (NLO) applications in which the electron deficient HAT core is connected to electron rich groups through double or triple bonds (26–30, Fig. 7).39
 Fig. 7  Nontrigonal donor–acceptor–donor HAT derivatives. 
Other synthetic approaches involving the use of oxocarbons (monocyclic polycarbonyl compounds) such as 2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-p-benzoquinone (31), hexaketocyclohexane (9) or rhodizonic acid (4) as starting materials (Scheme 9) have also been explored. Thus, condensation between 2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-p-benzoquinone (31) and o-phenylenediamine 32, followed by oxidation with nitric acid, affords a tetraketo derivative 33 which can be condensed in acidic media with other substituted o-phenylenediamine derivatives (34a,b) to yield the final non-trigonal HAT derivatives 35a,b (Scheme 9).40
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of nontrigonal HAT derivatives from different oxocarbons as starting materials. 
In the previous section we have shown how hexaketocyclohexane (9) can be condensed with unsaturated 1,2-diamines to reach trigonal HATs easily. Alternatively, 9 can be condensed with an o-phenylenediamino derivative (30b) in a carefully chosen reaction medium (formic acid at room temperature) to afford α-diketone 36 in very good yield (83%). This α-diketone can be further condensed with other different o-pheneylenediamine derivatives (37a–c) to form the corresponding nontrigonal HAT derivatives 38a–c (Scheme 9).40 On the other hand, intermediate α-diketone derivative 36 can also be obtained from rhodyzonic acid (4) by condensation with an o-phenylenediamine derivative (34b), followed by oxidation (Scheme 9). Furthermore, Wang and coworkers reacted α-diketone derivative 36 thus obtained with 2,3-diaminomaleonitrile (10) to afford nontrigonal HAT derivative 39 with a high electron accepting capability due to the presence of the nitrile groups and with smectic liquid crystalline properties, these are due to the long alkyl chains and the flat HAT core.41
A completely different approach has been developed by Scondo and Fages for the synthesis of nontrigonal HAT derivatives laterally bridged with two macrocyclic units (41, Scheme 10). The procedure involves the condensation of a linear trisbenzil precursor (40) with hexaaminobenzene (6) acting as both a reagent and a template (Scheme 10). Here, the stepwise creation of the six imine bonds, leading to the formation of the HAT core and the concomitant construction of the two lateral macrocycles, was reasoned to imply the wrapping of one molecule of the linear trisbenzil precursor (40) around the hexaaminobenzene (6) nucleus in a sequence of one bimolecular and two intramolecular condensations.42
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of an unsymmetrical bismacrocyclic HAT derivative. 
The novel routes toward non-trigonal HATs open up a field of novel materials and applications of HAT derivatives, as will be outlined in the following sections.
3.3 Post-synthesis functionalization of HAT derivatives
In almost all of the previous synthetic sequences the last step consists of the formation of the HAT nucleus. In this section, we will present functionalized HAT derivatives that can be further modified.
The first example of post-synthesis functionalization of a HAT derivative was based on the conversion of the functional groups attached to the HAT core and it has already been presented in Scheme 3.29 Thus, the cyano groups of hexacyano HAT (11) can be reduced to the hexaamido derivative (12) which can be converted to the corresponding hexa(methylcarbonyl) analogue (13) which can be further hydrolysed to the hexacarboxylic acid HAT derivative (14). In addition, the hexa(methylcarbonyl) derivative (13) has been reported to react with different amines to yield the corresponding amides.43
Czarnik et al. reported the synthesis of HAT-trisimides 44a–d by reaction of HAT-trianhydride (42) with different amines (43a–d, Scheme 11). In addition, they explored the influence of different amounts of HAT-trianhydride (42) in polymerization reactions between pyrromellitic dianhydride and 4,4′-oxydianiline (43d). In these reactions, 42 is used as a crosslinking agent in the synthesis of polyimides due to its trifunctional character.44
 Scheme 11  
HAT-trisimide derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization. 
Another functionalization based on a functional group transformation has been reported by Aumiller et al. who have been able to synthesize hexakis-(dihalomethyl) HATs (46 and 47) and hexaformyl HAT (48) by halogenation and oxidation reactions of hexamethylhexaazatriphenylene (45, Scheme 12) respectively.45
 Scheme 12  
HAT derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization. 
Our group has reported the synthesis of a dibromomethyl substituted HAT derivative (49) and its further conversion to the corresponding diphosphonate derivative (50) which can undergo Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons olefination reactions with different aromatic aldehydes to yield donor–acceptor–donor HAT derivatives (28–30, Scheme 13) with nonlinear optical properties.
 Scheme 13  Donor–acceptor–donor HAT derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization. 
Hexacyano-HAT (11) has also been used as a substrate for nucleophilic aromatic substitutions where the CN groups act as leaving groups. Thus, the reaction of 11 with alkyl thiols yielded the corresponding hexahexylthio derivatives 52.46 In contrast, analogous reaction of 11 with alkyl alcohols afforded HAT derivatives in which only three CN groups are substituted (51a,bScheme 14).47 This different behaviour can be rationalized in terms of the higher electron donor ability of the alkyloxy groups that deactivate the neighbour CN groups for further substitution reactions. The previous proposed mechanism could explain this fact, due to the weaker electron donating ability of alkylthio groups in comparison with alkyloxy groups, the deactivation of the CN groups being in this case smaller, thus allowing them to react until all of the groups have been substituted. A similar behaviour has been observed for the reaction of hexachloro-HATNA18a with alkylthiols and alkylalcohols (Scheme 14). Total replacement of the chlorine atoms, upon reaction of 18a with alkyl thiols, was observed yielding derivatives 53–5648 as electron transporting discotic materials.49 On the other hand, a similar reaction between 18a and different alkyl alcohols did not provide characterizable products.50
 Scheme 14  Post synthesis functionalization of HATs based on aromatic nucleophilic substitution. 
It can thus be seen that the possibility of obtaining HAT derivatives endowed with functional groups greatly enhances the possibility of incorporating the HAT moiety into novel molecular and macromolecular materials as well as into supramolecular assemblies.
3.4 Expanding the HAT core conjugation
The first example of a HAT derivative with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system (57, Fig. 8) was reported by Lehn and coworkers in 1996 in the search of rigid ligands for polymetallic molecular architectures. The novel HAT derivative was obtained by reaction of hexaaminobenzene (6) with a suitable diketone to yield only the symmetrical product.51 The other HAT derivative with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system is the planar conjugated macrocycle 61 (Fig. 8) which has also been used as a ligand. After coordination of 61 with three Co ions, the [CoN4]3 complex shows an excellent behavior as a nonprecious metal catalyst (NPMC) for fuel cell applications.52,53 In this case, the compound was obtained through a multistep reaction sequence after the HAT ring was formed as depicted in Scheme 15.
 Fig. 8  
HAT derivatives with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system. 
 Scheme 15  Multistep synthesis of planar conjugated macrocyclic HAT derivative 61. 
However, the main driving force for the development of HAT derivatives with extended π-conjugation has been the search for novel organic semiconductors. Large-sized semiconductors with an expanded π-electron system tend to have a positive influence on the charge carrier mobility due to the increase of the self-assembling aggregative nature between the stacked molecules as well as the increase of the orbital overlap between the π-orbitals of the molecules. For example, the p-type self-assembling semiconductor hexabenzocoronenes1 with an expanded π-electron system are well-known as good carrier-transporting materials.54 On the other hand, the n-type self-assembling semiconductors are very often limited to small- and medium-sized aromatics.55
Thus, the creation of new large-sized self assembling n-type semiconductors including HAT, the tuning of their HOMO and LUMO values together with the study of their self-assembling properties both in solution and in the solid state, has been a hot subject of research in recent years.
In this regard, Wang and coworkers synthesized a series of n-type HAT derivatives (63–66, Fig. 9).56 It is observed that the absorption and emission spectra are red-shifted with the increase of the pyrazine unit number. In particular, the LUMO energy levels are drastically decreased from −3.54 eV (63) to −4.02 eV (66), even lower than a well-known n-type material PCBM (−3.8 eV) used in organic photovoltaics.57
 Fig. 9  Frontier orbital tuning of a series of HAT derivatives (63–66) with different number of pyrazine units. Adapted with permission from Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4378–4381. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
We and others have synthesized HAT derivatives with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system such as 58,5859,596015 and 6260 (Fig. 8) with the aim of investigating their self-assembling properties both in solution and in the solid state as it will be summarized in the following section.

HAT derivatives directly conjugated with strong electroactive moieties (75, 76, 77, Fig. 10) have also been synthesized. Liu and coworkers reported the synthesis of redox-active tri-star molecule 75 combining the strong electron donor tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) and HAT. The target compound was obtained via the direct condensation reaction of hexaketocyclohexane (9) with a TTF derivative endowed with a diamino functionality.61
 Fig. 10  
HAT derivatives directly conjugated with the strong electron donor tetrathiafulvalene (75) and the strong electron acceptors naphthalimide (76) and perylene bisimide (77). 
On the other hand, in the frame of a systematic study of a family of n-type semiconducting naphthalimide-based pyrazinacenes, we have recently reported the synthesis of a HAT derivative directly conjugated with the strong electron acceptor naphthalimide (76).62 The synthesis was carried out via the direct condensation of hexaaminobenzene (6) with a naphthalimide derivative endowed with a diketone functionality. It was shown that, in comparison with linear analogues, the discotic shape of HAT derivative 76 improves the film forming properties which is of interest for its use in devices.
Xiao and coworkers have reported the synthesis of an n-type star shaped molecule 77 that contains a HAT core fused with three perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid bisimide (PBI) “arms” at the bay sites, which is composed of 25 fused six-membered aromatic rings. Interestingly, an n-type charge carrier mobility of 3.34 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained for 77 by steady-state space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements, which is considerably higher than 8.71 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 as determined for the PBI monomer.63
In the next section we will review how some of these HAT derivatives with extended π-cores have a strong tendency for aggregation, both in solution and in the solid state.
4 Self-assembling properties of HAT derivatives
Molecular self-assembly via noncovalent interactions has been employed as a tool for obtaining supramolecular architectures. Among these noncovalent interactions, the controlled self-assembly of π-conjugated molecules into ordered supramolecular architectures via π–π stacking is a subject of increasing research interest for the tailoring of their functionalities, and for their application in organic electronic devices.64 Such ordered supramolecular aggregates are more attractive candidates for electron transporting materials than glassy-type amorphous aromatics with unfavorable positional and energy disorder.65
The outcome of the self-assembly at the molecular scale can be visualized at different levels such as (i) three dimensional (3D) ordered liquid crystals (LC) in the solid state,66 (ii) one dimensional (1D) micro/nanostructures67 and (iii) assemblies on solid surfaces.68 We will review how HAT derivatives are used to generate supramolecular architectures at the three above mentioned levels and we will also summarize the available research on the self-assembling properties of HAT derivatives in solution.
4.1 Self-assembly in solution
As has been already mentioned, HAT derivatives can be self-assembled both in the solution and in the solid state. Although most of the applications of the supramolecular assemblies are based on solid-state materials, the first evidence for the aggregation is provided by means of spectroscopic techniques very often performed in solution. For example, Ishi-I and co-workers, in the search of new large-sized self-assembling n-type semiconductors, investigated the aggregation properties of a family of HAT derivatives with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system (57–58, Fig. 8) by means of UV-vis, fluorescence, 1H-NMR spectroscopies and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.58,59 They observed concentration- and temperature dependent spectral changes in 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane solutions which were attributed to dynamic exchange between monomer and aggregate species. The trends observed are very similar to those of the π-stacked aggregates with a H-type parallel stacking mode which is rationalized by the molecular exciton model.69 The aggregation of these HAT derivatives is also reflected in the fluorescence spectra. In 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, a significant concentration dependence was observed due to the dynamic exchange between the monomer and aggregates species, as found in the UV-vis spectra. They also observed in 1H-NMR line-broadening effects arising from the aggregation. By addition of trifluoroacetic acid-D1, the broad peaks became sharp according to aggregate dissociation. Sharpening of the 1H-NMR signals can also be appreciated at temperatures higher than 100 °C indicating also aggregate dissociation at higher temperatures. Interestingly, direct evidence for aggregation could also be obtained by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in which assemblies of three, four and even five molecules could be detected.
A similar study has been also reported by Wang et al. for HAT derivatives with tunable LUMO levels (63–66, Fig. 9) where a growing tendency towards molecular aggregation with an increased number of fused aromatic rings is observed.56
In the frame of a joint theoretical and experimental study, we investigated the aggregation behaviour in solution of the so-called tri-HAT derivative 60 (Fig. 8) which has the same amount of fused aromatic ring as those systems described by Ishi-I (57–58, Fig. 8) but containing six more nitrogen atoms in the conjugated backbone.15 We investigated the electronic and molecular structure of these novel molecules bearing three fused HAT moieties and fully characterized them by means of optical and vibrational Raman spectroscopy, electrochemistry, solid state UV, inverse photoemission spectroscopy (UPS and IPES), and by comparison with quantum-chemical calculations. Concerning the aggregation in solution, concentration and temperature-dependent UV-vis and fluorescence measurements provide a similar behaviour to that reported by Ishi-I for HAT derivatives 57–58 (Fig. 8) with redshifted emission upon increased concentration. The molecular aggregation was investigated by QM/MM calculations on dimer models considering two different types of conformations, π-stacked and T-shaped arrangements, either with parallel or antiparallel dispositions. The energy profiles obtained predict that the antiparallel π-stacking interaction is the most stable conformation for 60 as well as for pristine HAT. This conclusion was also supported by photophysical data. Indeed, upon dimerization, the lowest excited energy level is expected to redshift in both parallel (perfectly co-facial) and anti-parallel configurations. However, the emission from this state in the parallel configuration is prohibited due to symmetry. Analyses of the different energy contributions indicate that electrostatic interactions are responsible for the stabilization of the antiparallel cofacial arrangement in relation to the parallel one in both HAT and tri-HAT60 dimers.
In 2014, Zhao and coworkers have used the ability of HAT derivatives for self-assembly to produce an unusual chiral amplification phenomenon in a very simple four component supramolecular system constructed by the coassembly of achiral hexa-2-pyridyl-HAT (78) with amino acid derivatives 79–81 (Fig. 11).70
 Fig. 11  Top: Chemical structures of achiral hexa-2-pyridyl-HAT (78) and amino acid derivatives 79–81. Bottom: Schematic illustration of the origin of the “sergeant-and-soldiers” principle on the basis of the transfer of chirality from the D-phenylalanine derivative to the other part of the complex. 
The coassembly of achiral HAT derivative 78 and chiral amino acids allows constructing propeller-like supermolecules driven by intermolecular hydrogen bonding. Both the “sergeants-and-soldiers” principle and the “majority-rules” effect are applicable in these discrete four-component supermolecules, which are the simplest supramolecular system ever reported that exhibit chiral amplification.
It can be concluded from these studies that the extension of the π-cores is a useful approach not only to tune the electronic properties of these materials but also to enhance their tendency for aggregation and even to participate in chiral amplification.
4.2 Self-assembly in the bulk: liquid crystal behaviour and charge transport properties
Discotic liquid crystals (DLCs)71,72 have attracted the attention of many research groups since their discovery by Chandrasekhar in 197773 and many efforts have been made to exploit DLCs in organic electronic devices.74
Simple discotic mesogens such as triphenylene (82, Fig. 12) derivatives have a more or less rigid planar core with typically six or eight flexible chain substituents laterally attached to the core.66 Thus, in 1988 it was reported that 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexakis(hexylthio)triphenylene (83, Fig. 12) can order in a columnar liquid crystalline structure.75
 Fig. 12  Structure of triphenylene 82 and a mesogen triphenylene derivative 83. 
This discovery was followed by the observation of a charge carrier mobility (μ) of μ = 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 83 in the ordered columnar liquid crystal (LC) state which was the best value in that time for a non-crystalline organic compound.76 By that time, the charge carrier mobilities of other mesogens based on hexabenzocoronene or phthalocyanine aromatic cores were also investigated77 and values of μ as high as 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 were reported for the columnar mesophase of hexabenzocoronene derivatives.78 However, most of the discotic mesogens reported at that time were better hole carriers than electron carriers creating, therefore, the need for new electron acceptor discotic mesogens.

HAT, incorporating six nitrogen heteroatoms within a triphenylene core, is a good electron acceptor and therefore it was expected that it should facilitate electron injection and collection. Because of its structural similarity with triphenylene (82), HAT derivatives were then proposed as good candidates to be investigated as electron-deficient mesogens.
In 1985, Kohne and Praefcke synthesized a family of HAT derivatives endowed with alkyl and aryl functionalities (6c, 6d, 6g, 6h, Scheme 2) with the aim of exploring their liquid crystalline properties by analogy with the parent triphenylene analogues. However, liquid crystalline properties were not observed by any of these compounds.26 Although Bushby and coworkers reported the ability of HAT derivatives to enhance the mesophase ranges by mixing with triphenylene derivatives,79 seminal work in the development of liquid crystalline HAT derivatives was performed by Lehmann, Geerts and coworkers that, in a series of papers, investigated the mesophase characterization of discotic mesogens based on HAT derivatives (52, 53, 84, Fig. 13).46,48,80
 Fig. 13  
HAT derivatives used to investigate their thermotropic liquid crystalline behavior. 
Surprisingly, it was found that hexathialkylhexaazatriphenylenes (52, Fig. 13) do not form columnar LC phases like their corresponding triphenylene analogues, probably because of the large negative charges on the nitrogen atoms, which led to the repulsion of the adjacent cores.46 In HAT derivative 84 (Fig. 13), hydrogen bonds were used to counterbalance and overcome this Coulombic repulsion, leading to the formation of a discotic mesophase with a charge-carrier mobility of ca. 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, as determined by microwave conductivity measurements.43 The amide hydrogen bonds serve as non-covalent “clamps” in the crystal phase of hexacarboxamidohexaazatriphenylene (84, R = H, Fig. 13). The resulting interplanar distance is as short as 3.32 Å which is significantly smaller (3.50–4.00 Å) than the one that was found for other semiconducting columnar mesogens.
Meijer and coworkers synthesized hexaazatriphenylene-hexacarboxy triimide (86, Fig. 13) which combines HAT as the acceptor core and 3,4,5-tridodecyloxyphenyl groups to introduce mesogenic character.81 The electron deficient LC material shows photoinduced electron transfer with poly-3-hexylthiophene as a donor which would make it interesting to be tested in organic solar cells. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are so far no reports on organic solar cells fabricated with this HAT derivative.

HAT derivatives with alternating donor alkoxy side chains and nitrile acceptor substituents (51b, Scheme 14) have also been investigated as potential mesogens. Only the derivative with the longer hexyl chain exhibits liquid crystalline behavior. For this particular derivative the intracolumnar disk-to-disk distance is of 3.39 Å. The presence of the alkoxy groups in the electron deficient HAT nucleus over-rides the non-existing π-complexation.47
In contrast with HAT derivatives 52, the larger hexaazatrinaphthylene analogues (53, Fig. 13) exhibit at least one LC mesophase before decomposition around 250 °C46,48 which is in agreement with the enhancement in the tendency for aggregation with the extension of the π-cores as it was observed in solution. The electron mobility was found to be higher in the crystalline than in the liquid crystalline phases (helical phase), with maximum values of 0.9 and 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively.82,83 The difference in mobility between the LC and the crystal phases has been rationalized in terms of the order lost in the columnar mesophase due to the movements of the disks that can deform the columns preventing a correct electron jumping between them.
Similar HATNA derivatives with six decyloxy side chains have also been reported to show LC behavior and they have been used to investigate the orientational packing of this discotic mesogens when they are in a confined space, i.e., between two flat glass substrates. It is observed that the thermal state of the mesogen during molecular stacking is crucial for a conveniently oriented columnar aggregation.84
We have investigated the LC properties of triHAT derivatives 60 (Fig. 8) with a two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system.85 The higher number of heterocyclic N atoms makes triHAT derivatives better electron acceptors than unsubstituted HAT. Derivatives with n-hexyl and n-decyl alkyl chains reveal mesomorphic properties, thus confirming the beneficial effect of conjugation extension in order to achieve liquid crystalline properties. However, the study of the mesomorphic properties of the HAT derivative with shorter alkyl chains was impeded by its decomposition before reaching its clearing point.
The mesogenic properties of a HAT analogue of 56, in which the peripheral benzene rings were replaced by thiophene moieties (85, Fig. 13), were also investigated80 but it was found that hexaalkylsulfanylhexaazatriisothianaphthene derivatives (85) do not show mesogenic properties. The authors rationalize this behavior in terms of Coulomb repulsion effects linked to the charge distribution found in the aromatic cores which could prevail over the stabilizing forces induced by van der Waals interactions.80
Ishi-I and coworkers demonstrated that the use of alkyl chains to obtain HAT derivatives is not necessary with LC properties. They report that HATs with six aromatic side chains (87, Fig. 14) aggregate both in liquid crystalline and in organogel phases.86
 Fig. 14  
HAT derivatives with aromatic side chains investigated as potential liquid crystal materials. 
In derivatives 87a–c, the aromatic side chains with terminal flexible groups make up soft regions that cooperatively stabilize the liquid crystalline and organogel supramolecular structures together with the hard regions of the HAT core and therefore have crystalline behaviour with two-dimensional hexagonal packings. In contrast, the analogues with shorter aromatic chains did not show LC behaviour.
Chemical doping of discotic liquid crystals is well known and, in some cases, it produces enhanced mesophase ranges.87 Hence, Bushby, Lozman and coworkers reported that substantially enhanced mesophase ranges can be obtained by mixing 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexakis(hexyloxy)triphenylene (88a, n = 6, Fig. 15) with a HAT derivative with a larger polyaromatic core (89, Fig. 15).79 The special stability of these π-stacked systems is not the result of either charge-transfer or (net) quadrupolar interactions but instead arises from a complementary polytopic interaction (CPI). This strategy provides a tool in order to develop π-stacking tectons in supramolecular chemistry as an alternative to, for example, hydrogen bonds.88 In this regard, the formation of CPI compounds with triphenylene derivatives and 89 (Fig. 15) can be used not only to enhance the mesophase range of triphenylene-based discotic liquid crystals but also to induce mesophase behaviour in non-mesogenic triphenylene derivatives,89–91 to improve their conductivity and alignment properties,89,92,93 to induce microphase separation in block copolymer systems,91 and to order fullerene C60 molecules in helical columnar structures.94
 Fig. 15  (a) Triphenylene (88) and HAT derivatives (89) that exhibit complementary polytopic interaction (CPI). (b) Representation of the stacking of 88 and 89 in an alternating manner. 
Big efforts have been made in order to shed light, with the help of quantum-chemical calculations, on the nature of charge transport at the molecular scale in discotic materials based on HAT derivatives and to establish structure-transport properties relationships.15,80,82,95,96 Charge transport in discotic liquid crystals is usually expected to correspond to a phonon-assisted hopping regime, as is the case in amorphous organic thin films97 or molecular crystals at high temperature.98 In such a regime, the charges are localized over a single molecule and jump from site to site to yield a current. A major parameter governing the charge mobility, be it in a (localized) hopping or (delocalized) a band regime, is the transfer integral t which describes the strength of the interactions between adjacent molecules. Quantum chemical calculations demonstrate that the amplitude of the transfer integrals is strongly dependent on geometric fluctuations, in particular ring rotations and translations between consecutive molecules in the columns of the mesophase while an increase in the size of the conjugated core does not necessarily ensure better transport properties. Thus, charge mobilities result from a subtle interplay between the size, nature of the conjugated core and side chains, and relative positions of the molecules in the columns.80,95 Based on quantum-chemical calculations Brédas, Cornil and coworkers predicted a significant increase in the charge mobility when going from triphenylene to hexaazatrinaphthylene which was further confirmed by measurements carried out with the pulse radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity technique.99 Kippelen, Marder and coworkers reported effective mobilities of 0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1 for HATNA derivatives endowed with alkyl ester and pentafluorobenzyl ester side chains (90, 91, Fig. 16).100 The effective charge carrier mobility was studied by the steady-state space-charge limited current technique. It is worth mentioning that these measurements were obtained from noncrystalline films. By using also the steady-state space-charge limited current technique, Chi and coworkers reported mobilities of 3.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for HAT derivatives end functionalized with dicarboximide groups (92, Fig. 16).101
 Fig. 16  
HATNA derivatives used to measure charge carrier mobilities. 
To the best of our knowledge, the highest mobility measured for a HAT derivative is 0.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 measured using the pulse-radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity technique for hexa(alkylsulfanyl) HATNA derivatives 55 and 56 (Scheme 14).82 This mobility was observed for the columnar solid phase while a mobility of 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 was measured in the liquid crystalline state. Due to the different techniques employed, the mobilities of 56 cannot be directly compared to the above mentioned mobilities for other HAT derivatives. It is observed that along the columns, mesogens do not pack in an eclipsed conformation and therefore adjacent molecules are rotationally or translationally displaced. Interestingly, it is observed that the side-chains have a strong influence on the intracolumnar ordering of these molecules which contrasts with the results of studies on larger discotic molecules, such as hexabenzocoronenes,78 for which the mobilities in the LC phase are found to be primarily independent of the side chains. Furthermore, transition temperatures above 200 °C were too high for practical use.
In 2014, Hanna and coworkers have synthesized a series of self-organizing n-type hexaazatrinaphthylenes with various bay-located side chains (93–95, Fig. 17) which are able to form long-range molecular columns with self-directed growth directions.102
 Fig. 17  Bay-substituted HATNA derivatives used to measure charge carrier mobilities. 
In particular, alkyl substituted HATNAs organize themselves as “in plane” molecular columns with axes parallel to substrates, whereas the columnar orientation of the HATNAs with alkylethynyl or alkylthio groups strongly depends on the side chains (Fig. 18). Interestingly, the derivative with octylthiochains exhibits “out-of-plane” molecular columns, in which an electron mobility of up to 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 was determined by the time-of-flight technique, highlighting the fact that such molecular columns based on bay-substituted HATNAs are promising n-type semiconductors for electronic device applications.102
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram representing “in plane” and “out of plane” molecular columns with the fastest electron transport observed for the “out-of-plane” molecular columns. Reproduced from ref. 102. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Thus, it has been already demonstrated that the electron deficient core of HAT facilitates the electron carrier transport and, by selecting appropriate substituents at specific locations, it is possible to achieve long-range molecular columns for fast charge transport.
4.3 Self assembling on surfaces
Assembly of individual molecules and the formation of molecular nanostructures on surfaces have attracted increasing attention as molecular and nanoscale engineering becomes an integral part of miniaturization in electronic and photonic devices.68 With this aim, in recent years some efforts have been devoted to investigate the molecular self-assembly of HAT derivatives on solid surfaces.103–106 Molecular self-assembly on solid surfaces is an intricate process involving a balance between adsorbate–adsorbate and adsorbate–substrate interactions and therefore different morphologies have been observed depending on the investigated HAT derivatives and substrates.
Samori and coworkers reported on the structural and electronic properties of N-(2-ethylhexyl)-substituted hexacarboxamido-hexaazatriphenylene (84, R = 2-ethylhexhyl, Fig. 13) physisorbed on surfaces.107 On electrically conductive substrates such as highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) investigations at the solid/liquid interface highlighted the formation of ordered monolayers with molecules assembled face-on with respect to the basal plane of the surface forming rows of dimers of the molecule in an oblique (near to rectangular) 2D lattice (Fig. 19a). Furthermore, Kelvin probe force microscopy experiments (KPFM) showed that the surface potential in multilayered samples was 4.53 eV. This estimation is of fundamental importance in molecular electronics because it enables the elucidation and correct tuning of differences in energy levels between molecular nanostructures and electrodes, thereby allowing optimization of charge injection.
 Fig. 19  STM image of (a) N-(2-ethylhexyl)-substituted hexacarboxamido-hexaazatriphenylene (84, R = 2-ethylhexhyl, Fig. 13) at the tetradecane/HOPG interface. Reproduced from ref. 107 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HATNA on Au(111). Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10493–10497. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Ha and coworkers reported their STM investigations of the morphological behavior of 1–2 monolayers (ML) of unsubstituted HATNA (Scheme 1) deposited on Au(111).104 The first ML consisted of molecules flat on the surface (Fig. 19b), arranged in one of three different ordered phases depending on annealing parameters. Regardless of the phase, the substrate influences the spatial charge distribution in the organic layer, as evidenced by the visibility of the Au(111) reconstruction features. The substrate–molecule interaction is weak because the desorption temperature is relatively low and ordered multilayers are not formed.
Shortly after these studies, Xu et al. reported on the investigation and control of the orientation of HATNA derivatives on surfaces by tailoring the molecular structures and through the adjustment of external stimuli.108 They demonstrated that it is possible to adjust the strength of the adsorbate–substrate interaction by changing the surface charge density and to subsequently form tunable assembled structures on the substrate surface (Fig. 20). For this purpose, they use electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy (ECSTM) which is a tool that effectively combines STM with electrochemical techniques.109 They were able to induce that HAT molecules organize in flat or vertical orientations on the Au(111) surface by applying electrode potentials. The possibility of tuning the molecular orientation on surfaces has been proposed as an approach to build nanostructures or thin films with controllable molecular orientations for electronic applications.
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the orientational transition of HATNA derivatives on Au(111) with varied electrode potentials. 
Ha and coworkers have probed by STM the layer-by-layer growth of tris{2,5-bis(3,5-bis-trifluoromethyl-phenyl)-thieno} [3,4-b,h,n]-1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaaza-triphenylene (THAP, 96, Fig. 21) on Au(111)106 because of its interest as an electron transport material.110–112 They show that at least 4 parallel ordered monolayers can be grown where the molecules align parallel to the surface and, at least the first three monolayers have a bidimensional hexagonal close packing (hcp, Fig. 21, left). Thus, in the growth from the first to fourth monolayers, each layer induces the order and lattice vector directions of the successive layer.
 Fig. 21  Chemical structure of THAP (104) and STM images of (a) one monolayer of 96 on Au(111) (Reprinted with permission from S. D. Ha, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 085433. Copyright 2008 by the American Physical Society) and (b) submonolayer coverage of 96 on Ag(110). Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9803–9807. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
The above shown assemblies of individual molecules on surfaces have been investigated on “nonreactive” substrates such as Au or HOPG with which molecules interact relatively weakly. However, Salomon and coworkers have also studied the balance between molecule–substrate and molecule–molecule interactions for THAP 96 (Fig. 21) and different metals.
First, the electronic properties of 96 films deposited layer-by-layer on medium and high work function metallic substrates (Ag and Au) were investigated by means of ultraviolet and X-rays photoemission spectroscopies. With Ag(110) a charge transfer occurs from the metal to the LUMO of the 96 molecule, leading to the occupation of a new interface gap state. No evidence of charge transfer or chemical reaction is observed for 96 adsorbed on Au(111) which indicates a weaker interaction.111
Following this study, the structural aspects of the adsorption of THAP 96 (Fig. 21) on a clean Ag(110) surface were also investigated via STM showing that the molecule–substrate interaction plays also an important role as well in defining the structure of the full monolayer.106 In contrast with the 4 parallel ordered monolayers of 96 grown on Au(111), small adjacent islands were observed when 96 was evaporated on Ag(110) (Fig. 21). While intermolecular van der Waals forces dominate in the Au(111) case, a stronger molecule–substrate chemical interaction occurs in the Ag(110) case.
The ability for self-assembling together with the versatility of functionalization and electrochemical characteristics of HAT derivatives makes these materials good candidates for further development of self-organized nanostructures on surfaces.
4.4 Nano and microstructures built by self assembly
Nanoscience has experienced a spectacular rise in the last two decades stimulated by advances in the synthesis and interdisciplinary investigation of the properties of low dimensional nanostructures and nanomaterials in which at least one of the dimensions falls in the 1–100 nm range.113 In this context, the supramolecular self-assembly of small organic molecules into well-defined micro/nanowires or micro/nanobelts represents a simple, efficient approach to the construction of micro/nanostructures with high aspect ratios.114 With this aim, HAT derivatives have been chosen as the basic scaffold because of their excellent π–π stacking ability, as well as attractive electro-optical properties.
Jen and coworkers reported the first example of nanostructures based on HAT derivatives by patterning robust self-assembled alkylamide-tethered HATNA derivatives (97, 98, Fig. 22) into nanorods and nanowires by microcontact printing.115 Compound 97 has good solubility in CHCl3; however, it gels easily in mixed solvents such as CHCl3/hexane ((v/v) 1:1) owing to enhanced amide–amide hydrogen bonding in a less polar environment. A morphological study reveals that 97 forms self-organized nanowires with a diameter of ∼20 nm and a length over 10 μm in the gel.
 Fig. 22  Chemical structure of alkylamide-tethered HATNA derivatives (97, 98) and AFM images of (a) nanowires and (b) nanorods pattern of 98 on SiO2/Si fabricated by microcontact printing. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13042–13043. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
The self-assembling properties of 98 are very different from those of 97 in CHCl3. The introduction of π-conjugated diacetylene groups further enhances the π–π stacking between the molecules. The shortened flexible alkyl groups also reduce the solvation of the molecules in CHCl3. As a result, the binding force between the molecules increases, and they start to aggregate at a lower concentration. Furthermore, the diacetylene units in 98 can be used for the fixation of the supramolecular nanowires by photo-cross-linking produced by exposing the self-assembled nanowires to a 18 W UV lamp. In addition, the microcontact printing116 has been used to form patterns of nanowires and nanorods of 98. The self-assembled nanostructures were first spin-coated onto a patterned polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp, which was then allowed to generate conformal contact with a SiO2/Si substrate for 30 s to transfer the nanostructures to the surface. These nanostructures could be directly transferred to SiO2/Si substrates without the need of any surface modification, and they formed robust patterns after postpolymerization by UV treatment (Fig. 22).115
Li and coworkers have reported the fabrication of microbelts through the coassembly of hexa-2-pyridyl-hexaazatriphenylene (78, Fig. 23) with primary alkyl ammonium triflate. The strategy was first to construct hydrogen-bonded complexes between 78 and primary alkyl ammoniums to mimic covalently bonded π-core alkyl chain structures, and then the complexes self-assembled into microbelts driven by π–π stacking in the π core and van der Waals interactions between the peripheral alkyl chains.117
 Fig. 23  Chemical structure of hexa-2-pyridyl-hexaazatriphenylene (78), its hydrogen bonding complex with n-dodecyl ammonium triflate (DAT) and TEM images of microbelts fabricated from the 78/DAT mixture (upper part). On the lower part are represented (left) the TEM image of the microspheres constructed from the 78/Zn2+ mixture, (middle) and the SEM image of 78/Ag+ microtubes and (right) the SEM image of 78/Ag+ microrods. Adapted with permission from Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13048–13051 and Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1505–1511. Copyright 2010 and 2011 American Chemical Society. 
No well-defined aggregates could be observed from the sample obtained from a chloroform solution of 78 indicating that the π core itself was not a good building block for self-assembly. This suggests that a side chain might be necessary to promote ordered aggregation. However, when n-dodecyl ammonium triflate (DAT) was introduced into a solution of 78 in chloroform, flocculent material precipitated out after standing for several minutes. A SEM image revealed that it consisted of well defined microbelts of 1 to 2 μm in width and tens of micrometers in length. The formation of a stable hydrogen-bonded 78-alkyl ammonium complex is believed to be the condition for this sequential self-assembly process, through which the complex could further self-assemble into microbelts (Fig. 23). This approach might offer a promising way to construct novel supramolecular architectures via the coassembly of simple components without the need to synthesize supramolecular building blocks with complicated chemical structures.
Li and coworkers have also described the construction of three well-defined discrete microstructures—microspheres, microtubes, and microrods—that have been fabricated through metalorganic coordination between hexa-2-pyridyl-hexaazatriphenylene (78, Fig. 23) and different transition metal ions.118 It is interesting to point out that deriving from the same organic unit, the resulting microspheres and microtubes (microrods) exhibit a dramatic difference in dimension (0D vs. 1D) as a result of different coordination manners of zinc and silver with 78 because of different coordination numbers and size and also by processing the coordination in different solvents.
The approaches described above represent promising methods to construct self-organized molecular assemblies in a tunable way and prove the suitability of HAT derivatives as a π core to build nano and microstructures.
5. HAT-CN, a special case of study
1,4,5,8,9,11-Hexaazatriphenylene hexacarbonitrile, or HAT-CN (IUPAC name: dipyrazino[2,3-f:2′,3′-h]quinoxaline-2,3,6,7,10,11-hexacarbonitrile, 11, Scheme 3), is a cyanoazacarbon, C18N12, first reported by Czarnik and co-workers.30,119 It is a strong electron-deficient discotic heterocyclic molecule with a deep-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (DL-LUMO) level (∼5.1 eV) and therefore a large electron affinity that acts as an electron-accepting unit. One consequence of this is that it avoids self π-complexation in its neutral form. In fact, in HAT-CN crystals, obtained from a methanol/acetonitrile mixture, the planar HAT-CN molecules do not align in a parallel manner via π–π stacking, but rather form a staircase-like chain motif with a perpendicular arrangement. The intermolecular spacing is 3.75 Å, which is larger than the expected van der Waals radii sum of 3.54 Å. The overall crystal packing is mainly dominated by CN–π interactions which leads to a complicated, but highly symmetric, 3D hexagonal arrangement.120,121 Through this weak intermolecular interaction the self-π-complexation can be avoided, which helps to preserve the large molecular electron affinity in the solid state.120
Concerning with its electrochemical behavior, three reductions steps are typically seen in cyclic voltammetry measurements.122 Although these three reductions are more or less reversible, depending on the conditions, the voltage separation is sufficient for three distinct species to be identified that at appropriate fixed potentials by spectroelectrochemistry.
Upon treatment with tetra-n-butylammonium oxalate, HAT-CN is reduced, leaving [tetra-n-butylammonium][HAT-CN] salt and CO2 gas. Magnetic susceptibility measurements on this salt show its ferromagnetic behavior with an estimate Curie temperature of Tc ∼ 3 K. In contrast with the staircase-like chain motif with a perpendicular arrangement observed for neutral HAT-CN, the molecular structure of [tetra-n-butylammonium][HAT-CN] is dominated by the stacking of the HAT-CN radical anions which form π-stacked pairs at a remarkably short distance of 3.110 Å. The pair of anions is rotated by 60° with respect to each other, which allows the staggering of the nitrile groups even though the rest of the atoms are almost fully eclipsed with a slip distance of only 1.457 Å. Each close pair is in turn slip-stacked with respect to its neighboring pairs, with an approximately half-molecule slip, or step, of 5.837 Å between adjacent pairs, and a somewhat longer interplanar spacing of 3.302 Å between the slipped pairs (Fig. 24). These closely associated pairs of ions are likely responsible for the low temperature ferromagnetism.123 Dunbar and coworkers investigated also the ability of reduced forms of HAT-CN to be used as ligands. Most binary compounds of the first row transition metals with discrete or extended polymeric structure exhibit paramagnetic behavior with the exception of a polymeric [Cu-HAT-CN] phase which behaves as a canted antiferromagnet below 6 K.120 No structural information was provided for this system. In spite of these observations, the magnetic properties of HAT-CN derivatives remain still relatively unexplored. Kitagawa and coworkers demonstrated the effect of the coordination mode of the oxidation states of HAT-CN that can be achieved through a self-assembly process with copper(I) ions and ferrocene derivative coligands. Interestingly, it is observed that the coordination mode of HAT-CN exerts a drastic effect on its reduction potentials through the “normal” effect of σ polarization.124
 Fig. 24  Vectors between adjacent pairs of HAT(CN)6 anions. Reproduced from Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1667–1671. Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 
Concerning with its optical properties, HAT-CN has a wide band gap of 3.3 eV and it is therefore highly transparent in the visible spectral range.125 Thus, the UV/vis absorption spectrum shows an onset at ∼370 nm (3.35 eV) and a peak at 320 nm (3.88 eV). Furthermore, HAT-CN is characterized by an infrared band at 2243 cm−1 (CN).126 Another interesting features of HAT-CN are its good hole injection characteristics,126–128 and its low refractive index of about 1.7 in the visible wavelength.129 It has very high stability even under ambient air conditions and it can be thermally evaporated at a low temperature below 300 °C in a vacuum.129
Furthermore, it has been found that HAT-CN is selectively soluble in 2-propanone and is insoluble in other solvents commonly utilized for solution processing (such as toluene, chlorobenzene, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, chloroform, and 1,2-dichloromethane). This unique characteristic facilitate its use as a universal hole-injection layer in multilayer solution-processed devices.130
Electron mobility in thin films of HAT-CN has been found to be μe ∼ 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 as determined by time of flight measurements.123
Because of all these features, HAT-CN has found interest for a variety of studies and applications that will be summarized below.
5.1 HAT-CN for (opto)electronic applications
Organic semiconductors have been developed vastly in the past few decades as materials for organic (opto)electronic applications due to their numerous advantages such as low cost, mechanical flexibility or versatility of chemical design and synthesis. Organic semiconductors are intensively used as active thin films and electron and hole transporting materials in (opto)electronic devices such as light-emitting-diodes (OLEDs),131 solar cells (OSCs),132 organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and sensors.133
Recently, transition metal oxides (TMOs) or organic dopants possessing a deep lying-LUMO level have received significant attention for their powerful roles in organic semiconductors. TMOs or organic dopants increase the conductivity and carrier density of organic films when they are doped in an organic semiconductor.134 In addition, thin layers of the materials can enhance the injection efficiency of charge carriers from the electrode to the organic layer by adjusting the work function of the electrodes135,136 including carbon nanotube electrodes.137 Furthermore, HAT-CN has some additional advantages as the low refractive index (1.7) which is lower than that of other TMOs, and it effectively protects organic layers below the HAT-CN layer from sputtering damage during the formation of a transparent electrode.129 In contrast to TMOs, HAT-CN is highly conductive and transparent, even in layers that are several tens of nanometers thick, thereby minimizing the optical and electrical power loss and improving the performance of organic electronic devices. Thus, also naked HAT-CN layers have been widely used in place of doped layers because of the good electrical properties of pristine HAT-CN layers.138,139 The molecular alignment and the nanostructure of HAT-CN thin films on organic surfaces have been investigated. HAT-CN molecules have been found to stack with a (001)hex preferred orientation on different organic surfaces and the orientation is maintained with increasing thickness.138 Even more interestingly, because the electronic properties of organic electronic devices depend strongly on the specific electrode–semiconductor interface, some efforts have also been devoted to investigate the layer growth, thermal stability and desorption behavior of HAT-CN on different electrodes. It has been found that, in contrast to growth on organic surfaces as indicated above, the thermal stability and preferred orientation of the HAT-CN molecules are related to the thickness of the film and the nature of the electrode substrate.140,141
Thus, the role of HAT-CN either as a dopant or as a naked layer has been tested in the following devices.

5.1.1. 
            HAT-CN in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). 
Conventional OLEDs are formed by selected organic materials (sometimes consisting of several layers) deposited between two electrodes. Usually the organic layers consist of an emitting layer (EML) between an electron injection layer (EIL) and a hole injection layer (HIL) (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Schematic structure of a conventional OLED. 
Optimized carrier injection from the electrodes to the emitting layer is usually desired, with the goal of manufacturing efficient and reliable organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). In general, large energy barriers between the organic emitting materials and the electrodes will cause high operation voltage, low electroluminescence (EL) efficiency, and fast degradation in OLEDs. One efficient strategy in order to enhance hole injection and lower operation voltage in OLEDs involves the use of a doped hole-injection layer HIL (Fig. 25) which is typically made by doping a strong electron acceptor material (i.e., p-type dopant), in a hole transport material to generate free charges in the injection transport layer.127,142–144 The enhanced electroluminescence performance is attributed to the formation of charge transfer complexes in doped organic host materials through electron transfer from organic molecules to the dopants.145 In this respect, HAT has been successfully used as a highly efficient p-type dopant with common hole transport materials in OLEDs and compared favorably with inorganic dopants in terms of power efficiency, half lifetime and lower temperatures for thermal evaporation.145–148
An alternative strategy to optimize hole injection barriers comprises the use of basic HAT-CN layers in place of doped layers.149 It has been found that such HAT-CN acceptor interlayers significantly reduce the hole injection barriers for organic semiconductors. With this aim, HAT-CN has been successfully employed as an interlayer in different OLED architectures146,150–152 including multi-stacked,153,154 inverted,128,129,155 tandem,126,156,157 p–i–n158 and phosphorescent OLEDs.159–166 Thus, this approach is proved to be very useful to improve the driving voltage of OLEDs, avoiding the more complex processing of doping layers.


5.1.2. 
            HAT-CN in organic solar cells (OSCs). 
Intensive work is currently done in search of high efficiency solar cells with low-cost fabrication. In this respect, in recent years, there has been growing interest in organic-based photovoltaic technology. Organic semiconductors show great promise owing to their synthetic variability, low-temperature processing, and the possibility of producing lightweight, flexible, easily manufactured, and inexpensive solar cells.167–169

HAT-CN has been used in both small-molecule-based and semiconducting polymers-based organic photovoltaics. Thus, the efficiency of a copper phthalocyanine (CuPc):C60 based organic solar cells (OSCs) can be improved by using a hole-transporting HAT-CN templating layer at the ITO anode that results in an ordered, vertical standing CuPc morphology. HAT-CN induces an ordered vertical phase in contrast to the more conventional flat lying orientation using strongly binding templates such as perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA).170 This reduces the layer resistance to charge transport between the CuPc donor and the ITO anode, thereby significantly increasing both the short circuit current (Jsc) and the field factor (FF) and hence the cell power conversion efficiency (PCE).

HAT-CN has also been used as an electron conducting window layer for separating the photoactive region from the cathode in organic small-molecule-based p–i–n type solar cells. The use of HAT-CN in this type of device was prevented by its exceptionally high electron affinity, estimated 4.8 eV, which introduces an electron injection barrier to the photoactive acceptor material C60. Nevertheless, the introduction of doped and undoped C60 intermediate layers efficiently removes the injection barrier and allows for using HAT-CN as a window layer in small-molecule-based p–i–n type solar cells.171
The use of HAT-CN as the organic interlayer for hole collection at the anode in semiconducting polymer-based organic photovoltaics has also been demonstrated. Thus, the open circuit voltage (VOC), FF and power conversion efficiency of inverted OSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene)(P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) can be greatly improved by inserting a HAT-CN interlayer between the active layer and the cathode.172
The above examples show the relatively unexplored possibilities of HAT-CN to improve the performances of OSCs.


5.1.3. 
            HAT-CN in organic field effect transistors (OFETs). 
Due to the potential applications in integrated circuits for large area, flexible, and ultralow-cost electronics, organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) have received much attention all over the world.173 Although the performance of n-type OFETs has improved in recent years, compared to p-type semiconductors, fewer n-type semiconductors have been investigated.55 Thus, because of the n-type character of HAT-CN, its performance in OFETs has been investigated. A mobility of 2.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an ON/OFF ratio of up to 2 × 104 has been measured at room temperature in a bottom-contact n-channel OFET with SiO2 dielectric and gold drain/source electrodes.174

HAT-CN has also been investigated in magnetoresistive field effect transistors. The phenomenon of organic magnetoresistance, usually abbreviated to OMAR, refers to the change in electrical resistivity in sandwich structures of nonmagnetic metals and organic materials under a magnetic field.175 The OMAR phenomenon has been studied in various organic materials with the aim of addressing fundamental questions about spin transport and spin manipulation in organic materials, but also because of its promising potential for the construction of lightweight, flexible, and multifunctional electronic devices without the use of ferromagnetic compounds.176 Until recently, OMAR was nearly always analyzed in two terminal devices. For a deeper understanding of OMAR, it is of high importance to explore this phenomenon in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), because this (three-terminal) device geometry allows the verification of the charge carrier sign in the conducting channel as well as the determination of the corresponding mobility. In 2012, Saragi and coworkers reported for the first time on magnetoresistive field effect transistors sensitive to ultrasmall magnetic fields (<5 mT) by using a charge transport layer achieved by mixing HAT-CN as a strong electron acceptor and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methylphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-TTB) as an electron donor (Fig. 26).177
 Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the experimental schemes reported in ref. 177. On the left and right side, non-magnetoresistive field-effect transistors based on p-type Spiro-TTB and n-type HAT-CN, as well as the corresponding chemical structures, are shown. Devices with a mixture of Spiro-TTB and HAT-CN show a significant response to an external magnetic field of 3.2 mT (depicted in the middle). Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These blends lead to a high density of coulomb-correlated intermolecular radical pair (IRP) states with magnetic-field-dependent formation, dissociation and interaction rates. The amount of IRP states can be tuned by changing the blending composition and, as a result, the magnetoresponse of the devices can be adjusted as well. Thus, the use of HAT-CN in donor–acceptor blends in organic semiconductor devices is a powerful tool for fabricating magnetoresistive devices.


5.1.4. Noncovalent functionalization of graphene with HAT-CN for the design of conductive graphene electrodes with tailored work function. 
It has been demonstrated that the electronic properties of graphene can be tuned by metal doping or chemical modification. However, it has been shown that the induced structural defects produced by these modifications can easily destroy the excellent properties of graphene, especially its high carrier mobility.178 In contrast, noncovalent functionalization, through physisorption of electron withdrawing/donating molecules on the graphene surface, has been reported to be a simple and effective scheme to nondestructively dope graphene.179 Chen and coworkers have recently performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to assess the electronic structure of graphene overlaid with a monolayer of electro-active conjugated molecules including HAT-CN. Calculations show that HAT-CN adopts AB-stacking and keeps its planar geometry when adsorbed on graphene; there is no significant distortion of graphene with a rumpling of less than 0.1 Å; the mean distance between graphene and HAT-CN is around 3.2 Å (Fig. 27). Interestingly, the noncovalent functionalization results in a work function modification that scales with the electron transfer from graphene, in line with the formation of an interfacial dipole. The use of the Boltzmann transport equation combined with the deformation potential theory shows that large charge carrier mobilities are maintained upon noncovalent functionalization of graphene, thereby suggesting that molecular doping is an attractive approach to design conductive graphene electrodes with tailored work functions.
 Fig. 27  Top and side view of the most stable configuration of HAT-CN adsorbed on graphene. The x–y plane is the graphene plane, and z is normal to the graphene plane. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2158–2165. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 

5.2 HAT-CN in immobilized one-dimensional columnar charge transfer assemblies
Charge-transfer complexes are combinations of charge donating (D) and charge-accepting (A) materials. While the constituting compounds tend to be unipolar semiconductors, the CT complex can have entirely different properties; it can be an ambipolar semiconductor, a metal, or even a superconductor.180 Apart from their electronic properties, many CTCs have also been reported to show interesting long-wavelength optical absorption bands that are not observed in their constituting materials.181
For a variety of applications using charge transfer (CT) complexes, long range structural ordering of donor/acceptor assemblies is important. In this respect, HAT-CN among other acceptors has been found to form CT complexes with amphiphilic triphenylene derivatives 99a,b shown in Fig. 28. Aida and coworkers have used mesoporous silicates to provide highly ordered, unidimensional channels that are optimal for the long-range structural ordering of these charge transfer assemblies.182
 Fig. 28  Formulas of triphenylene donors 99a,b and acceptor HAT-CN and a schematic representation of a mesoporous silica film containing one-dimensional charge transfer (CT) assemblies immobilized in a hexagonal array of nanoscopic channels. 
The mesostructured silica films were fabricated by using the triphenylene-based CT complexes as templates for sol–gel synthesis. The silica wall segregates the individual CT columns, which display neither solvatochromism nor guest-exchange activity, and exhibits red-shifted absorption bands, possibly as a consequence of a long-range structural ordering. Furthermore, the donor/acceptor molar ratio, which is related to photoconductive properties, can be varied over a wide range from 1:1 to 9:1.
This seminal contribution paved the way for the use of mesoporous silicates with unidirectional nanoscopic channels as good scaffolds for ensuring long-range ordering of columnar assemblies of functional groups in order to develop anisotropic optoelectronic properties.183
5.3 Interactions between anions and HAT-CN
In recent years, the presence of noncovalent interactions of anions has garnered much interest with the goal of designing anion-specific molecular sensors and receptors,184 for applications in biological and medicinal chemistry, e.g. transmembrane anion π-slides.185 In 2002, the term “anion–π interaction” was used by Deyà, Frontera et al. to describe the interaction of anions with electron-deficient arenes.186 Several studies have shown that certain arenes possessing strong electron-accepting abilities and large quadrupole moments undergo significant changes in their absorption and emission spectra upon interaction with anions.187 In these systems, the π-acceptor/anion interaction involves charge transfer (CT),188 which in several cases is accompanied by the appearance of highly colored solutions or crystals, rendering them promising candidates for designing selective anion-sensing receptors.189
Considering the high π-acidity of HAT-CN, due to the conjugated cyano groups, its high molecular polarizability, and positive quadrupole moment, it was suggested that HAT-CN could be a particularly attractive heterocyclic system to establish anion- or lone pair-π contacts.190 Thus, Dunbar and coworkers showed the existence of CT bands in the complexation process of HAT-CN with several halide anions (i.e., X = Cl−, Br−, and I−) using THF as a solvent. The dominant multisite CT interactions afforded extremely high values (KCT,X = (1–4) × 103 M−1) as compared to those typically determined (1–10 M−1) for related complexes also displaying CT-bands.187
Shortly afterwards, Ballester and coworkers reported experimental evidence indicating that the nature of the interaction established between HAT-CN and mono- or polyatomic anions switches from the almost exclusive formation of reversible anion–π complexes, featuring a markedly charge transfer (CT) or formal electron-transfer (ET) character, to the quantitative and irreversible net production of the anion radical [HAT-CN]˙− and the dianionic [HAT-CN]2− species.191
The high stability of the distinctly colored complexes assembled with different anions as directing elements and the simultaneous multisite CT interactions in which HAT-CN engages are unique in the literature of this area. These are highly desirable features for the design of anion-sensing receptors. These seminal studies pave the way for further studies of interactions of HAT-CN with other anions.
5.4 HAT-CN as a source for patterned graphene growth
Since the successful isolation of graphene via mechanical exfoliation of graphite,192,193 various methods of graphene synthesis have been developed, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),194,195 chemical reduction of graphene oxides,196–198 and organic synthesis from micromolecules.199,200 However, one limitation is that for these procedures it is necessary to physically transfer the grown graphene onto desired substrates for subsequent device processing. Thus, intense efforts are currently focusing on developing alternative synthetic methods that can avoid transfer and the introduction of defects into the graphene sheet associated with the transfer process. In this respect, in 2015 Sun and coworkers have reported a simple, transfer-free method capable of synthesizing N-doped graphene directly on dielectric substrates at temperatures as low as 600 °C using HAT-CN polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon as a carbon source.201 The carrier mobility of N-doped graphene from HAT-CN was measured at 1835 cm2 V−1 s−1 without optimization and a square resistance of 850 Ω cm−2 at the lowest growth temperature (∼600 °C) which is compatible with direct growth on glass substrates.
Thus, this method should provide a possible route for directly growing graphene on a variety of substrates, for example, quartz or glass, without the need for any transfer process.
6. Miscellaneous studies and applications for HAT derivatives
In addition to the self-assembling properties of HAT derivatives and the applications outlined above for HAT-CN, there are additional interesting studies and applications found for other HAT derivatives that will be reviewed below.
6.1 HAT derivatives and energy transfer processes
Energy transfer in donor–acceptor systems is an important process in a natural photosynthetic system202 as well as for the development of light harvesting antennas which are important and practically useful for the design of artificial photovoltaics.203
In this respect, taking advantage of the strong tendency for the self- assembly of HAT, Ishi-I and coworkers designed and prepared an energy transfer system based on the incorporation of the HAT possessing perylenebisimide (PBI) acceptor moiety into HAT-based columnar-type aggregates (Fig. 29).204
 Fig. 29  Formulas of HAT-PBI assembly (100) and a schematic representation of the dimer aggregates that exhibit an energy transfer process from the HAT core to the peripheral PBI moieties. 

PBI was selected as an acceptor moiety because of its strong accepting nature, suitable overlap of its absorption spectrum with the fluorescence spectrum of the HAT chromophore used as an energy donor moiety, and good separation between the fluorescence spectra of the HAT and PBI chromophores.
In order to investigate the energy transfer process, a film of a HAT derivative with six octyloxy-containing biphenyl groups (HAT-OC8) doped with 5 mol% HAT-PBI100 was prepared by spin coating. It was observed that in the presence of HAT-PBI100 the emission from HAT-OC8 was quenched even upon excitation of the HAT chromophore. In addition, the PBI emission upon indirect excitation of the HAT chromophore was enhanced by a factor of 4 times compared to that observed upon direct excitation of the PBI chromophore which indicates the efficient light harvesting properties of the HAT-OC8 based medium. The energy transfer phenomenon can be easily visualized by a change in the emission color from green HAT emission to red PBI emission.
Another efficient energy transfer system based on HAT derivatives and triphenylene (TP) derivatives endowed with (diphenylaminobiphenyl)biphenyl (DAB), phenoxybiphenyl (POB) and biphenyl (BP) groups was reported. In this case the HAT derivatives act as energy-acceptors. Thus, in 1:1 mixtures of TP/HAT, the blue emission from TP was completely quenched and only the green emission from HAT was detected and, even in the presence of 10 equivalent of HAT, the quenching of TP-DAB emission occurred significantly. Thus, an energy transfer system can be created by combination of triphenylene and HAT moieties with structural similarity and electronic complementarity.205
It can be concluded from these results that HAT derivatives can be efficiently used to provide self-assembled light harvesting and energy transfer systems.
6.2 Nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of HAT derivatives
Nonlinear optics is the branch of optics that describes the behavior of light in media where the dielectric polarization responds nonlinearly to (the electric field component) light. The doubling of the frequency of the incident beam, through the second harmonic generation (SHG) process, constitutes one example of nonlinear optical (NLO) phenomena that is currently exploited in laser components as well as in optical information processing and data storage devices.206
The most important class of molecules that has received significant attention in this field are donor–acceptor dipolar molecules in which the ease of polarization in one direction within the molecule is easier than that in the opposite direction.207 However, Zyss and coworkers208 showed that octupolar molecules with C3 symmetry exhibit first hyperpolarizability comparable to those of the donor–acceptor dipoles and a great deal of interest have been devoted to the use of these types of systems for NLO applications.209 Indeed, the lack of a permanent dipole moment of octupolar structures, usually associated with an improved hyperpolarizability and with a good transparency, constitutes a strong advantage over more classic dipolar structures for many applications.210 In this respect, the HAT moiety has been identified as a good scaffold to build octupolar systems and the NLO properties of some HAT derivatives (101–103, Fig. 30) have already been investigated.211,212 Thus, we have recently explored the electron-withdrawing property of HAT by ramifying and fully substituting its six peripheral positions with electron donor arms giving rise to new octupolar extended HAT dyes 101a,b, 102a,b (Fig. 30) in a donor-to acceptor pattern with the modulation of the charge transfer character. In addition, we have compared the nonlinear optical behavior of these charge transfer compounds with that of 10315 which consists of the fusion of three HAT molecules and that, without relying on donor–acceptor derived noncentrosymmetry (as necessitated in linear conjugated structures), epitomizes the purely octupolar implementation of noncentrosymmetry.211,212
 Fig. 30  Formulas of octupolar HAT derivatives for NLO. 
First hyperpolarizability (β) values between 250 and 510 × 10−30 esu were found for the charge transfer compounds 101a,b, 102a,b. Among them it was observed that the amine derivatives turned out to enhance the NLO activity due to their large electron donor capacity. On the other hand, a β value of 690 × 10−30 esu was found for 103. The conclusion of this study was that the modulation of the second order optical response is a balance of charge transfer and octupolar contributions.
Cho and coworkers found that the NLO properties of HAT derivatives 101c–d can be increased by complexation of the HAT derivatives with Cu(I) at the center of the octupolar molecules. This behavior is in agreement with the increase in the acceptor strength of the HAT moiety upon complexation.211
Apart from the NLO optical properties of HAT derivatives with C3 symmetry, we have also explored in a joint theoretical-experimental study the nonlinear optical properties of V-shaped HAT derivatives with C2 symmetry (26–30, Fig. 7).39β values between 30 and 66 × 10−30 esu were determined and it was found that by varying the type of linkage and the nature of the donor moiety, the electrochemical properties as well as the absorption spectra of the well-defined asymmetric donor–acceptor conjugated systems can easily be tuned and, again, the highest values were obtained for HAT derivatives containing the more electron-rich dibutylamino moiety.
The study of multiphoton-absorbing materials is another research field that has grown rapidly in the area of organic nonlinear optical materials because of its broad technological impact. The technologically useful multiphoton excitation-based applications, especially by two-photon absorption TPA, have drawn considerable attention including (but not limited to) three-dimensional (3D) fluorescence imaging, photodynamic therapy, nonlinear optical transmission, optical power limiting, up-converted lasing, three-dimensional data-storage, 3D microfabrication, and uncaging of bioactive species.213
Two-photon absorption (TPA) is a process whereby molecules simultaneously absorb two photons and is inherently weak at normal light intensities. From the design point of view it has been identified that donor–acceptor substitution can enhance the two-photon absorption activity of molecules through an increase in the transition dipole moment or the dipole moment difference between the ground and excited states. Furthermore, TPA cross sections (δ) can also be enhanced by intermolecular interactions, such as intercalation and self-assembling to form dimers and aggregates.214 With this in mind, Ishi-I and coworkers synthesized a family of donor–acceptor HAT derivatives bearing six electron-donating moieties 104d (Fig. 31).215
 Fig. 31  Formulas of TPA dyes 104a–d based on HAT and schematic representation of the enhancement of the TPA nature by self-assembly. Adapted from Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 29–37. Copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier. 
An enhancement of the two-photon absorption cross-section was observed for the self-assembled 104b system to give a δ value of 1460 GM (at 870 nm), which is 1.4 times larger than the value for the non-aggregative 104c (1080 GM at 850 nm) system bearing bulky tert-butyl groups. The δ value increased with the expansion of the π-electron system from 104b to 104d (2560 GM at 850 nm). Compared to the phenanthrene-fused 104b system, the phenanthroline-104a demonstrated a larger δ value (2420 GM at 870 nm). Thus, the order of the two-photon absorption nature was determined to be in agreement with the aggregative nature of the molecules.
We have also investigated the TPA properties of HAT derivatives 101a–b and 102a–b (Fig. 30).212 We found that in this family of compounds the increase of the TPA cross section (δ) values is consistent with the rise of the first hyperpolarizability (β) and with the decrease of the experimental and theoretical HOMO–LUMO gaps. The linear relationship between β and δ values can be a useful guide for developing new strategies to synthesize compounds with great NLO and TPA properties.
The above contributions show how the chemical design of suitable molecular structures is an efficient method to tune nonlinear optical properties.
6.3 HAT derivatives as photoinitiators for polymerization reactions
The photoinitiating systems play an important role in free radical polymerization (FRP), thiol-ene polymerization (TEP), cationic polymerization (CP) or free radical promoted cationic polymerization (FRPCP) and interpenetrated polymer network (IPN) synthesis. Great efforts are being devoted to the design of UV, visible and near IR sensitive photoinitiating systems working upon exposure to monochromatic or polychromatic lights, under high or low intensity sources, in laminate, an inert atmosphere or under air.216
In this respect, phenazine derivatives have been used in photopolymerization reactions and benzo[2,3-b]phenazines have been found to be quite efficient photosensitisers in radical as well as cationic polymerization processes, but only upon high intensity Xenon lamp exposure.217HAT derivatives exhibit enhanced light absorption properties compared to the previously used phenazine analogues which exhibit only UV light absorption. This is due to the fact that the lowest energy transition exhibits a π/π* character and involves strongly delocalized molecular orbitals. Thus, basic HATNA as well as other HATNA derivatives (105, 106, Fig. 32) have been proposed as suitable photoinitiators and it has been recently shown that HAT-based three component photoinitiating systems allow efficient radical polymerization of acrylates and cationic polymerization of epoxides upon exposure to easily accessible, energy saving and cheap LEDs at 385, 395 and 405 nm as well as a laser diode at 405 nm or a halogen lamp.218
 Fig. 32  Formulas of HATNA derivatives used as photoinitiators in photopolymerization reactions. 
The excellent absorption properties in the 380 to 425 nm range resulting from the presence of strongly delocalized molecular orbitals are promising for the development of other derivatives exhibiting a red-shifted absorption.
6.4 HAT derivatives for molecular recognition and sensors
Different HAT derivatives have been designed and synthesized with the aim of using them for molecular recognition and sensors.
Badjić and coworkers synthesized internally functionalized and dynamic cavitands of type 107a–c (Fig. 33) which can be used as “claws” for selectively “grabbing” small chemical analytes such as CBr4.219
 Fig. 33  Formulas of HAT derivatives used for molecular recognition and sensors. 
Organogels based on HAT derivative 108 (Fig. 33) have been used for silver(I) recognition.220 The strong stacking between the large planar HAT core and the van der Waals forces of the six aliphatic chains of this C3-symmetric molecules greatly facilitate the formation of organogels in several solvents. It is observed that the introduction of silver(I) salts results in the formation of silver–108 complexes which led to the destruction of the organogels due to the collapse of the well-ordered molecular arrangement. Fifteen nitrates were tested, with the metals ranging from alkali, alkaline-earth to transition metals and, remarkably, only Ag+ was found to be capable of breaking the organogel which was ascribed to the strong complexation between 108 and Ag+ in aqueous medium. This is a nice example that suggests a new way for the fabrication of gel-based sensing systems or smart soft materials.

HAT derivatives have also been used as chemosensors capable of selectively and efficiently detecting fluoride anions. Thus, HAT derivative 109 (Fig. 33) displays a high degree of F− discrimination both in the organic solvent and the aqueous mixture by direct deprotonation of phenolic OHs.221 Compound 109 is fluorescence silent, which might be attributed to the charge transfer between the electron-deficient HAT core and electron-rich phenol units. Therefore, the fluorescence emission of 109 could not be turned on upon addition of anions and its recognition behavior had to be investigated using UV-vis spectroscopy. Thanks to the high acidity of the phenolic OH units and the strong intramolecular hydrogen bonds formed between them and the HAT core, the formation of intermolecular hydrogen-bonding between the OHs and anions was blocked and thus only direct deprotonation of OHs by F− could occur, which led to a high selectivity to fluoride over other anions.
The same HAT derivative 109 has also been recently used for selective recognition of Cu2+ through the formation of a coordination polymer which further aggregates into metal–organic nanospheres. The polymer is formed through the coordination interactions between the phenolic hydroxyl groups of 109 and Cu2+. It exhibits distinct color changes and absorption variation toward Cu2+ without being interfered by other competing metal ions and a satisfactory visual detection limit of 6.25 × 10−6 M can be reached.222 This is a good example of how coordination polymers can also exhibit high selectivity and sensitivity as chemosensors for the recognition of metal cations.
While the introduction of phenolic substituents into the HAT core produces fluorescence silent derivatives, the introduction of other less electron-donating aromatic rings makes the compounds emissive.223 This is interesting considering that, due to operability and sensitivity, fluorescent sensors are powerful tools for the detection of metal ions and widely used not only in environmental monitoring but also in biological studies. Thus, HAT derivative 78117,118 (Fig. 34) with electron-deficient pyridine substituents has been found to have excellent fluorescent selectivity for Cd2+ over many other metals (K+, Na+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Ag+, Hg2+, Zn2+, and Cr3+).118 This fact is of interest, as developing a Cd2+ selective fluorescence sensor that can discriminate Cd2+ from Zn2+ as a consequence of the similar chemical properties of Cd2+ and Zn2+ has been a great challenge. Thus, compared with the weak fluorescence in solution of free HAT derivative 78, the emission color of the solution changes from dark to bright blue after the addition of Cd2+ ions. The monitoring event can be even observed in a naked-eye experiment under UV-vis light irradiation because the emission color changes perceptively from dark to bright blue. The recognition process of Cd2+ by 78 is reversible. This was demonstrated by the addition of an equal amount of an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) aqueous solution into the glowing 78–Cd2+ solution, which recovers the original emission of 78 (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 34  Reversible recognition process of Cd2+ by HAT derivative 78 showing the fluorescent complex (right) and the non-fluorescent free HAT derivative 78 (left). 
Inspired by the pioneering work described above, a series of HAT derivatives with different coordination structures, such as non-centrosymmetric HATs, have been designed and synthesized in order to obtain different fluorescence sensors for different metal ions.224,225 Thus, two C2-symmetrical HAT derivatives (110a, 111a, Fig. 33) bearing different number of pyridine and phenyl groups, were synthesized.224 The two C2-symmetrical HAT derivatives 110a and 111a are architecturally different in their coordination geometry compared with the symmetrical analogue 78. Both 110a and 111a exhibit ratiometric and colorimetric fluorescence recognition of Zn2+ nearly without interference by many other background metal ions, including alkali ions, alkaline earth ions and a wide range of transition metal ions, including Cd2+. Compound 110a, with a detection limit of 0.095 μM, is more sensitive toward Zn2+ than 111a.
Considering that Cd2+ has similar electronic structure but a larger size related to Zn2+, it has been shown that replacing the phenyl groups with smaller substituents, such as methyl groups, thus reducing the steric hindrance to metal ions and enhancing the binding ability to Cd2+, is an efficient strategy for the design of Cd2+ response fluorescent sensors. With this aim, two C2-symmetrical HAT derivatives bearing methyl groups instead of phenyl rings (110b, 111b, Fig. 33) have been synthesized and investigated as chemosensors.225 They both exhibit selective turn-on fluorescent recognition of Cd2+ ions that is nearly unaffected by many other background metal ions including Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Ag+ and Pb2+.
One common strategy to improve the sensitivity of chemical sensors consists of enhancing the fluorescence emission of the complex formed between the sensor and the analyte. Thus, a novel HAT derivative (112, Fig. 35) that retains the receptor structure of 78 but with an extended chromophoric group has been prepared with the aim of getting a more sensitive response to the Cd2+ ion.226 The detection limit of 0.02 μM is remarkably lower than that of parent HAT derivative 78 due to the extension of the chromophoric group with pyrene in 112 that exaggerates the fluorescence response. Interestingly, 112 exhibits water tolerance, low cytotoxicity and cell membrane permeability which allow for its use as an in vivo sensor of intracellular Cd2+ levels.
 Fig. 35  Formulas of HAT with extended pyrene chromophores used for molecular recognition and sensors. 
The strategy of extending the conjugated systems of the chromophore has been also used for other HAT derivatives (113, 114, Fig. 35) used as Hg2+ fluorescent chemosensors. The novel derivative 113 is analogous to 112 but the peripheral pyridine moieties are substituted by phenyl rings. Thus, through this alteration of the binding site, the two HAT-based sensors can selectively respond to different metal ions. The detection limits of 113 and 114 are 2.8 and 3.1 nM which is lower than the toxic level of Hg2+. Thus, these HAT derivatives are suitable for the detection of a sub-micromolar level of Hg2+ in many biological and environmental systems.227 Furthermore, these sensors maintain their fluorescence sensing properties on test paper, which makes their practical application more convenient.
These studies show that by appropriate design HAT derivatives can be used as efficient and selective fluorescent chemosensors for small chemical analytes and a variety of ions.
6.5 HAT derivatives as scaffolds for microporous frameworks
Until recently, organic polymers have not been considered as materials for gas storage because polymers generally have enough conformational and rotational freedom to pack space efficiently and thus do not offer high surface areas. However, the polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs) have been developed that are composed wholly of fused ring subunits designed to provide highly rigid and contorted macromolecular structures that pack space inefficiently.228 In the search of polymers for hydrogen storage, McKeown, Budd and coworkers developed a polymer of intrinsic microporosity (PIM) based on HAT (115, Fig. 36).229
 Fig. 36  Formula of the HAT network polymer with intrinsic porosity 115. 
The polymer can be obtained by reaction between hexachlorohexaaza-trinaphthylene (18a, Fig. 5) and a spirocyclic bis(catechol) monomer. A Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 820 m2 g−1 was measured for 115 by nitrogen adsorption at 77 K. The measurements for H2 adsorption reveal that 115 adsorbs significant quantities of H2 (1.4% by mass) at relatively low pressures with saturation being reached at less than 10 bar pressure and with most of the adsorption taking place below 1 bar. Calculations show that the maximum number of hydrogen molecules adsorbed per fused-ring of the polymeric repeat unit is approximately 0.43 H2 per ring. One interesting characteristic of this system is that unlike other types of microporous materials (zeolites, MOFs), the structures of this system are not necessarily constrained by a fixed network structure and may be dissolved in suitable solvents and swollen by suitable nonsolvents. Thus, polymer structural manipulation can be used to optimize H2 adsorption; for example, the rapid removal of a solvent from the swollen network could generate additional free volume and thus provide greater accessible surface area.
An important class of porous frameworks are those named π-conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) which consist of an extended π-conjugated system and inherent nanopores.230,231 The combination of the porous structure and the characteristics of π-conjugated systems opens up the field for new applications. Thus, Jiang and coworkers reported the synthesis of a porous framework based on aza-fused CMPs with the general structure (116, Fig. 37a) and highlighted their functions in supercapacitive energy storage and electric power supply.232
 Fig. 37  (a) Synthesis of aza-fused π-conjugated microporous polymer 116. (b) The elementary pore structure of aza-CMPs calculated using the Gaussian03 program at the B3LYP/3-21G(d) level (the carbon network is gray and nitrogen is blue). (c) Photographic image of the powder and flexible thin films with different shapes of 116. Reproduced from ref. 232 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Different aza-CMPs with general structure 116 were ionothermally synthesized by a condensation reaction of 1,2,4,5-benzenetetramine (117) with hexaketocyclohexane (9) at 300, 350, 400, 450, and 500 °C. BET areas of up to 1200 m2 g−1 were obtained for the polymer obtained at higher temperatures. Aza-MPs are amorphous and they can be used to prepare free standing flexible thin film electrode films with different shapes (Fig. 37c). Galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling experiments with disk-shaped films were done in order to test the supercapacitive performance. The highest capacitance measured was of 946 F g−1 which is superior to the specific capacitance of nitrogen-enriched porous carbon materials and state-of-the art carbon nanostructures such as graphenes and carbon nanotubes and exceeds that of the best values of supercapacitors with a redox ruthenium oxide electrode.233 The energy density is higher than those of nanostructured porous carbon materials and reaches the regime of batteries such as Pb-acid, NiCd and even lithium ion batteries. Furthermore, it has an excellent cycle life as well.
More recently, Jiang and coworkers have synthesized another HAT-based CMP (118, Fig. 38) as a new platform for lithium-battery energy storage with a built-in redox active skeleton and permanent nanopores.234 The HAT-based CMP (118) was synthesized via Sonogashira cross-coupling polycondensation of 1,4-diethynylbenzene and hexaiodo HATNA in the presence of tetrakis-(triphenylphosphine) palladium and copper iodide catalysts and a diisopropylamine base.
 Fig. 38  Schematic representation of HAT-based CMP 118 (upper part) and its elementary pore structure (lower part). 
The CMP strategy provides a useful platform for crosslinking redox-active modules into highly stable porous electrodes (the porosity of 118 was revealed by a BET surface area of 616 m2 g−1); such organic cathode materials have long been pursued in the exploration of next-generation green batteries.235,236 It is worth pointing out that the structural features of the CMP work together in energy storage with lithium-ion batteries because of the HAT-base built from redox-active units that serve as energy-storing and power supplying modules, it bears inherent open nanopores that are accessible to lithium ions and it possesses a high surface area that facilitates the charge dynamics. Thus, it has been found that batteries fabricated with 118 exhibit a near-unity coulombic efficiency, high capacity and energy density, and enable repetitive energy storage and supply with good cycle stability.
The above examples demonstrate the enormous potential of HAT-derived CMPs as green electrode materials for designing high-energy storage and power supply devices.
7. Summary and conclusions
The first three decades after the synthesis of HAT have witnessed great interest in this system from the synthetic, theoretical and application points of view. As for the applications, it has revealed itself as a basic scaffold in the areas of organic materials and nanoscience.
The structural behaviour of HAT has been investigated showing that, because of its discotic D3h symmetry and planarity, the HAT core has a strong tendency towards π–π stacking. Furthermore, the presence of six nitrogen atoms with sp2 hybridization provides HAT a good electron acceptor ability as demonstrated by electrochemical and UPS/IES experiments.
Thus, the understanding of the particular structural and, moreover, electron acceptor ability of HAT as well as the establishment of the accessible method for the synthesis and functionalization of this unique molecule have allowed the smart design of materials with tailored properties.
In this review we have summarized the main general synthetic methods for the synthesis of HAT derivatives with D3h symmetry. We have also highlighted the few examples of synthetic strategies toward HAT derivatives with non-trigonal symmetry which open up the way for the development of V-shaped NLO materials or the tuning of the liquid crystalline properties, among others. We have also outlined the main synthetic strategies for the post-synthesis functionalization of HAT derivatives which has allowed the incorporation of a variety of functionalities into HAT including electroactive moieties. We have summarized the main synthetic strategies followed to expand the HAT core conjugation with the aim of creating n-type self-assembling semiconductors.
The outcome of the self-assembly of HAT derivatives at the molecular level has been investigated at different levels. (i) HAT-based three dimensional ordered liquid crystals have been prepared and n-type charge carrier mobilities have been measured for some HAT derivatives. (ii) HAT derivatives have revealed as excellent scaffolds for the development of self-organized nanostructures on different surfaces. It has been found that by using electrochemical scanning tunnelling microscopy it is possible to induce HAT molecules to organize in flat or vertical orientations on metallic surfaces which is a suitable way to build nanostructures or thin films with controllable molecular orientations for electronic applications. (iii) Different HAT derivatives have been used for the production of nano and microstructures including microbelts, microtubes or microspheres by using additional hydrogen bonding or metalorganic coordination interactions.
We have also reviewed the main applications found for HAT derivatives. In this respect we have remarked the special character of a HAT-CN, a HAT derivative endowed with six electron accepting nitrile groups. HAT-CN is a strong electron-deficient discotic heterocyclic molecule with a deep-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (DL-LUMO) level (∼5.1 eV) which has found extensive application as a charge transport layer or as a dopant in different (opto)electronic devices such as organic light emitting diodes, organic solar cells, organic filed effect transistors including magnetoresistive field effect transistors. It has also been used (i) for the work function tuning of graphene through noncovalent interactions, (ii) for the development of unidirectional nanoscopic channels (iii) for applications related to its ability of anion–π interactions and (iv) as a source for the production of N-doped graphene.
Other important applications of HAT derivatives have also been summarized. By attaching suitable light harvesting antennas such as perylene bisimide derivatives to the HAT core it has been possible to show that HAT derivatives can be efficiently used to provide self-assembled light harvesting and energy transfer systems.
Because of its octupolar character with trigonal symmetry appropriately functionalized HAT derivatives have proven as suitable materials for NLO applications and as chromophores of multiphoton absorption.
By attaching appropriate functionalities HAT derivatives can be used as efficient and fluorescent selective sensors of small chemical analytes such as CBr4, fluoride anions or metal ions including Zn2+, Cd2+ or Hg2+.
HAT derivatives can also be used as high performance photoinitiators for the ring opening polymerization of epoxy monomers as well as for the free radical polymerization of (meth)acrylates.
Very recently, HAT derivatives have also proved to be excellent scaffolds for the development of microporous frameworks, including conjugated microporous polymers (CMP). Thus, batteries fabricated with HAT-based CMPs have been found to exhibit a near unity coulombic efficiency, high capacity and energy density that enable energy storage and supply with good cycle stability.
In summary, HAT is a molecule whose interesting electronic properties have challenged the creativity and inventiveness of chemists in areas such as organic, polymer, supramolecular and materials chemistry as well as in nanoscience. The knowledge accumulated during these years of research based on this system will certainly lead to novel applications for this unique molecule.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from Spanish Government (Project MAT2014-52305-P) and a UCM-BSCH joint project (GR3/14) is acknowledged. The authors wish to give credit to the scientists who have participated in the development of this research field whose names are cited in the references.
Notes and references
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bendikov, F. Wudl and D. F. Perepichka, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4891–4946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 5028–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 452–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6113–6127 RSC .
K. Takimiya, I. Osaka, T. Mori and M. Nakano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1493–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zade and M. Bendikov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4012–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Biermann and W. Schmidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 3163–3173 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kaur, M. Jazdzyk, N. N. Stein, P. Prusevich and G. P. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1261–1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Cao, N. S. Colella, Y. Liang, J. L. Bredas, K. N. Houk and A. L. Briseno, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 500–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. H. F. Bunz, J. U. Engelhart, B. D. Lindner and M. Schaffroth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3810–3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitagawa and S. Masaoka, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 246, 73–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barlow, Q. Zhang, B. R. Kaafarani, C. Risko, F. Amy, C. K. Chan, B. Domercq, Z. A. Starikova, M. Y. Antipin, T. V. Timofeeva, B. Kippelen, J. L. Bredas, A. Kahn and S. R. Marder, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3537–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Juárez, M. M. Oliva, M. Ramos, J. L. Segura, C. Alemán, F. Rodríguez-Ropero, D. Curcó, F. Montilla, V. Coropceanu, J. L. Brédas, Y. Qi, A. Kahn, M. C. Ruiz Delgado, J. Casado and J. T. López Navarrete, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10312–10322 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Grove and J. Sletten, J. Chem. Crystallogr., 2000, 30, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bondi, J. Phys. Chem., 1964, 68, 441–451 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Foster, Organic Charge-Transfer Complexes, Academic Press, London,  1969, pp. 233–234 Search PubMed .
N. Defay, D. Maetens and R. Nasielski-Hinkens, Org. Magn. Reson., 1984, 22, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, T. Okajima, F. Kitamura, N. Matsumoto, T. Thiemann, S. Mataka and T. Ohsaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9452–9458 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nasielski-Hinkens, M. Benedek-Vamos, D. Maetens and J. Nasielski, J. Organomet. Chem., 1981, 217, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nietzki and A. W. Schmidt, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1888, 21, 1227–1230 CrossRef .
B. Eistert, H. Fink and H.-K. Werner, Liebigs Ann., 1962, 657, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Skujins and G. A. Webb, Tetrahedron, 1969, 25, 3935–3945 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Farminer, S. Skujins and G. A. Webb, J. Mol. Struct., 1971, 10, 121–134 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kohne and K. Praefcke, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1985, 522–528 CrossRef CAS .
D. Z. Rogers, J. Org. Chem., 1986, 51, 3904–3905 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Boddu, D. S. Viswanath, T. K. Ghosh and R. Damavarapu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 181, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. P. Sarma and A. W. Czarnik, Synthesis, 1988, 72–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanakarajan and A. W. Czarnik, J. Org. Chem., 1986, 51, 5241–5243 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, Y. Liu, Y. Geng, Y. Cheng, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 1649–1652 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choudhary, C. Gozalvez, A. Higelin, I. Krossing, M. Melle-Franco and A. Mateo-Alonso, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1525–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Ong, S.-C. Liao, T. H. Chang and H.-F. Hsu, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 3181–3185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barlow, Q. Zhang, B. R. Kaafarani, C. Risko, F. Amy, C. K. Chan, B. Domercq, Z. A. Starikova, M. Y. Antipin, T. V. Timofeeva, B. Kippelen, J.-L. Brédas, A. Kahn and S. R. Marder, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3537–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, H. Shadnia, G. Qian, X. Du, D. Yu, D. Ma, J. S. Wright and Z. Y. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 8902–8908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Piglosiewicz, R. Beckhaus, W. Saak and D. Haase, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14190–14191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nasielski, C. Moucheron, C. Verhoeven and R. Nasielski-Hinkens, Tetrahedron Lett., 1990, 31, 2573–2576 CrossRef CAS .
C. Moucheron, M. A. Kirsch-De and S. Choua, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 584–592 CrossRef CAS .
R. Juarez, M. Ramos, J. L. Segura, J. Orduna, B. Villacampa and R. Alicante, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 7542–7549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Yeh, S.-C. Liao, S.-H. Chao and C. W. Ong, Tetrahedron, 2010, 66, 8888–8892 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, L. Zhang, Q. Bai, Y. Li, J. Yang and L. Wang, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2735–2738 RSC .
P. Secondo and F. Fages, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Gearba, M. Lehmann, J. Levin, D. A. Ivanov, M. H. J. Koch, J. Barbera, M. G. Debije, J. Piris and Y. H. Geerts, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1614–1618 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kanakarajan and A. W. Czarnik, Polym. Commun.,  1989, ch. 171, vol. 30, p. 3 Search PubMed .
W. D. Aumiller, C. R. Dalton and A. W. Czarnik, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 728–729 CrossRef CAS .
O. Roussel, G. Kestemont, J. Tant, H. V. de, R. G. Aspe, J. Levin, A. Remacle, I. R. Gearba, D. Ivanov, M. Lehmann and Y. Geerts, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2003, 396, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Chang, B.-R. Wu, M. Y. Chiang, S.-C. Liao, C. W. Ong, H.-F. Hsu and S.-Y. Lin, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 4075–4078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kestemont, V. d. Halleux, M. Lehmann, D. A. Ivanov, M. Watson and Y. H. Geerts, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2074–2075 RSC .
J. Clark, R. Archer, T. Redding, C. Foden, J. Tant, Y. Geerts, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 124510 CrossRef .
C. W. Ong, S.-C. Liao, T. H. Chang and H.-F. Hsu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 1477–1480 CrossRef CAS .
K. Warnmark, O. Heyke, J. A. Thomas and J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Commun., 1996, 2603–2604 RSC .
L. Arnold, S. R. Puniredd, M. C. von, W. Pisula, N. Koshino, H. Higashimura, M. Baumgarten, M. Wagner and K. Muellen, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2012, 16, 564–575 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, M. C. von, L. Arnold, N. Koshino, H. Higashimura, M. Baumgarten and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10372–10375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5592–5629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Guo and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5372–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Li, H. Tong, Y.-X. Cheng, L.-X. Wang, X.-B. Jing and F.-S. Wang, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4378–4381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, X. Guo, H. Tian, C. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Geng and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3092–3097 RSC .
T. Ishi-I, K. Yaguma, R. Kuwahara, Y. Taguri and S. Mataka, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 585–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishi-i, R. Hirashima, N. Tsutsumi, S. Amemori, S. Matsuki, Y. Teshima, R. Kuwahara and S. Mataka, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 6858–6868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tong, W. Zhao, J. Luo, H. Mao, W. Chen, H. S. O. Chan and C. Chi, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 494–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, S. X. Liu, C. Tanner, C. Leiggener, L. Sanguinet, E. Levillain, S. Leutwyler, A. Hauser and S. Decurtins, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1878–1880 RSC .
H. Herrera, P. de Echegaray, M. Urdanpilleta, M. J. Mancheno, E. Mena-Osteritz, P. Bauerle and J. L. Segura, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 713–715 RSC .
Z. Zhao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhang and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21373–21376 RSC .
S. I. Stupp and L. C. Palmer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 507–518 CrossRef .
P. Strohriegl and J. V. Grazulevicius, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1439–1452 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Kaafarani, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 378–396 CrossRef .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 682–732 CrossRef .
L. Xu, L. Yang and S. Lei, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4399–4415 RSC .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 21 CrossRef .
B. Nie, T.-G. Zhan, T.-Y. Zhou, Z.-Y. Xiao, G.-F. Jiang and X. Zhao, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 754–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi and S. Kumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 264–285 RSC .
S. Kumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 83–109 RSC .
S. Chandrasekhar, B. K. Sadashiva and K. A. Suresh, Pramana, 1977, 9, 471–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laschat, A. Baro, N. Steinke, F. Giesselmann, C. Hägele, G. Scalia, R. Judele, E. Kapatsina, S. Sauer, A. Schreivogel and M. Tosoni, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4832–4887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fontes, P. A. Heiney and W. H. de Jeu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 1202–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Adam, P. Schuhmacher, J. Simmerer, L. Haussling, K. Siemensmeyer, K. H. Etzbachi, H. Ringsdorf and D. Haarer, Nature, 1994, 371, 141–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. van de Craats and J. M. Warman, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 130–133 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. v. d. Craats, J. M. Warman, A. Fechtenkötter, J. D. Brand, M. A. Harbison and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1469–1472 CrossRef .
E. O. Arikainen, N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, O. R. Lozman, J. G. Vinter and A. Wood, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2333–2336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lehmann, V. Lemaur, J. Cornil, J.-L. Brédas, S. Goddard, I. Grizzi and Y. Geerts, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pieterse, P. A. van Hal, R. Kleppinger, J. A. J. M. Vekemans, R. A. J. Janssen and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2675–2679 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lehmann, G. Kestemont, R. G. Aspe, C. Buess-Herman, M. H. J. Koch, M. G. Debije, J. Piris, H. M. P. de, J. M. Warman, M. D. Watson, V. Lemaur, J. Cornil, Y. H. Geerts, R. Gearba and D. A. Ivanov, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3349–3362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kestemont, H. V. de, M. Lehmann, D. A. Ivanov, M. Watson and Y. H. Geerts, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2074–2075 RSC .
W. Zheng, Y.-T. Hu, C.-Y. Chiang and C. W. Ong, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 943–955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Juárez, M. Ramos, M. Lehmann and J. L. Segura, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 222–227 CrossRef .
T. Ishi-i, T. Hirayama, K.-i. Murakami, H. Tashiro, T. Thiemann, K. Kubo, A. Mori, S. Yamasaki, T. Akao, A. Tsuboyama, T. Mukaide, K. Ueno and S. Mataka, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1261–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Praefcke and J. Holbrey, J. Inclusion Phenom. Mol. Recognit. Chem., 1996, 24, 19–41 CrossRef CAS .
O. R. Lozman, R. J. Bushby and J. G. Vinter, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2001, 1446–1452 RSC .
N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, Z. Lu and O. R. Lozman, Liq. Cryst., 2001, 28, 657–661 CrossRef CAS .
N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, G. Cooke, O. R. Lozman and Z. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7915–7916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, Q. Liu and O. R. Lozman, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1612–1617 RSC .
T. Kreouzis, K. J. Donovan, N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, O. R. Lozman and Q. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 1797–1802 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kreouzis, K. Scott, K. J. Donovan, N. Boden, R. J. Bushby, O. R. Lozman and Q. Liu, Chem. Phys., 2000, 262, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Bushby, I. W. Hamley, Q. Liu, O. R. Lozman and J. E. Lydon, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4429–4434 RSC .
J. Cornil, V. Lemaur, J. P. Calbert and J. L. Brédas, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 726–729 CrossRef CAS .
X. Crispin, J. Cornil, R. Friedlein, K. K. Okudaira, V. Lemaur, A. Crispin, G. Kestemont, M. Lehmann, M. Fahlman, R. Lazzaroni, Y. Geerts, G. Wendin, N. Ueno, J.-L. Brédas and W. R. Salaneck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11889–11899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15–56 CrossRef .
C. Duke and L. Schein, Phys. Today, 1980, 33, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lemaur, D. A. da Silva Filho, V. Coropceanu, M. Lehmann, Y. Geerts, J. Piris, M. G. Debije, A. M. van de Craats, K. Senthilkumar, L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. M. Warman, J.-L. Brédas and J. Cornil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3271–3279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Kaafarani, T. Kondo, J. Yu, Q. Zhang, D. Dattilo, C. Risko, S. C. Jones, S. Barlow, B. Domercq, F. Amy, A. Kahn, J.-L. Brédas, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16358–16359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, J. Chang and C. Chi, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 7045–7052 CAS .
X.-Y. Liu, T. Usui and J. Hanna, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14207–14212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Palma, J. Levin, V. Lemaur, A. Liscio, V. Palermo, J. Cornil, Y. Geerts, M. Lehmann and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3313–3317 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Ha, B. R. Kaafarani, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and A. Kahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10493–10497 CAS .
X. Qing-Min, M. Hong, T. Neil, A. B. Julie and K. Y. J. Alex, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 335302 CrossRef .
E. Salomon, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and A. Kahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9803–9807 CAS .
M. Palma, J. Levin, V. Lemaur, A. Liscio, V. Palermo, J. Cornil, Y. Geerts, M. Lehmann and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3313–3317 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-M. Xu, H. Ma, N. Tucker, J. A. Bardecker and A. K. Y. Jen, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 335302 CrossRef .
K. Gentz and K. Wandelt, Chimia, 2012, 66, 44–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, F. Amy, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. Marder and A. Kahn, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 431, 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
E. Salomon, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 944–951 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, E. Salomon, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165336 CrossRef .

Handbook of Nanoscience, Engineering, and Technology, CRC Press, 3rd edn,  2012 Search PubMed .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip, J. Zou, H. Ma, Y. Tian, N. M. Tucker and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13042–13043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Perl, D. N. Reinhoudt and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2257–2268 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Xiao, X. Zhao, X.-K. Jiang and Z.-T. Li, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13048–13051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Xiao, X. Zhao, X.-K. Jiang and Z.-T. Li, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Rademacher, K. Kanakarajan and A. W. Czarnik, Synthesis, 1994, 378–380 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Szalay, J. R. Galán-Mascarós, R. Clérac and K. R. Dunbar, Synth. Met., 2001, 122, 535–542 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Szalay, J. R. Galán-Mascarós, B. L. Schottel, J. Bacsa, L. M. Pérez, A. S. Ichimura, A. Chouai and K. R. Dunbar, J. Cluster Sci., 2004, 15, 503–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Beeson, L. J. Fitzgerald, J. C. Gallucci, R. E. Gerkin, J. T. Rademacher and A. W. Czarnik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 4621–4622 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Gallegos, A. H. Francis, N. W. Ockwig, P. G. Rasmussen, R. G. Raptis, P. R. Challen and I. Ouedraogo, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1667–1671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furukawa, T. Okubo, S. Masaoka, D. Tanaka, H.-C. Chang and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Falkenberg, S. Olthof, R. Rieger, M. Baumgarten, K. Muellen, K. Leo and M. Riede, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 927–932 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Liao, W. K. Slusarek, T. K. Hatwar, M. L. Ricks and D. L. Comfort, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 324–329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, W. S. Jeon, T. J. Park, R. Pode, J. Jang and J. H. Kwon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 133303 CrossRef .
S. M. Park, Y. H. Kim, Y. Yi, H.-Y. Oh and J. Won Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 063308 CrossRef .
J.-H. Lee, S. Lee, J.-B. Kim, J. Jang and J.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15262–15266 RSC .
H.-W. Lin, W.-C. Lin, J.-H. Chang and C.-I. Wu, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1204–1210 CrossRef CAS .
K. Albrecht, K. Matsuoka, K. Fujita and K. Yamamoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5677–5682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Torsi, M. Magliulo, K. Manoli and G. Palazzo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8612–8628 RSC .
K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1233–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Greiner, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang, Z.-B. Wang, J. Qiu and Z.-H. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 76–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Winkler, J. Frisch, R. Schlesinger, M. Oehzelt, R. Rieger, J. Räder, J. P. Rabe, K. Müllen and N. Koch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22285–22289 CAS .
H. Lee, J. Lee, S. Park, Y. Yi, S. W. Cho, J. W. Kim and S. J. Kang, Carbon, 2014, 71, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, J.-H. Lee, J. W. Kim, S. Lee, J. Jang, H. H. Lee and J.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1260–1264 RSC .
H. Glowatzki, B. Bröker, R.-P. Blum, O. T. Hofmann, A. Vollmer, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, E. Zojer, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3825–3829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Frank, T. Djuric, M. Koini, I. Salzmann, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, R. Resel, N. Koch and A. Winkler, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6650–6657 CAS .
P. Frank, N. Koch, M. Koini, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, R. Resel and A. Winkler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 473, 321–325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. G. Helander, Z. Wang and Z. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16746–16749 CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kido and T. Matsumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2866–2868 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Gao, X.-Z. Zhu, L. Zhang, D.-Y. Zhou, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 153301 CrossRef .
S. H. Cho, S. W. Pyo and M. C. Suh, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 402–405 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Yook, S. O. Jeon and J. Y. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 6109–6111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J.-H. Lee, K. H. Kim, S.-J. Yoo, T. G. Kim, J. W. Kim and J.-J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2346–2351 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bröker, R. P. Blum, J. Frisch, A. Vollmer, O. T. Hofmann, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, J. P. Rabe, E. Zojer and N. Koch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 243303 CrossRef .
J. Niederhausen, P. Amsalem, J. Frisch, A. Wilke, A. Vollmer, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 165302 CrossRef .
P. Amsalem, A. Wilke, J. Frisch, J. Niederhausen, A. Vollmer, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 113709 CrossRef .
S. E. Jang and J. Y. Lee, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chiba, Y.-J. Pu, R.-I. Miyazaki, K.-I. Nakayama, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 710–715 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Joo, J. Moon, J.-H. Han, J. W. Huh, J. Lee, N. S. Cho, J. Hwang, H. Y. Chu and J.-I. Lee, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Small, S.-W. Tsang, J. Kido, S. K. So and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3261–3266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee and J.-J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 855–860 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chang, Z.-J. Wu, Y.-H. Liang, Y.-S. Chang, C.-H. Chiu, C.-W. Tai and H.-H. Chang, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 548, 389–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, I. Lim, S. H. Han and T. W. Kim, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Cui, Y. Liu, X.-D. Yuan, Q. Li, Z.-Q. Jiang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 8177–8185 RSC .
J.-K. Bin, N.-S. Cho and J.-I. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2911–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Son, Y. J. Kim, M. J. Park, H.-Y. Oh, J. S. Park, J. H. Yang, M. C. Suh and J. H. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5008–5014 RSC .
S.-C. Dong, Y. Liu, Q. Li, L.-S. Cui, H. Chen, Z.-Q. Jiang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6575–6584 RSC .
E. Najafabadi, K. A. Knauer, W. Haske and B. Kippelen, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Duan, D. Zhang, J. Qiao, G. Dong, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Son, M. J. Park, Y. J. Kim, J. H. Yang, J. S. Park and J. H. Kwon, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1183–1188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sasabe, H. Nakanishi, Y. Watanabe, S. Yano, M. Hirasawa, Y.-J. Pu and J. Kido, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5550–5555 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, Z. Hong, Z. Xu, G. Li, R. A. Street and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6642–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cnops, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, B. Verreet, M. A. Empl and P. Heremans, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3406 Search PubMed .
B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, C. K. Renshaw and S. R. Forrest, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A444–A450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Falkenberg, S. Olthof, R. Rieger, M. Baumgarten, K. Muellen, K. Leo and M. Riede, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 927–932 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Jeon and J. Y. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2012, 18, 661–663 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, X. Fu, J. Liu, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6158–6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. I. Saragi, T. Reichert, A. Scheffler, M. Kussler and J. Salbeck, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1572–1576 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Pham, Y. Kawasugi and H. Tada, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 143301 CrossRef .
G. Veeraraghavan, T. D. Nguyen, S. Yugang, O. Mermer and M. Wohlgenannt, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2007, 54, 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reichert, T. P. I. Saragi and J. Salbeck, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7388–7390 RSC .
S. Bruzzone and G. Fiori, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 222108 CrossRef .
W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Goetz, D. Vermeulen, M. E. Payne, C. Kloc, L. E. McNeil and O. D. Jurchescu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3065–3076 RSC .
T. Matsushima, G.-H. Jin, Y. Kanai, T. Yokota, S. Kitada, T. Kishi and H. Murata, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 520–528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Okabe, T. Fukushima, K. Ariga and T. Aida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3414–3417 CrossRef CAS .
W. Otani, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 143, 335–343 RSC .
C. Caltagirone and P. A. Gale, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 520–563 RSC .
R. E. Dawson, A. Hennig, D. P. Weimann, D. Emery, V. Ravikumar, J. Montenegro, T. Takeuchi, S. Gabutti, M. Mayor, J. Mareda, C. A. Schalley and S. Matile, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 533–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Quiñonero, C. Garau, C. Rotger, A. Frontera, P. Ballester, A. Costa and P. M. Deyà, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3389–3392 CrossRef .
Y. S. Rosokha, S. V. Lindeman, S. V. Rosokha and J. K. Kochi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4650–4652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Hay and V. S. Bryantsev, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2417–2428 RSC .
B. Han, J. Lu and J. K. Kochi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1327–1334 CAS .
H. T. Chifotides, B. L. Schottel and K. R. Dunbar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7202–7207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Aragay, A. Frontera, V. Lloveras, J. Vidal-Gancedo and P. Ballester, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2620–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Su, A.-Y. Lu, C.-Y. Wu, Y.-T. Li, K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, S.-Y. Lin, Z.-Y. Juang, Y.-L. Zhong, F.-R. Chen and L.-J. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3612–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, W. H. Lee, R. Piner, I. Kholmanov, Y. Wu, H. Li, H. Ji and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2471–2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhuo, J. Gao, M. Peng, L. Bai, J. Deng, Y. Xia, Y. Ma, J. Zhong and X. Sun, Carbon, 2013, 52, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. B. Alemany, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhuo, Y. Ma, J. Gao, P. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Tian, X. Sun, J. Zhong and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 3141–3147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen and N. J. Tao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 429–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ravani, K. Papagelis, V. Dracopoulos, J. Parthenios, K. G. Dassios, A. Siokou and C. Galiotis, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 527, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Zhuo, Q. Wang, Y. P. Zhang, D. Zhang, Q. L. Li, C. H. Gao, Y. Q. Sun, L. Ding, Q. J. Sun, S. D. Wang, J. Zhong, X. H. Sun and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Chow, J. Biol. Phys., 2003, 29, 447–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1246–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishi-i, K.-i. Murakami, Y. Imai and S. Mataka, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 3175–3178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishi-i, H. Tashiro, R. Kuwahara, S. Mataka, T. Yoshihara and S. Tobita, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 158–159 CrossRef CAS .
E. Garmire, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 30532–30544 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Marder, Chem. Commun., 2006, 131–134 RSC .
J. Zyss and I. Ledoux, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 77–105 CrossRef CAS .
O. Maury and H. Le Bozec, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 691–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Argouarch, R. Veillard, T. Roisnel, A. Amar, A. Boucekkine, A. Singh, I. Ledoux and F. Paul, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2409–2411 RSC .
B. R. Cho, S. K. Lee, K. A. Kim, K. N. Son, T. I. Kang and S. J. Jeon, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 9205–9208 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Oliva, R. Juárez, M. Ramos, J. L. Segura, S. v. Cleuvenbergen, K. Clays, T. Goodson, J. T. L. Navarrete and J. Casado, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 117, 626–632 Search PubMed .
L. Guo and M. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5400–5428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. He, L.-S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishi-i, S. Amemori, C. Okamura, K. Yanaga, R. Kuwahara, S. Mataka and K. Kamada, Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Crivello and M. F. Aldersley, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 801–814 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Szymczak, R. Podsiadły, K. Podemska and J. Sokołowska, Color. Technol., 2012, 128, 378–386 CAS .
M.-A. Tehfe, F. Dumur, P. Xiao, J. Zhang, B. Graff, F. Morlet-Savary, D. Gigmes, J.-P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Polymer, 2014, 55, 2285–2293 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hermann, M. Nakhla, J. Gallucci, E. Dalkilic, A. Dastan and J. D. Badjić, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11313–11316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-G. Tao, X. Zhao, X.-K. Jiang and Z.-T. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 1840–1842 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Fu, T.-G. Zhan, L. Dai, Y. Chen and X. Zhao, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 5039–5042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Fu, T.-G. Zhan, X.-Z. Wang, L. Dai, Y. Chen and X. Zhao, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 6486–6489 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirayama, S. Yamasaki, H. Ameku, T. Ishi-i, T. Thiemann and S. Mataka, Dyes Pigm., 2005, 67, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X.-M. Liu, T.-L. Hu, J. Han, W.-J. Ruan and X.-H. Bu, Talanta, 2013, 108, 150–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Zhang, C.-F. Zhao, Y. Li, X.-M. Liu, A. Yu, W.-J. Ruan and X.-H. Bu, Talanta, 2014, 119, 632–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Yang, X.-M. Liu, K. Liu, H. Liu, F.-Y. Zhao, W.-J. Ruan, Y. Li, Z. Chang and X.-H. Bu, Talanta, 2014, 128, 278–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, A. E. Albers, A. P. Wong and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16030–16031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Budd, E. S. Elabas, B. S. Ghanem, S. Makhseed, N. B. McKeown, K. J. Msayib, C. E. Tattershall and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 456–459 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. McKeown, B. Gahnem, K. J. Msayib, P. M. Budd, C. E. Tattershall, K. Mahmood, S. Tan, D. Book, H. W. Langmi and A. Walton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1804–1807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1291–1295 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2056–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kou, Y. Xu, Z. Guo and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8753–8757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, X. Chen, Z. Tang, D. Wu, R. Fu and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4788–4790 RSC .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .

Footnote† Dedicated to the memory of our friend and colleague Dr Günther Götz.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

José L. Segura
	José L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry from the UCM in Madrid working in Organic materials. After a stay in W. Dailey's group (Univ. Pennsylvania) he performed postdoctoral stays in the groups of M. Hanack (Univ. Tübingen), F. Wudl (UCSB, USA), and P. Bäuerle (Univ. Ulm). In 1995 Prof. Segura joined the faculty at the Complutense University in Madrid where he is leading the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials. His current research interests involve synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of molecular and macromolecular electroactive systems for optoelectronics. His results have been published in more than 140 scientific contributions.

Rafael Juárez
	Rafael Juárez obtained his degree in Chemistry in 2004 from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain. After a short stay in the Spanish Research Council he enrolled in 2006 in the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos where he obtained his PhD in 2011. He has made research stays under the direction of Dr Matthias Lehmann in Chemnitz in 2008 and Prof. René Jannsen in Eindhoven in 2011. His research interest includes the study of nitrogenated acenes (specially hexaazatriphenylene derivatives) from both, the experimental and the theoretical point of view. Currently he teaches Chemistry in the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos in Spain.

Mar Ramos
	Mar Ramos is an Associate Professor at Rey Juan Carlos University. She received her BSc degree in Chemistry from the Complutense University of Madrid and obtained her PhD from the same institution. She has developed her research career in the Organic Chemical Department of the Complutense University of Madrid (1986–1998). In 1998, she joined Rey Juan Carlos University as a teaching assistant. She joined the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials of the Organic Chemistry Department of the Complutense University of Madrid in 2004. Her current research interest is focused on design and characterization of organic materials for optoelectronics.

Carlos Seoane
	Carlos Seoane obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the Universidad de Santiago, Spain in 1975 and obtained a tenured Assistant Professorship at Universidad Complutense (1978) and a Full Professorship in 1988, first at Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha and then at Universidad Complutense, where he has been the Vice-rector. His research interests include heterocyclic synthesis and reactivity, industrial research projects in medicinal chemistry, as well as new organic materials. He was inducted to the Royal Academy in 2004. He has published some 220 scientific papers. He is a general editor for the “Síntesis” collection of Chemistry books. He chairs the British-Hispanic Foundation.

 	Fig. 1  Selected examples of linear polycyclic aromatics, N-substituted polycylic aromatics, 2D-acene analogues and the structure of 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (HAT).	 

 	Fig. 2  Theoretical electronic structure of HAT frontier orbitals. B3LYP/6-31G**.	 

 	Fig. 3  HAT·2H2O packing viewed from a: a axis, b: b axis and c: c axis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Experimental16 and theoretical14 bond distances (all values in Å) determined for HAT.	 

 	Scheme 1  Top: The first synthesis of HAT; bottom: the first synthesis of a HAT derivative, HATNA.	 

 	Scheme 2  Top: First systematic synthesis of a series of HAT derivatives. Bottom: Rogers' synthesis of HAT.	 

 	Scheme 3  Multistep synthetic route for the production of HAT from hexaketocyclohexane (9).	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of a family of HATNA derivatives using hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material.	 

 	Fig. 5  Selected examples of HATNA derivatives synthesized using hexaketocyclohexane (9) as a starting material.	 

 	Scheme 5  Metal mediated synthesis of HATNA.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthetic approaches to trigonal HAT derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 6  Some samples of trigonal and non-trigonal symmetries of HATs.	 

 	Scheme 7  Aleatory method for the synthesis of non-trigonal HATs.	 

 	Scheme 8  First controlled synthesis of non-trigonal HATs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Nontrigonal donor–acceptor–donor HAT derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of nontrigonal HAT derivatives from different oxocarbons as starting materials.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of an unsymmetrical bismacrocyclic HAT derivative.	 

 	Scheme 11  
HAT-trisimide derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization.	 

 	Scheme 12  
HAT derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization.	 

 	Scheme 13  Donor–acceptor–donor HAT derivatives obtained by post-synthesis functionalization.	 

 	Scheme 14  Post synthesis functionalization of HATs based on aromatic nucleophilic substitution.	 

 	Fig. 8  
HAT derivatives with two-dimensional expansion of the π-conjugated system.	 

 	Scheme 15  Multistep synthesis of planar conjugated macrocyclic HAT derivative 61.	 

 	Fig. 9  Frontier orbital tuning of a series of HAT derivatives (63–66) with different number of pyrazine units. Adapted with permission from Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4378–4381. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  
HAT derivatives directly conjugated with the strong electron donor tetrathiafulvalene (75) and the strong electron acceptors naphthalimide (76) and perylene bisimide (77).	 

 	Fig. 11  Top: Chemical structures of achiral hexa-2-pyridyl-HAT (78) and amino acid derivatives 79–81. Bottom: Schematic illustration of the origin of the “sergeant-and-soldiers” principle on the basis of the transfer of chirality from the D-phenylalanine derivative to the other part of the complex.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of triphenylene 82 and a mesogen triphenylene derivative 83.	 

 	Fig. 13  
HAT derivatives used to investigate their thermotropic liquid crystalline behavior.	 

 	Fig. 14  
HAT derivatives with aromatic side chains investigated as potential liquid crystal materials.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Triphenylene (88) and HAT derivatives (89) that exhibit complementary polytopic interaction (CPI). (b) Representation of the stacking of 88 and 89 in an alternating manner.	 

 	Fig. 16  
HATNA derivatives used to measure charge carrier mobilities.	 

 	Fig. 17  Bay-substituted HATNA derivatives used to measure charge carrier mobilities.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram representing “in plane” and “out of plane” molecular columns with the fastest electron transport observed for the “out-of-plane” molecular columns. Reproduced from ref. 102. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  STM image of (a) N-(2-ethylhexyl)-substituted hexacarboxamido-hexaazatriphenylene (84, R = 2-ethylhexhyl, Fig. 13) at the tetradecane/HOPG interface. Reproduced from ref. 107 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HATNA on Au(111). Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10493–10497. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the orientational transition of HATNA derivatives on Au(111) with varied electrode potentials.	 

 	Fig. 21  Chemical structure of THAP (104) and STM images of (a) one monolayer of 96 on Au(111) (Reprinted with permission from S. D. Ha, Q. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 085433. Copyright 2008 by the American Physical Society) and (b) submonolayer coverage of 96 on Ag(110). Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9803–9807. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structure of alkylamide-tethered HATNA derivatives (97, 98) and AFM images of (a) nanowires and (b) nanorods pattern of 98 on SiO2/Si fabricated by microcontact printing. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13042–13043. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structure of hexa-2-pyridyl-hexaazatriphenylene (78), its hydrogen bonding complex with n-dodecyl ammonium triflate (DAT) and TEM images of microbelts fabricated from the 78/DAT mixture (upper part). On the lower part are represented (left) the TEM image of the microspheres constructed from the 78/Zn2+ mixture, (middle) and the SEM image of 78/Ag+ microtubes and (right) the SEM image of 78/Ag+ microrods. Adapted with permission from Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13048–13051 and Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1505–1511. Copyright 2010 and 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Vectors between adjacent pairs of HAT(CN)6 anions. Reproduced from Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1667–1671. Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic structure of a conventional OLED.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the experimental schemes reported in ref. 177. On the left and right side, non-magnetoresistive field-effect transistors based on p-type Spiro-TTB and n-type HAT-CN, as well as the corresponding chemical structures, are shown. Devices with a mixture of Spiro-TTB and HAT-CN show a significant response to an external magnetic field of 3.2 mT (depicted in the middle). Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  Top and side view of the most stable configuration of HAT-CN adsorbed on graphene. The x–y plane is the graphene plane, and z is normal to the graphene plane. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2158–2165. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Formulas of triphenylene donors 99a,b and acceptor HAT-CN and a schematic representation of a mesoporous silica film containing one-dimensional charge transfer (CT) assemblies immobilized in a hexagonal array of nanoscopic channels.	 

 	Fig. 29  Formulas of HAT-PBI assembly (100) and a schematic representation of the dimer aggregates that exhibit an energy transfer process from the HAT core to the peripheral PBI moieties.	 

 	Fig. 30  Formulas of octupolar HAT derivatives for NLO.	 

 	Fig. 31  Formulas of TPA dyes 104a–d based on HAT and schematic representation of the enhancement of the TPA nature by self-assembly. Adapted from Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 29–37. Copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 32  Formulas of HATNA derivatives used as photoinitiators in photopolymerization reactions.	 

 	Fig. 33  Formulas of HAT derivatives used for molecular recognition and sensors.	 

 	Fig. 34  Reversible recognition process of Cd2+ by HAT derivative 78 showing the fluorescent complex (right) and the non-fluorescent free HAT derivative 78 (left).	 

 	Fig. 35  Formulas of HAT with extended pyrene chromophores used for molecular recognition and sensors.	 

 	Fig. 36  Formula of the HAT network polymer with intrinsic porosity 115.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Synthesis of aza-fused π-conjugated microporous polymer 116. (b) The elementary pore structure of aza-CMPs calculated using the Gaussian03 program at the B3LYP/3-21G(d) level (the carbon network is gray and nitrogen is blue). (c) Photographic image of the powder and flexible thin films with different shapes of 116. Reproduced from ref. 232 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 38  Schematic representation of HAT-based CMP 118 (upper part) and its elementary pore structure (lower part).	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to the memory of our friend and colleague Dr Günther Götz.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
