Enhancement of the intrinsic light harvesting capacity of Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 double perovskite via modification with sulphide   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10422D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10422D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2008-2020Enhancement of the intrinsic light harvesting capacity of Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite via modification with sulphide†

        
          
            Narendra 
            Pai
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jianfeng 
            Lu
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Mingchao 
            Wang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Anthony S. R. 
            Chesman
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Aaron 
            Seeber
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Pavel V. 
            Cherepanov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dimuthu C. 
            Senevirathna
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Thomas R. 
            Gengenbach
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Nikhil V. 
            Medhekar
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Philip C. 
            Andrews
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Udo 
            Bach
          
        
      bcef and 

        
          
            Alexandr N. 
            Simonov
          
        
      *ag
aSchool of Chemistry, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: alexandr.simonov@monash.edu
bARC Centre of Excellence for Exciton Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
eCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Manufacturing, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
fMelbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
gARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Received 
      21st September 2019
    , Accepted 9th December 2019First published on 11th December 2019AbstractCaesium silver bismuth halide double perovskites, in the first instance Cs2AgBiBr6, were recently introduced to the field of emerging photovoltaics as environmentally friendly, non-toxic and thermodynamically stable photoabsorber materials. However, the wide indirect bandgaps of these materials indicate the need for bandgap engineering and enhancing the light absorption to improve the photovoltaic performance. The present work demonstrates that this can be achieved via modification of the double perovskite with sulphide to obtain caesium silver bismuth sulphobromide materials, Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx, which have been synthesised as pin-hole-free uniform films and systematically investigated herein. Notable enhancements in the intrinsic light absorption for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2 are demonstrated, as are the improvements by up to 50% in the photocurrent density of the corresponding thin-film solar cells. The devices based on the films with the nominal composition Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 delivered a short-circuit current density of 3.0 ± 0.3 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 1.9 ± 0.1% (cf. 2.1 ± 0.2 mA cm−2 and 1.3 ± 0.1%, respectively, for the control cells based on the sulphide-free Cs2AgBiBr6). Equally important, caesium silver bismuth sulphobromides demonstrate excellent stability against all common environmental stimuli, viz. heat, light, and humidity.
Introduction
The collective efforts of many research teams globally have eventuated in the outstanding progress of the perovskite solar cell (PSC) technology over the past decade.1,2 The best PSCs are based on hybrid lead(II) halide perovskites APbIIX3 (A+ being most frequently CH3NH3+, (NH2)2CH+ and Cs+; X− being a halide anion), which are cheap and easy to fabricate as thin films; according to the latest reports, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of research perovskite solar cells now exceeds 25%.3–5 Moreover, the readily adjustable optoelectronic properties of these materials promote their use in other applications, like X-ray or photodetectors, and photo(electro)catalysis.6–10 Unfortunately, these unique properties come at the price of unsatisfactory stability and the high toxicity of lead(II), which is readily soluble in water and can severely damage human health and cause environmental damage.11,12 In the light of recent incidents of significant Pb2+ contamination in the water supplies of Michigan, Pittsburgh, and Hong Kong, it is unlikely that lead-based PSC technology will easily pass environmental regulations.8 These considerations have driven research into non-toxic and stable alternatives to hybrid lead perovskites with similarly favourable optoelectronic properties.11,13–15
Towards this aim, the homovalent and heterovalent substitution of lead(II) in a perovskite structure with metals of a similar chemical nature is broadly considered as one of the feasible strategies. The replacement of Pb2+ with Sn2+ and Ge2+ resulted in compounds with even greater instability, which undergo rapid oxidation by air because of their high energy 4s and 5s orbitals.16,17 In contrast, hybrid perovskites based on metal cations with a stable oxidation state other than +2 often exhibit excellent stability.9,18 Specifically, so-called double perovskites, or elpasolites, with a generic formula A2M1M2X6 contain two metal ions (M1 and M2) with the oxidation states of +1 (M1 = Cu+, Ag+, Au+) and +3 (M2 = Sb3+, Bi3+) instead of two Pb2+ cations. Such materials have been proven to be compositionally and structurally stable within the operating temperature range of solar cells, in contrast to the benchmark CH3NH3PbX3 perovskites.13
Detailed computational screening studies have provided initial insights into the thermodynamically stable compositions of double perovskites with suitable electronic band structures.19 Inspired by these theoretical predictions, the groups of Karunadasa,20 Woodward,21 and Snaith and Giustino22 pioneered the successful synthesis of the Cs2AgBiX6 compounds in 2016. Karunadasa and co-workers relied on a vacuum annealing approach to grow large single crystals of Cs2AgBiBr6 by reacting CsBr and BiBr3 in concentrated hydrobromic acid, followed by the addition of AgBr, which was then capped and annealed at 110 °C for 2 h, and filtered at a reduced pressure overnight.20 Woodward and colleagues precipitated polycrystalline Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl− or Br−) from a mixed hydrohalic–hypophosphorous acid solution and annealed the product in the air at 210 °C for 10 h.21 Finally, Snaith, Giustino and co-workers obtained Cs2AgBiX6 nanocrystals via a solid–state reaction of CsX, AgX and BiX3 at 500 °C under vacuum.19 Later, other approaches, including hot-injection and colloidal methods, were introduced for the synthesis of these compounds.8,9 In confirmation of the preceding theoretical work, both Cs2AgBiCl6 and Cs2AgBiBr6 were found to be indirect bandgap (Eg) semiconductors with Eg values of ca. 2.8 and 2.2 eV, respectively.21 From the perspective of solar cells, these bandgaps are too wide, and more favourable values were predicted for the Cs2AgBiI6 double perovskite.23,24 However, the isolation of this compound and its utilisation for solar cells is highly challenging due to the thermodynamic instability of Cs2AgBiI6.25 Thus, research has predominantly focused on Cs2AgBiCl6 and Cs2AgBiBr6, which adopt the isometric undistorted cubic crystal structure of the Fmm space group and are stable.21,26 Further comprehensive physical characterisation studies have established that these compounds can provide a reasonably high fundamental carrier lifetime (∼1.4 μs), do not suffer from significant ion migration under an electric field, photoemit at relatively short wavelengths (550–700 nm), and exhibit high electric resistivity (109 to 1011 Ω cm−1).6,27 Taken together, these properties frame Cs2AgBiCl6 and Cs2AgBiBr6 as suitable materials for a range of applications, including photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors.7,9,23,28,29
All of the aforementioned optoelectronic applications require highly uniform thin films of the active materials, which should be preferably obtained by facile solution-based or evaporation methods. To the best of our knowledge, all but one report on thin films of Cs2AgBiBr6 (this compound attracted more attention than its chloride counterpart due to the narrower bandgap) employed conceptually similar fabrication strategies based on casting a dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) dispersion of the pre-synthesised double perovskite material onto an appropriate support. The exception is the first report on Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells by Greul et al. in 2017,30 who employed DMSO solutions of CsBr, AgBr and BiBr3 precursors for hot-casting onto mesoporous titania (m-TiO2) electron transport material (ETM), followed by annealing at 280 °C in air. Films obtained in such a manner predominantly contained large (>700 nm) aggregates of Cs2AgBiBr6, but the underlying comparatively thick m-TiO2 ETM (800 nm) remained uncovered by the double perovskite in many visualised areas. Nevertheless, when combined with the spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)9,9′-spirobi-fluorene) hole transport material (HTM),31 the resulting solar cells were reported to operate with a PCE of 1.8 ± 0.4%. On the positive side, impressive open-circuit voltage (Voc) values over 1 V were achieved; on the negative side, notable hysteresis was observed with a significant difference in the photocurrent (J) vs. voltage (V) curves scanned from short-circuit to open-circuit and reverse directions. This was rationalised in terms of trapping/detrapping of charge carriers and the migration of halide anions by the authors.30 Remarkably, this PCE remains one of the best among all reports on bismuth-based double perovskite solar cells, notwithstanding the notable improvements in the quality of the photoactive films achieved in later work. For example, Pantaler et al. employed an “antisolvent”-assisted spin-coating approach, commonly used in the PSC field, to deposit Cs2AgBiBr6 onto m-TiO2 as a relatively homogeneous coating, but the solar cells provided efficiencies of only 0.9 ± 0.3%, though it is noted that a different HTM (poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine]; PTAA) was used in this work.32 Devices with an inverted planar architecture incorporating copper-doped nickel(II) oxide as a HTM, bathocuproine as an ETM and a comparatively uniform Cs2AgBiBr6 photoactive film pre-treated with isopropanol were reported to operate with a PCE of 1.99 ± 0.06%.33 Recently, Igbari et al. achieved relatively uniform films by spin-coating a dispersion of pre-synthesised double perovskite crystals in DMSO and reported efficiencies of 2.48 ± 0.03% employing a Ag|MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr6|c-TiO2|FTO device configuration (c-TiO2 is a compact titania layer; FTO is fluorine-doped tin(IV) oxide).34
One major problem of all hitherto reported Cs2AgBiBr6-based devices is their low photocurrent density, which is commonly attributed to inefficient charge separation and extraction to common charge transport materials like spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA. The excessively wide bandgap ranging from 2.0 to 2.5 eV, accompanied by a downshifted valence band edge (below −5.6 eV),18,28,34,35 along with a not very high absorption coefficient (104 to 105 cm−1)9,36 also limit the photovoltaic capacity of the double perovskite. Moreover, Bartesaghi et al. demonstrated that non-uniform thin films of Cs2AgBiBr6 contain a significant concentration of surface trap states that promote fast recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers and thereby significantly reduce the photocurrent density.28
In an attempt to address this bandgap problem, Li et al. demonstrated that placing Cs2AgBiBr6 under extreme pressure of 15 GPa induces structural changes, resulting in an upshift in the valence band edge (EVB) and a downshift in the conduction band edge (ECB) energy levels by several hundred meV, which gives a closer-to-optimal Eg of ca. 1.7 eV; unfortunately, this effect vanished upon the release of the high pressure.37 Later, Du et al. investigated the effects of partial substitution of Bi3+ cations with In3+ and Sb3+, and achieved a contracted bandgap of ca. 1.9 eV for Cs2Ag(Sb0.38Bi0.62)Br6 and expanded Eg of 2.3 eV for Cs2Ag(In0.75Bi0.25)Br6 as opposed to 2.1 eV for the parent bismuth-only double perovskite.35 However, the corresponding effects on the photovoltaic performance were not reported.
A widely adopted strategy for bandgap engineering in perovskites and other semiconductors is based on anionic substitution,38,39 but this approach has not been deeply explored for the bismuth-based double-perovskites. Commonly, the chemical nature of an anion has the strongest influence on Evb.24,40 For example, theoretical studies on Cs2AgBiX6 predicted that the substitution of Br− with I− should upshift the valence band edge by ca. 0.3 eV and decrease the Eg from 2.0–2.2 eV to 1.75–1.85 eV.21,22,24 However, as mentioned above, the introduction of I− anions is not feasible due to the intrinsic instability of the iodide variants of caesium-silver-bismuth double perovskites.23,41 An alternative anion that can induce the desired upshift of the valence band and contraction of the bandgap is sulphide, as recently demonstrated for silver iodobismuthates.42 Herein, the latter approach is applied to caesium silver bismuth bromide double perovskites (Scheme 1). The effects of sulphide on the phase stability, composition, film morphology, optoelectronic properties and photovoltaic performance, as well as the stability of double perovskites and the photovoltaic devices based thereon against thermal, moisture and light soaking stimuli are reported.
 Scheme 1  Structure of Cs2AgBiBr6 and possible crystallographic changes induced by partial substitution of two Br− with S2− (highlighted with dotted circles). Far-edge bromine replacement scenario is shown. 
Experimental
Materials
Unless otherwise stated, analytical grade chemicals as received from Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar were used without further purification. All the reactions and film deposition procedures were carried out inside a glove box filled with high purity dinitrogen (≤2.5 ppm O2, ≤0.5 ppm H2O). Bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) [Bi(S2CAr)3] was synthesised as reported by Senevirathna et al.43via a sonochemical reaction of Bi2O3 with 4-methylbenzodithioic acid in toluene followed by multiple filtration and recrystallisation steps in hot toluene. Poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) was purchased from Rieke Metals; poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich; poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl) carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}) (PTB7) was sourced from 1-material; spiro-OMeTAD was obtained from Luminescence Technology Corp. Graphite particles were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. Fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass (FTO) substrates (10 cm × 10 cm; sheet resistance ca. 8 Ω sq−1) were purchased from Kaivo Optoelectronics Tech. Corp. Titania particle paste (average size 30 nm; 30 NRD) was sourced from Dyesol.
Fabrication of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films and photovoltaic devices
FTO substrates were laser engraved with a Versa laser 2.30 instrument to provide two separate conducting areas, and then cleaned by following a previously optimised procedure involving (i) ultrasonication (Elmasonic S300H bath with an operating power of 1500 W) in a 1% Helmanex surfactant solution, water and ethanol (15 min in each medium), (ii) drying under an intense N2 flow, and (iii) plasma treatment at 1000 mTorr for 15 min (Harrick plasma cleaner). A 10 nm thick compact titania blocking layer (c-TiO2) was deposited onto a cleaned FTO surface by spray pyrolysis of 5 vol% bis(isopropoxide)-bis(acetylacetonate) titanium(IV) in anhydrous isopropanol at 500 °C for 30 min. C-TiO2|FTO sheets were then cut to obtain substrates of the size of ca. 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm. Further, a mesoporous titania scaffold (thickness ca. 200 nm) was produced on top of c-TiO2|FTO by spin-coating (Laurell WS-650HZ-23NPP/UD2 Spin Coater) 30 μL of a 17 wt% 30 nm TiO2 particle paste in ethanol at 4000 rpm for 20 s, drying at 100 °C for 10 min and then keeping at 500 °C for 1 hour in air.
The Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving caesium(I) bromide (99.99%), silver(I) bromide (99%), bismuth(III) bromide (99%) in a 2:1:1 molar ratio along with the required amount of bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithiolate) in DMSO (anhydrous, 99.8%) inside glovebox. After 1 hour of vigorous stirring and shaking, the solutions were heated at 70 °C for 10 min and were spin-coated onto the 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO substrates using the following two-step procedure: (i) 500 rpm for 10 s, (ii) 2500 rpm for 30 s. Deposited films were annealed at the desired temperature within a 150–300 °C range for 10 min (optimised heating rate 0.5 °C s−1) using a Harry Gestigkeit GmbH titan hotplate. Afterwards, the samples were allowed to cool to ambient temperature (24 ± 2 °C) naturally.
The 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO samples were then modified with a layer of a hole-transporting material (HTM), which was one of the following: P3HT, PTAA, PTB7, spiro-OMeTAD, CuSCN or CuI. In all cases, deposition of the HTM was completed inside a N2-filled glovebox by spin-coating of a solution containing the dissolved HTM, and subsequent mild heat-treatment for 10 min (the latter annealing step was not used for spiro-OMeTAD and PTB7). The following deposition parameters were used: (i) P3HT: 20 μL of a 20 mg mL−1 dichlorobenzene solution, 2000 rpm for 30 s, 130 °C; (ii) PTAA: 25 μL of a 10 mg mL−1 toluene solution, 1500 rpm for 30 s, 60 °C; (iii) PTB7: 20 μL of a 5 mg mL−1 dichlorobenzene solution, 2000 rpm for 30 s; (iv) spiro-OMeTAD: 25 μL of a 60 mM solution in chlorobenzene also containing 200 mM 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and 30 mM bis(trifluoromethane-sulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI), 3000 rpm for 30 s. (v) CuSCN and CuI: 15 and 12 mg mL−1 solutions in diethylsulphide, respectively, 3000 rpm for 30 s, 60 °C.
For solar cells with an organic HTM, a 50 nm-thick gold layer deposited by evaporation (DDong DD-GCMO3CR; initial vacuum level 8 × 10−6 Torr) was employed as a counter electrode. A graphite back contact was applied by doctor blading a chlorobenzene dispersion of ball-milled graphite particles onto the devices made with CuI and CuSCN hole-transporting materials. Finally, a steel photomask was applied to define the photoactive area of 0.16 cm2. The cells were not encapsulated.
Characterisation

X-ray diffraction (XRD). 
X-ray diffractograms were obtained using a D2 phaser Bruker diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) source operating at 30 kV and 15 mA at a step size of 0.05° and a time per step of 2 s. For analysis, freshly prepared Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films with a thickness of approximately 300 nm were obtained using the same spin-coating/annealing procedure as the one used for the solar cell fabrication, but with an unmodified glass as a support. Lattice parameters were obtained by TOPAS refinement considering the analysed material as a single phase. The simulated XRD patterns were obtained from the modelled relaxed structures at different ratios of sulphide modification at 0 K.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
Scanning electron micrographs were recorded in a backscattered electron detection mode using a FEI Magellan 400 XHR FEGSEM microscope equipped with a Bruker Quantax silicon drift X-ray detector (SDD) at a voltage of 5 kV and a probe current of 13 pA. For top-view imaging, as-deposited and annealed Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO samples were attached to a SEM specimen stub using double-sided carbon tape; copper tape was applied to provide electrical contact. For side-view imaging, complete Au|HTM|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO devices were split using a glass cutter and pliers; one of the two pieces was immobilised in a TED PELLA, Inc. cross-sectional side-view holder and coated with a ca. 1 nm layer of iridium to minimise charging effects. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping and spectra were acquired at 15 kV and 1.6 nA. For this analysis, samples were deposited following the standard procedure onto unmodified glass supports to avoid signals from titanium and oxygen. Such samples were then either immobilised directly onto a SEM stub, or the material was scratched off, dispersed in ethanol, drop cast onto a silicon support, dried in an oven (60 °C) and attached to a SEM stub using a double-sided carbon sticky tape.


Ion chromatographic analysis. 
Ion chromatographic analysis was carried out in an isocratic mode (30 mM KOH eluent, 0.38 mL min−1 flow rate) at 30 °C using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Integrion HPIC instrument equipped with a Dionex IonPac AS11-HC-4 μm column, anion self-regenerating suppressor (Dionex ADRS 600 2 mm) operating in auto suppression-recycle mode and Integrion conductivity detector. Sample volume was 10 μL. For analysis, Cs2AgBiBr6 powder was prepared at 280 °C and treated with aqueous 0.01 M KOH. The resulting mixture was filtered to remove insoluble species using a PTFE filter (0.2 μm pore size; PALL Life sciences). Note that AgBr was insoluble under such conditions, which was taken into account when calculating the amount of Br−. A range of standard NaBr solutions (0–300 μM) were also prepared in 0.01 M KOH and filtered prior to analysis. The bromide concentration was calculated as [Br−]/μM = (A/μS min)/(s/μM μS−1 min−1), where A is the area of the peak and s is the slope of the calibration curve.


X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis was performed using an AXIS Nova spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, Inc.) at a pressure of about 1 × 10−8 mbar with a monochromatic Al-Kα X-ray source operating at 180 W (15 kV × 12 mA) and a hemispherical analyser in fixed analyser transmission mode. High-resolution spectra were recorded at a pass energy of 40 eV with an overall spectral resolution of better than 0.9 eV. The accuracy of the quantitative analysis was considered to be 10–15%. For depth profiling experiments, the Ar Gas Cluster Ion Source (GCIS; Kratos Analytical, Inc. Minibeam 6) was operated at a cluster size of Ar 1000+ with an impact energy of 10 keV, equating to average partition energy of 10 eV per atom. For the scanning ion beam, a raster size of 1.75 mm × 1.75 mm was employed. Stable beam current was confirmed prior to performing the depth profile experiments by measuring the sample current on the earthed sample platen.


UV-vis spectroscopy. 
UV-vis spectra were recorded for the freshly prepared Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO samples in transmission and reflectance modes using a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. M-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO substrates were used to obtain background spectra that were subtracted from all absorption data reported in this paper.


Photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA). 
Photoelectron spectroscopy in air measurements were performed on a Riken Kekei AC-2 spectrometer in a power intensity range of 20 to 50 nW. For analysis, 200 nm-thick films of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx coated onto 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm c-TiO2|FTO substrates (the same deposition procedure as for photovoltaic device fabrication) were used.


Current–voltage (J–V). 
Current–voltage data were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter and an Oriel solar simulator equipped with a xenon lamp (100 mW cm−2) and an AM1.5G filter. The light intensity was 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) as calibrated using a silicon reference cell having a KG3 glass filter (PV Measurements, Inc.). No pre-treatment or pre-conditioning procedures were applied.


Incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE). 
Incident photon to current conversion efficiency spectra were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter under the irradiation of a 300 W xenon lamp passing through an Oriel Corner-stone 260¼ m monochromator. The monochromatic photon flux was quantified using a calibrated silicon cell (Peccell Technologies).

Density functional theory calculations
Structure optimisation and total energy calculations were conducted using density functional theory as implemented in the VASP code.44 The plane wave cutoff energy was set to 400 eV. The generalised gradient approximation of the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functional was utilised to describe electron exchange and correlation,45 while the core and valence electronic interactions were calculated using the projector augmented wave potentials.46 A Γ-centre 4 × 4 × 4 k-mesh was employed for sampling the Brillouin zones of all simulation models. The optimised structures were obtained when the total Hellmann–Feynman force on each ion was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. To analyse the decomposition of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx based on the experimentally identified reaction pathway (vide infra), the decomposition free energies (ΔGD) of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx with x = 1/32, 3/32, 5/32, 7/32, 1/4, 1/2 and 1 were calculated at 298 K using ΔGD = ΔHD − TΔS.
The enthalpy contribution ΔHD was obtained as (1)
Terms in eqn (2) represent the total energies of relaxed AgBiS2, Cs2AgBiBr6, CsBr, and Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx unit cells (see Fig. S1† for atomistic structures). The configurational entropy difference ΔS was approximated using a regular solution model as47 (2)where kB is the Boltzmann constant.
Herein, we only consider fully ordered double perovskite structures with a regular arrangement of [AgBr6] and [BiBr6] octahedra, since they are more thermodynamically stable than their disordered counterparts.48
Results and discussion
Deposition of uniform Cs2AgBiBr6 films
High-quality layers of a photoactive material uniformly covering the support are always required for thin-film photovoltaic applications to avoid short-circuiting, provide efficient charge-transfer pathways and to suppress the emergence of trap states that promote non-radiative recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. Some or all of these problems were present in the previously reported solar cells based on bismuth double perovskites solar cells, which consequently exhibited low fill factors (FF) and low short-circuit photocurrent densities (Jsc).9,20,22,25,26,28,30,32,33
The initial aim herein was to develop a simple spin-coating method to deposit uniform Cs2AgBiBr6 films on a comparatively thin mesoporous TiO2 scaffold (∼200 nm) immobilised on FTO substrates pre-modified with a compact titania blocking layer. The use of m-TiO2 supports was expected to facilitate homogenous crystallisation of active layers and enhance the charge transfer efficiency in the final devices. Upon optimisation of the deposition and post-treatment conditions, the following procedure was established. First, a DMSO solution of the CsBr, AgBr, and BiBr3 precursors were pre-heated to 70 °C, which was necessary to maintain all precursors dissolved and to improve the wettability of the substrates. Second, spin-coating should be done in two steps, starting with a low speed (500 rpm in our case) to spread the solution evenly over the substrate and then switching to a faster rotation (2500 rpm in our case) to promote solvent evaporation and formation of a polycrystalline film. Third, the post-annealing step should involve a slow ramping stage (0.5° s−1) before achieving the desired temperature, which presumably provides optimal conditions for the Ostwald ripening and crystal growth processes. Scanning electron microscopic images in Fig. S2† exemplify the importance of the two-step spin-coating and slow heating method. Specifically, the developed optimised procedure provides significant improvements to the material grain size and homogeneity of the film that completely covers the underlying mesoporous titania support.
The optimal precursor concentration was within the 0.4–0.6 M range, and the best results in terms of film homogeneity were always achieved when the nominal concentration of [Cs2AgBiBr6] was 0.55 M (Fig. S3†). Finally, the effects of annealing temperature on the phase composition and film quality were examined using SEM and X-ray diffraction analysis. It was found that complete conversion of the precursors was achieved at the lowest examined temperature of 150 °C (cf. data in Fig. S4 and S5†), but the formation of the pure target cubic Fmm Cs2AgBiBr6 phase requires at least 225 °C (BiOBr and AgBr were detected at lower temperatures) (Fig. S5†). The increased intensity of the (222) reflection at 2θ = 27.4° in XRD patterns of the pure double perovskite when compared to the (220) and (400) peaks at 22.3° and 32.1°, respectively, is different from the tabulated diffraction data (Fig. S5†). This observation implies preferential crystal growth along the specific longitudinal direction (222) under the optimised deposition conditions employed herein. A slightly higher temperature of ≥280 °C was needed to provide uniform coverage of the mesoporous titania scaffold with a virtually pinhole-free layer of large 300–600 nm double perovskite grains (Fig. 1). The mean crystallite size of Cs2AgBiBr6 was comparatively small (ca. 70 nm, as calculated by applying the Scherrer equation to the full width at the half of the maximum for the (222) peak), attesting to the polycrystalline nature of the visualised grains. No further appreciable improvements in terms of crystallinity and morphology were achieved at temperatures beyond 280 °C.
 Fig. 1  Morphology (visualised by top-view SEM) of the Cs2AgBiBr6 films coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO (a) before and (b–f) after annealing at (b) 150, (c) 200, (d) 250, (e) 280 and (f) 300 °C for 10 min (slow heating at a rate of 0.5 °C s−1 was employed in all cases). 
The composition of the Cs2AgBiBr6 films, as obtained under optimised conditions and determined by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis under the SEM conditions in a mapping mode (Fig. S6a†), almost perfectly matched the expected stoichiometry for all elements except bromine (Table S1†). Specifically, the bromine concentration relative to metal cations corresponded to an unrealistic Cs2AgBiBr8 composition confronting the XRD data. At the same time, the EDX/SEM analysis of the powder samples obtained by scratching off the same films produced the correct stoichiometric ratio for all elements including Br (Fig. S7†), indicating that the unexpected EDX results obtained with the thin film samples stem from the uncertain limitations of the method. This was additionally confirmed by ion chromatographic analysis of the solutions derived from dissolving freshly deposited films, which indicated the presence of 5.94 ± 0.01 bromide ions per each silver and bismuth atom (Fig. S8†). Depth-profiling analysis by XPS also demonstrated a relatively uniform distribution of elements throughout the Cs2AgBiBr6 films deposited under optimised conditions (Fig. S9†). Juxtaposition of the high-resolution XPS data obtained from the samples, surface with the binding energies provided in the NIST database confirmed the expected oxidation states of the major elements in the system (Fig. S10a–d†).
Sulphide modification
Introduction of sulphide dianions into the investigated double perovskite was accomplished following the strategy previously developed for the synthesis of silver bismuth sulphoiodides,42viz. by adding a required amount of bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzothiolate) (Bi(S2CAr)3) to the precursor solution. Bi(S2CAr)3 decomposes to form pure bismuth(III) sulphide at temperatures as low as 125 °C, meaning that the conditions of post-annealing employed to produce Cs2AgBiBr6 (optimised temperature 280 °C) were sufficient for the complete decomposition of the arylthiolate ligands to S2− and co-products that are efficiently removed during heating.42,43,49 Addition of red-coloured Bi(S2CAr)3 to a yellow DMSO solution of CsBr, AgBr, and BiBr3 produced corresponding changes in the colour of the precursor mixtures (Fig. S11a†). More interestingly, solids obtained using these modified solutions became progressively darker with the increase in the amount of Bi(S2CAr)3 added, as was best seen for bulk powder samples (Fig. S11b†). In contrast to our previous work,42 the solubility of Bi(S2CAr)3 was not a limiting factor, most probably due to the high temperature of the solution prior to the deposition and possible interaction with the other precursors. Thus, a set of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx materials with a sulphide amount of up to x = 2 was produced.
Probing the obtained S-modified samples by EDX/SEM confirmed the incorporation of sulphur into the films (Fig. S6b and c†). Notwithstanding some limitations with the Br quantification in the films discussed above, EDX mapping analysis demonstrated decreases in the bromine amount upon introduction of sulphur that matched well the expected stoichiometry changes (Fig. S6a–c and Table S1†). It was additionally noted that the surfaces of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films with higher S amounts (x ≥ 1.0) were decorated with poorly conducting particles of irregular shape and approximately 80–100 nm in size (Fig. S6c†). According to EDX, these were richer in sulphur than the other parts of the films. Depth-profiling XPS analysis of the Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 sample again demonstrated a relatively homogeneous distribution of the elements throughout the film and did not reveal any significant changes to the oxidation states of elements upon introduction of sulphide at this level. Analysis of the oxidation state and amount of sulphur by XPS was complicated by the overlap of the S 2s and Cs 4s signals. Nevertheless, juxtaposition of the XPS data in the S 2s spectral region for the Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 and Cs2AgBiBr6 films qualitatively indicated the presence of increased amounts of S in the former (Fig. S10e†).
Modification of Cs2AgBiBr6 polycrystalline films with small amounts of sulphide (x ≤ 0.2) induced some variations in the intensity and positions of XRD peaks, although the peak shifts were minor (Fig. 2). Fitting analysis of the experimental diffraction data confirmed the retention of the cubic Fmm space group crystal geometry with a very slight contraction of the lattice parameters (Table S2†). This observation echoed the results found previously for AgaBibI6−2xSx materials.42 An increase of x to 0.5 and higher values in Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx resulted in the formation of multiphase products and complicated the calculation of the lattice parameters. Specifically, CsBr, AgBiS2 and unknown phase(s) were identified apart from the parent cubic Cs2AgBiBr6-based phase, which was still present (Fig. 2). Major peaks of these phases often overlap, rendering the indexing of the XRD peaks for higher sulphide ratios (x ≥ 0.5) highly challenging.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films (coated onto flat glass supports) with varied sulphide amount: x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), 1.0 (light blue), and 2.0 (tan). Tabulated diffractograms for Cs2AgBiBr6 (black, JCPDS 01-084-8699), CsBr (light purple, JCPDS 00-005-0588) and AgBiS2 (grey, JCPDS 04-016-8878) are provided for reference. 
To interpret the XRD data, theoretical analysis was undertaken. First, diffractograms for relaxed Cs2AgBiBr6 structures where different amounts of bromides were replaced with sulphides were simulated (Fig. S12 and S13†). Theoretically predicted effects of S2−-modification on the diffraction data agreed well with the experimental observations: at low levels of sulphide modification (x < 0.2), cubic Fmm space group double perovskite crystal geometry is retained, while new diffraction peaks are expected to emerge at x ≥ 0.2. Simulations also predicted the expected slight contraction of the crystalline lattice upon anionic substitution of two Br− with S2− (Table S3†), but corresponding diffractograms modelled on the basis of these parameters exhibit negligible differences (e.g. compare data for x = 0 and x = 0.093 in Fig. S13†). Thus, the contraction of the crystalline lattice of Cs2AgBiBr6 upon anionic substitution of Br− with S2− at x < 0.20 would be experimentally inaccessible, which explains the inability to detect this change by conventional XRD analysis (Table S2†).
Further, to understand changes in the XRD profiles at high x, the thermodynamic stability of the Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx phases was assessed by undertaking density functional theory calculations of the free energy of decomposition of the materials at 298 K (ΔGD) for a wide range of x values. Based on the experimental observations (Fig. 2), conversion into AgBiS2, CsBr and parent Cs2AgBiBr6 (eqn (3)) was considered as a major degradation pathway. (3)
Density functional theory calculations suggest that the decomposition free energies for Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx become progressively more negative with an increase in x, indicating the destabilisation of the compound and an increasing probability of spontaneous phase segregation (Fig. 3a and Table S4†). It was also noted that the substitution of two adjacent Br− with S2− is less energetically favourable than the substitution of bromide atoms at opposite edges of [AgBr6] and [BiBr6] octahedra (Fig. 3a and Table S4†). Most probably, this reflects a significant distortion of the octahedral network within the perovskite structure for the adjacent replacement scenario (see relaxed calculated crystal structures in Fig. 3b and S12†). Thus, the undertaken theoretical analysis indicated that the double perovskite structure of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx becomes thermodynamically unstable as high amounts of sulphide are introduced. This explains the experimentally observed phase segregation at x ≥ 0.5 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 3  Theoretical analysis of the thermodynamic stability of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx at 298 K. (a) Decomposition free energy per unit cell (ΔGD) as a function of x for structures where sulphide atoms were introduced by replacing either far-edge (blue) or adjacent edge bromide atoms (red). All lines are guide to the eye. (b) Relaxed crystal structures of Cs2AgBiBr5.5S0.25 generated by replacing far-edge (left) or adjacent edge bromide atoms (right) with S2−. 
Optoelectronic properties
The optoelectronic properties of the sulphide-modified caesium silver bismuth bromide films differed notably from that of the parent double perovskite over the whole x range examined. Unmodified Cs2AgBiBr6 exhibited significant absorption at short wavelengths with a sharp peak at 436 nm (Fig. 4a), matching well the previously reported data.26 Introduction of small fractions of sulphide (x ≤ 0.2) induced an insignificant red shift in the absorption edge, and more importantly, substantially increased the absorption (A) at wavelengths up to ca. 540 nm. However, a further increase in the level of sulphide modification resulted in suppressed A at >400 nm but produced a new peak at around 375 nm (Fig. 4a). This absorption band intensified with higher x, which supports the XRD results on the formation of new phase(s) upon significant sulphide modification of Cs2AgBiBr6 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 4  Optoelectronic properties of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO: (a) UV-vis spectra (main plot) and Tauc plots for the indirect band transition (inset) for x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), and 1.0 (light blue). (b) Dependence of the electronic band structure on the amount of sulphide x (Eg and EVB were obtained from the Tauc plots and PESA data, respectively). Eg values are presented as mean ± one standard deviation derived from the characterisation of at least 3 independent samples of each type. The thickness of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx capping layer was ca. 100 nm for all samples with x < 0.2, but significantly decreased for higher x; m-TiO2 was completely impregnated with Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx for all x (see Fig. 5). 
When analysed following the protocol introduced by Tauc,50 the absorption data for all samples could be acceptably linearised by using the (Ahν)1/2 − hν coordinates only (Fig. 4a inset), attesting to the indirect band transition. The bandgap values derived from extrapolation of the linear parts of these plots to zero gradually decreased upon adding sulphide at x ≤ 0.15 from Eg of 2.37 ± 0.03 eV for the parent Cs2AgBiBr6 down to 2.30 ± 0.02 eV for Cs2AgBiBr5.7S0.15. Corresponding changes in the valence band edge positions (EVB) determined by photoelectron spectroscopy in air were very similar, i.e. EVB slightly upshifted from −5.56 ± 0.02 eV at x = 0 to −5.48 ± 0.03 eV at x = 0.15. Importantly, the EVBvs. x dependence in this range was close to linear, while the change in position of the conduction band edge was minimal (Fig. 4b and S14†). These effects are qualitatively similar to the behaviour found for silver bismuth sulphoiodides before,42 though the magnitude of changes in EVB (and consequently in Eg) observed herein for the bismuth-based double perovskite material was lower. Nevertheless, these results suggest broad applicability of the halide-to-chalcogenide anion replacement for bandgap and light absorption tuning.
The valence band edge and bandgap values for the Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films modified with a higher amount of sulphide (x ≥ 0.5) did not follow the expected trend, most probably due to the formation of new compounds with different properties, as demonstrated by XRD (Fig. 2) and UV-vis (Fig. 4a). PESA data for x = 0.50 also support this conclusion, where an additional signal was recorded at lower energies (Fig. S14†). Interestingly, a similar but less pronounced effect was observed with x = 0.20, which might be indicative of the development of minor admixtures on the surface of the film at this level of sulphide modification as well.
Overall, the sulphide modification was found to affect the optoelectronic properties of Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite substantially. Introduction of low amounts of S2− induced notable changes in the optical absorption and contracted the bandgap by shifting the valence band edge to more positive values. When higher amounts of sulphide were added, the formation of new phases was detected by XRD and corroborated by the absorption and PESA data. Thus, it was anticipated that the most interesting effects of sulphide modification on the photovoltaic properties of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx should be found with low x.
Photovoltaic devices
Solar cells constructed and studied in this work were based on a standard n–i–p architecture supported on FTO glass substrates covered by compact and ca. 200 nm thick mesoporous titania layers. Photoactive Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films were deposited onto a m-TiO2 scaffold providing an electron selective contact, and were coated with a hole extraction layer, which in turn, was covered with a gold (for organic HTMs) or graphite (for inorganic HTMs) counter electrode. As mentioned above, the mesoporous scaffold promoted homogeneous crystallisation of the double perovskite films and was also expected to improve charge extraction by providing a high surface area of the n|i interface.
Data in Fig. 4b demonstrate that the valence band edges of all examined Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx compositions do not exceed −5.4 eV, meaning that the charge transfer between these photovoltaic materials and the commonly employed HTMs is thermodynamically feasible. Indeed, the highest occupied molecular orbital levels (HOMO) for the organic hole transporting materials spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA, P3HT and PTB7 are −5.2, −5.1, −4.8 and −5.1 eV, respectively, while EVB for inorganic HTMs CuI and CuSCN are −5.2 and −5.1 eV, respectively.41,48 All of these compounds were examined herein, but the best results were always obtained with spiro-OMeTAD modified with lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulphon)imide and tert-butylpyridine.
The morphology of the photoactive layer is one critical parameter that substantially affects the performance of a solar cell. The high quality of the unmodified Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite films observed in top-view SEM images (Fig. 1e and 5a) was corroborated by the cross-sectional analysis of the photovoltaic devices, which demonstrated homogeneous filling of the mesoporous scaffold with the photoactive material and formation of a thin, ca. 100 nm, double perovskite capping layer (Fig. 5b). Small amounts of sulphide at the x ≤ 0.10 level of modification did not alter this favourable morphology, but the introduction of more S significantly deteriorated the capping layer (see Fig. 5). Therefore, any changes in the photovoltaic performance can be confidently attributed to the adjusted optoelectronic properties of the photoactive Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx material with x ≤ 0.10, but additional detrimental effects, such as trap-assisted recombination and short-circuiting of ETM and HTM, were expected to affect the efficiency of the solar cells containing more sulphide. In addition to the presence of a substantial amount of pin-holes or voids, poorly conducting impurities were detected on the surface of the films with x ≥ 0.20 (seen as “white” objects in SEM images in Fig. 5a), consistent with the characterisation data presented and discussed above. Rod-shaped crystalline structures without definite grain boundaries emerged for the films at higher concentrations of sulphide (x ≥ 1.0).
 Fig. 5  Effects of sulphide modification on the morphology of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx: (a) top-view SEM images of the Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO supports, and (b) cross-sectional micrographs of the Au (orange)|spiro-OMeTAD (purple)|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx capping layer (yellow)|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2 (light green)|c-TiO2 (teal)|FTO solar cells. Cross-sectional SEM images were coloured manually post-analysis. 
Quantification of the photovoltaic performance of the electrode|HTM|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO devices with an active surface area of 0.16 cm2 was undertaken under simulated irradiation of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2 intensity, AM1.5G spectrum), except for the IPCE measurements, where monochromatic light was applied. The major photovoltaic parameters were extracted from J–V curves (Fig. 6), and the performance was additionally confirmed by the quasi-stabilised potentiostatic measurements at the potential of maximal power output for the selected devices (Table S5†).
 Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance of the Au|spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO solar cells (aperture 0.16 cm2) with x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), and 1.0 (light blue) under 1 sun AM1.5G irradiation (except for the IPCE data): (a) photocurrent density vs. voltage curves (sweep rate 100 mV s−1) recorded in the open-circuit to short-circuit (reverse bias) direction (dotted lines are guides to the eye showing zero J and V); (b) photocurrent (solid) and corresponding PCE (dashed) transients recorded at potentials of maximal power derived from J–V data, viz. at 754 mV for x = 0 (teal) and 702 mV for x = 0.10 (purple); (c) IPCE spectra. 
The best solar cells based on sulphide-free Cs2AgBiBr6 fabricated herein produced a Jsc of 2.1 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 1000 mV with a fill factor (FF) of 64% in reverse scan, corresponding to a power conversion efficiency of 1.4% (Fig. 6a and S15a†). Forward bias sweep provided slightly reduced Voc of ca. 970 mV, but also slightly improved Jsc of 2.2 mA cm−2 and FF of 65%, which altogether resulted in the same PCE of 1.4% (Fig. S14a†). Thus, the insignificant hysteresis observed in J–V curves did not affect the measured performance. The quasi-stabilised power output measurements additionally confirmed the PCE value at the maximal efficiency voltage of 754 mV, which remained stable and even showed small improvement during the measurement (Fig. 6b), which possibly could be due to the additional oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD by air oxygen. The IPCE spectra of the sulphide-free devices demonstrated maximum current conversion below 400 nm (Fig. 5c), consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 4a).
The average power conversion efficiency of 1.3 ± 0.1% achieved herein with the unmodified Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells is nominally inferior to the 1.8 ± 0.4% result reported by Greul et al.30 for the devices with qualitatively similar configuration and structure, though with a significantly less favourable morphology of the photoactive layer. Importantly, the photoactive Cs2AgBiBr6 + m-TiO2 layer was substantially thicker in that study (800 nm) as compared to the cells investigated herein (ca. 400 nm), which most probably provided enhanced light absorption and therefore higher PCE. It is also noted that a very significant “S-shaped” hysteresis was reported by Greul et al.,30 something that the devices based on uniform and thinner Cs2AgBiBr6 layers do not exhibit (Fig. S15a†). Our attempts to reproduce the results reported in ref. 30 were not successful, and the best PCE we were able to obtain when following the procedures reported in that publication was not higher than 0.8%. The use of a thicker m-TiO2 in our procedure for the deposition of Cs2AgBiBr6 films did not allow for any improvements in the performance, indicating the need for further optimisations. A more straightforward comparison of our results is possible with the PCE of ca. 0.9% reported by Pantaler et al.32 who also used m-TiO2 ETM of a comparable thickness (ca. 400 nm) and spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM. The major difference in the photovoltaic results reported in ref. 32 and herein is in the fill factor (ca. 57% vs. 64.0 ± 0.4%, respectively) and Voc (ca. 640 mV vs. 1010 ± 10 mV, respectively), which is attributed to the better quality of the photoactive films achieved under our optimised conditions. In the same work,32 Pantaler et al. have improved the PCE of their solar cells to approximately 1.3% employing PTAA as a HTM. Conversely, our efforts to replace spiro-OMeTAD with PTAA resulted in a worse performance of ca. 1% PCE.
Finally, all major photovoltaic parameters of the Au|spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr6 + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO cells described herein agreed well with those reported by Igbari et al.34 for the Ag|MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr6|c-TiO2|FTO devices (PCE = 1.35 ± 0.06%) based on the vacuum deposited active layer of a similar thickness (ca. 200 nm) and demonstrating a very similar UV-vis absorption spectrum. In the same work,34 Cs2AgBiBr6 layers with significantly enhanced light absorption were obtained via a spin-coating approach, which allowed for a significantly improved power conversion efficiency of 2.48 ± 0.03%; however, reasons for this enhancement remain unclear. Probably, the authors have succeeded in depositing a significantly thicker layer of Cs2AgBiBr6, but unfortunately, no direct experimental data on the thickness of the spin-coated material were provided.
Modification of the Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite photoactive material with sulphur did not deteriorate, and even slightly improved, the fill factor within the whole range of x considered herein (Fig. 6a and Table S5†). This result was unexpected given the high concentration of pores in Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films at x ≥ 0.15, which was anticipated to deteriorate shunt resistance due to short-circuiting. In contrast to FF, a consistent decrease in the Voc with an increase in x was observed, which cannot be attributed to the changes in the optoelectronic properties but is rather associated with other factors induced by the introduction of sulphide, viz. phase impurity (Fig. 2) and deteriorated morphology of the photoactive layer that induces recombination (Fig. 5). At the same time, the dependence of Jsc on x (Fig. 6a and Table S5†) was in excellent agreement with the corresponding alterations in the light absorption properties of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx (Fig. 4). Specifically, photocurrent density notably improved upon modification with small amounts of sulphide, reaching ca. 50% enhancement at x = 0.10–0.15 with respect to the unmodified double perovskite, and gradually decreased when more S was introduced (Fig. 6a and Table S5†). IPCE data were also in good agreement with the light absorption and J–V analysis results (Fig. 3a).
Although the data in Fig. 4 suggest that the solar cells based on Cs2AgBiBr5.7S0.15 should provide the best photocurrent values, the deteriorating morphology of the photoactive layer (Fig. 5) limited improvements in the Jsc for this material. Coupled to the gradually decreasing Voc, the observed trends in the photocurrent density values eventuated in the highest PCEs at x = 0.10. Specifically, the best-performing Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1-based photovoltaic devices exhibited a fill factor of 65% and produced Jsc of 3.2 cm−2 and Voc of 930 mV, which correspond to a transient PCE of 1.9% (Fig. 6a and S15b†). Interestingly, when analysed under quasi-steady-state conditions at 702 mV, the PCE slowly improved during the measurement and achieved a slightly higher value of 2.0% after 10 min (Fig. 6b). Overall, modification of the Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite with a small amount of sulphide allowed for ca. 50% relative improvement in the photovoltaic efficiency. Equally important, these results were highly reproducible as established by testing 15 photovoltaic devices from 3 independent batches (Table S5†).
Considering the limitations of the spiro-OMeTAD HTM, in particular, instability at >80 °C, attempts to construct a Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 solar cell with more stable polymeric (PTAA, P3HT and PTB7) and inorganic (CuI and CuSCN) hole-selective materials were undertaken. The use of PTB7 enabled notable improvement in the short-circuit photocurrent density, but unfortunately, also deteriorated shunt resistance, resulting in low FF, and substantially decreased Voc (Fig. S16 and Table S5†). Hence, the overall PCE was not enhanced as compared to the spiro-OMeTAD-based solar cells. In fact, all polymeric HTMs examined showed significantly lower Voc (except PTAA) and fill factor of the photovoltaic devices as compared to those found with spiro-OMeTAD as a HTM. The lower performance achieved with the inorganic copper(I)-based HTMs was due to the degradation of the photoactive film by the diethylsulphide solvent used to deposit CuI and CuSCN.
The final set of tests focused on the examination of the stability of the solar cells based on the new Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 photoactive material during storage in air, as well as upon heating and exposure to high humidity or continuous irradiation. Firstly, the stability of Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 itself (supported on glass) in air under continuous 1 sun illumination for one hour, at relative humidity of 80% for 5 days, during annealing at 100 °C for one hour and storage for 15 days was confirmed by X-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. 7a). Photovoltaic devices also showed similarly good stability without a significant drop in the performance under a range of conditions (Fig. 7b). The only slight drop in PCE was observed during thermal tests at temperatures above 75 °C, which was interpreted in terms of the deterioration in the conductivity of spiro-OMeTAD due to the evaporation of tert-butylpyridine.51,52
 Fig. 7  Stability of Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 (deposited as thin films on glass) and non-encapsulated solar cells based on this material in air under different conditions: (a) XRD patterns of as-prepared film (red) and samples after keeping at 80% relative humidity at 30 ± 5 °C for 15 days (blue), irradiating with 1 sun illumination for 1 hour (magenta), annealing at 100 °C for 1 hour (dark red), and storage under ambient conditions (relative humidity 20%, 25 ± 2 °C; diffuse light) for 15 days (green); (b) evolution of the power conversion efficiency of the Au|spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO devices (b.1) kept in ambient conditions (relative humidity 20%, 25 ± 2 °C; diffuse light) for 15 days, (b.2) after annealing at different temperatures for 1 hour (dark red), (b.3) during potentiostatic (673 mV) measurement under continuous 1 sun illumination, and (b.4) storing under different RH conditions at 30 ± 5 °C for 1 hour. 
Overall, the Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite modified with small amounts of sulphide is likely to provide sufficiently high stability for the photovoltaic applications. However, significant improvements in power conversion efficiency are still required to bring this material to a level of substantial technological interest. The sulphide-modification strategy was applied herein to support research efforts towards this aim.
Conclusions
An approach to tune the optoelectronic properties of Cs2AgBiBr6 by modification with sulphide has been demonstrated and applied to increase the photovoltaic performance of solar cells based on this double perovskite compound. Solar cells constructed with the new Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 photoactive material are capable of continuous operation with a PCE of 1.9 ± 0.1%, as compared to 1.3 ± 0.1% provided by unmodified Cs2AgBiBr6. The major contribution to the performance enhancement is from the significantly improved photocurrent density. Importantly, the Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 film and the corresponding photovoltaic devices exhibit encouraging stability by retaining the initial PCE while under an impact of various stimuli, including light, moisture, heat, and time.
The new optimised method to produce thin and highly uniform films of the photoactive Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx materials provided reasonable fill factors of at least 64% for all devices examined herein, notwithstanding some deterioration of the morphology induced by the introduction of high amounts of sulphide. The latter also promoted phase segregation, in particular, the emergence of AgBiS2, and CsBr phases in addition to the double perovskite component. This suggests that significantly improved photovoltaic performance can be achieved upon the development of a strategy for the stabilisation of the double perovskite structure with high amounts of sulphide introduced. An equally promising approach to promote the photovoltaic efficiency of the Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx solar cells would be the introduction of procedures for the fabrication of significantly thicker sulphide-modified double perovskite layers. In light of the indirect band transition and long carrier lifetime inherent to these materials, this is seen as a straightforward strategy to improve the photocurrent density. When applied together, the sulphide modification and the deposition of thick light-harvesting layers is anticipated to provide notable improvements in the Jsc, which is currently the most problematic photovoltaic parameter of the Cs2AgBiBr6-based solar cells. If these improvements are achieved and the efficiency is improved to the industrially relevant levels, devices based on caesium silver bismuth sulphobromide double perovskites with a relatively wide bandgap can be considered for the use as top layers in tandem solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy (funded by the Australian Research Council grant LE110100223) and Monash X-ray Platform (funded by Australian Research Council grant LE130100072) for the instrumental support. Funding of this research by the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics (ACAP), the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), and the Australian Research Council through the Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science (CE170100026) and Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (CE140100012) are also greatly appreciated. High-performance computing resources used in this work are supported by Monash University Cluster, the Australian National Computing Infrastructure (NCI), and the Pawsey Supercomputing Centre. Authors also thank Dr Andrew Scully (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Manufacturing, Clayton, Australia) for invaluable discussions and help with the interpretation of the optoelectronic data.
References
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Gratzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, X. Lin, X. Jiao, T. Gengenbach, A. D. Scully, L. Jiang, B. Tan, J. Sun, B. Li, N. Pai, U. Bach, A. N. Simonov and Y.-B. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1880–1889 RSC .
N. R. E. L. [Online], Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed 20/12/2019.
W. Pan, H. Wu, J. Luo, Z. Deng, C. Ge, C. Chen, X. Jiang, W.-J. Yin, G. Niu, L. Zhu, L. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Xie, X. Ke, M. Sui and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 726–732 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Z. Lei, Z.-F. Shi, Y. Li, Z.-Z. Ma, F. Zhang, T.-T. Xu, Y.-T. Tian, D. Wu, X.-J. Li and G.-T. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7982–7988 RSC .
L. Zhou, Y.-F. Xu, B.-X. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, 1703762 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Igbari, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803150 CrossRef .
L. Yin, H. Wu, W. Pan, B. Yang, P. Li, J. Luo, G. Niu and J. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1, 1900491 CrossRef .
A. Abate, Joule, 2017, 1, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, F. Hao, J. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Wei and H. Lin, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 425–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zelewski, J. M. Urban, A. Surrente, D. K. Maude, A. Kuc, L. Schade, R. D. Johnson, M. Dollmann, P. K. Nayak, H. J. Snaith, P. Radaelli, R. Kudrawiec, R. J. Nicholas, P. Plochocka and M. Baranowski, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8350–8356 RSC .
M. G. Ju, J. Dai, L. Ma and X. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8038–8043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518–11549 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Z. Song and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 11, 1803792 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Filip, S. Hillman, A. A. Haghighirad, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2579–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS .
G. Volonakis, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Yang, F. Hong, L. Sun, P. Han, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 5359–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2628–2633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Luo, X. Guo, Z. Huang, H. Ting, W. Sun, X. Zhong, S. Wei, S. Wang, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700759 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Eyre, F. Wei, F. Brivio, A. Sadhanala, S. Sun, W. Li, K. H. L. Zhang, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, P. D. Bristowe, R. H. Friend, A. K. Cheetham and F. Deschler, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800464 CrossRef .
D. Bartesaghi, A. H. Slavney, M. C. Gelvez-Rueda, B. A. Connor, F. C. Grozema, H. I. Karunadasa and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4809–4816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Ravi, N. Singhal and A. Nag, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21666–21675 RSC .
E. Greul, M. L. Petrus, A. Binek, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19972–19981 RSC .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pantaler, K. T. Cho, V. I. E. Queloz, I. García Benito, C. Fettkenhauer, I. Anusca, M. K. Nazeeruddin, D. C. Lupascu and G. Grancini, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1781–1786 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, C. Ran, J. Xi, B. Jiao, W. Zhang, M. Wu, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Igbari, R. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, X.-J. Ma, Q. Wang, K.-L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L.-S. Liao and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2066–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Z. Du, W. Meng, X. Wang, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 8158–8162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ning, F. Wang, B. Wu, J. Lu, Z. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Tao, J. M. Liu, W. Huang, M. Fahlman, L. Hultman, T. Sum and F. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706246 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Wang, W. Pan, W. Yang, B. Zou, J. Tang and Z. Quan, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 15969–15973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sabba, H. K. Mulmudi, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Krishnamoorthy, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1763–1767 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Han, D. Pan, X. Yan, H.-W. Wang, C. Wu, G. Cheng, H. Zhang, S. Yang, B. Li, H. He and J. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2899–2904 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Fuggle, in Narrow-Band Phenomena—Influence of Electrons with Both Band and Localized Character, ed. G. A. Sawatzky and J. W. Allen, Springer,  1988, vol. 184, pp. 163–167 Search PubMed .
C. Lan, S. Zhao, J. Luo and P. Fan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24339–24344 RSC .
N. Pai, J. Lu, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Seeber, A. S. R. Chesman, L. Jiang, D. C. Senevirathna, P. C. Andrews, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and A. N. Simonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803396 Search PubMed .
D. C. Senevirathna, M. V. Werrett, N. Pai, V. L. Blair, L. Spiccia and P. C. Andrews, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 8171–8175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758–1775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. He, T. Liu, N. Zhao, M. Qin, J. Liu, F. Jiang, F. Qin, L. Sun, X. Lu, S. Jin, Z. Xiao, T. Kamiya and Y. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1216–1224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. Zhang and S.-H. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pai, J. Lu, D. C. Senevirathna, A. S. R. Chesman, T. Gengenbach, M. Chatti, U. Bach, P. C. Andrews, L. Spiccia, Y.-B. Cheng and A. N. Simonov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2483–2494 RSC .
J. Tauc, Mater. Res. Bull., 1968, 3, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Huang and T. Wu, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2809–2816 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2219–2230 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images, XRD patterns, XPS, and PESA data; J–V curves; modelled structures; crystallographic and photovoltaic data. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10422dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Structure of Cs2AgBiBr6 and possible crystallographic changes induced by partial substitution of two Br− with S2− (highlighted with dotted circles). Far-edge bromine replacement scenario is shown.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Morphology (visualised by top-view SEM) of the Cs2AgBiBr6 films coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO (a) before and (b–f) after annealing at (b) 150, (c) 200, (d) 250, (e) 280 and (f) 300 °C for 10 min (slow heating at a rate of 0.5 °C s−1 was employed in all cases).	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films (coated onto flat glass supports) with varied sulphide amount: x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), 1.0 (light blue), and 2.0 (tan). Tabulated diffractograms for Cs2AgBiBr6 (black, JCPDS 01-084-8699), CsBr (light purple, JCPDS 00-005-0588) and AgBiS2 (grey, JCPDS 04-016-8878) are provided for reference.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Theoretical analysis of the thermodynamic stability of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx at 298 K. (a) Decomposition free energy per unit cell (ΔGD) as a function of x for structures where sulphide atoms were introduced by replacing either far-edge (blue) or adjacent edge bromide atoms (red). All lines are guide to the eye. (b) Relaxed crystal structures of Cs2AgBiBr5.5S0.25 generated by replacing far-edge (left) or adjacent edge bromide atoms (right) with S2−.	 

 	Fig. 4  Optoelectronic properties of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO: (a) UV-vis spectra (main plot) and Tauc plots for the indirect band transition (inset) for x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), and 1.0 (light blue). (b) Dependence of the electronic band structure on the amount of sulphide x (Eg and EVB were obtained from the Tauc plots and PESA data, respectively). Eg values are presented as mean ± one standard deviation derived from the characterisation of at least 3 independent samples of each type. The thickness of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx capping layer was ca. 100 nm for all samples with x < 0.2, but significantly decreased for higher x; m-TiO2 was completely impregnated with Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx for all x (see Fig. 5).	 

 	Fig. 5  Effects of sulphide modification on the morphology of Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx: (a) top-view SEM images of the Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx films coated onto m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO supports, and (b) cross-sectional micrographs of the Au (orange)|spiro-OMeTAD (purple)|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx capping layer (yellow)|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2 (light green)|c-TiO2 (teal)|FTO solar cells. Cross-sectional SEM images were coloured manually post-analysis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance of the Au|spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr6−2xSx + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO solar cells (aperture 0.16 cm2) with x = 0 (orange), 0.05 (blue), 0.10 (red), 0.15 (green), 0.20 (brown), 0.50 (magenta), and 1.0 (light blue) under 1 sun AM1.5G irradiation (except for the IPCE data): (a) photocurrent density vs. voltage curves (sweep rate 100 mV s−1) recorded in the open-circuit to short-circuit (reverse bias) direction (dotted lines are guides to the eye showing zero J and V); (b) photocurrent (solid) and corresponding PCE (dashed) transients recorded at potentials of maximal power derived from J–V data, viz. at 754 mV for x = 0 (teal) and 702 mV for x = 0.10 (purple); (c) IPCE spectra.	 

 	Fig. 7  Stability of Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 (deposited as thin films on glass) and non-encapsulated solar cells based on this material in air under different conditions: (a) XRD patterns of as-prepared film (red) and samples after keeping at 80% relative humidity at 30 ± 5 °C for 15 days (blue), irradiating with 1 sun illumination for 1 hour (magenta), annealing at 100 °C for 1 hour (dark red), and storage under ambient conditions (relative humidity 20%, 25 ± 2 °C; diffuse light) for 15 days (green); (b) evolution of the power conversion efficiency of the Au|spiro-OMeTAD|Cs2AgBiBr5.8S0.1 + m-TiO2|c-TiO2|FTO devices (b.1) kept in ambient conditions (relative humidity 20%, 25 ± 2 °C; diffuse light) for 15 days, (b.2) after annealing at different temperatures for 1 hour (dark red), (b.3) during potentiostatic (673 mV) measurement under continuous 1 sun illumination, and (b.4) storing under different RH conditions at 30 ± 5 °C for 1 hour.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images, XRD patterns, XPS, and PESA data; J–V curves; modelled structures; crystallographic and photovoltaic data. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10422d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
