Mastering heterostructured colloidal nanocrystal properties for light-emitting diodes and solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC01334A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC01334A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6430-6446Mastering heterostructured colloidal nanocrystal properties for light-emitting diodes and solar cells

        
          
            R. 
            Mastria
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            A. 
            Rizzo
          
          
        
      *b
aDipartimento di Matematica e Fisica “E. De Giorgi”, Università del Salento, Via per Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy
bCNR-Nanotec – Istituto di Nanotecnologia, Polo di Nanotecnologia c/o Campus Ecotekne, via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy. E-mail: aurora.rizzo@nanotec.cnr.it
Received 
      1st April 2016
    , Accepted 23rd May 2016First published on 27th May 2016AbstractSolution-grown colloidal nanocrystal (NC) materials represent ideal candidates for optoelectronic devices, due to the flexibility with which they can be synthesized, the ease with which they can be processed for device-fabrication purposes and, foremost, for their excellent and size-dependent tunable optical properties, such as high photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield, color purity, and broad absorption spectra up to the near infrared. The advent of surfactant-assisted synthesis of thermodynamically stable colloidal solutions of NCs has led to peerless results in terms of uniform size distribution, composition, rational shape-design and the possibility of building heterostructured NCs (HNCs) comprising two or more different materials joined together. By tailoring the composition, shape and size of each component, HNCs with gradually higher levels of complexity have been conceived and realized, which are endowed with outstanding characteristics and optoelectronic properties. In this review, we discuss recent advances in the design of HNCs for efficient light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and photovoltaic (PV) solar cell devices. In particular, we will focus on the materials required to obtain superior optoelectronic quality and efficient devices, as well as their preparation and processing potential and limitations.
R. Mastria
Rosanna Mastria received her MSc degree in Biotechnology in 2012 from the University of Salento (Italy). In the period 2007–2012, she was a research fellow at the National Nanotechnology Laboratory of CNR-INFM, Lecce, Italy, for the synthesis of colloidal heterostructured nanocrystals. She is currently a PhD student in “Bio-molecular Nanotechnologies” at the Department of Mathematics and Physics “Ennio De Giorgi” at the University of Salento. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals and the fabrication of nanocrystal-based photovoltaic devices.
A. Rizzo
Aurora Rizzo received a PhD degree in “Innovative Materials and Technologies” from the National Nanotechnology Laboratory (NNL), Università del Salento, CNR-INFM, Lecce. In the period 2008–2009, she joined the group of Prof. Olle Inganäs at the University of Linköping (Sweden), working on “Bio-Organic Light Emitting Diodes”. She is currently a Researcher at the Nanotechnology Institute of the National Research Council (CNR), Lecce, Italy. Aurora Rizzo's research interests include the design, fabrication and characterization of hybrid inorganic–organic plastic solar cells and optoelectronic devices based on colloidal nanocrystals and hybrid perovskite.
1. Introduction
Surfactant-assisted techniques allow the growth of semiconductor, metal, metal-oxide and alkaline rare-earth NCs with high crystalline quality, which are almost free from defects and have a narrow size distribution.1–3 By a facile modification of the synthetic protocols, NCs with desired properties could be purposely designed for disparate applications, including fast optical switches,4 spintronics,5 transistors,6 magnetic field driven7 and optoelectronic devices,8,9 low-threshold lasers,10 and biological labelling.11,12
In this frame, electrically driven LEDs and solar cells based on colloidally synthesized inorganic semiconductor NCs represent a completely new technology platform for the realization of flat-panel displays/lighting systems and flexible photovoltaic devices at a low cost.13,14 The successful application of NCs in LED and solar-cell technology relies on the versatility of the colloidal synthesis technique and the excellent optical properties of NCs, including tuneable saturated color emission across the UV-visible-near-IR range, high PL quantum yield and long term chemical/optical stability.15 These characteristics have paved the way to the implementation of hybrid devices, in which the low-cost, flexible technology of organic materials is combined with the long operating lifetime of inorganic semiconductor devices.
In order to improve the optoelectronic quality, the NC surface is ameliorated by epitaxially growing a wider band-gap semiconductor shell, forming core/shell HNCs. Such an approach offers the unique opportunity to create novel optoelectronic properties by using semiconductor HNCs, instead of a single-composition material.16,17 Depending on the energy level alignment of the two adjoined materials, different carrier-localization regimes can be obtained. Because in the strong confinement regime, the size and dimensionality dictate the position and the density of energy, a careful design of the composition, size and shape of each component can modify the energy offsets in semiconductor HNCs.
Concerning LEDs, the first demonstration of electroluminescence (EL) using quantum dot (QD) NCs dates back to 1994,18 and the highest reported external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 20.5%19 for red-emitting QD NC-based LEDs is very recent. Non-radiative trap-assisted recombination, Auger annihilation with free carriers, and electric-field-induced PL quenching needs to be contained.20 The challenge is to develop stable NC emitters with a high PL quantum yield in the combined presence of charge carriers and an electric field. In order to reach this target, much progress in engineering HNCs for LED application has been made, allowing passivation of defects and suppression of Auger losses, and obtaining unprecedented color purity.
Notwithstanding the considerable progress with respect to HNCs for LED applications, few reports are focused on solution-phase syntheses of HNCs of high optoelectronic quality for photovoltaic devices.9,21 Significant efforts have been addressed to the engineering of NC solar cell architectures that are mainly based on PbS or PbSe single materials.22 Different structures have been proposed, including Schottky-like diode junctions,23 depletion heterojunctions,24,25 hybrid bulk heterojunction structures,26,27 and QD-sensitized solar cells.28 By analogy with LEDs, solar cells can potentially profit from the heterostructuring strategy, since the reduction of surface trap density is essential to improve both Jsc and Voc values, by mitigating charge carrier recombination losses.26,29 In the last part of the review, we will show how the design of HNCs can be exploited as an interesting and promising opportunity to improve the performance of NC-based solar cells.
2. Carrier localization regimes and optical properties
The quantum confinement effect governs the optical and electronic properties of NCs, resulting in size and shape-dependent characteristics.30,31 As the dimensions of a nanostructure decrease, reaching a value below the exciton Bohr radius, characteristic of each bulk material, the spatial confinement effect induces the quantization of the electronic states and energy band-gap (Fig. 1). Therefore, by changing size, composition, and shape, it is possible to tune the NC optical properties over a wide spectral range; colloidal chemistry methods allow this to be achieved in a cheap, scalable and highly efficient way. Fig. 1(b and c) shows an example of size-dependent PL emission of CdSe/ZnS-based spherical NCs across the visible spectrum.
 Fig. 1  (a) Sketch of the effect of band-gap narrowing by increasing the size of NCs. (b) Suspensions of colloidal CdSe/ZnS core/shell HNCs of different sizes under UV excitation and (c) relative size-dependent emission spectra. 
Colloidal NCs are usually synthesized by the thermal decomposition of precursor materials in a hot reaction media containing surfactant molecules (i.e. fatty acids, fatty amines, alkylphosphonic acid, or trialkylphosphine),32,33 which dynamically overcoat and guide the growth, ensuring stability and dispersion in the most common solvents. As a result, NCs prepared by means of surfactant-assisted colloidal synthesis can be deposited by low-cost solution-based deposition techniques, such as spin-coating, inkjet printing, and roll-to-roll casting, instead of the more expensive and less versatile vacuum-assisted processes.34–36
The resulting nanocrystalline material performance and optoelectronic quality is strongly influenced by the presence of both anionic and cationic unpassivated sites on the surface (dangling bonds), originating from the breakdown of the periodic crystal lattice.37 Inefficient passivation of these sites could lead to material photooxidation and instability under ambient and moist conditions. Furthermore, because surface sites are energetically localized within the NC band-gap, they usually act as charge trapping-states, thus heavily affecting the charge separation and recombination dynamics.29,38,39 Relaxation into such localized surface states diminishes the overlap between the electron and hole wave functions, reducing the probability of radiative recombination events. In addition, surface defects form even deeper energy trap states, leading to strong carrier localization and nonradiative exciton relaxation processes. Therefore, surface chemistry and passivation in these systems assume a pre-eminent role in their successful application in highly efficient optoelectronic devices.
In general, organic ligands provide a good degree of surface passivation, but their efficacy mainly relies on the stability of the ligand itself; thus, it does not ensure a long-term effect.40 Organic ligands, indeed, can be distorted during the processing of NCs into films and actual devices and, in addition, barely passivate both anionic and cationic surface sites simultaneously. Moreover, the long and insulating surfactant molecules hinder efficient charge transport and percolation through NC domains. A powerful way to solve this issue is to overcoat the NC surface with a second inorganic semiconductor material, creating the so-called HNCs. In this case, the inorganic coating effectively enables the passivation of both unsaturated anionic and cationic species. Recent advances in colloidal science have led to the synthesis of HNCs based on several semiconductor materials combined into spherical core/shell quantum dots (QDs), dot-in-rod, rod/rod and branched nanostructures.32 In addition, compared to single-material-based NCs, HNCs allow further degrees of tuning of their physical properties, such as the emission quantum yield and exciton lifetime, which are fundamental parameters for their application in LED and photovoltaic devices. Depending on the energy-level alignment of the two materials, different carrier-localization regimes can be obtained. A fine tuning of the composition, size and shape of each component can modify the energy offsets in semiconductor HNCs, and in turn the electron–hole wave function overlap and material optoelectronic properties.41 Thus, the thoughtful design of HNCs will lead to the desired photophysical and optoelectronic properties, targeting different device applications. The relative energy band offset of HNCs can be engineered through the quantum confinement effect, as well as by varying the relative size and shape of each component; as a result, the same core/shell combination of materials can lead to different regimes of charge localization, depending on the core size or shell thickness.42–45
In general, possible HNC energy band configurations can be classified as type I, quasi-type II, and type II regimes, depending on the relative bulk semiconductor energy levels (Fig. 2).41
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the energy level alignment and carrier localization in type I, quasi-type II and type II HNCs. The red and orange lines indicate the lowest-energy electron and hole wave functions, respectively. 
This scheme represents three ideal cases of charge carrier distribution, valid only for infinite offsets. Whereas for finite offsets, and especially in HNCs, charge localization regimes are not well defined, since the electron and hole wave functions can completely or partially spread throughout the entire HNC. Therefore, the bulk band offset scheme between two or more semiconductors in HNCs should be used merely as a tool to predict in which material the wave function of a given carrier mainly resides.
2.1 HNC type I enclosed energy level alignment
The type I regime is an enclosed alignment, in which the band-gap of one component is located entirely within the gap of the other semiconductor. In this configuration, both charge carriers are confined in the narrower band-gap material. Type I HNCs are usually constructed by growing a shell onto preformed NC cores having a narrower optical band-gap. Several material combinations (CdSe/ZnS,46,47 CdS/ZnS,48 CdSe/CdS,49 InP/ZnS,50 and PbS/CdS51) and synthetic protocols have been developed for highly efficient and stable type I HNCs. The growth of a shell having a wider bandgap offers the advantage of protecting the core from the surrounding environment, thus preserving its optical properties during oxygen exposure, purification or ligand exchange treatments. As an example, the CdSe NC surface is highly susceptible to photooxidation, due to the presence of unpassivated Se sites that can react with oxygen or water molecules. The deleterious effect of surface oxidation causes a broadening and blue shift of the first excitonic peak in the absorption spectrum and a reduction in the optical density.47 By overcoating the CdSe core with a few monolayer-thick ZnS, CdS or ZnSe shells, the density of surface dangling bonds is massively reduced, resulting in an enhanced PL quantum yield and minimized photooxidation.47 PL studies showed that CdSe core-only NCs display a prominent deep-trap emission whose contribution to the whole spectrum is ∼82%; such deep-trap emission is greatly reduced to a contribution of ∼4%, ∼29% and ∼40% for ZnS, CdS and ZnSe shells, respectively.46 As the deep-trap emission decreases, the PL quantum yield increases from ∼4% up to ∼77% in the case of a four-monolayer-thick ZnS shell and up to ∼82% with a multiple shell made of ZnSe and ZnS, (Fig. 3(a–d))46 thus demonstrating that reducing the deep-trap emission is of utmost importance to achieve high PL intensity and saturated color emission.
 Fig. 3  Absorption and emission spectra of CdSe-based core/shell NCs: (a) CdSe/ZnS, (b) CdSe/ZnSe/ZnS, and (c) CdSe/CdS/ZnS nanocrystals and related QE measured relative to rhodamine B in methanol (85% QE). (d) PL spectra of core/shell HNCs at 5 K. In parentheses, the percentage of deep trap emission. (e) Variation of the first exciton absorption peak (solid symbols), the emission maximum (open symbols), and the size of nanocrystals. Error bars represent emission bandwidths (full width at half-maximum). (f) Proposed band-offset for the core/shell structure. Dotted lines illustrate electron and hole wave functions. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Due to these properties, type I HNCs are among the most investigated as efficient emitters for LED devices.52,53
Besides the outstanding emission properties, type I heterostructuring can also lead to an enhancement of the UV-vis absorption. In CdSe/ZnS QD HNCs, the shell growth causes a red shift of the CdSe absorption and emission peaks, resulting from a partial extension of charge carriers into the ZnS shell.47 In CdSe/ZnS HNCs, while the hole wave function remains localized in the CdSe core, the electron wave function slightly spreads into the ZnS shell (Fig. 4(b)),54 reducing the confinement energy and leading to red-shifted absorption. However, beyond a limit value of the shell thickness, the confinement energies remain constant because the electron and hole wave functions cannot spread out any further. In this regime, although the emission properties are unaffected, the shell thickness variation becomes relevant in charge separation/recombination dynamics and charge transfer mechanisms. Transient absorption spectroscopy measurements on a system consisting of anthraquinone molecules, acting as an electron withdrawing material adsorbed onto the surface of CdSe/ZnS HNCs, reveal that both the charge separation and recombination rates decay exponentially as a result of increasing the shell width (Fig. 4).54
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the photoinduced charge separation (kCS) and recombination (kR) processes in CdSe/ZnS core/shell QD-anthraquinone complexes. (b) Band alignments and radial distribution functions for 1S electron and hole levels of CdSe/ZnS core/shell QD with a 13.7 Å CdSe core and 3 monolayers of ZnS shell. Vertical dashed lines indicate CdSe/ZnS and ZnS/organic ligand interfaces. Potentials are relative to the vacuum energy level. (c) Plot of charge separation (open circles) and recombination (open triangles) rates as a function of ZnS shell thickness. The figure also shows the calculated electron (red dashed line) and hole (blue dashed line) densities at the shell surface as a function of shell thickness. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The charge recombination rate decays faster than the separation rate due to the different hole and electron distributions between the core and the shell (Fig. 4). These findings suggest that, in principle, type I HNCs could be exploited to improve the charge separation efficiency of a donor/acceptor PV system by simply varying the shell thickness.
2.2 HNC type II-staggered energy level alignment
The type II arrangement consists of staggered energy-level positioning, in which both the low-energy electron and hole states are in different semiconductors, thus negative and positive carriers are spatially separated and localized in each component material.
Type II band alignment can be achieved with several combinations of materials, such as CdTe/CdSe,55 CdSe/ZnTe,55 CdTe/CdS,56 ZnTe/CdS,57 ZnTe/CdTe,57 and CdS/ZnSe.42 The spatial separation of charge carriers has several implications on the absorption and emission properties, as well as on the charge separation and recombination dynamics of HNCs. Typically, the absorption spectra show new optical bands that appear at lower energies, adding up to the contribution of each single component.58,59 Such bands are related to weak spatially indirect transitions, i.e. charge transfer states, existing at the interface between the two semiconductors, which extend the absorption of the type II HNCs to longer wavelengths. Additionally, the PL and absorption of type II HNCs shift towards lower energies, because the effective energy gap is given by the band offset between the two components, and it is independent of the band-gap of the single core and shell material. Due to this property, type II HNCs can be exploited as promising tunable near-infrared emitters.60 As an example, the emission spectrum of CdTe/CdSe HNCs is peaked at lower energy compared to the corresponding core, which is completely quenched during HNC formation.58 Similar behaviour has also been observed in other type II systems, such as CdS/ZnSe HNCs.42
Besides the effect on the absorption and emission properties, type II band alignment also influences the exciton dynamics (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Absorption (solid lines) and PL (dotted lines) spectra of the CdTe cores and CdTe/CdSe core–shell HNCs with different shell thicknesses. (b) Drawing of photoinduced charge separation and recombination between CdTe core and CdSe shell. (c) Plot of the time-resolved PL decay of CdTe cores and CdTe/CdSe core–shell HNCs with different shell thickness. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2010 The American Physical Society. 
Time-resolved PL emission spectra of CdTe core and CdTe/CdSe HNCs show that PL lifetimes increase as the shell grows. The radiative lifetime gradually increases from 15 ns (CdTe cores) to 38 ns (CdTe/CdSe),10 demonstrating the formation of long-lived electron–hole pairs as a result of better charge separation in the CdTe/CdSe type II system. In addition, the longer life-times indicate the suppression of the non-radiative decay path, obtained through the passivation of surface trap states of the CdTe core by CdSe capping.58,59 These peculiar characteristics, in addition to the extended near-infrared absorption, make type II HNCs suitable in photovoltaic applications, where light harvesting and charge recombination dynamics greatly influence the overall device efficiency.
2.3 HNC quasi-type II
The quasi-type II regime exhibits a finite offset for only one carrier and a zero offset for the opposite one. Such an energy band alignment induces the delocalization of at least one carrier in the whole HNC.
Examples of quasi type II systems are CdS/ZnSe,42 PbSe/CdSe,61 PbSe/PbS,62 and CdSe/CdS.45 It is worthwhile to mention that these systems are very sensitive to quantum confinement effects, since variations in core or shell size can easily determine a transition from quasi-type II to type I or type II, and vice versa. CdSe/CdS HNCs are usually referred as type I, but the small conduction band offset is not enough to distinctly confine electrons to the CdSe core. As a result, the electron wave function is delocalized over the entire HNC, while the hole is confined in the core. The strong dependence between size and electron wave function localization has been investigated in a CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod HNC configuration.63

Fig. 6 clearly shows the size dependence of radiative lifetimes of such HNCs. Dot-in-rod structures with smaller CdSe cores, i.e. a larger bandgap, show a longer exciton lifetime as a consequence of a high degree of electron delocalization.63 Moreover, because of their large valence band offset, holes remain confined to the core, regardless of the core size and band-gap variation.
 Fig. 6  (a) Sketch illustrating the expected variation of conduction band configuration for different CdSe core diameters. (b) Energy variation, ΔE, for the first exciton absorption peak (black squares) between core-only and core/shell structures and the PL lifetime (red triangles) as a function of the core diameter. Time-resolved PL traces are shown in the inset. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Similar behavior has been observed in quasi type II PbSe/PbS HNCs. In this case, the small valence band offset allows the delocalization of the holes over the entire HNCs, whereas electron delocalization strongly depends on the core size (Fig. 7).62
 Fig. 7  (a) Sketch of the PbSe/PbS core/shell structure (top) and a typical energy band diagram for 3.5 nm HNCs (bottom). (b) Calculated radial probability density of electron (blue) and hole (red) wave functions in PbSe/PbS core/shell HNCs. The core and the shell boundary are indicated with vertical dashed and solid lines, respectively. (c) Dependence of the band gap energy on the core radius and shell thickness of PbSe/PbS HNCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
As consequence, in such HNC systems, the optical band-gap varies with the core-to-shell ratio, thus it can be finely tuned by simply increasing/decreasing the shell thickness. Furthermore, as in the case of CdSe/CdS HNCs, time resolved PL measurements reveal that PbSe/PbS HNCs exhibit a long radiative lifetime compared to PbSe core-only NCs.62
3. HNC-based light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
Conventional inorganic semiconductor LEDs are efficient and stable, but are intrinsically point sources, requiring sophisticated processes for their integration in diffuse lighting sources. On the other hand, organic semiconductor technology has opened the possibility of fabricating diffuse and large-area light-emitting panels by low-cost fabrication techniques, albeit with several limitations, such as short lifetimes at the high luminances (>1000 cd m−2) required for lighting applications and different aging times, which vary for diverse luminescent organic compounds. In this frame, the introduction of NC luminophores as active species in LEDs could expedite the development of a facile and low-temperature solution-based route to the assembly of devices via utilization of “inorganic inks” that combine the advantages of low-temperature solution-processable organic compounds and the stable emission color of inorganic semiconductors.
The basic NC LED architecture consists of a stack of one or more NC layers, eventually combined with hole-transporting and/or electron-transporting layers made of organic small molecules, semiconductor polymers, or metal oxide materials (i.e. ZnO), sandwiched between a transparent anode, usually indium tin oxide (ITO) and a metallic cathode (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  (a) Sketch of a general NC-based LED structure and (b) scheme of the basic operating principle. 
When an appropriate voltage (typically between 2 and 10 V) is applied to the device, the injected positive and negative charges migrate within the thin film in the opposite direction toward each other, under the influence of the applied electric field. An excited state hole–electron pair is formed and it can emit light by radiative decay to the ground state, which competes with unwanted nonradiative recombination processes. The structure of the transport layers and the choice of the anode and cathode are designed to maximize the recombination process in the emissive layer.
The performance of LED devices can be characterized by their internal and external quantum efficiency (IQE, EQE), power efficiency or luminous efficacy (lm W−1), and luminous efficiency (cd A−1), sometimes called luminous yield. The internal quantum efficiency is the number of photons generated inside the device per number of injected hole–electron pairs. The EQE is the number of photons released from the device per number of injected hole–electron pairs. The light out-coupling efficiency is determined by the refractive index of the emissive layer, and poor light extraction is one of the most important factors limiting the EQE of NC-based and organic LED devices. The luminous efficacy is the ratio of the lumen output to the input electrical watts and the luminous efficiency measures the light output for a given current.
In NCs, radiative electron/hole recombination occurs on a ns time scale64,65 and competes with other deactivation mechanisms, such as phonon-assisted electron/hole and Auger recombination,66 and charge trapping at defect or dangling-bond surface states.65,67 In particular, Auger recombination dominates the charge carrier dynamics in multiple electron–hole pair excitation regimes, becoming very efficient in quantum-confined NCs under electrically driven excitation, since multiexciton generation can readily occur upon direct charge injection. Consequently, in an actual LED device,68 the majority of NCs are prone to becoming dark and generating more heat than light. One of the most successful strategies to improve the surface quality and properties and to maximize the PL efficiency and, in turn, the LED performance, is the realization of epitaxially grown HNCs arranged in elaborate core/shell architectures.69,70 Indeed, as discussed in the previous paragraph, in NCs with a high surface/volume ratio, the presence of surface states (vacancies, oxidation states, and loss of passivating ligands) that can trap charge can strongly affect the optoelectronic quality of the material. Two design guidelines can be clearly identified for the chemical synthesis of high-quality HNCs that are amenable to LED application: the starting NC core needs to be monodisperse and the materials constituting the HNC should have minimal lattice mismatch.71
3.1 Effect of shell thickness and crystalline phase on hybrid LED efficiency
In spherical NCs (QDs), the thickness of the inorganic shell can be increased (>5 nm) to isolate the excited electron–hole pairs from the surface. This thick shell can be exploited to reduce the single-dot emission intermittency (blinking) phenomenon, strongly suppress non-radiative Auger recombination,72 and increase the PL efficiency of HNCs.73,74 Recently, with the aim of evaluating the effectiveness of this approach for hybrid LED application, a series of spherical CdSe/CdS HNCs with shells of increasing thickness have been synthesized and tested in actual devices.74 The CdS shell varied from 4 up to 16 monolayers, overcoating 3 nm diameter CdSe cores. As expected, the absorption and PL spectra shifted to lower energies as the shell thickness was increased (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (a) A scheme of the simple device architecture comprising the spherical CdSe/CdS HNCs, along with a sketch and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of HNCs. (b) Optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra of CdSe/CdS HNCs with increasing shell thickness: 4, 8, 13 and 16 monolayers. (c) TEM images of HNCs with different shell thicknesses. (d) EQE and maximum luminance vs. CdS shell thickness graph. Inset: An image of the working hybrid LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Although the PL efficiency measured in solution decreases as a result of increasing the shell thickness, the corresponding LED devices with 11–16 monolayers outperform by more than an order of magnitude in EQE and luminance the thinner shell HNCs (4–8 monolayers). The authors attributed such an improvement to several cooperative effects, which are discussed below. Firstly, the optical properties of thick-shell HNCs are mostly independent of the passivating ligand coating; consequently, the PL efficiency is likely to be retained in the films, regardless of the ligand degradation often occurring in the solid state. In addition, the giant shell could reduce the probability of inter-NC energy-transfer processes, which in densely packed NC films can lead to exciton diffusion and transfer to non-emissive trap states. Finally, the effective reduction of Auger recombination can be achieved. Nonetheless, the performance of giant-shell-based LEDs, in terms of EQE and maximum luminance, is not yet comparable to the best reported values for hybrid inorganic–organic QD-LEDs.68,75 These low performances have been ascribed to the spread size distribution and, therefore, an inhomogeneous broadening of the PL spectra and a poor ensemble PL efficiency of the giant core/shell HNCs.73,76
Besides the shell thickness, the design and synthesis of optoelectronic-grade HNCs for highly efficient LEDs requires the optimization of the crystalline quality of the material. To this purpose, Bawendi et al.77 have successfully developed high-quality wurtzite CdSe/CdS core/shell HNCs using cadmium oleate (Cd-oleate) and octanethiol as shell precursors. The low reactivity of octanethiol and the strong carbon–sulfur chemical bond favor a slow continuous shell precursor infusion, keeping a narrow size distribution during shell growth. In addition, due to the small lattice mismatch (3.9%) between core and shell, the resulting QDs maintain the CdSe core crystal structure. The single CdSe/CdS HNC blinking is effectively suppressed with a relatively thin shell (∼2.4 nm, corresponding to 7 monolayers) and the intrinsic ensemble PL is quite high.77
Lately, pure zinc blende CdSe/CdS core/shell HNCs have been synthesized with epitaxially grown shells, with controlled thicknesses from 4 to 16 monolayers. This HNC design allows non-blinking single NC emission and, most importantly, excellent reproducible optical properties at ensemble and PL efficiencies >90%. Zinc-blende QDs were found to be substantially better in comparison to their wurtzite counterparts78 and this, according to theory,79 has been attributed to the more symmetric crystal field of the zinc-blende structure, resulting in a less complex energy level landscape, compared to wurtzite. These zinc-blende HNCs with a shell of 10 monolayers were successfully integrated as active layers in solution-processed red-emitting LEDs, with excellent performance and reproducibility.19 The LED device architecture comprises stacked layers of ITO anode, PEDOT:PSS, poly(N,N9-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N9-bis(phenyl)-benzidine) (poly-TPD, 30 nm), poly(9-vinylcarbazole) (PVK, 5 nm), CdSe–CdS core–shell HNCs (40 nm), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, 6 nm) ZnO nanoparticles (150 nm) and a silver cathode (Fig. 10). The insertion of the thin insulating PMMA polymer between the HNCs and ZnO transporting layers allows optimization of the electron–hole charge balance in the device, modulating the injection in the active layer and preserving the HNC emission properties, which could be degraded by an excess of charge accumulation. Notably, such devices represent the best-performing solution-processed red LED so far, showing a superior external quantum efficiency of 20.5%, low efficiency roll-off and a turn-on voltage of 1.7 V, combined with a good stability of more than 100000 hours at 100 cd m−2.19
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the hybrid LED device stack incorporating pure zinc blende CdSe/CdS core–shell HNCs. (b) TEM cross section of the device stack and (c) flat-band energy level alignment, the deep highest-occupied molecular orbital of PVK facilitating efficient hole injection. The insertion of a thin PMMA layer between ZnO and the HNCs optimizes the charge balance in the device. (d) EL spectrum and an image of the working LED device (inset) showing a saturated red emission. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Following the same concept, zinc blende CdSe cores have been used as seeds to grow onion-like high-quality CdSe/CdS/ZnS HNCs. LED devices with emission in the green and orange portions of the visible spectrum have been successfully demonstrated with current efficiencies of 16.4 cd A−1 for the green and 12 cd A−1 for the orange emission.80
In addition to visible-emitting devices, the core/shell heterostructuring strategy has been used to improve the performance of hybrid infrared LEDs. High-performance shortwave-infrared LEDs have been recently fabricated by using PbS/CdS QDs as emitting species.81 Such devices show a maximum external quantum efficiency of up to 4.3% ± 0.3%, that is, a 50–100 fold improvement compared to devices based only on a PbS core. The turn voltages are lowered by 0.6 ± 0.2 V and per-amp radiant intensities are increased by up to 150 times. The authors proposed that such a performance enhancement is due to the passivation of PbS cores by CdS shells. This further demonstrates the potentiality of HNCs for NC application in LEDs.
3.2 Alloyed-shell growth: improved structural uniformity and LED efficiency
A second approach to limit the undesired Auger process, and consequently to improve the efficiency of HNC-based LEDs, is to reduce the confinement potential by stepwise change in the lattice parameters. This strategy allows improvement of the structural uniformity in shell growth and reduction of the interfacial core/shell defects, which are likely to occur at a steep interface between different materials due to lattice stress.47 The gradual chemical compositional gradient enables effective strain relief, thus improving the optical properties of the resulting HNCs. The composition gradient in the intermediate shell can be adjusted by varying the relative ratios of the precursors.
This concept has been exploited to develop HNC QDs with a graded, alloyed intermediate shell (Cd1−xZnxSe1−ySy) sandwiched between the Cd- and Se-rich core and the Zn- and S-rich outer shell. The amounts of Zn and S are modulated to tune the composition of the intermediate shell, obtaining either a Cd- and S-rich or a Zn- and Se-rich intermediate shell (named as CdS-rich and ZnSe-rich HNCs). Blue, green and red LEDs with high external quantum efficiencies (14.5% for green, 12.0% for red and 10.7% for blue devices) have been reported from this approach, demonstrating that the fine compositional design could have a pre-eminent role in determining the final LED performances, due to its beneficial effect on charge injection, transport and recombination.8
A sketch of the solution-processed device multilayer, incorporating graded ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs, is shown in Fig. 11(a and b); this consists of a conventional sandwiched device architecture with the addition of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-N-(4butylphenyl)diphenylamine) (TFB) and ZnO nanoparticle hole transport and blocking layers, respectively. The ZnO layer allows for efficient electron injection, along with good confinement of holes into the HNC active layer, ensuring high emissive charge recombination efficiency.82 In addition, the ZnO nanoparticles act as a protective barrier to moisture, and could improve the device stability. All the graded HNC-based LEDs are fabricated by solution-processing, amenable to mass production, with low turn-on voltages and saturated pure color emission. Notably, green and red LEDs are quite stable, showing lifetimes of 90000 and 300000 h.8
 Fig. 11  (a) A sketch of the ZnCdS/ZnS HNC-based device. (b) EL spectrum and an image of the blue, green and red-emitting LEDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) A scheme of the energy level diagram, along with an image and a maximum EQE value distribution of the blue-emitting LED based on graded shell ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs. (d) PL and absorption spectra of the and a sketch of the spherical ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The alloyed-shell concept and the same device configuration have recently been exploited for the fabrication of low turn-on-voltage blue-violet LEDs83 (Fig. 11(c and d)). By analogy with organic small molecules, obtaining color-saturated blue emission with a high performance is an open issue in NC-based LEDs. The difficulties reside in the requirement for wide band gaps for pure blue emission, which hinders efficient hole and electron injection in the active layer, as well as the increased energy loss pathways for exciton quenching. For these reasons, the EQE of blue NC-based LEDs is still lower than those of the best performing red and green-emitting ones,80,84–87 with a high turn-on voltage >3 V that lowers the luminous power efficiency and reduces the operational lifetime of the device. High-efficiency blue-violet devices have been realized by using graded shell ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs as active emitting species. Such HNCs show a uniform size distribution and a continuous composition gradient with a small lattice mismatch (<6.8%) between ZnCdS and ZnS.
Most notably, these HNCs are characterized by excellent optical properties, such a high PL quantum yield of about 90% in solution, pure and deep-blue light (peak at 441 nm) with a narrow spectral breadth (∼20 nm), and a non-blinking effect. In order to improve the device efficiency by balancing the electron/hole current, the HNCs undergo a ligand-exchange process that substitutes the long and insulating native oleic acid ligand with the shorter 1-octanethiol. The turn-on voltage (∼2.3 V) is lower than the photon voltage of the HNC optical band gap (hν = 2.8 eV), and is attributed by the authors to the Auger-assisted energy upconversion process trigged by the ZnO nanoparticle layer.52,83 A maximum luminance of L = 5700 cd m−2 is achieved at 5.5 V, with a peak EQE of 6.7% and a current efficiency of 1.3 cd A−1.
The graded shell concept been has successfully applied in onion-like multishell CdSe/CdS/ZnS HNCs. Due to the low lattice mismatch, and consequent high PL efficiency (up to 85%), CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs have led to good performances for LED applications.13,53,88
A similar approach has been used to improve the shell thickness and passivation on Cd-free InP QDs. For LED application, mitigation of environmental concerns related to nanocrystalline materials relies on the replacement of the toxic Cd heavy-metal element.89 InP NCs90 are regarded as the most promising candidates for substitution of Cd-based II–VI compounds. Although considerable progress has been made in the synthesis of InP-based materials, the optoelectronic properties and stability of Cd-based HNCs are still superior. Such a gap is mainly attributed to the difficulties in controlling the reaction process, caused by covalent bonding character, and the difficulties in obtaining an optimum surface passivation. Among the available materials, ZnSe is regarded as the best choice for InP-based NCs, due to its low toxicity and suitable lattice-parameter fitting. However, the lattice mismatch between the InP core and the higher band-gap ZnS shell is still too high, leading to compressive lattice strain, which limits the maximum thicknesses of the shell to <1 nm, reducing the environmental stability of InP HNCs.
Growing a graded ZnSe/ZnS shell in the radial direction has been demonstrated to be a successful strategy to synthesize InP HNCs: the ZnSe alleviates the lattice strain while the ZnS protects the HNCs from degradation. Carrier localization in these HNCs occurs via a quasi-type II regime; while hole wave functions are mostly confined to the InP core phase, electron wave functions are delocalized to the shell phase. Such a strategy allows InP/ZnSeS core/shell QDs to be obtained with high PL yield and stability.91–93 The PL yield is greatly enhanced by shell growth, in which the shell thickness is increased by up to >70% with ∼6 monolayers of ZnSeS (Fig. 12(a and b)). To date, the PL yield of this InP/ZnSeS multishell material has led to the best performing LED based on Cd-free HNC materials.93
 Fig. 12  (a) Energy level diagram and InP/ZnSeS multishell HNC sketch with 1.1 nm and 1.7 nm shell thickness. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of InP core-only (black), InP/ZnSeS HNCs with 1.1 nm (red) and 1.7 nm (green) shell thicknesses. (c) Schematic of the hybrid LED device stack along with a TEM cross section. (d) EL spectra and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
This breakthrough in device performances is achieved by engineering the device architecture for direct charge-carrier injection into an InP/ZnSeS HNC, with the aim of improving the exciton recombination. The direct electron injection within HNCs is obtained by a solution-processed thin conjugated polyelectrolyte layer (poly[(9,9-bis(30-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-ioctylfluorene)]) (PFN); such a PFN layer acts as an interfacial dipole layer between the ZnO electron transport layer and the HNCs, reducing the electron injection barrier and promotes the charge balance within the HNCs (Fig. 12(c)). The resulting LEDs show a record external quantum efficiency of 3.46% and a luminance of 3900 cd m−2, representing a 10-fold increase in device efficiency, compared with previous reports on the same Cd-free material (Fig. 12(d).)
A similar approach to efficiently passivating the surface defects of InP cores, is a “strain-relieved” growth. This method involves synthesizing the InP cores in a Zn-rich environment, zinc carboxylates, which leads to surface stabilization of the InP/ZnS core/shell HNCs.94 The high-quality InP/ZnS HNCs, with a high PL quantum yield of ∼60%, a narrow emission linewidth and good photostability, were obtained. A white-emitting hybrid LED based on the resulting InP/ZnS HNCs has been successfully demonstrated.
It is worth mentioning that other HNCs, albeit with poorer efficiency, have been synthesized for the development of Cd-free LEDs. As an example, Cu-doped InP/ZnS/InP/ZnS shell QDs, with double-band emission,95 multishell HNC InP,96 and ZnSe-based QDs, have been reported.97 All these studies demonstrate that the preparation of efficient and stable Cd-free materials for future implementation in LED technology is feasible.
3.3 Tuning the confinement regime through shape-design of HNCs
Multi-color emission in HNC LEDs is usually obtained by accurate selection and mixing of colloidal NCs with different sizes. To obtain white light, all the three primary colors (red, green and blue) have to be produced simultaneously.14 As an example, white bright emission EL has been obtained from homogenous blends, without phase segregation, between the active ternary of CdSe/ZnS HNC composites and the organic matrix 4,4,N,N-diphenylcarbazole (CBP), exploiting the energy transfer and charge-trapping properties of the different species.98 In another approach, contact printing has been exploited to deposit HNCs on a p-doped organic layer.99 Recently, an alternative HNC “dot-in-bulk” configuration has been proposed to obtain a two-color-emitting material under optical and electrical excitation. In the “dot-in-bulk” HNCs, the quantum-confined CdSe core is surrounded by a 7–9 nm bulk-like CdS shell (Fig. 13).100,101
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of a “dot-in-bulk” HNC and LED device architecture. (b) Dual-color EL of spectra HNC-based LED along with an image of the working device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The emission color of such HNCs is a combination of the core and shell emission bands, and could be modulated by the intensity of the optical excitation (for PL) or the applied bias in electroluminescent devices. Generally, in conventional CdSe/CdS core/shell HNCs, the large valence band offset from one side and the small conduction band offset from the other lead to the formation of a quasi-type II heterojunction. This configuration leads to strong confinement of holes in the core and delocalized electrons over the entire HNCs and, due to the fast hole relaxation,102 emission occurs by radiative recombination of the core exciton. The design of the “dot-in-bulk” HNCs allows the relaxation time of holes in the core to be reduced, so that holes can recombine in the bulk-like CdS shell, resulting in a double-peak emission. The LED device consists of a sandwich-like architecture, in which the HNC layer is solution-deposited onto a PEDOT:PSS hole-injection layer, and the LiF/Al cathode is thermally evaporated. The device shows a dual-color emission, resulting in overall yellow light with a luminance of 2000 cd m−2 and an efficiency of 0.1%, which can be tuned by changing the applied bias.101
Dual emissive peaks under single-excitation wavelength are obtained in a type II core–shell system consisting of Cu-doped CdS core–ZnSe shell NCs, by superposition of core and shell emission.103 The emission is tuned in the wavelength range from visible to near-infrared by simply controlling the doping of CdS and the shell thickness. Such engineered HNCs exhibit characteristic ‘‘zero self-absorption,’’ but also show high quantum yields (56%) and good thermal stability. A white LED lamp was fabricated using a commercial blue LED chip combined with the Cu-doped CdS–ZnSe as color converters.
Alternatively, localization of the electron/hole wave function and PL quantum yield can be tuned by synthesizing elongated core/shell HNCs. Synthetic developments based on the seeded-growth approach104 have yielded CdSe/CdS core/shell-type nanorods with narrow distributions of both lengths and diameters, which additionally emit wavelength-tunable, linearly polarized light with high efficiency. The seeded-growth is performed by co-injecting appropriate precursors and preformed spherical CdSe monodisperse QD seeds in a mixture of hot surfactants suited to the anisotropic growth of CdS HNCs. The presence of the seeds allows bypassing of the homogeneous nucleation, finally obtaining a narrow size distribution. Varying the aspect ratio (rod length/rod diameter) of the nanorod HNCs, the PL quantum yield increases by up to 70–75% (aspect ratio of 3) and decreases to 10% for longer nanorods (aspect ratio 28). In general, for aspect ratios larger than 10, the decrease in PL efficiency can be due to a more delocalized electron wave function, together with an increasing number of surface trap states arising from the CdS region.
Due to their regular shape and permanent dipole moment along the long axis, which is due to the noncentrosymmetric wurtzite lattice structure,105,106 such rod-shaped HNCs are prone to self-assemble into ordered anisotropic solids; this has recently been exploited to realize LEDs with polarized emission (Fig. 14(a and b)).107 Close-packed films of ordered HNC rod arrays are obtained by spreading onto a water surface a drop of colloidal nanorods that, during solvent evaporation, spontaneously self-assemble in an ordered film at the water/air interface. Subsequently, a poly(dimethylsiloxane) PDMS stamp pad is used to fish and transfer by contact printing the close-packed film from the water surface to a previously evaporated organic thin film, which acts as a hole-transporting layer for the actual device. The hybrid LEDs have been fabricated in a multilayer organic/inorganic device architecture, consisting of a thermally evaporated N,N′-bis(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine (α-NPD) hole injection layer doped with 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) and a CBP hole-transporting layer. The HNC rod film acts as the emissive species, and the device is completed with a thermally-evaporated 3-(4-biphenylyl)-4-phenyl-5-t-butylphenyl-1,2,4-triazole (TAZ) hole-blocking layer, a tris(8-hydroxyl-quinoline) aluminum (Alq3) electron-transporting layer, and LiF/Al electrodes.
 Fig. 14  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of nanorod-shaped HNCs arranged in smectic/nematic configurations. (b) Normalized EL spectrum of the nanorod HNC-based LEDs. Inset: EL spectra for two orthogonal directions, showing polarized emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (c) A sketch of the nanorod-based LED, along with a (c) SEM cross section of the device structure and SEM images of the active and transporting layers. (d) PL and EL HNC emission and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In the proposed structure, the hole-injection has been improved by p-doping the α-NPD matrix with the strong electron acceptor, F4-TCNQ. The F4-TCNQ molecules remove electrons from the α-NPD highest-occupied molecular orbital states and hence generate holes. Moreover, the use of TAZ avoids the transfer of holes and excitons into the Alq3 and consequently inhibits emission from this layer. The maximum brightness of 170 cd m−2 was reached at 19 V and 140 mA cm−2, and the maximum current efficiency of 0.24 cd A−1 was reached at 12 V. The electroluminescence spectra for two orthogonal polarization directions, showing polarized light emission, are reported in Fig. 14(a and b), along with scanning electron microscopy images of the HNC rods aligned in either smectic or nematic fashion.
Very recently, similar rod-shaped CdSe/CdS HNCs have been integrated in solution-based-processed bright and efficient red-emitting LEDs.108 The device architecture is depicted in Fig. 14(c and d); the HNC rod films are sandwiched between PEDOT:PSS/PVK hole injection/transporting layers and a polyelectrolytic electron-transporting layer with mobile Br-counteranions. Most notably, the device has a low turn-on voltage of ∼3 V, a high brightness of 1200 cd m−2, and an external quantum efficiency of 6.1% with no roll-off at high current densities, which the authors attribute to the use of the polyelectrolytic electron-transporting layer.
The best performing LEDs based on elongated HNCs have been prepared, starting from double-heterojunction nanorods, consisting of seed CdS nanorods with an average 27.6 nm length and 4.1 nm diameter with CdSe grown at the tips and a ∼0.7 nm ZnSe shell overcoating the CdSe tips (Fig. 15(a)).109,110
 Fig. 15  (a) TEM and SEM images of double heterojunction nanorod HNCs. Inset: An illustration of the CdS nanorods with the ZnSe/CdSe tips. (b) Schematic and TEM cross-section of the hybrid LED structure and (c) energy level alignment. (d) Power efficiency and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The double-heterojunction nanorods form a type II staggered band alignment and are both in contact with one smaller-band-gap material. Such a configuration provides independent control over the electron and hole injection/extraction processes, keeping high PL quantum yields (∼40%) and a narrow linewidth.
Record efficiency has been obtained by integrating such HNCs into an optimized device geometry, which is schematized in Fig. 15(b–d). The hole-transporting layer consists of poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,40-(N-(4-s-butylphenyl))diphenylamine)] (TFB) doped with the strong electron acceptor, F4-TCNQ. The introduction of the F4-TCNQ dopant improves the hole injection/transport and makes the TFB more resistant to solvent for subsequent deposition of the HNC layer. ZnO nanoparticles are used as electron-transporting materials. The band alignment of the different layers in the device stack allows exceptional performances to be obtained, due to optimized carrier injection, minimized energy transfer losses and enhanced light outcoupling. The LEDs based on such double heterojunction nanorod HNCs feature a maximum brightness of 76000 cd m−2, a current efficiency of 27.5 cd A−1, a power efficiency of 34.6 lm W−1 and an external quantum efficiency of 12%.
Another innovative and intriguing approach to obtaining high PL efficiency is the design of quasi-2D colloidal nanoplatelet HNCs. Core/shell CdSe/CdS and CdSe/CdZnS semiconductor atomically thin nanoplatelets have been recently demonstrated.111 Such HNCs have been obtained by starting from CdSe nanoplatelets and growing a shell using a layer-by-layer process, which allows precise control over the shell thickness, resulting in a homogeneous 2 nm-thick shell. Such 2D HNCs have then been tested as active materials in a hybrid LED configuration, in which organic PVK polymer and ZnO layers act as charge transport layers and optical spacers.112 These LEDs show a maximum EQE of 0.63%, coupled with a narrow spectral breadth (25–30 nm), which is characteristic of 2D nanoplatelet HNCs. The present result opens an avenue for the synthesis of a new class of materials with excellent color purity.
4. HNC application in photovoltaic devices
The basic working principle of colloidal NC-based solar cells involves several physical steps: (i) light absorption and electron–hole pair (exciton) generation, (ii) exciton dissociation and (iii) collection of charge carriers at the electrodes (Fig. 16(a and b)).
 Fig. 16  (a) Sketch illustrating the physical steps involved in the generation of a photocurrent: (1) light absorption and exciton generation, (2) exciton diffusion, (3) exciton dissociation at the interface between donor and acceptor materials and (4) collection pf charge carriers at the electrode. (b) Energy band alignment between donor and acceptor materials. (c) Typical J–V curve of a solar cell showing the Voc, Jsc and the FF. Vmax and Jmax represent the voltage and current density at the maximum output power density. 
In general, the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices is the product of three key parameters: the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF), which represents the ratio between the maximum output power density of the device to the product of Voc and Jsc (Fig. 16(c)).
In order to maximize the device efficiency, each of these three factors—Voc, Jsc, and FF—need to be optimized by engineering the device architecture and the photoactive material absorption properties. Using semiconductor NCs as active materials in photovoltaic devices has several advantages compared to their organic semiconductor counterparts. NCs typically exhibit much larger extinction coefficients over a broader spectral range, allowing for better matching of solar radiation and an improved light harvesting capability, which could increase the photocurrent generation when integrated in an actual device. The NC material selection guides the band-gap tuning; as an example, Cd-based NCs can harvest the entire visible spectral range,113 and complementary, smaller band-gap Pb chalcogenide NC materials can be used to cover the infrared region of the solar spectrum.114 However, the use of too-low band-gap materials would lower the Voc and, the cell's power output being the product of Jsc and Voc, the band-gap in the range 1.1–1.4 eV represents a good tradeoff to maximize the device performance.
In this section, we will discuss the recent advances in creating functional HNCs and the possible impact on the development of next-generation low-cost and high-efficiency solar cells.
4.1 Effect of shell thickness on solar cell efficiency and photostability
PbS or PbSe semiconductors are among the most promising materials for NC-based photovoltaic devices, due to their extended absorption spectra in the near-infrared region,114 as well as the possibility of hot carrier extraction115 and multiple exciton generation.116 A successful example of Pb-based HNCs applied to solar cells is type I PbS/CdS QDs. PbS/CdS HNCs have been used as a p-type layer in a p–n heterojunction device, in which the n-type layer consists of colloidal ZnO nanoparticles. In type I HNCs, the shell usually exhibits an energy band gap wider than the core one. The resulting core-to-shell energy band offset confines both charge carriers, electrons and holes, into the core of the HNCs. Although the shell could potentially act as an energy barrier for charge carrier extraction, it plays a fundamental role in obtaining efficient passivation of dangling bonds, thus enhancing material photostability, and potentially improving device performance. It has been reported that by minimizing the shell thickness and thus limiting the barrier effect, charges can still be easily extracted from the core of type I HNCs.117–119 Therefore, through intelligent shell-thickness engineering, NC stability can be greatly enhanced without affecting the charge carrier extraction and transfer dynamics. PbS/CdS QDs are synthesized through a low-temperature cation-exchange method51 that, due to the low working temperature, minimizes the Ostwald ripening effect and leads to a narrow NC size distribution. Moreover, by using the cation-exchange technique, the CdS shell grows at the expense of the PbS core, which decreases in size during shell formation. The reduction in the PbS core diameter impacts on the optoelectronic properties of PbSe/PbS HNCs, leading to a blue shift in the excitonic peak associated with the widening of the PbS core bandgap. Consequently, the Voc value could be positively affected by both the reduction in surface traps and the wider bandgap of PbSe/PbS HNCs. When integrated in the actual devices, PbS/CdS HNCs lead to an increased Voc value of more than 0.2 V, compared to the PbS core only.21,120 The authors demonstrate that the density of the trap state is reduced in the HNCs due to efficient surface passivation through the CdS shell, and the emission decay lifetime is increased, thanks to the suppression of non-radiative recombination channels. It is worth noting that CdS shells that are too thick (>0.1 nm) act as a tunneling barrier to charge transfer between each single HNC, which is detrimental to the device efficiency.21 Further surface treatments on PbS/CdS HNC films, using halide and dithiol ligands, could increase carrier mobility and thus they maximize device performances. Using this approach, the best device performances, including PbS/CdS HNCs, are achieved with a CdS shell thickness of 0.1 nm and by performing a combined surface treatment with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, as bromine source, and ethane dithiol. In this latter case, a PCE of 6.05%, an FF of 0.39, a Voc of 0.65 V and a current density of 23.9 mA cm−2 have been reached (Fig. 17).21 These results demonstrate that the 0.1 nm shell thickness represents an optimal compromise, ensuring at the same time both efficient defect-state passivation and charge extraction.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic energy band alignment of the heterojunction cell and the effect of a CdS shell on the PbS electronic structure. Defect states in the unshelled PbS NCs promote non-radiative recombination, whereas the addition of a CdS shell reduces recombination and thus improves Voc values. (b) Drawing of the device architecture used for performance testing. (c) Current-to-voltage curves of the PbS and PbS/CdS HNC-based devices obtained by performing different ligand exchange treatments on NC films. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, PbS/CdS HNCs have been exploited in quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells as a light harvesting material, in which HNCs are directly absorbed on mesoporous TiO2 instead of conventional dye molecules.121 The CdS shell increases the electron lifetime in the PbS core, leading to an enhancement of the electron diffusion length and charge collection. Also, in sensitized solar cells, a thicker CdS shell acts as an energy barrier to charge injection to the electrodes. The best results have been achieved using a PbS core with a CdS shell of 0.5 nm, a PCE of 1.18%, a Jsc of 5.70 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.47 V and an FF of 0.44, whose values are significantly higher than those obtained with PbS core-only NCs.
The best performing sensitized solar cells have been achieved by including spherical ZnTe/CdSe type II HNCs.122 In particular, by using ZnTe/CdSe HNCs as sensitizers, electrons localized in the CdSe shell are rapidly injected into the TiO2 electrode, while the holes remain located in the ZnTe core. This leads to the creation of a dipole moment that upshifts the conduction band edge of the TiO2. As a result, solar cells sensitized with ZnTe/CdSe HNCs exhibit an improved Voc that can reach a PCE of 6.82%, which is higher than CdSe core-only NC-sensitized solar cells (PCE = 5.33%).122
Recently, quasi-type II PbSe/PbS HNCs have been synthesized and integrated in solar cell devices. In general, in quasi type II HNCs, the conduction or the valence band offset is extremely small, and holes are usually delocalized over the entire core/shell structure, whereas the degree of electron delocalization depends on the size of the HNCs.62 In the particular case of small PbSe/PbS HNCs, both electrons and holes are delocalized over the whole HNC volume. In this case, charge carrier separation, extraction and transport is improved and this is extremely favorable for photovoltaic applications, as has been demonstrated by integrating PbSe/PbS HNCs that showed an higher PCE compared to non-shelled PbSe NCs.9,123
In detail, the increase in the PbS shell thickness resulted in a 95% increment of the Jsc because of the enhanced light harvesting due to the shrinking of the bandgap.9 Furthermore, the PbS shell has the advantage of reducing the charge trap density of the PbSe core, thus leading to an increased FF due to the reduction of trap-assisted recombination phenomena. The reduction of surface traps is also beneficial for the Voc, whose value does not change, despite the band-gap reduction. However, shells thicker than 1 nm lead to a drastic decrease in the overall device efficiency (Fig. 18). This is ascribed to the formation of recombination centers during thick shell growth, which is possibly caused by lattice strain. However, as in the case of PbS/CdS HNCs, further halide treatment is required to provide higher carrier mobility and longer diffusion length in the HNC solar cells, which leads to improvement in the solar cell performance. At present, the best device performance is reached with PbSe/PbS HNCs having a shell of 0.9 nm thick. The best device exhibits a Jsc of 21.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.5 V, an FF of 57% and a PCE of 6.5%.9 Therefore, further efforts are necessary for the development of new synthesis protocols for high-quality thick-shell PbSe/PbS HNCs.
 Fig. 18  PbSe/PbS-based solar cell characteristics (a) variation of Jsc (red circles) with effective band gap energy (orange squares), (b) FF (green triangles) with relative quantum yield (pale green diamonds), (c) Voc, and (d) power conversion efficiency for PbS shell thicknesses of 0.5, 0.9, and 1.3 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Improved charge percolation through shape-design of HNCs
With the aim of improving the charge separation efficiency, type II CdTe/CdSe HNCs with a branched tetrapod shape have been conceived.124 In principle, in type II HNCs, the staggered band alignment leads to ultrafast photoinduced charge separation and increased charge carrier lifetimes. Moreover, type II HNCs could also exhibit better light-harvesting properties due to the contribution from both the two material components and from charge-transfer states that exist at the interface between the two semiconductors. Such features make type II HNCs an appealing material for photovoltaic applications.
Despite the efficient charge separation at the interface between CdTe and CdSe, adding up to the advantageous tetrapod shape of the HNCs, the performance of such devices is limited by inefficient charge extraction from the HNCs and by the lack of a continuous charge percolation path to the electrode. To overcome this problem, type II CdSe/CdTe tetrapods have been used in a double-layer photovoltaic device structure, together with a 40 nm thick C60 layer. The C60 layer allows efficient electron extraction from the CdSe core, due to its favorable energy level alignment with CdSe, besides being characterized by a high electron mobility. Such a hybrid device leads to a PCE of 0.6%, a Jsc of 3.15 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.43 V and a FF of 0.46.125
 Fig. 19  (a) Photovoltaic device configuration including PCDTBT:CdSe/CdTe tetrapod-rGO nanocomposite. (b) Schematic energy level alignment of the device. J–V curves of the devices with (c) different photoactive layer and (d) PCDTBT:tetrapod-rGO in various blend ratios. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Further improvements in type II CdSe/CdTe-tetrapod-based solar cells have been reached by linking tetrapods with conductive reduced graphene oxide sheets (rGO) before blending them with poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] (PCDTBT) (Fig. 19).126 In such hybrid systems, the simultaneous presence of rGO and PCDTBT ensure efficient electron/hole separation and transport, leading to an enhancement of the overall device performances. Devices including a PCDTBT:tetrapods-rGO blend are characterized by an high Voc of 0.82 V, a Jsc of 6.04 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.5, which yields a PCE of 3.3%, which is significantly higher than reported results without rGO. The high photovoltaic performances obtained with the PCDTBT:tetrapod-rGO nanocomposite demonstrate that, for efficient exploitation of type II HNCs, electron and hole extraction/transporting materials are essential.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Surfactant-assisted colloidal synthesis of epitaxially grown HNCs opens the route for the fabrication of efficient and innovative LEDs and solar cell devices.
Recent advances in the field have led to the realization of HNCs based on several semiconductor materials combined into complex onion-like core/shell, dot-in-rod, and branched structures. In addition, heterostructuring framework allows modulation of the hole and electron wave functions, thus modifying the carrier confinement regime. Such an approach offers the undoubted advantage of the ability to construct various shapes, combinations of semiconductors, and graded or net core/shell interfaces, finally providing facile and unprecedented control over the photophysical and optoelectronic properties of HNCs.
Concerning LED application, a nano-heterostructuring strategy has led to the demonstration of highly efficient and multicolor devices. Proper shell thickness optimization has been demonstrated to reduce the blinking phenomenon and strongly suppress non-radiative Auger recombination, thus increasing the PL efficiency of HNCs.
Besides the shell thickness, highly efficient LEDs require optimization of the crystalline quality of the two adjoined materials. The best performing solution-processed red LED, showing a superior external quantum efficiency of 20.5%, a low efficiency roll-off and a turn-on voltage of 1.7 V, combined with a good stability of more than 100000 hours at 100 cd m−2, has been obtained from pure zinc blende CdSe/CdS core/shell HNCs. This design allows non-blinking single NC emission and, most importantly, excellent reproducible optical properties at ensemble and PL efficiencies >90%.
In parallel, graded-shell growth has been demonstrated to improve structural uniformity in the HNCs, resulting in hybrid LED efficiency. The gradual chemical compositional gradient enables effective strain relief, thus improving the optical properties of the material. Multicolor LEDs with high external quantum efficiencies (14.5% for green, 12.0% for red and 10.7% for blue devices) have been reported by this approach, demonstrating that the fine compositional design could have a pre-eminent role in determining the final LED performances. Growing a graded ZnSe/ZnS shell in the radial direction has been demonstrated to be a successful strategy to synthesize Cd-free InP/ZnSe, while alleviating the lattice strain and protecting the HNCs from degradation.
The quantum confinement regime could be also tuned through shape-design of HNCs. The dot-in-bulk, dot-in-a-rod and double-heterojunction nanorods are examples of shape-design for hybrid LED device purposes. These approaches allow either white emission or polarized EL, and represent an additional opportunity to improve the PL efficiency.
The effect of shell thickness has also been studied to improve solar cell efficiency and photostability. One of the most limiting factors of NC-based solar cells is represented by charge-trapping surface states, which have a deleterious effect, mainly on Voc values. In PbS/CdS HNCs, the efficient surface passivation of PbS NCs through the CdS shell leads to an increased Voc compared to the PbS core only. The best device performances are achieved with a CdS shell thickness of 0.1 nm, giving a PCE of 6.05%, an FF of 0.39, a Voc of 0.65 V and a current density of 23.9 mA cm−2. PbS/CdS HNCs have been also exploited in QD-sensitized solar cells as light-absorbing materials. The CdS shell leads to enhancement of the electron diffusion length and charge collection. Moreover, the shell thickness of quasi type II and type II HNCs can be opportunely tailored to improve carrier separation and extraction for high-efficiency solar cells. Solar cells, including quasi type II PbSe/PbS HNCs, have reached the highest performances obtained with HNCs. The best device exhibits a Jsc of 21.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.5 V, an FF of 57% and a PCE of 6.5%.9 In addition, type II ZnTe/CdSe has been efficiently used in sensitized solar cells, resulting in the best PCE of 6.82%.
With the aim of improving the charge separation efficiency, type II CdTe/CdSe HNCs with a branched tetrapod shape have been conceived; however, the performance of such devices is limited by inefficient charge extraction from the HNCs and by the lack of a continuous charge percolation path to the electrodes. Therefore, further modifications are required to enhance solar cell efficiency, such as additional layers or a ternary hybrid blend.
Despite the progress in recent years, there is still room to improve the performance of HNC-based solar cell devices in order to compete with other new-generation PV technologies.22,127 Following the evolution of HNCs for LEDs, PV performance enhancement must involve the design of HNCs with higher levels of complexity, in parallel with the optimization of the solar cell device architecture.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge SIR Two-Dimensional Colloidal Metal Dichalcogenides based Energy-Conversion Photovoltaics (2D ECO), Bando SIR (Scientific Independence of young Researchers) 2014 MIUR Decreto Direttoriale 23 gennaio 2014 no. 197 (project number RBSI14FYVD, CUP: B82I15000950008) for funding.
Notes and references
Z. Hens, Science, 2015, 348, 1211–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Hendricks, M. P. Campos, G. T. Cleveland, I. Jen-La Plante and J. S. Owen, Science, 2015, 348, 1226–1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Xu, Y. Du, X. Qin, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, S. Wen, W. Ren, E. M. Goldys, J. A. Piper, S. Dou, X. Liu and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. I. Saari, M. M. Krause, B. R. Walsh and P. Kambhampati, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 722–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Lekshmi, R. Buonsanti, C. Nobile, R. Rinaldi, P. D. Cozzoli and G. Maruccio, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1731–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang, D. S. Dolzhnikov, W. Liu, S. Nam, M. Shim and D. V. Talapin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6309–6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mehdaoui, V. Connord, J. Carrey, P. F. Fazzini, M. Respaud and B. Chaudret, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3241–3248 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259–266 CAS .
H. Choi, J. H. Song, J. Jang, X. D. Mai, S. Kim and S. Jeong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17473–17481 RSC .
C. Grivas, C. Li, P. Andreakou, P. Wang, M. Ding, G. Brambilla, L. Manna and P. Lagoudakis, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2376 Search PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. X. Lim, Nature, 2016, 531, 26–28 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, S. J. Lee, J. Chae, J. W. Kim, D. H. Kim, J.-Y. Kwon, G. Amaratunga, S. Y. Lee, B. L. Choi, Y. Kuk, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, C. Han, H. Kang, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. Lee, N. Myoung, Y. Sang-Youp and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10941–10949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nurmikko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1001–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3733–3734 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449–493 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bozyigit, O. Yarema and V. Wood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3024–3029 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. J. Neo, C. Cheng, S. D. Stranks, S. M. Fairclough, J. S. Kim, A. I. Kirkland, J. M. Smith, H. J. Snaith, H. E. Assender and A. A. R. Watt, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4004–4013 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 994–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, X. Wang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1398–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374–3380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mastria, A. Rizzo, C. Giansante, D. Ballarini, L. Dominici, O. Inganäs and G. Gigli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14972–14979 CAS .
C. Giansante, R. Mastria, G. Lerario, L. Moretti, I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella, G. Lanzani, S. Carallo, M. Esposito, M. Biasiucci, A. Rizzo and G. Gigli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giménez, I. Mora-Seró, L. Macor, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, R. Gómez, L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295204 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nagpal and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 486 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 326–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195–1208 RSC .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fischer, L. Rollny, J. Pan, G. H. Carey, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, J. Y. Kim, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5742–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. Chen, M. S. Bradley, J. E. Halpert, M. C. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. Kramer, J. C. Minor, G. Moreno-Bautista, L. Rollny, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. M. Thon, G. H. Carey, K. W. Chou, D. Zhitomirsky, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 116–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Gómez-Campos and M. Califano, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4508–4517 CrossRef PubMed .
A. a. Bakulin, S. Neutzner, H. J. Bakker, L. Ottaviani, D. Barakel and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8771–8779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Aldana, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8844–8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhu and T. Q. Lian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9406–9418 CAS .
S. A. Ivanov, A. Piryatinski, J. Nanda, S. Tretiak, K. R. Zavadil, W. O. Wallace, D. Werder and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11708–11719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chuang, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2530–2535 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Donegá, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1512–1546 RSC .
H. Eshet, M. Grünwald and E. Rabani, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5880–5885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lim, B. Chon, T. Joo and S. K. Shin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1744–1747 CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Steckel, J. P. Zimmer, S. Coe-Sullivan, N. E. Stott, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2154–2158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 7863, 7019–7029 CrossRef .
L. Li and P. Reiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11588–11589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Neo, N. Venkatram, G. S. Li, W. S. Chin and W. Ji, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18037–18044 CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, W.-J. Joo, E. Jang, T.-H. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-J. Kwon, J. Y. Han, B.-K. Kim, B. L. Choi and J. M. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038–15045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H.-J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466–11467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dorfs, T. Franzi, R. Osovsky, M. Brumer, E. Lifshitz, T. A. Klar and A. Eychmüller, Small, 2008, 4, 1148–1152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xie, X. Zhong and T. Basche, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2741–2745 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, H. Zhong and G. D. Scholes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 1–4 Search PubMed .
P. T. K. Chin, C. D. M. Donegá, S. S. Van Bavel, S. C. J. Meskers, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14880–14886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, Y. T. Lim, E. G. Soltesz, A. M. De Grand, J. Lee, A. Nakayama, J. A. Parker, T. Mihaljevic, R. G. Laurence, D. M. Dor, L. H. Cohn, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Swart, Z. Sun, D. Vanmaekelbergh and P. Liljeroth, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1931–1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yanover, R. Vaxenburg, J. Tilchin, A. Rubin-Brusilovski, G. Zaiats, R. K. Čapek, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17001–17009 CAS .
G. Rainò, T. Stoferle, I. Moreels, R. Gomes, J. S. Kamil, Z. Hens and R. F. Mahrt, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4031–4036 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jones, J. Nedeljkovic, R. J. Ellingson, A. J. Nozik and G. Rumbles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11346–11352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jones, S. S. Lo and G. D. Scholes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 3011–3016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 13173–13179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Califano and F. M. Gómez-Campos, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2047–2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Wood, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. B. Katari, V. L. Colvin and a. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4109–4117 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 822–828 CrossRef .
J. Cui, A. P. Beyler, I. Coropceanu, L. Cleary, T. R. Avila, Y. Chen, J. M. Cordero, S. L. Heathcote, D. K. Harris, O. Chen, J. Cao and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 289–296 CrossRef PubMed .
F. García-Santamaría, S. Brovelli, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 687–693 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Mahler, P. Spinicelli, S. Buil, X. Quelin, J.-P. Hermier and B. Dubertret, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 659–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Pal, Y. Ghosh, S. Brovelli, R. Laocharoensuk, V. I. Klimov, J. A. Hollingsworth and H. Htoon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 331–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. E. Halpert, J.-M. Caruge, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3581–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chen, J. Zhao, V.
P. Chauhan, J. Cui, C. Wong, D. K. Harris, H. Wei, H.-S. Han, D. Fukumura, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 445–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nan, Y. Niu, H. Qin, F. Cui, Y. Yang, R. Lai, W. Lin and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19685–19693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. Norris and M. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843–4856 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, Q. Lin, H. Wang, L. Qian, Y. Yang, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, Y. Zheng and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12011–12016 CAS .
G. J. Supran, K. W. Song, G. W. Hwang, R. E. Correa, J. Scherer, E. A. Dauler, Y. Shirasaki, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1211–1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, S. Wang, H. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, Y. Yang, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, Y. Zheng and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4260–4265 CAS .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Steckel, P. Snee, S. Coe-Sullivan, J. P. Zimmer, J. E. Halpert, P. Anikeeva, L.-A. Kim, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5796–5799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, J. H. Lee, W. S. Song, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. H. Lee and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7295–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, S. Jun, E. Jang, H. Baik, H. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. V. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 1012, 9, 1012–1057 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, T. Kim, M. Kang, S. K. Kwak, T. W. Yoo, L. S. Park, I. Yang, S. Hwang, J. E. Lee, S. K. Kim and S. W. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3804–3809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, M. K. Nam, J. Jung, C. Lee, K. Char and S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4459–4463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Divayana, D. Zhao, K. Swee Leck, F. Lu, S. Tiam Tan, A. Putu Abiyasa, Y. Zhao, H. Volkan Demir and X. Wei Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 233110 CrossRef .
J. Lim, M. Park, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, S. Lee, C. Lee and K. Char, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9019–9026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Zhao, K. S. Leck, S. T. Tan, Y. X. Tang, J. Zhao, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4180–4185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Li, K. Huang, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, R. Xie, M.-Y. Han, Y. Wang and W. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1405–1411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, C. Ippen, T. Greco, J. Lee, M. S. Oh, C. J. Han, A. Wedel and J. Kim, Opt. Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 1436 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, H. Shen, S. Zang, Q. Lin, H. Wang, L. Qian, J. Niu and L. Song Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2951–2959 RSC .
Y. Li, A. Rizzo, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rizzo, M. Mazzeo, M. Biasiucci, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Small, 2008, 4, 2143–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brovelli, W. K. Bae, F. Meinardi, B. Santiago, M. Lorenzon, C. Galland and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brovelli, W. K. Bae, C. Galland, U. Giovanella, F. F. Meinardi and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2013, 14, 486–494 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, F. Tassone, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3142–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Luan, K. Huang, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, R. Xie and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3614–3622 RSC .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. Della Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Baker, A. Widmer-Cooper, M. F. Toney, P. L. Geissler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 097402 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rizzo, C. Nobile, M. Mazzeo, M. De Giorgi, A. Fiore, L. Carbone, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1506–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castelli, F. Meinardi, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, V. Pinchetti, M. Lorenzon, L. Manna, I. Moreels, U. Giovanella and S. Brovelli, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5455–5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas and M. Shim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Nam, N. Oh, Y. Zhai and M. Shim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 878–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mahler, B. Nadal, C. Bouet, G. Patriarche and B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18591–18598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Zhuoying Chen, B. Nadal, B. Mahler and H. Aubin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 295–302 CrossRef .
C. A. Leatherdale, W. K. Woo, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7619–7622 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dworak, V. V. Matylitsky, V. V. Breus, M. Braun and T. Basch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 155, 3949–3955 Search PubMed .
H. Zhao, H. Liang, B. A. Gonfa, M. Chaker, T. Ozaki, P. Tijssen, F. Vidal and D. Ma, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 215–225 RSC .
H. Zhao, Z. Fan, H. Liang, G. S. Selopal, B. A. Gonfa, L. Jin, A. Soudi, D. Cui, F. Enrichi, M. M. Natile, I. Concina, D. Ma, A. O. Govorov, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, Nanoscale, 2014, 7004–7011 RSC .
M. J. Speirs, D. M. Balazs, H.-H. Fang, L.-H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1450–1457 CAS .
L.-H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 736–742 RSC .
S. Jiao, Q. Shen, I. Mora-Sero, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, Y. Kuga, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 908–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, D. Yanover, R. K. Čapek, R. Vaxenburg, Z. Xue, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Lifshitz and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2736–2741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6538–6543 CAS .
Y. Li, R. Mastria, A. Fiore, C. Nobile, L. Yin, M. Biasiucci, G. Cheng, A. M. Cucolo, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4461–4466 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Tong, N. Mishra, C. L. Su, V. Nalla, W. Wu, W. Ji, J. Zhang, Y. Chan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1904–1910 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

R. Mastria
	Rosanna Mastria received her MSc degree in Biotechnology in 2012 from the University of Salento (Italy). In the period 2007–2012, she was a research fellow at the National Nanotechnology Laboratory of CNR-INFM, Lecce, Italy, for the synthesis of colloidal heterostructured nanocrystals. She is currently a PhD student in “Bio-molecular Nanotechnologies” at the Department of Mathematics and Physics “Ennio De Giorgi” at the University of Salento. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals and the fabrication of nanocrystal-based photovoltaic devices.

A. Rizzo
	Aurora Rizzo received a PhD degree in “Innovative Materials and Technologies” from the National Nanotechnology Laboratory (NNL), Università del Salento, CNR-INFM, Lecce. In the period 2008–2009, she joined the group of Prof. Olle Inganäs at the University of Linköping (Sweden), working on “Bio-Organic Light Emitting Diodes”. She is currently a Researcher at the Nanotechnology Institute of the National Research Council (CNR), Lecce, Italy. Aurora Rizzo's research interests include the design, fabrication and characterization of hybrid inorganic–organic plastic solar cells and optoelectronic devices based on colloidal nanocrystals and hybrid perovskite.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Sketch of the effect of band-gap narrowing by increasing the size of NCs. (b) Suspensions of colloidal CdSe/ZnS core/shell HNCs of different sizes under UV excitation and (c) relative size-dependent emission spectra.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the energy level alignment and carrier localization in type I, quasi-type II and type II HNCs. The red and orange lines indicate the lowest-energy electron and hole wave functions, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorption and emission spectra of CdSe-based core/shell NCs: (a) CdSe/ZnS, (b) CdSe/ZnSe/ZnS, and (c) CdSe/CdS/ZnS nanocrystals and related QE measured relative to rhodamine B in methanol (85% QE). (d) PL spectra of core/shell HNCs at 5 K. In parentheses, the percentage of deep trap emission. (e) Variation of the first exciton absorption peak (solid symbols), the emission maximum (open symbols), and the size of nanocrystals. Error bars represent emission bandwidths (full width at half-maximum). (f) Proposed band-offset for the core/shell structure. Dotted lines illustrate electron and hole wave functions. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the photoinduced charge separation (kCS) and recombination (kR) processes in CdSe/ZnS core/shell QD-anthraquinone complexes. (b) Band alignments and radial distribution functions for 1S electron and hole levels of CdSe/ZnS core/shell QD with a 13.7 Å CdSe core and 3 monolayers of ZnS shell. Vertical dashed lines indicate CdSe/ZnS and ZnS/organic ligand interfaces. Potentials are relative to the vacuum energy level. (c) Plot of charge separation (open circles) and recombination (open triangles) rates as a function of ZnS shell thickness. The figure also shows the calculated electron (red dashed line) and hole (blue dashed line) densities at the shell surface as a function of shell thickness. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Absorption (solid lines) and PL (dotted lines) spectra of the CdTe cores and CdTe/CdSe core–shell HNCs with different shell thicknesses. (b) Drawing of photoinduced charge separation and recombination between CdTe core and CdSe shell. (c) Plot of the time-resolved PL decay of CdTe cores and CdTe/CdSe core–shell HNCs with different shell thickness. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2010 The American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Sketch illustrating the expected variation of conduction band configuration for different CdSe core diameters. (b) Energy variation, ΔE, for the first exciton absorption peak (black squares) between core-only and core/shell structures and the PL lifetime (red triangles) as a function of the core diameter. Time-resolved PL traces are shown in the inset. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Sketch of the PbSe/PbS core/shell structure (top) and a typical energy band diagram for 3.5 nm HNCs (bottom). (b) Calculated radial probability density of electron (blue) and hole (red) wave functions in PbSe/PbS core/shell HNCs. The core and the shell boundary are indicated with vertical dashed and solid lines, respectively. (c) Dependence of the band gap energy on the core radius and shell thickness of PbSe/PbS HNCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Sketch of a general NC-based LED structure and (b) scheme of the basic operating principle.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A scheme of the simple device architecture comprising the spherical CdSe/CdS HNCs, along with a sketch and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of HNCs. (b) Optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra of CdSe/CdS HNCs with increasing shell thickness: 4, 8, 13 and 16 monolayers. (c) TEM images of HNCs with different shell thicknesses. (d) EQE and maximum luminance vs. CdS shell thickness graph. Inset: An image of the working hybrid LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the hybrid LED device stack incorporating pure zinc blende CdSe/CdS core–shell HNCs. (b) TEM cross section of the device stack and (c) flat-band energy level alignment, the deep highest-occupied molecular orbital of PVK facilitating efficient hole injection. The insertion of a thin PMMA layer between ZnO and the HNCs optimizes the charge balance in the device. (d) EL spectrum and an image of the working LED device (inset) showing a saturated red emission. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A sketch of the ZnCdS/ZnS HNC-based device. (b) EL spectrum and an image of the blue, green and red-emitting LEDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) A scheme of the energy level diagram, along with an image and a maximum EQE value distribution of the blue-emitting LED based on graded shell ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs. (d) PL and absorption spectra of the and a sketch of the spherical ZnCdS/ZnS HNCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Energy level diagram and InP/ZnSeS multishell HNC sketch with 1.1 nm and 1.7 nm shell thickness. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of InP core-only (black), InP/ZnSeS HNCs with 1.1 nm (red) and 1.7 nm (green) shell thicknesses. (c) Schematic of the hybrid LED device stack along with a TEM cross section. (d) EL spectra and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of a “dot-in-bulk” HNC and LED device architecture. (b) Dual-color EL of spectra HNC-based LED along with an image of the working device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of nanorod-shaped HNCs arranged in smectic/nematic configurations. (b) Normalized EL spectrum of the nanorod HNC-based LEDs. Inset: EL spectra for two orthogonal directions, showing polarized emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (c) A sketch of the nanorod-based LED, along with a (c) SEM cross section of the device structure and SEM images of the active and transporting layers. (d) PL and EL HNC emission and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) TEM and SEM images of double heterojunction nanorod HNCs. Inset: An illustration of the CdS nanorods with the ZnSe/CdSe tips. (b) Schematic and TEM cross-section of the hybrid LED structure and (c) energy level alignment. (d) Power efficiency and an image of the working LED device. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Sketch illustrating the physical steps involved in the generation of a photocurrent: (1) light absorption and exciton generation, (2) exciton diffusion, (3) exciton dissociation at the interface between donor and acceptor materials and (4) collection pf charge carriers at the electrode. (b) Energy band alignment between donor and acceptor materials. (c) Typical J–V curve of a solar cell showing the Voc, Jsc and the FF. Vmax and Jmax represent the voltage and current density at the maximum output power density.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic energy band alignment of the heterojunction cell and the effect of a CdS shell on the PbS electronic structure. Defect states in the unshelled PbS NCs promote non-radiative recombination, whereas the addition of a CdS shell reduces recombination and thus improves Voc values. (b) Drawing of the device architecture used for performance testing. (c) Current-to-voltage curves of the PbS and PbS/CdS HNC-based devices obtained by performing different ligand exchange treatments on NC films. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  PbSe/PbS-based solar cell characteristics (a) variation of Jsc (red circles) with effective band gap energy (orange squares), (b) FF (green triangles) with relative quantum yield (pale green diamonds), (c) Voc, and (d) power conversion efficiency for PbS shell thicknesses of 0.5, 0.9, and 1.3 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photovoltaic device configuration including PCDTBT:CdSe/CdTe tetrapod-rGO nanocomposite. (b) Schematic energy level alignment of the device. J–V curves of the devices with (c) different photoactive layer and (d) PCDTBT:tetrapod-rGO in various blend ratios. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
