Mechanistic insights into the influence of surface ligands on quantum dots for photocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09293J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09293J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 8497-8514Mechanistic insights into the influence of surface ligands on quantum dots for photocatalysis

        
          
            Yijiang 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Yu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiang-Bing 
            Fan
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Li-Zhu 
            Wu
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Ying 
            Zhou
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu 610500, China
bSchool of New Energy and Materials, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu 610500, China. E-mail: yushan@swpu.edu.cn; yzhou@swpu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK
dBOE Technology Group Co., Ltd., Beijing, 100176, P. R. China
eKey Laboratory of Photochemical Conversion and Optoelectronic Materials, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. E-mail: lzwu@mail.ipc.ac.cn
Received 
      29th November 2022
    , Accepted 11th March 2023First published on 15th March 2023AbstractQuantum dots are promising semiconductor nanocrystals in the field of photocatalysis owing to their unique properties in contrast to bulk semiconductors. Surface ligands, the molecules or ions connected to quantum dots, are indispensable components for intact colloidal quantum dots. They play important roles in influencing various physical and chemical properties of quantum dots. Therefore, understanding the structure of surface ligands and their specific mechanism for the photocatalytic process of quantum dots is of great significance. In this paper, the typical classification, the common characterization techniques and the function of surface ligands are first reviewed in brief. This provides a general understanding of surface ligands, which is a prerequisite for revealing their possible impact on the photocatalytic processes. Influences of surface ligands of quantum dots on photocatalysis are then discussed in detail from four aspects: adjustment of the band energy structure, the charge transfer and separation process, the surface reaction process as well as photocatalytic stability. In the end, we summarize the current research progress and potential research directions in this field, which could give the readers clues for future study.
1. Introduction
Quantum dots (QDs) are semiconductor nanocrystals with sizes smaller than the exciton Bohr radius of the corresponding bulk semiconductors. Usually, they have a small size of less than 10 nm. They were first synthesized by Onushchenko1 in a glass matrix and Brus2 in colloidal solution, respectively, and were named by Reed in 1988.3 They are also referred to as semiconductor nanoparticles or nanocrystals.4 QDs show different physical and chemical properties from bulk materials, which is mainly manifested in the quantum confinement effect and surface effect. These effects further yield an adjustable band gap and unique optoelectronic properties of QDs.5–8 Benefiting from these properties, QDs are widely used in the fields of solar cells,9,10 light emitting diodes (LEDs),11–13 photocatalysis,14,15etc. Among them, photocatalysis can utilize solar energy directly to drive chemical reactions such as water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen, and CO2 reduction to liquid fuel methanol. During this process, solar energy can be stored in the form of chemical energy, which is similar to the principle of photosynthesis in nature and greatly ensures clean and renewable energy utilization.
In 2011, Wu et al. combined CdTe QDs with a [FeFe] hydrogenase mimic for robust hydrogen evolution in an aqueous solution.16 Later, Eisenberg et al. reported an efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution system with CdSe QDs as light absorbing units and a nickel complex as the catalytic center.17 A series of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution systems have then been built quickly based on various QDs, including CdSe,18,19 CdTe,20 CdS,21,22 ZnSe,23 InP,24–27 CuxInyS,28 CdS/CdSe,29 CdSe/CdS,30,31 CdSe/ZnS,32 CsPbBr3,33 graphene QDs,34etc. Meanwhile, the application of QDs has been extended to photocatalytic CO2 reduction,14,35–38 degradation of pollutants,39–43 and photocatalytic organic synthesis.15,26,44–49 QDs can also combine with various kinds of catalytic centers such as nickel complexes,17,50 iron complexes,16,51 noble metals,52,53 and enzymes54 for photocatalytic reactions. This demonstrates the good prospects of QDs in photocatalysis.55–60
Specifically, QDs have several advantages when they are applied to photocatalysis. Firstly, QDs make some semiconductors become efficient photocatalysts due to their adjustable band gap, which do not have catalytic activity in the form of bulk. Taking CdSe for instance, its bulk materials do not show photocatalytic hydrogen production activity due to its low conduction band position. However, CdSe QDs have been widely reported for effective hydrogen production.61 Secondly, in the colloidal solution of QDs, light can be fully scattered in all directions. The light scattering effect is much stronger than that of bulk materials, which increases the light utilization efficiency of the system.62 Moreover, multi-exciton generation and hot electron injection of QDs can increase the utilization efficiency of high-energy photons. Thirdly, the smaller size of QDs is more favorable to the migration of photogenerated charges to the outer surface, which could facilitate the charge separation process. Fourthly, compared with bulk materials, the specific surface area and surface-active sites of QDs are significantly increased, which promotes the kinetics process of the catalytic reaction on the surface. In addition, QDs also have versatile surface properties and their catalytic activity can be changed significantly by modifying the surface of QDs, which will be revealed in this paper.
In general, the composition of QDs is shown in Fig. 1, and includes a core, shell and surface ligand shell. In photocatalysis, the core is mainly responsible for light absorption. The shell is not a necessary part of QDs, but it can improve the stability of the core. Some shells like CdS can also respond to visible light. A surface ligand is the molecule or ion bound to the surface of QDs. It can passivate the dangling bonds on the surface of QDs,63,64 control the nucleation and growth process of QDs,65 and provide a steric effect or electrostatic repulsion to ensure the stability of QDs in a colloidal solution.66,67 Therefore, a surface ligand is indispensable in the synthesis and preservation of QDs in solution. Different surface ligands have significant effects on the energy level distribution,68,69 amount of defect states,70 charge separation efficiency71–73 and stability66,67 of QDs. Therefore, surface ligands can significantly affect the photocatalytic performance of QDs.
 Fig. 1  Structure of quantum dots. 
We have noticed that there are many reviews on QDs, including QD electronics,74 multicarrier dynamics in QDs,75 the surface science of QDs,76 QD devices (photovoltaic cells, photodetectors and LEDs),77 synthesis and photocatalytic applications of QDs,78etc. Meanwhile, the influence of QDs on photocatalysis has also been reviewed by variation of synthesis methods,79 composition,80–83 facet engineering,84,85 as well as the shape and size of QDs.86,87 However, the influence of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs has not been reviewed systematically yet. Accordingly, this paper aims to discuss the influence of surface ligands on QDs in photocatalysis. The types characterization methods as well as the functions of surface ligands will be introduced first in Section 2, which helps to better understand the structure of surface ligands. Then we will focus on the influence of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs from various aspects in Section 3. In the last section, we will make a summary and an outlook of the research in this field. We hope this review will reveal a comprehensive prospect of surface ligands and emphasize the importance of surface ligands in photocatalysis.
2. Types and characterization techniques of surface ligands
2.1 Types of surface ligands
The surface ligands of QDs, that is, the molecules or ions connected to the surface of QDs, are indispensable in the synthesis and preservation of QDs in solution. In the early stage of QD science, it is believed that the surface of nanocrystals rich in metal cations is coordinated with anionic ligands to maintain the overall charge neutrality of QDs.88 With the continuous development of synthesis methods and characterization technology, it is found that the combination of ligands and QDs is not limited by charge neutralization.
The interaction between surface ligands and QDs can be divided into chemical adsorption and physical adsorption. At present, most of the adsorption between QDs and ligands is through chemical bonding. In specific, based on the theory of coordination chemistry, the surface ligands of QDs can be further divided into three categories: L-type, X-type and Z-type.76 L-Type ligands are neutral donors with free electron pairs, for example, amines (NH2R), phosphines (PR3), and phosphine oxides (OPR3).89 They coordinate with metal atoms on the surface of QDs. X-Type surface ligands are generally ions and have a strong binding ability with QDs. They provide one electron to bond with metal ions on the surface of QDs. The typical X-type ligands include carboxylate (RCOO−), thiolate (RS−) and phosphonate (RPO(OH)O−), as well as various inorganic ions (Cl−, OH−, S2−, and PO43−) and ion pairs (NR4+I− and (NH4+)2S2−).90 Z-Type ligands are neutral acceptors, which are formed by the combination of metal cations and inorganic anions, such as Pb(OOCR)2, CdCl2 and Pb(SCN)2.90
The surface ligands can also be divided into hydrophilic ligands and hydrophobic ligands according to their hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. Hydrophobic ligands are typically long alkyl chain coordinating chemicals such as oleic acid (OA), stearic acid (SA), oleylamine (OAm), trioctylphosphine and octadecylphosphonic acid, which make QDs soluble only in nonpolar organic solvents.91,92 Hydrophilic ligands are generally bifunctional ligands which present both a surface-anchoring group (e.g. thiol) and a hydrophilic end group (e.g. carboxyl or hydroxyl), such as 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), cysteine, 2-mercaptoethanol, and 1-thioglycerol, where the QDs can be dissolved in water or other polar solvents.93,94 In addition, we can also briefly classify surface ligands by organic and inorganic species. Typical organic surface ligands include OAm, OA, tri-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO), MPA, etc., while typical inorganic surface ligands include sulphide (S2−), halides (X−), SnS42−, and so on. The kinds of the latter are relatively limited.
2.2 Characterization techniques of surface ligands
To study the effect of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs, it is needed to determine the structure and distribution of surface ligands first. At present, the main characterization methods of surface ligands include infrared (IR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA), mass spectrometry (MS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and small angle neutron scattering (SANS).95 In brief, XPS and EDX could obtain the surface element information. NMR, IR, Raman and MS are mainly used to determine the chemical structure of surface ligands. TGA could indicate the content of organic surface ligands. DLS could analyze the size and distribution of the overall QDs. SANS is used to determine the distribution of surface ligands, which includes the thickness and the number of ligands.
In detail, XPS can provide information on surface elements of QDs. It is applicable to both inorganic and organic ligands.65 For example, Alivisatos et al. used XPS to determine the surface inorganic ligands (F−) of InP QDs. There is a signal of InF3 at 684.7 eV in the XPS spectra of InP–HF QDs, which indicates that F as surface ligands exist on the surface of InP QDs by binding with In.64 Donega et al. found that there was no phosphorus-related signal in the XPS spectra of Cu2−xS QDs synthesized in TOPO solvent, indicating the lack of TOPO as ligands on the surface of Cu2−xS QDs.65 Jin et al. used XPS to find that the S/Cd atom ratio increased significantly after ligand exchange, which confirmed that MPA and meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid successfully replaced OA on QDs.30
Similarly, EDX can also be used to analyze surface elements of QDs. For instance, Brutchey et al. demonstrated the existence of S and Te by EDX, indicating the successful capping of PhSH and PhTeH on CdSe QDs.96 Sargent et al. used XPS and EDX to prove the existence of Br− ligands on the PbS QD surface, and determined that the ratio of Br− to Pb2+ was 1:1.97
IR spectroscopy has been used to infer the possible functional groups as well as the binding modes of surface ligands with QDs by detecting their vibration characteristics. For example, Beard et al. compared the IR spectra of OA coated PbS QDs with that of functionalized cinnamic acid modified PbS QDs.98 The IR spectrum of free OA molecules presents a broad –OH feature from 2250–3250 cm−1, alkane/alkene C–H (–CH3 or –CH2–) stretches at around 3000 cm−1 and a distinct C–O (–COOH) stretch near 1680 cm−1. After coating on PbS QDs, signals related to the alkane/alkene C–H bond from OA remains, but the broad OH and sharp C–O stretches from –COOH disappear. This proves that OA mainly coordinated with PbS by the COOH group.98 After exchanging the original OA ligand with a series of functionalized cinnamic acid, signals related to symmetric and asymmetric COO– stretches of cinnamic acid at 1530 and 1408 cm−1 were observed.98 Other typical functional groups like nitrile groups could also be easily distinguished using IR spectroscopy. For instance, for 4-cyanocinnamate and trans-4-cyanocinnamic acid coated PbS QDs, the unique CN triple bond stretching can be clearly observed near 2250 cm−1.98 Currently, the use of IR spectroscopy to characterize surface ligands of QDs has become a common method.99,100 However, the IR analysis often gives us a part of bond information, and can hardly reveal the overall structure of surface ligands.
Raman spectroscopy can also determine the identity of surface ligands as well as the binding modes between the ligand and QDs.76 For example, Bastiaansen et al. found that after ligand exchange of CuInS2/ZnS QDs by using oligomeric caprolactone molecules, there were typical C–S (650–750 cm−1) and CO (1721 cm−1) signals of the molecule in the Raman spectra of the ligand-exchanged QDs, but the characteristic peaks of S–H (2576 cm−1) and S–S (526 cm−1) in the molecule disappeared. This result indicates that the surface ligands are successfully bound to the QD surface by thiol functional groups.101
NMR spectroscopy is a convenient non-destructive-tool for determining the structure of ligands, assessing the coverage of ligands, and distinguishing between surface-bound and free ligands.102,103 A variety of heteroatoms and functional groups in the ligand bound to the surface of the QDs can be detected by 1H, 13C and 31P NMR, including phosphonic acids,104 phosphines/phosphine oxides,69,104–106 amines,69,89,105–107 fatty acids,64,67,98,108–110 amino acids,111 carboxylic acids/carboxylate90,107,109,112–114 and thiols.114–116 For example, Herman et al. reported the structure determination of capped ligands on the surface of CdSe QDs by 31P and 1H NMR. They proved that 1H NMR is useful for identifying the length of the alkyl chain of the surface ligands of CdSe QDs. For CH3(CH2)n−1P(O)(OH)2, the chemical shift is approximately 0.8–1.0 ppm for H atoms in CH3 and 1.1–1.9 ppm for H atoms in (CH2)n−1. The number of carbon atoms in the alkyl chain, n, can be determined by comparing the integral area of these two peaks. However, the chemical shift of H atoms in different organic phosphine molecules (such as phosphonic acids, TOPO, phosphines, and so forth) could overlap due to the similar chemical environment. This makes it difficult for 1H NMR to distinguish the exact molecules coordinated on QDs. Accordingly, they further studied the 31P NMR of the as-synthesized CdSe QDs and successfully observed peaks related to phosphonic acids and Cd-phosphonic acid complexes. Other signals related to TOPO or tri-n-butylphosphine oxide (TBPO) were not detected. This suggests that the surface ligands of CdSe QDs are mainly phosphoric acids in their system.104 In addition, the NMR study of other elements can also be used to determine the structure of surface ligands, such as 119Sn NMR117,118 and 19F NMR.105 Compared with IR technology, NMR is more powerful and accurate to reveal the exact structure of surface ligands, and is hence widely used as well.
MS can also be used to confirm the chemical structure of ligands by analysis of the molecular fragment with a certain mass-to-charge (m/z) value.117,119,120 It is applicable to both inorganic117 and organic ligands.119 For example, Kim et al. used MS to determine the identity of the surface inorganic ligands (SnS44−, SbS43− and AsS33−) of CdSe QDs. And signals with m/z values of 294.71, 262.74, 216.77, 184.88 and 152.85 for Sb based fragments and 170.79 for AsS33− could be observed.117 In addition, other ligands like isobutene and tert-butylthiol organic ligands could also be distinguished by MS.119
Through the above methods the chemical structure of ligands on QDs could be revealed. Besides, quantitative analysis of the amount of ligands can also be provided by TGA, which studies the weight loss of QDs by heating QDs.96,119,121,122 Brutchey et al. found that the TGA data of CdSe QDs capped with native ligands (mainly TOPO) differ significantly from those of CdSe QDs exchanged with tert-butylthiol (tBT). The former mainly exhibits a typical weight loss of about 22–24% in the range of 330–470 °C, but the latter presents a major (89%) weight loss below 230 °C. This indicates high degree replacement of the native ligands. Moreover, the weight loss of 7% at 600 °C for CdSe QDs capped with tBT can translate to a surface coverage of 2.2 ligands nm−2.119 Similar results were also obtained with CdSe QDs after the native stearate ligand was exchanged with Stibanate, with the disappearance of the typical weight stage related to stearate in TGA.122 In addition, they compare the TGA curve of CdSe QDs after ligand exchange with that of free Stibanate molecules and find that both display three processes with similar weight loss ratios (66:27:7 and 61:29:10) in the same temperature range, confirming that the ligands capped on CdSe QDs are Stibanates.
In some cases, TGA can be used together with MS to determine the identity of the surface ligands as well.119 For example, Kim and Jeon et al. confirmed the existence of the 1,2-hexadecanedithiol ligand on InP QDs by using TGA/simultaneous thermal analyser mass spectrometer (STA-MS).120 In specific, they observe a weight loss that begins at 220 °C in the TGA curve. STA-MS analysis indicates that the corresponding decomposition products contain components with molecular weights of 32, 34, and 222, which could be assigned to elemental sulfur, H2S, and the fragment of 1,2-hexadecanedithiol after the loss of two H2S. This confirms the successful capping of 1,2-hexadecanedithiol on InP QDs.
DLS can be used to measure the size and distribution of QDs. For example, Wu et al. used DLS to determine the diameter of overall CdSe QDs capped with MPA as 2.4 nm.123 Similarly, Reiss et al. also found that the hydrodynamic diameter of InP/ZnS QDs capped with cysteine is 8 nm by DLS.111
Recently, the SANS technique has been applied to characterize the coverage and thickness of surface ligand layers on QDs, which could provide additional information to the above characterization techniques.124–126 In special, SANS is very sensitive to elements like H, and the ligand could show significant contrast to the QD core (or shell) because of their different neutron scattering length densities (SLDs). This makes SANS well-suited to distinguish the ligand surface layer from QDs. It could not only analyse the ligand layer, but also distinguish the core from the shell. For example, by SANS, Tisdale et al. confirmed the presence of a thin PbClx shell of ca. 0.3 nm on the surface of PbS QDs when synthesized with a large excess amount of PbCl2 (Fig. 2a). Fitting profiles of SANS with different solvent deuteration profiles in Fig. 2b–d have provided information on the volume fraction as well as SLD profiles of each component (PbS core, PbClx shell, oleate ligand and toluene solvent) in QDs. It is calculated that the number of oleate ligands on PdS QDs with a full size of 7.4–7.6 nm is ca. 923, which is very close to the result obtained from quantitative NMR analysis (1009 ± 6). Meanwhile, information on the oleate ligand coverage (4.91 per nm2) on the surface of QDs could also be obtained. Importantly, with complicated analysis of SANS data, they proposed that the distribution of oleate ligands varies on (100) and (111) facets of PbS QDs.127 Weir et al. also determined that the number of ligands with a packed Langmuir monolayer coverage is 120 for a PbS QD with a diameter of around 3.3 nm, corresponding to 3.51 ligands per nm2. Moreover, by SANS they conjecture that PbS QDs with oleic acids as the ligands have three different ligand environments: directly bound to the PbS surface; physisorbed to QDs (which is indicated from the coverage thickness of more than a monolayer) and free ligands in the solution.126
 Fig. 2  Proposed structure and SANS data of PbS QDs. (a) Proposed structure of the thin PbClx shell on PbS. (b)–(d) SANS data: (b) fitted intensity profiles with different solvent (toluene) deuteration fractions. (c) Fitted volume fraction profile. (d) Fitted scattering length density (SLD) profile for the fully deuterated sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
With the combination of the above methods, it is feasible to make a full investigation of the surface ligands on QDs. This is the prerequisite to reveal the role of surface ligands in photocatalysis with QDs, which will be presented in the next section.
2.3 Effects of the surface ligands on basic properties of QDs
The surface ligands of QD are indispensable in the synthesis and preservation of QDs in solution. It will affect the nucleation and growth of QDs during the synthesis process. In addition, it will also affect some basic properties of QDs, such as morphology, colloidal stability and photoluminescence properties. In the following section, we will summarize them briefly.

2.3.1 Influence on nucleation and growth of QDs. 
The surface ligands can control the nucleation rate and growth rate of QDs in synthesis. Peng et al. reported that the growth kinetics of CdSe colloidal QDs can be effectively controlled by surface ligands. They found that the growth rate of CdSe QDs increases with the decrease in chain length of the surface ligands, fatty acid lauric acids (LA).128 They also reported that the nucleation and growth of CdS QDs can be tuned by changing the concentration of surface ligands in synthesis. With the increase of the concentration of OA ligands in synthesis, the number of CdS QDs nuclei increased significantly in the nucleation stage, and the growth rate of CdS QDs increased.129
In addition, ligands can affect the diffusion rate of the nucleus and precursor during synthesis. Typically, ligands with shorter chains can increase the diffusion rate of the nucleus and precursor.104 For example, in the process of synthesizing CdS QDs, long-chain surface ligands slow down the diffusion of precursor Cd2+ due to their large steric hindrance, thus hindering nucleation and growth. In contrast, short-chain ligands are beneficial to the diffusion of precursors, thus accelerating the nucleation and growth rate in synthesis.130


2.3.2 Influence on morphology of QDs. 
During the synthesis of QDs, strong binding of ligands on certain facets could suppresses their growth, and modulation of ligands by concentration, chain length and others could lead to a variety of morphologies of QDs, including spherical dots, rods, tetrapods, etc. Taking CdSe QDs for instance, Peng et al. investigated the effect of ligand concentration on the morphology of CdSe QDs. They found that spherical CdSe QDs can be synthesized in low concentration of hexyl-phosphonic acid ligands. However, CdSe QDs synthesized in higher concentrations of hexyl-phosphonic acids will become rods.131 Similarly, Herman et al. reported that the morphology of CdSe QDs can be controlled by different mixed ratios of surface ligands octadecylphosphonic acid (ODPA) to MPA, or tetradecylphosphonic acids (TDPA) to hexylphosphonic acids (HPA). CdSe QDs become more elongated with branched chains with the increased molar ratio of MPA or HPA.104 They also studied the effect of the length of the alkyl phosphonic acid ligand chain on the morphology of CdSe colloidal QDs and found that the rod shape of CdSe QDs got thinner and longer as the chain length of the phosphonic acid ligand became shorter, and it even branched to form a tetrapod shape.104


2.3.3 Influence on colloidal stability of QDs. 
Surface ligands are essential to the colloidal stability of QDs in solvents. This colloidal stability is due to favourable interactions between the ligand and the surrounding solvent, as well as the steric hindrance or electrostatic repulsion provided by the surface ligands. As a result, colloidal stability is highly sensitive to the packing structure of the surface ligands. The stability of QDs in solvents is affected by the type, chain length, concentration and branch chain of surface ligands.66,67,109,130,132,133 These differences in ligands change the interaction between QDs and the solvent, thus affecting the colloidal stability of QDs. Yu et al. reported the effect of acids with different chain lengths in ligands on the stability of CdS QDs. It was found that the absorption spectra of CdS QDs with different ligands had almost no change after storage, but the PL intensity of C18 (SA) capped CdS QDs was weaker than that of C14 (myristic acids) capped CdS QDs, which showed that the colloidal stability of C14 capped CdS QDs was higher.130 Guo et al. reported that the stability of CsPbBr3 QDs decreased with the low ligand density on the CsPbBr3 QD surface.133


2.3.4 Influence on photoluminescence (PL) properties of QDs. 
Surface ligands can affect the PL properties of QDs significantly. Peng et al. demonstrated that the PL properties of CdSe colloidal QDs can be effectively controlled by surface ligands. They studied the PL properties of CdSe QDs with 6 different ligand/solvent systems, including high-purity TOPO, technical-grade TOPO, SA, SA/TOPO, dodecylamine (DDA)/TOPO and HPA/TOPO, and found that different ligands can make the PL of CdSe QDs blue or red shifted.128 In addition, they also studied the PL properties of CdS QDs synthesized with different ligand concentrations. Specifically, they found that the PL of CdS QDs red shifts systematically with the increase of OA concentration.129 Moreover, the chain length of the ligand can also influence the PL properties of QDs. Banerjee et al. studied CsPbBr3 QDs with 5 alkylamine ligands with different chain lengths, including C4, C8, C12, C14 and C18, and observed the gradual red-shift of the PL peak of QDs with the decrease in the chain length of the ligands.107,134
In addition to the PL peak shift of QDs, PL intensity could be easily modified by surface ligands.135 Houtepen et al. proved that introducing Z-type ligands to CdTe QDs can increase PL intensity by passivation of uncoordinated surface atoms. Treatments with InCl3 or CdCl2 under optimal conditions afford a near-unity (>90%) PL quantum yield (PLQY), while for other metal halogen or carboxylate salts, only a smaller increase in PLQY can be obtained, which is the result of the weaker binding or steric repulsion.63

3. Effect of surface ligands on photocatalysis with quantum dots
To study the effect of surface ligands on photocatalysis, we first need to understand the three major steps in photocatalysis: (i) generation of charge carriers (electron–hole pairs) inside QDs after excitation by incident light, (ii) charge separation and migration to the outer part of the QDs, and (iii) reduction and oxidation reactions on active sites. The overall photocatalytic efficiency is dependent on the cumulative effects of these three consecutive steps. When the photon energy of incident light is greater than the band gap of the QDs (i.e., Eg: the energy difference between the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM)), the electrons on the VB of the photocatalyst can get enough energy to transition to the CB, leaving holes on the VB. Subsequently, the photogenerated electrons and holes transfer to the outer surface. This process is always accompanied by recombination and trapping of electrons and holes, which will decrease the efficiency of the system. Finally, if the energy level of electrons (i.e. CBM) is more negative than the redox potential of the reductive reaction, and that of holes (i.e. VBM) more positive than that of the oxidative reaction, a photocatalytic reaction will happen thermodynamically. In practice, whether the reaction occurs or not is also largely influenced by other factors like the over potential of the reaction on different catalytic sites. For example, for overall H2O splitting into H2 and O2, the CBM of QDs must be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE, pH 0), and the VBM must be more positive than the sum of the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE, pH 0) and the over potential.136
In the following section, we will summarize the influence of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs from four aspects: the energy band structure, charge transfer and separation process, surface redox reaction, and stability. In special, influence on the charge transfer and separation process is further divided into several parts, including the influence of surface ligand adsorption configuration, chain length, concentration and others.
3.1 Influence on the energy band structure
From the above description, it is conceived that the energy band structure of QDs can not only influence the light absorption ability of QDs during generation of charge carriers, but also modulate the redox ability of QDs in the surface reaction. Therefore, the energy band structure plays a vital role in photocatalysis. Although the energy band structure is mainly dependent on the component of QDs, the surface ligands can also alter it.
One main reason why surface ligands affect the band gap is that they may change the strength of the QD-ligand surface dipole. By changing the identity of the chemical binding group and dipole moment of the ligand, the strength of the QD-ligand surface dipole could be changed. This further shifts the vacuum energy level and, in turn, the VBM and CBM of QDs. Moreover, the surface ligands may also affect the delocalization of the CBM in the QDs, thereby further changing the band gap of QDs.
Bulović and Grossman et al. demonstrated that the band structure of PbS colloidal QDs can be effectively controlled by surface ligands. They studied the band structure of PbS QDs with 12 different surface ligands, including thiols, primary amine, ammonium thiocyanate and halides (Fig. 3a), and found that ligand exchanged QDs can achieve band edge shifts of 0.9 eV (Fig. 3c). By using density functional theory (DFT) simulations and experiment data from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), they found that the energy shifts of PbS QDs correlates with the interaction between the intrinsic dipole moment of the surface ligand molecule itself and the QD-ligand interface dipole (Fig. 3b), which is formed by the surface atoms of QDs and the anchoring group of ligands. For instance, the tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) ligand exhibits a large band energy shift due to its large total dipole. This is caused by its lack of the intrinsic dipole moment of iodide in opposition to the surface-ligand dipole moments. Similarly, for ligands with an opposite intrinsic dipole moment and interface dipole moment, like benzenethiol (BT), and 1,2-, 1,3- and 1,4-benzenedithiol (BDT), the total dipole moment increases monotonously with a decrease in the intrinsic dipole moment, which makes band energy levels shift downwards gradually.68
 Fig. 3  The influence of surface ligands on energy levels of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structures of different surface ligands. (b) The energy level shift of each ligand modified QD (black arrows) is the sum of the contributions of the interface dipole (red arrows) and the intrinsic dipole of the ligand (blue arrows). (c) Complete energy level diagrams of PbS QDs exchanged with the ligands shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, Kroupa and Vörös et al. also showed that the band edge position of PbS QDs can be tuned through surface ligand modification. They explored a library of functionalized cinnamic acid (CA−) molecules to systematically tune the band gap of PbS QDs, and found that ligand-exchanged QDs exhibit remarkable band edge shifts of 2.1 eV (Fig. 4). By using theoretical calculations and experimental data from XPS, they found that the energy shifts of PbS QDs in the form of films matches well with the electronic dipole moment of the molecules, except for the fluorinated ligands. With ab initio simulations, they attributed this phenomenon to the strong repulsive force between the fluorinated ligands, which reduces ligand interactions between QDs (that is, the inter digitization of ligands). Effective inter digitization often decreases the effective dipole moments felt by the PbS core, as the dipole moment of ligands of neighbouring QDs has an opposite direction to the original one. Accordingly, the effective dipole moment is decreased obviously for non-fluorinated ligand modified QDs because of the stronger inter digitization of the ligand shell, but is maintained for fluorinated ligand modified QDs. This makes band energy levels of 4-CF3-CA− and 3,5-F CA−/QDs shift downwards more significantly than that of others.98
 Fig. 4  The influence of functionalized cinnamic acid molecules on the energy level of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structure of oleylamine and a library of functionalized cinnamic acid molecules. (b) Schematic diagram of the energy structure of PbS QDs with different ligands shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Besides the band structure influence by ligands with thiolates and carboxylates as the anchoring group, Sargent and Ning et al. also reported that the treatment of QDs with different halide ion ligands (iodide, bromide and chloride) would shift the CB and VB positions of PbS QDs. Specifically, they discovered that in contrast to iodide modified PbS films with a typical n-type character, bromide and chloride modified PbS shows a Fermi level closer to the VBM, indicating their p-type character after air exposure.137
In addition to the above PbS QDs, the effects of ligand treatment on the band structures of other QDs have also been reported. For typical binary cadmium based QDs, Waldeck et al. reported a difference in the band edge positions of CdSe QDs capped by three ligands with similar chemical structures (phenyl ring) but different anchoring groups (aniline with amine, An; thiophenol with thiol, TP; phenylphosphonic acid with phosphonic acid, PPA). Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) experiments were performed to evaluate the VBM and it turns out that the shift of the VBM of CdSe QDs could reach ca. 0.5 eV with the change of the anchoring group from amine to phosphonic acid.106 This is probably because PPA with stronger electronegativity distributes less electron density to CdSe QDs than An, as evidenced by theoretical Mulliken charge analysis. Meanwhile, the VBM may also move to more positive positions with the increase of ligand density, as the net charge displacement increases. For binary indium based QDs, Alivisatos and Jang et al. reported that the treatment of InP colloidal QDs with hydrofluoric acid as the ligand decreases the CBM of InP QDs. Surface fluoride with strong electronegativity could effectively promote the delocalization of the CBM of InP QDs, which results in a significant decrease of the band gap.64 For ternary QDs, Schaller et al. examined the effects of ligand composition (OAm, diphenylphosphine, and tributylphosphine) on the band gap of CuInSe2 QDs, and they found that the band gap can be controlled between 1.27–1.43 eV by using these three ligands.69
The shift of the energy level of the CBM and VBM will further influence the photocatalytic activity. For instance, using photodecomposition of organic dye methyl orange as a model reaction, Abargues et al. reported that PbS QDs capped with MPA and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) show 3.5-fold faster photodegradation of methyl orange than PbS QDs capped with OAm, and PbS QDs capped with tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) shows the lowest photocatalytic activity. Energy band structure analysis by UPS shows that the CBM of PbS QDs capped with OAm, EDT, MPA and TBAI is −0.7, −0.5, −0.6 V and +0.1 V, respectively. Therefore, the former three QDs can effectively produce reactive oxygen species through the reduction of O2/˙O2− (−0.35 V), O2/˙O2H (−0.07 V) and O2/H2O2 (+0.11 V); however, for PbS capped with TBAI, only reduction of O2/H2O2 (+0.11 V) can reluctantly happen. Consequently, the absence of ˙O2− and other reactive species in PbS-TBAI resulted in the least photocatalytic activity. Besides, though PbS-MPA and PbS-EDT show a similar band edge energy to PbS-OAm, there is also a significant difference in activity. This is attributed to the strong influence of carrier mobility, which will be discussed in the next section of this review.40
3.2 Influence on the charge transfer and separation process
In the photocatalytic process, the second step is often defined as the migration of photogenerated charge carriers (electrons and holes) from the bulk to the surface of QDs, which is vital to the net photocatalytic efficiency of QDs. As part of QDs, surface ligands have a great influence on the charge transfer process. In specific, various characters of the ligands on the surface of QDs can affect the charge transfer process, including the chain length, adsorption configuration, concentration, etc.

3.2.1 Adsorption configuration of organic ligands. 
To elucidate the mechanism of charge transfer in the QD-ligand system, the modes of the surface ligand adsorption configuration should be considered first. Weiss et al. reported that electron transfer behaviour of PbS QDs could be modified by the adsorption behaviour of 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ), which may function as both an electron acceptor and surface ligand. Two electron transfer mechanisms in the system are discovered by using transient absorption (TA) spectra. One is static photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from PbS to BQ which occurs on the timescale of picoseconds, when BQ is effectively absorbed on the surface of PbS (Fig. 5a). The other is collisional PET from PbS to diffusing BQ molecules on the timescale of microseconds, when BQ is not effectively bound to PbS (Fig. 5b). Benefitting from the long lifetime of charge carriers in PbS QDs, the latter collisional PET effectively promotes the overall PET process from PbS to BQs by a factor of 2.5 more than that for static PET only.138
 Fig. 5  Impact of the adsorption configuration on the electron transfer rate. (a and b) Two mechanisms of photoinduced electron transfer from the PbS QDs to BQ: (a) static PET and (b) collisional PET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Different adsorption configurations of ligands on the surface of CdSe QDs, and a possible electron transfer pathway. (through-bond, red, and through-space, blue) for each configuration. (d) The intrinsic charge separation rate (kCS,int) for the CdSe QD-viologen complexes in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, they further investigated the possible influence of different adsorption configurations of viologens on the PET process of CdS QDs.139 Alkylcarboxylate-functionalized viologens containing different numbers of methylene groups were adopted as the ligands. The authors proposed that two different ligand adsorption configurations could exist, hence resulting in two possible PET mechanisms (Fig. 5c). In the first adsorption configuration, two oxygens in the carboxylate group are both adsorbed on the surface of QDs, and the whole ligand molecule is far away from the surface of QDs. In the second adsorption configuration, only one oxygen in the carboxylate group is adsorbed on the surface of the QDs, and the whole ligand molecule is close to the surface of QDs. Accordingly, the first “through bond” mechanism is that electrons are transferred from the QDs to the bipyridinium core through the alkylcarboxylate group (Fig. 5c, adsorption configuration 1, red arrow). The second “through space” mechanism is that the electrons bypass the alkylcarboxylate and only pass through the non-bonded orbitals of the QDs and of the bipyridinium core (Fig. 5c, adsorption configuration 2, blue arrow). If the PET process is carried out through the “through bond” mechanism where the alkyl linker extends the viologen away from the QDs surface, the rate of PET will decrease with the increase in the linker length. However, TA analysis reveals that the rate constant of PET of this system is independent of the number of methylene groups in the alkyl chain. This indicates that the main PET pathway occurs through space with the second adsorption structure.
Roberts and Kilina et al. found that the rate of electron transfer from PbS QDs to perylenediimide (PDI) acceptors varies significantly by the adjustment of the molecular orientation or tilting extent of PDI on PbS QDs, which is practically fulfilled by the change of the dipole moments of the neighbouring “spectator ligands” that do not directly participate in the electron transfer process.140 By the introduction of fluorine atoms at different positions, a series of cinnamic acid molecules with different dipole moments were synthesized and used as the spectator ligands (Fig. 6). For example, spectator ligand 2,6-F-CA− has a dipole moment direction close to the surface of PbS QDs with the electron-deficient region at the outer shell. This induces the electron-rich PDI tilting heavily to bend closer to these ligands and hence decrease the distance between the PDI acceptors and PbS surface (2.89 Å by DFT calculations, Fig. 6b), which is beneficial for electron transfer from QDs to PDI. In contrast, spectator ligand 4-CF3-CA− has a dipole moment direction far away from the surface of PbS QDs and the electron-rich region at the outer shell, which drags the major part of PDI to stay away from the PbS surface (4.96 Å, Fig. 6b) and hence hampers the electron transfer process. The experimental results indicate that the electron transfer rate is well in line with the dipole moment of the spectator molecules and the corresponding tilting extent of PDI, and a variation of the electron transfer rate by over a factor of 4 was achieved (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  The influence of different adsorption configurations of spectator ligands on the charge transfer process of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structures of spectator ligands and a PDI electron acceptor. (b) Energy-minimized structures of PbS:PDI QDs capped with 2,6-F-CA- and 4-CF3-CA-spectator ligands. (c) The kET,int values of PbS:PDI QDs with different spectator ligands and the spatial separation data of PDI:PbS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
From the above examples, it is revealed that the adsorption configuration could directly influence the charge transfer rate, which may have an important impact on the whole photocatalytic efficiency. However, currently there is little research that correlates the adsorption configuration of ligands with the photocatalytic efficiency of QDs directly, which may provide a future research direction of QDs in photocatalysis.


3.2.2 Chain length of organic ligands. 
In order to clarify the effect of the length of the ligand chain on the electron transfer rate and further on the photocatalytic performance of QDs, researchers have carried out a series of studies. Weiss et al. showed that the rate of electron transfer from the CdSe QDs to the electron acceptor unit poly(viologen) (PV) could be changed by adjustment of the chain length of surface ligands HS–(CH2)n–COO− with n = 1, 2, 5, 7, 10 and 15 (Fig. 7a). Judging from the kinetics fitting results from the ground state bleaching (GSB) signals of CdSe QDs in TA spectra (Table 1), it is conceived that all PET processes occur quantitatively in an ultrafast timescale with less than 10 ps for n from 1 to 7, though the PET rate decreases gradually with the increase in the chain length (Fig. 7b). The decrease in the PET rate is mainly attributed to the longer distance for electron tunnelling across the ligand shell to the outer part of QDs. However, the PET rate for n = 10 and 15 decreases dramatically in magnitude with decreased PET efficiency as well, which shows similar bleaching dynamics to that in the absence of the electron acceptor unit. A possible reason is the formation of bundles of ligands with increasing chain length, which makes access to the electron acceptor unit difficult and the electron tunnelling process extremely slow.71,141
 Fig. 7  Electron transfer behaviour of CdSe QDs capped by HS–(CH2)n–COOH− with different chain lengths. (a) Structure of the CdSe QDs capped with HS–(CH2)n–COOH; reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) The relationship between the ligand chain length and electron transfer rate. n is the number of methylenes in the HS–(CH2)n–COOH ligand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 The results of two and four exponential fitting results of ground state bleaching kinetic traces of poly(viologen)/CdSe–Cn films. The n is the number of methylenes in the HS–(CH2)n–COOH ligand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society





n


A
1


A
2


A
3


A
4


τ
1/ps

τ
2/ps

τ
3/ps

τ
4/ps




1
1.23
0.17
—
—
0.42
1.3
—
—


2
1.51
0.06
—
—
0.37
2.5
—
—


5
1.02
0.22
—
—
0.63
2.2
—
—


7
0.92
0.25
—
—
0.83
7.8
—
—


10
0.21
0.25
0.28
0.24
3.3
27.5
222
2884


15
0.22
0.27
0.21
0.30
1.2
18.2
305
6072




Lian and Yang et al. also reported how the length of the capped HS–(CH2)n–COO− ligands on the surface of CdS QDs affects its interfacial electron transfer, and consequently the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency in the hybrid system containing [NiFe] hydrogenase and redox mediators (propyl-bridged 2,2′-bipyridinium, PDQ2+).142 Similarly, the electron transfer efficiency varies little in the range of 94 ± 1% to 97 ± 1% when the number of methylene units in the ligand changes from 2 to 7. Correspondingly, the reduction efficiency of redox mediator PDQ2+ slightly reduced, and the quantum efficiency for hydrogen evolution slowly decreases from 54 ± 6% to 43 ± 2%. However, an abrupt decrease of the electron transfer efficiency was observed from 94 ± 2 to 39 ± 5% when the n further increases from 7 to 11. This yielded an abrupt decrease of the quantum yield of H2 production from 43 ± 2% to 4 ± 1% (Fig. 8). This phenomenon indicates that the surface ligands of QDs with n > 7 are a significant barrier for electron tunnelling between CdS QDs and reactants, damaging the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency, which is similar to the above work by Weiss. The authors suggested that when n is in the range of 2–7, these mercaptocarboxylate ligands are highly disordered (corresponding to the “liquid” phase), and small redox mediator PDQ2+ molecules could easily diffuse into the ligand shell and are absorbed on CdS for nearly quantitative PET. Under this circumstance, the PET efficiency is almost insensitive to the length of ligands. When n further increases, however, the increased interchain van der Waals interaction of the ligands induces their crystallization to a certain extent (corresponding to the “crystalline” phase). The as-obtained phase structure blocks the accessibility of PDQ2+ molecules to the surface of CdS QDs, which is revealed by temperature-dependent infrared absorption spectroscopy analysis. Consequently, the efficiency of PET and hydrogen evolution decreases significantly. We also confirmed that InP/ZnS QDs capped with MPA exhibited higher photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency than that capped with 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) and one reason should be the longer insulating alkyl chain in MUA.24
 Fig. 8  The influence of the ligand chain length of CdS QDs. (a) Schematic diagram of CdS QDs for a hydrogen production system. (b) The effect of the ligand length dependence on electron transfer and the efficiency of H2 production. The n is the amount of CH2 in the alkyl chain. (c and d) Distribution of surface ligands HS–(CH2)n–COOH and redox mediator PDQ2+ when 2 ≤ n ≤ 7 (c) and n ≥ 10 (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
As introduced in Section 3.1, Abargues et al. examined the influence of ligand exchange on the photocatalytic activity of PbS QDs with OAm, EDT, MPA and TBAI. In addition to the modification of the band energy level of PbS QDs by using different ligands, the authors also suggest that the insulating chain length of OAm and TABI is much longer than that of MPA and EDT, which strongly hinders the charge transfer of PbS QDs.40 These two factors together make PbS QDs capped with MPA and EDT show 3.5-fold faster efficiency for photodegradation of methyl orange than that with TBAI and OAm.
In addition, the surface ligands with different chain lengths may have different steric hindrances, which will also affect the photocatalytic process. Lu et al. reported that replacing the initial organic ligands (OA/OAm) on the surface of CsPbBr3 QDs with short-chain glycine ligands could improve the photocatalytic activity of QDs for CO2 reduction to CO by 5 times. This is partly due to the reduction of the steric hindrance by glycine ligands, which is beneficial to the charge separation process.143 Similarly, Sargent et al. found that replacing the original ligand with strong steric hindrance with short chain carboxylates with weak steric hindrance can reduce the trap state density of PbS QDs; this decreases the recombination loss and improves the mobility of charge carriers.144


3.2.3 Concentration of ligands. 
A difference in the surface ligand concentration influences the charge transfer of QDs as well. This could be further divided into two cases: surface ligands that can function as electron acceptors and promote charge transfer, and surface ligands that are insulating and hinder charge transfer.
In the first case, Weiss et al. investigated the relationship between the concentration of surface ligand N-[1-heptyl], N'-[3-carboxypropyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium (V2+) on CdS QDs and the electron transfer rate from CdS to V2+.145 V2+ is a good electron acceptor with a bipyridinium structure. By kinetic analysis of the GSB signal in the TA spectra of CdS QDs in the 0–75 ps and 0–3000 ps region (Fig. 9a and b), it is clearly observed that the decay of GSB signals become faster with the increased amount of V2+ in the system. This suggests the faster electron transfer rate from CdS to V2+ when more V2+ are bound to CdS QDs (Fig. 9c).141
 Fig. 9  Influence of the concentration of V2+ ligands on the charge transfer process of CdS QDs. (a and b) The kinetic analysis of the GSB signal in the TA spectra of CdS QDs with different amounts of electron acceptor ligands in the timescale of the (a) 0–75 ps and (b) 0–3000 ps region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Relationship of the concentration of surface-bound ligands and electron transfer rate ket. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
In the second case, Wang et al. reported that reasonable control of insulating surface ligand (OAm and OA) concentration can promote effective charge transfer of CsPbBr3 QDs, so as to achieve efficient photocatalytic hydrogen production activity.146 Three QDs with different ligand concentrations were prepared using a recyclable ethyl acetate/hexane washing treatment. QDs washed one to three times are labelled as CsPbBr3-1, CsPbBr3-2, and CsPbBr3-3, respectively, with less insulating ligand left on the surface. This is also evidenced from the 1H NMR results of CsPbBr3 QDs, in which the H signals from the insulating organic molecules are much stronger in CsPbBr3-1 than in others (Fig. 10a). As a result, the induction period for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of CsPbBr3 QDs is the longest for CsPbBr3-1 (Fig. 10b). At the beginning of the photocatalytic process, the surface insulating ligand blocks the charge transfer from CsPbBr3-1 to TiO2. After partial removal or decomposition of surface ligands during illumination, an effective charge transfer path is then formed at the surface of QDs, which facilitates the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution process.
 Fig. 10  NMR and photocatalytic properties of CsPbBr3 QDs with different ligand concentrations. (a) 1H-NMR spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs with different ligand concentrations. The ligand concentration decreased from CsPbBr3-1 to CsPbBr3-3. (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of various samples (visible light >420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Based on the above situations, it should be kept in mind that the nature of surface ligands (insulating or conductive) should be considered first if we try to adjust the charge transfer process by changing the concentrations of ligands adsorbed on QDs.


3.2.4 Additional functions of ligands in charge transfer and separation. 
In addition to the above factors of surface ligands, many others could also modulate the charge transfer and separation process of QDs, including the conductivity of surface ligands, the trap states formed by surface ligands, the additional function as charge capturers, and so on.
The conductivity of ligands could be vital to the PET process. Liu et al. demonstrated the control of the PET process of CsPbBr3 QDs to TiO2 with three different ligands as the linker, i.e., OA and OAm, (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES) and naphthoic acid (NCA). It turns out that in comparison to long alkyl chain OA/OAm, the conjugated aromatic NCA boosts the PET rate; and the crosslinked insulating APTES remarkably suppresses the extraction of electrons by over a factor of 3.147
Some researchers suggest that trap states formed by different ligands affect the charge separation as well. For instance, Kamat et al. reported that after ligand exchange of TOPO/DDA capped CdSe QDs with the MPA ligand, Se vacancies and deep traps are formed, which could trap electrons quickly. This avoids the quick recombination of electrons and holes in the VB, which could further increase the charge separation efficiency.148 Furthermore, Jin et al. reported that the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency of CdSe/CdS QDs capped with poly (acrylic acid) (PAA), MPA, and 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) gradually increases.30 They attribute this phenomenon to the different energy levels of the surface traps formed in the ligand exchange processes, in which PAA without thiol groups has the lowest trap energy levels, MPA with one thiol group has a middle energy level, and DMSA with two thiol groups has the highest energy level. This further affects the hole transfer process of the system, as surface traps with higher energy levels have a larger driving force. As a result, CdSe/CdS QDs with DMSA have the highest hydrogen evolution efficiency with either a Ni complex or Pt functioning as the catalytic unit.
Ligands can further function as the electron or hole capturer to promote charge transfer and separation. For example, using phenothiazine ligands as the hole delay to effectively extract holes from QDs, Wu et al. reported that photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency for CdSe QD could be significantly improved by 40 times.149
Interaction between the ligands and the reactants could change the charge separation of the system, too. Kamat et al. investigated the effects of three different ligands, i.e., native OA/OAm ligands, PbSO4 oleate, and docosalkyl dimethyl ammonium bromide (DDAB) on interfacial charge transfer from CsPbBr3 QDs to methyl viologen (MV2+).150 From TA analysis, they calculated the electron transfer rate for these three QDs is in the same time scale of 1011 s−1 regardless of the lower binding ability of CsPbBr3-DDAB QDs with MV2+. Interestingly, they propose that CsPbBr3-DDAB QDs achieve the highest charge separation efficiency of 65%, as it may stabilize the electron transfer product MV+.
From the above discussion, it is clearly revealed that the charge transfer and separation process could be affected by surface ligands in many aspects. As a matter of fact, different factors of ligands can influence the charge separation efficiency simultaneously, which make the situation complicated in most cases.


3.2.5 Special attention on inorganic surface ligands. 
It should be noted that most of the above studies are focused on organic ligands. In recent years, influence of inorganic ligands on the charge transfer process of QDs has received more and more attention. Therefore, we discuss the influence of inorganic ligands on charge transfer and separation in this separate section.
In 2015, Kim et al. studied the electron transfer rate from three inorganic ligands (SnS44− (Sn-ICL) SbS43− (Sb-ICL) and AsS33− (As-ICL)) capped CdSe QDs to TiO2.117 Due to the different HUMO and LUMO levels of these inorganic ligands, SnS44−-QDs exhibit the fastest electron transfer rate with the smallest energy gap (Δε) between the CBM of CdSe QDs and LUMO of these inorganic ligands (Fig. 11). Zhong et al. later discovered that the PET rate from thiosulfate (S2O32−) capped CdSe QDs to TiO2 (1.07 × 109 s−1) is much higher than that from S2− capped QDs (0.72 × 109 s−1).151 This may be due to the strong mutual electronic coupling between S2O32− capped CdSe QDs and TiO2, which is indicated by the higher absorbance of the excitonic peak of the former QDs. The two inorganic ligands capped QDs without an insulating alkyl chain, of course, have a higher PET rate than OAm capped QDs (0.10 × 109 s−1). Accordingly, QDs with S2O32− ligands present the highest power conversion efficiency when used for solar cells in their work.
 Fig. 11  Energy level of CdSe QD (orange), HOMO and LUMO energy levels of various ligands (black) and the corresponding electron transfer rate from the three inorganic ligand capped CdSe QDs to TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Wu et al. reported that increasing the concentration of S2− in the solution of CdSe QDs could effectively enhance the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency of the system and they discovered that the initial S2− could grow into the crystal lattice of CdSe QDs and promote the interaction of QDs with the catalytic center, while the following S2− mainly functions as the surface ligands that substitute the original MPA ligands and enhance the hole transfer process (Fig. 12).61 As a result, an increase in the hydrogen evolution amount by a factor close to 5 could be observed.
 Fig. 12  The influence of different S2− concentrations on CdSe QDs capped with MPA for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Similarly, we later introduced inorganic S2− to substitute the native OAm ligand capped on InP/ZnS QDs for excellent photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. S2− could function as an effective hole capturer in our system, which was evidenced by TA spectroscopy.24 Moreover, we prepared chloride (Cl−) and phosphate (PO43−) capped InP/ZnS QDs for comparison and found that the performance of the S2− ligand still outperforms that of the other two inorganic ligands (Fig. 13).152 The combination of TA, time-resolved fluorescence spectrum (TRPL), and transient mid-infrared absorption spectrum (TRIR) techniques at femtosecond to nanosecond time scales reveal ultrafast hole transfer from the VBM to surface S2− within 4–5 ps, which then form a charge transfer state (CTS) with a lifetime of ca. 900 ps, and the hole can further stay at the ligand for more than 4.5 ns (Fig. 13b). This ensures the following effective oxidative removal of unfavourable organic molecules left on QDs during the ligand exchange process. In contrast, though holes could also inject into Cl− and PO43− within 1 ps, backward recombination of the injected holes with electrons left in QDs may occur, which yielded lower charge separation efficiency. We believe that S2− balances the ionic radii and net charge to ensure the optimal condition for charge transfer among these three ligands, which finally yields the highest photocatalytic performance with S2− capped InP/ZnS QDs.
 Fig. 13  The correlation between the carrier transfer process and photocatalytic hydrogen production activity with InP/ZnS QDs. (a) TRIR differential kinetic trace (6000–5580 nm) of QDs capped with different ligands and the corresponding schematic of the hole injection dynamics. (b) Hole related carrier dynamics in QDs capped with S2− (c) photocatalytic activity of QDs capped with different ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2022, Science China Press. 

3.3 Influence on the surface reaction
As the last step in photocatalysis, the surface reaction of QDs is also crucial for photocatalytic efficiency. With delicate design of surface ligands, they can promote the combination of QDs with a catalytic center,29 or reaction species,153–155 which further improves the surface redox reactions.

3.3.1 Interaction with the catalytic center and reaction substrate. 
The surface of QDs can provide different functional groups for QDs, which is helpful to build the bridge between QDs and the catalytic center, which further improves the photocatalytic efficiency. For instance, Talapin et al. reported that after exchanging the original tetradecylphosphonic acid ligands of CdSe QDs with inorganic S2−, QDs can bind to Pt2+ for effective hydrogen evolution.156
Jin et al. constructed a photocatalytic hydrogen production system of CdS/CdSe QDs with S2− and OH− as surface ligands, respectively. They found that S2− on QDs could effectively interact with Ni2+ ions and form the catalytic center, a complex of nickel and sulphur with a ratio of 1:2. Correspondingly, the hydrogen evolution efficiency of S2− capped QDs is much higher than that of OH− capped QDs.29 Furthermore, they also studied the effect of the concentration of the S2− ligand on the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency of the system. They found that when the concentration of the S2− ligand is very low, it will completely coordinate with Ni2+ to form a catalytic center that can effectively generate H2, thus promoting the surface reaction. However, if the concentration of S2− ligands in the system exceeds twice that of Ni2+, the excess S2− ions could introduce surface traps on the QD surface. These newly formed traps will compete with the catalyst to capture the excited electrons in the QDs, resulting in the reduction of photocatalytic activity.29 Weiss et al. also reported that the negatively charged carboxylate of the MPA ligands on QDs could interact with a positively charged quaternary ammonium ion in the catalytic molecule effectively, which facilitates the assembly of CuInS2 QDs (light absorption center) and iron tetraphenylporphyrin (FeTMA, catalytic center) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.157 In addition, Wu et al. reported that the modification of CdSe QDs with per-6-thiol-cyclodextrin (CDSH) ligands could effectively promote the assembling of QDs and a catalytic center [FeFe] hydrogenase mimic via the host guest supramolecular interaction between the hydrophobic cavity of cyclodextrin (CD) and the adamantyl (AD) ligand. As such, the hydrogen evolution efficiency of the system has been improved by a factor of 12.123
It is worth noting that ligands may block the catalytic sites in some cases. Reisner et al. found that the rate of H2 generation of the ligand-free CdS QDs was 175 times higher than that of MPA capped CdS QDs in the presence of a Co complex as the catalytic center. They suggest that MPA functions as the physical barrier, which occupies the active site on the surface of QDs and limits the binding of QDs with the Co catalytic center.21 This throws us a big challenge for the optimization of photocatalytic activity by modification of ligands.
The surface reaction can also be promoted by changing the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of the surface ligands. Wang et al. also found that compared with the CdS QDs capped with hydrophobic surface ligands (1-hexanethiol), the CdS QDs capped with hydrophilic surface ligands (6-mercaptohexanoic acid) can be in better contact with the reaction substrate lignin in CH3OH/H2O solvents to enhance the surface reaction, which promotes the performance of QDs for photocatalytic conversion of lignin.158


3.3.2 Modulation of reaction products. 
In some photocatalytic reactions, there may be competition between different reaction routes, and the modification of surface ligands of QDs can increase the selectivity for the desired route as well.
Typically, photocatalytic CO2 reduction always competes with H2 evolution. Reisner et al. found that modification of colloidal ZnSe QDs with imidazolium ligands could increase the product selectivity towards CO instead of H2 by 13 times.159 DFT calculation shows that imidazolium ligands can stabilize the key *CO2− intermediate for CO2 reduction, thereby improving the selectivity towards CO.159 On the basis of this research, they further studied a series of ZnSe QDs modified with dithiols (EDT, 1,4-butanedithiol (BuDT), 1,6-hexanedithiol (HexDT) and 1,8-octanedithiol (OctDT)) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.160 They found that the catalytic activity of QDs depends on the length of the dithiol ligands. Specifically, the short dithiol ligand (EDT) can promote the reduction of CO2 and inhibit the hydrogen evolution reaction in the absence of a Ni(cyclam) co-catalyst. The long chain dithiol ligand (HexDT) further promotes CO2 reduction and inhibits hydrogen evolution in the presence of a Ni(cyclam) co-catalyst. In addition to the hydrophobic chemical environment created by these organic ligands, they suggest that short dithiol ligands (EDT) can stabilize *CO2δ− intermediates through H-bonding and promote CO2 reduction on the surface of QDs, and long dithiol ligands (HexDT) can promote the formation of *COOH intermediates on the surface of Ni(cyclam) co-catalysts and enhance the CO2 reduction reaction.160 In contrast, monothiol ligands can hardly enhance the selectivity towards CO due to the absence of terminal free –SH groups.
By promoting the interaction between QDs and the catalytic center, surface ligands can further modulate the selectivity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Li et al. constructed a photocatalytic CO2 reduction system of CdTe QDs with L-cysteine as surface ligands. They found that L-cysteine ligands on CdTe QDs could effectively interact with the catalytic center Fe2+ (CdTe-b-Fe) for CO2 reduction. At the same time, the L-cysteine ligands can also act as a charge transfer channel. Correspondingly, the CO2 reduction efficiency and carbon containing product (CH4/CO) selectivity (98%) of L-cysteine capped CdTe QDs are much higher than that of the original MPA capped QDs (Fig. 14).161
 Fig. 14  Different reaction mechanisms and activities for photocatalytic CO2 reduction with CdTe QDs. (a) QDs with MPA ligands. (b) QDs with a bridging L-cysteine ligand. (c) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity in the absence or presence of Fe ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In photocatalytic formic acid (FA) oxidation, it is found that different surface ligands of CdS QDs can also lead to the different oxidation products. Reisner et al. reported that the MPA ligand capped CdS QDs can generate H2 in FA/sodium formate solution with a high activity and more than 99% selectivity in the presence of a Co co-catalyst. In contrast, CO formation is favoured by CdS QDs with BF4 counter ions with a high activity and efficiency in aqueous solution (Fig. 15).162 In addition to the influence of the different pH values in the system discussed in this work, ligands may also contribute to different selectivities of the reaction, considering that Cd ions on the surface of QDs proved to be the active sites for CO formation.
 Fig. 15  Photocatalytic oxidation of formic acid by CdS QDs with different surface ligands. (a) Scheme of the influence of ligands on the reaction selectivity. (b) Reaction activity of CdS QDs with ligand MPA on (QD-MPA) or off (QD-BF4) in different solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 

3.4 Influence on the photocatalytic stability
In photocatalysis, not only activity but also stability is important to evaluate photocatalysts. Ligands on QDs with different binding capabilities and anchoring groups will influence the stability of QDs and the corresponding photocatalytic systems, too.
Eisenberg et al. found that compared with single or double coordinated thiol ligands, tricoordinated thiolligands help maintain the stability of CdSe QDs for photocatalytic hydrogen production. In their photocatalytic reaction system, the three tripodal thiol groups of the as-synthesized ligands can closely bind to QDs and hardly dissociate from QDs in contrast to the ligands with only one or two thiol groups. Accordingly, the activity of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution system is maintained after 60 h.18
Jaeckel and Li et al. demonstrated that lowering the concentration of ligands in CdS QDs capped with cysteine will reduce their photocatalytic stability for hydrogen evolution in the presence of Pt clusters.163 With the decreased concentration of cysteine ligands, though the activity of CdS increased initially, its stability decreased significantly (Fig. 16). At the very beginning of the photocatalytic reaction, there is an induction period with only a trace amount of hydrogen, owing to the high concentration of cysteine that tightly connected to CdS QDs. This may block the electron transfer from CdS QDs to the Pt cluster. After the gradual removal of cysteine ligands by illumination, the amount of hydrogen generated in the system increases remarkably. However, the activity drops to almost zero within 1 h due to the instability of colloidal CdS QDs with the loss of the protective ligands. Such a result shows that the concentration of ligands may have a reverse influence on stability compared to on the charge transfer process which is discussed in Section 3.2.3.163 To solve this problem, they introduced triethanolamine (TEOA) as an additional ligand in the system. The short dendritic TEOA added to the system could function as a weakly binding ligand for CdS QDs, which not only ensures the efficient electron transfer from QDs to the Pt cluster, but also maintains the stability of the colloidal QD system. As a result, long-term stability with high efficiency of the system was achieved.163
 Fig. 16  The influence of TEOA ligands on the stability of CdS QDs for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Wu et al. reported that negatively charged MPA ligands of CdTe QDs can interact with cationic chitosan to form a new ligand shell through the electrostatic interaction. This effectively improves the photocatalytic stability of the system composed of CdTe QDs and an [FeFe]-hydrogenase ([FeFe]-H2ase) mimic. The new chitosan ligand shell not only promotes the colloidal stability of CdTe QDs but also facilitates the interaction between QDs and the [FeFe]-H2ase mimic by confining them together. As a result, the activity and stability of the system was significantly improved. Specifically, the photocatalytic stability of the system was improved from 8 h to 60 h.164 Similarly, they reported the formation of a polyethylene imine (PEI) ligand shell on the surface of CdSe QDs due to the strong coordination between the amino functional group from PEI and Cd2+, which also improves the photocatalytic stability of the system composed of CdSe QDs and a poly(acrylic acid)-based [FeFe]-H2ase mimic.165
Yuan et al. studied the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activities of AgInZnS QDs capped with different molar ratios of mixed MPA/cysteine (Cys) ligands (0:10, 2:8, 4:6, 5:5, 7:3 and 8:2). They found that different ratios of MPA/Cys could not only have an impact on the charge transfer process but also influence the stability of the system. Specifically, the stability of AgInZnS QDs capped with an MPA/Cys (5:5) ligand was better than that of AgInZnS QDs capped with pure Cys.166 This is because the mixed ligand passivates the surface better, provides better surface protection and prevents light corrosion, thus improving the photocatalytic stability of AgInZnS QDs.
4. Conclusion and outlook
In this review, we have emphasized the significance of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs from several aspects. It is revealed that surface ligands can adjust the band energy structure of QDs, modify the charge transfer and separation process, impact the surface reaction as well as influence the stability of the photocatalytic system. Though a series of research studies has been devoted to this field, the study on the influence of surface ligands on photocatalytic performance still suffers from some problems and deserves more attention.
Firstly, as discussed in Section 3.2, we mentioned that some properties of the surface ligands, such as the adsorption mode on QDs, could influence the charge transfer process with electron acceptors. However, relative study in a specific photocatalytic system is very limited. In addition, one factor of ligands could influence several photocatalytic processes simultaneously. For example, as we mentioned in Section 3.2.3, 3.3.1 and 3.4, the concentration of ligands not only influences the charge transfer process, but also influences the surface reaction process as well as photocatalytic stability. We believe that other factors like the adsorption configuration or chain lengths of ligands could have a similar influence, and more work in this field should be encouraged in the future.
Secondly, the influence of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance could be the combined results of several factors in many circumstances. These factors entwine with one another; this may make the clear attribution of the reasons behind various photocatalytic activities difficult and influence our judgement. Therefore, careful design with a single variable and comprehensive characterization of surface ligands is suggested, which could rule out interference from multiple factors to the maximum extent.
Thirdly, although there is some study focusing on the stability of the photocatalytic system as reviewed in Section 3.4, more attention should be given to this, and the possible exfoliation of surface ligands from QDs during the photocatalytic process should be considered seriously. This is because photogenerated holes with strong oxidative capability could decompose the surface ligands. How to retain the intactness of surface ligands and maintain the colloidal stability during photocatalysis is still a challenge to us.
Currently, the influence of surface ligands on the photocatalytic performance of QDs is relatively lacking in contrast to that of others, such as the composition, shape and size control of QDs. We hope that this paper would help readers realize the importance of surface ligands of QDs in photocatalysis and inspire more studies in this area.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22002123, 22211530070, 22109132 and 22178291), National High-end Foreign Experts Recruitment Program (G2022036015L) and Special Project for the Central Government to Guide the Development of Local Science and Technology in Sichuan Province (22ZYZYTS0231).
Notes and references
A. I. Ekimov, A. L. Efros and A. A. Onushchenko, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 921–924 CrossRef CAS.
R. Rossetti, S. Nakahara and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS.
M. A. Reed, Superlattices Microstruct., 1988, 4, 741–747 CrossRef.
C. J. Murphy, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 520A–526A CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Chowdhury and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5417–5418 CrossRef CAS.
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002454 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. E. Hughes, J. L. Stein, M. R. Friedfeld, B. M. Cossairt and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14198–14207 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Wang and N. Herron, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 525–532 CrossRef CAS.
H. S. Rao, W. Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS.
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Serό, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Zou, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. Liu, R. Feng, F. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng, M. Hong and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443–11450 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Chen, Y. Q. Xu, W. H. Jiang, Z. X. Xie, L. J. Wang and W. Jiang, Inorg. Mater., 2020, 35, 439–446 Search PubMed.
E. A. Weiss, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1005–1013 CrossRef CAS.
K. P. McClelland and E. A. Weiss, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 92–96 CrossRef.
F. Wang, W. G. Wang, X. J. Wang, H. Y. Wang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3193–3197 CrossRef CAS.
Z. J. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Das, Z. Han, M. G. Haghighi and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A, 2013, 110, 16716–16723 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z. J. Li, J. J. Wang, X. B. Li, X. B. Fan, Q. Y. Meng, K. Feng, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6613–6618 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z. J. Li, X. B. Fan, X. B. Li, J. X. Li, C. Ye, J. J. Wang, S. Yu, C. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Q. Y. Meng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8261–8268 CrossRef CAS.
C. M. Chang, K. L. Orchard, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, J. Mater. Chem.
A, 2016, 4, 2856–2862 RSC.
J. J. Wang, Z. J. Li, X. B. Li, X. B. Fan, Q. Y. Meng, S. Yu, C. B. Li, J. X. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1468–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. J. Gao, Y. Yang, X. B. Li, H. L. Wu, S. L. Meng, Y. Wang, Q. Guo, M. Y. Huang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4858–4861 RSC.
S. Yu, X. B. Fan, X. Wang, J. Li, Q. Zhang, A. Xia, S. Wei, L. Z. Wu, Y. Zhou and G. R. Patzke, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4009 CrossRef PubMed.
S. Yu, Z. Xie, M. Ran, F. Wu, Y. Zhong, M. Dan and Y. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 573, 71–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. N. Chakraborty, S. Roy, G. Devatha, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2258–2262 CrossRef CAS.
J. Bang, S. Das, E. J. Yu, K. Kim, H. Lim, S. Kim and J. W. Hong, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6263–6271 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. B. Fan, S. Yu, F. Zhan, Z. J. Li, Y. J. Gao, X. B. Li, L. P. Zhang, Y. Tao, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4833–4838 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Wang, J. Zhang, H. He, X. Xu and Y. Jin, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13470–13475 RSC.
P. Wang, J. Zhang, H. He, X. Xu and Y. Jin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5767–5775 RSC.
Z. J. Li, X. B. Fan, X. B. Li, J. X. Li, F. Zhan, Y. Tao, X. Zhang, Q. Y. Kong, N. J. Zhao, J. P. Zhang, C. Ye, Y. J. Gao, X. Z. Wang, Q. Y. Meng, K. Feng, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10365–10373 RSC.
Y. J. Gao, X. B. Li, X. Z. Wang, N. J. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. K. Xin, J. P. Zhang, T. Zhang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Matter, 2020, 3, 571–585 CrossRef.
Y. Yuan, H. Zhu, K. Hills-Kimball, T. Cai, W. Shi, Z. Wei, H. Yang, Y. Candler, P. Wang, J. He and O. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22563–22569 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Wang, M. Wang, F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. Yao, X. Liu and F. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1914–1918 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. F. Kuehnel, C. D. Sahm, G. Neri, J. R. Lee, K. L. Orchard, A. J. Cowanb and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2501–2509 RSC.
Z. K. Xin, Y. J. Gao, Y. Gao, H. W. Song, J. Zhao, F. Fan, A. D. Xia, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 34, e2106662 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. K. Xin, M. Y. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. J. Gao, Q. Guo, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202207222 CAS.
Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Zhu, F. Wang, F. Teng, W. Jiang and Y. Yang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 2474–2478 CrossRef CAS.
D. Kandi, S. Martha, A. Thirumurugan and K. M. Parida, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 9040–9056 CrossRef CAS.
R. Abargues, J. Navarro, P. J. Rodríguez-Cantό, A. Maulu, J. F. Sánchez-Royo and J. P. Martinez-Pastor, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1978–1987 RSC.
M. Y. Shu, J. l. Lu, Z. J. Zhang, T. Shen and J. Y. Xu, Inorg. Mater., 2021, 36, 1217–1222 CrossRef.
R. He, R. Chen, J. Luo, S. Zhang and D. Xu, Acta. Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2011022 Search PubMed.
Y. Z. Shangguan, Y. H. Zhou, R. J. Zheng, X. Z. Feng, Q. Y. Ge, R. H. Wang, D. Z. Yang, W. F. Wei, X. Y. Wu, J. Lin and H. Chen, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 3450–3456 CrossRef CAS.
X. B. Li, Z. J. Li, Y. J. Gao, Q. Y. Meng, S. Yu, R. G. Weiss, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2085–2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Huang, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem. Eur. J., 2018, 24, 11530–11534 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. L. Nan, Y. Wang, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 6768–6771 RSC.
C. Huang, J. Qiao, R. N. Ci, X. Z. Wang, Y. Wang, J. H. Wang, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem, 2021, 7, 1244–1257 CAS.
J. Qiao, Z. Q. Song, C. Huang, R. N. Ci, Z. Liu, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 27201–27205 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Dai and Y. Xiong, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, 1, e9120006 CrossRef.
M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. E. Dalle and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7217–7223 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati, D. S. Dolzhnikov, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8931–8938 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Y. Wang, F. Zhan, X. Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Kong, N. J. Zhao, Q. Guo, H. L. Wu, Z. J. Li, Y. Tao, J. P. Zhang, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4789–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Huang, X. Wang, J. Yang, G. Liu, J. Han and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11584–11591 CrossRef CAS.
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS.
L. Z. Wu, B. Chen, Z. J. Li and C. H. Tung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2177–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 160–173 CrossRef CAS.
H. L. Wu, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900709 CrossRef PubMed.
X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10804–10811 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. B. Li, Z. K. Xin, S. G. Xia, X. Y. Gao, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9028–9056 RSC.
J. Wu, J. Liu, W. Xia, Y. Y. Ren and F. Wang, Acta. Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2008043 Search PubMed.
X. B. Fan, S. Yu, X. Wang, Z. J. Li, F. Zhan, J. X. Li, Y. J. Gao, A. D. Xia, Y. Tao, X. B. Li, L. P. Zhang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804872 CrossRef PubMed.
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC.
N. Kirkwood, J. O. V. Monchen, R. W. Crisp, G. Grimaldi, H. A. C. Bergstein, I. du Fossé, W. van der Stam, I. Infante and A. J. Houtepen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15712–15723 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. G. Kim, D. Zherebetskyy, Y. Bekenstein, M. H. Oh, L. W. Wang, E. Jang and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11529–11540 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. H. M. van Oversteeg, F. E. Oropeza, J. P. Hofmann, E. J. M. Hensen, P. E. de Jongh and C. d. M. Donega, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 541–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Yang, H. Qin, M. Jiang, L. Lin, T. Fu, X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Niu, H. Cao, Y. Jin, F. Zhao and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2133–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Nolf, S. M. Cosseddu, J. J. Jasieniak, E. Drijvers, J. C. Martins, I. Infante and Z. Hens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3456–3464 CrossRef PubMed.
P. R. Brown, D. Kim, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, J. C. Grossman and V. Bulović, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5863–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. M. Harvey, D. W. Houck, W. Liu, Y. Liu, D. J. Gosztola, B. A. Korgel, M. R. Wasielewski and R. D. Schaller, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19588–19599 CrossRef CAS.
F. Xu, L. F. Gerlein, X. Ma, C. R. Haughn, M. F. Doty and S. G. Cloutier, Materials, 2015, 8, 1858–1870 CrossRef CAS.
M. Tagliazucchi, D. B. Tice, C. M. Sweeney, A. J. Morris-Cohen and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9907–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. V. Vokhmintcev, P. S. Samokhvalov and I. Nabiev, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 189–211 CrossRef CAS.
W. Wang, M. Zhang, Z. Pan, G. M. Biesold, S. Liang, H. Rao, Z. Lin and X. Zhong, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4091–4162 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Liu, N. Yazdani, M. Yarema, M. Jansen, V. Wood and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 548–558 CrossRef.
C. Melnychuk and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 2325–2372 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. P. Litvin, I. V. Martynenko, F. Purcell-Milton, A. V. Baranov, A. V. Fedorov and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13252–13275 RSC.
M. Jouyandeh, S. S. M. Khadem, S. Habibzadeh, A. Esmaeili, O. Abida, V. Vatanpour, N. Rabiee, M. Bagherzadeh, S. Iravani, M. R. Saeb and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4931–4954 RSC.
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and L. Tan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 296, 91–124 CrossRef CAS.
B. Bajorowicz, M. P. Kobylanski, A. Golabiewska, J. Nadolna, A. Zaleska-Medynska and A. Malankowska, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 256, 352–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Burke, K. L. Bren and T. D. Krauss, J. Chem. Phys., 2021, 154, 030901 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Wang, Y. Shi, Y. Wang and Z. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 2043–2059 CrossRef CAS.
J. Aguilera-Sigalat and D. Bradshaw, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 267–291 CrossRef CAS.
A. Kusior, M. Synowiec, K. Zakrzewska and M. Radecka, Crystals, 2019, 9, 163 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Shang and L. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500140 CrossRef PubMed.
P. Losch, W. Huang, E. D. Goodman, C. J. Wrasman, A. Holm, A. R. Riscoe, J. A. Schwalbe and M. Cargnello, Nano Today, 2019, 24, 15–47 CrossRef CAS.
M. Periyasamy and A. Kar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4604–4635 RSC.
B. Fritzinger, R. K. Capek, K. Lambert, J. Martins and Z. Hens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10195–10201 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. D. Roo, Y. Justo, K. D. Keukeleere, F. V. d. Broeck, J. C. Martins, I. V. Driessche and Z. Hens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6488–6491 CrossRef PubMed.
N. C. Anderson, M. P. Hendricks, J. J. Choi and J. S. Owen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18536–18548 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. L. Sowers, B. Swartz and T. D. Krauss, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS.
S. Tamang, C. Lincheneau, Y. Hermans, S. Jeong and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2491–2506 CrossRef CAS.
P. Zrazhevskiy, M. Sena and X. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4326–4354 RSC.
V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2905–2929 RSC.
C. L. Hartley, M. L. Kessler and J. L. Dempsey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 1251–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. J. Buckley, E. Couderc, M. J. Greaney, J. Munteanu, C. T. Riche, S. E. Bradforth and R. L. Brutchey, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2512–2521 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. M. Kroupa, M. Vörös, N. P. Brawand, B. W. McNichols, E. M. Miller, J. Gu, A. J. Nozik, A. Sellinger, G. Galli and M. C. Beard, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15257 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Jasieniak, M. Califano and S. E. Watkins, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5888–5902 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Nag, M. V. Kovalenko, J. S. Lee, W. Liu, B. Spokoyny and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. J. J. Draaisma, D. Reardon, A. P. H. J. Schenning, S. C. J. Meskers and C. W. M. Bastiaansen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5747–5754 RSC.
Z. Hens and J. C. Martins, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1211–1221 CrossRef CAS.
X. Liu, M. Yu, H. Kim, M. Mameli and F. Stellacci, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1182 CrossRef PubMed.
W. Wang, S. Banerjee, S. Jia, M. L. Steigerwald and I. P. Herman, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2573–2580 CrossRef CAS.
K. E. Knowles, D. B. Tice, E. A. McArthur, G. C. Solomon and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1041–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. P. Bloom, L. B. Zhao, Y. Wang, D. H. Waldeck, R. Liu, P. Zhang and D. N. Beratan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22401–22411 CrossRef CAS.
A. Pan, B. He, X. Fan, Z. Liu, J. J. Urban, A. P. Alivisatos, L. He and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7943–7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Giansante, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18110–18116 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Pang, J. Zhang, W. Cao, X. Kong and X. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2454 CrossRef PubMed.
J. J. Calvin, J. K. Swabeck, A. B. Sedlak, Y. Kim, E. Jang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18897–18906 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Tamang, G. Beaune, I. Texier and P. Reiss, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9392–9402 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. D. Nolf, R. K. Capek, S. Abe, M. Sluydts, Y. Jang, J. C. Martins, S. Cottenier, E. Lifshitz and Z. Hens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2495–2505 CrossRef PubMed.
Y. Chen, J. M. Cordero, H. Wang, D. Franke, O. B. Achorn, F. S. Freyria, I. Coropceanu, H. Wei, O. Chen, D. J. Mooney and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4652–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. L. Hartley, M. L. Kessler, C. Y. Dones Lassalle, A. M. Camp and J. L. Dempsey, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 8612–8622 CrossRef CAS.
J. S. Owen, J. Park, P. E. Trudeau and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12279–12281 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Malicki, K. E. Knowles and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4400–4402 RSC.
H. Jin, S. Choi, G. Xing, J. H. Lee, Y. Kwon, W. K. Chong, T. C. Sum, H. M. Jang and S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13827–13835 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Protesescu, M. Nachtegaal, O. Voznyy, O. Borovinskaya, A. J. Rossini, L. Emsley, C. Copéret, D. Günther, E. H. Sargent and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1862–1874 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. H. Webber and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Seo, M. Bang, Y. Kim, C. Son, H. B. Jeon and S. W. Kim, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 11517–11523 RSC.
A. Dauth and J. A. Love, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 7782–7791 RSC.
J. J. Buckley, M. J. Greaney and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6311–6317 CrossRef CAS.
X. B. Li, J. X. Jian, X. Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. G. Xia, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000474 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Luo, D. Marson, Q. K. Ong, A. Loiudice, J. Kohlbrecher, A. Radulescu, A. Krause-Heuer, T. Darwish, S. Balog, R. Buonsanti, D. I. Svergun, P. Posocco and F. Stellacci, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1343 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Luo, Y. Yang, A. Radulescu, J. Kohlbrecher, T. A. Darwish, Q. K. Ong, S. Guldin and F. Stellacci, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6750–6758 CrossRef CAS.
M. P. Weir, D. T. W. Toolan, R. C. Kilbride, N. J. W. Penfold, A. L. Washington, S. M. King, J. Xiao, Z. Zhang, V. Gray, S. Dowland, J. Winkel, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend, A. Rao, A. J. Ryan and R. A. L. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4713–4719 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. W. Winslow, Y. Liu, J. W. Swan and W. A. Tisdale, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 209–216 CrossRef CAS.
Z. A. P. Lianhua Qu and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 333–337 CrossRef.
W. W. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2368–2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Ouyang, J. Kuijper, S. Brot, D. Kingston, X. Wu, D. M. Leek, M. Z. Hu, J. A. Ripmeester and K. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7579–7593 CrossRef CAS.
X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. J. Calvin, T. M. Kaufman, A. B. Sedlak, M. F. Crook and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2663 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Kuang, C. Zhu, W. He, X. Wang, Y. He, X. Ran and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 23905–23912 CrossRef CAS.
J. Cho, H. Jin, D. G. Sellers, D. F. Watson, D. H. Son and S. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8810–8818 RSC.
D. A. Hines and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3041–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. F. Fu, X. Wu and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802106 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Ning, O. Voznyy, J. Pan, S. Hoogland, V. Adinolfi, J. Xu, M. Li, A. R. Kirmani, J. P. Sun, J. Minor, K. W. Kemp, H. Dong, L. Rollny, A. Labelle, G. Carey, B. Sutherland, I. Hill, A. Amassian, H. Liu, J. Tang, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 822–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. E. Knowles, M. Malicki and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12470–12473 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. D. Peterson, M. T. Frederick, J. M. Kamm and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2840–2844 CrossRef CAS.
E. K. Raulerson, D. M. Cadena, M. A. Jabed, C. D. Wight, I. Lee, H. R. Wagner, J. T. Brewster II, B. L. Iverson, S. Kilina and S. T. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 1416–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. E. Knowles, M. T. Frederick, D. B. Tice, A. J. Morris-Cohen and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 3, 18–26 CrossRef.
W. Yang, G. E. Vansuch, Y. Liu, T. Jin, Q. Liu, A. Ge, M. L. K. Sanchez, D. K. Haja, M. W. W. Adams, R. B. Dyer and T. Lian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35614–35625 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Xu, W. Zhang, K. Su, Y. X. Feng, Y. F. Mu, M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Chem. Eur. J., 2021, 27, 2305–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Liu, F. Che, B. Sun, O. Voznyy, A. Proppe, R. Munir, M. Wei, R. Quintero-Bermudez, L. Hu, S. Hoogland, A. Mandelis, A. Amassian, S. O. Kelley, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1225–1230 CrossRef CAS.
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. T. Frederick, L. C. Cass and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10146–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Xiao, M. Hao, M. Lyu, E. G. Moore, C. Zhang, B. Luo, J. Hou, J. Lipton-Duffin and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905683 CrossRef CAS.
X. Liu, H. Zhao, L. Wei, X. Ren, X. Zhang, F. Li, P. Zeng and M. Liu, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10, 1967–1975 CrossRef CAS.
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11272–11276 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. B. Li, B. Liu, M. Wen, Y. J. Gao, H. L. Wu, M. Y. Huang, Z. J. Li, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500282 CrossRef PubMed.
J. T. DuBose and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 12990–12998 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Ren, J. Yu, Z. Pan, J. Wang and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18936–18944 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, M. Abdellah, W. Lin, J. Meng, Q. Zhao, S. Yu, Z. Xie, Q. Pan, F. Zhang, T. Pullerits and K. Zheng, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 65, 2529–2539 CrossRef CAS.
X. Pei, D. Xiong, H. Wang, S. Gao, X. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3687–3691 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Xiong, M. Chen, X. Cui, Q. Wang, X. Liu and B. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22851–22857 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Tu, Q. Wang, F. Zhang, F. Lan, H. Liu and R. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4410–4417 RSC.
A. Nag, D. S. Chung, D. S. Dolzhnikov, N. M. Dimitrijevic, S. Chattopadhyay, T. Shibata and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13604–13615 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 568–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Wu, S. Xie, C. Liu, C. Zhou, J. Lin, J. Kang, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8443–8451 CrossRef CAS.
C. D. Sahm, E. Mates-Torres, N. Eliasson, K. Sokolowski, A. Wagner, K. E. Dalle, Z. Huang, O. A. Scherman, L. Hammarstrom, M. Garcia-Melchor and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9078–9087 RSC.
C. D. Sahm, A. Ciotti, E. Mates-Torres, V. Badiani, K. Sokolowski, G. Neri, A. J. Cowan, M. Garcia-Melchor and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 5988–5998 RSC.
Y. Bao, J. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Cui, R. Long and Z. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2507–2514 RSC.
M. F. Kuehnel, D. W. Wakerley, K. L. Orchard and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9627–9631 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Li, J. R. Lee and F. Jaeckel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29434–29441 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. X. Jian, Q. Liu, Z. J. Li, F. Wang, X. B. Li, C. B. Li, B. Liu, Q. Y. Meng, B. Chen, K. Feng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2695 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Wen, X. B. Li, J. X. Jian, X. Z. Wang, H. L. Wu, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29851 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Mao, B. Luo, K. Zhang, W. Wei, Z. Kang, W. Shi and S. Yuan, Catal. Lett., 2019, 149, 1800–1812 CrossRef CAS.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure of quantum dots.	 

 	Fig. 2  Proposed structure and SANS data of PbS QDs. (a) Proposed structure of the thin PbClx shell on PbS. (b)–(d) SANS data: (b) fitted intensity profiles with different solvent (toluene) deuteration fractions. (c) Fitted volume fraction profile. (d) Fitted scattering length density (SLD) profile for the fully deuterated sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The influence of surface ligands on energy levels of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structures of different surface ligands. (b) The energy level shift of each ligand modified QD (black arrows) is the sum of the contributions of the interface dipole (red arrows) and the intrinsic dipole of the ligand (blue arrows). (c) Complete energy level diagrams of PbS QDs exchanged with the ligands shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The influence of functionalized cinnamic acid molecules on the energy level of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structure of oleylamine and a library of functionalized cinnamic acid molecules. (b) Schematic diagram of the energy structure of PbS QDs with different ligands shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Impact of the adsorption configuration on the electron transfer rate. (a and b) Two mechanisms of photoinduced electron transfer from the PbS QDs to BQ: (a) static PET and (b) collisional PET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Different adsorption configurations of ligands on the surface of CdSe QDs, and a possible electron transfer pathway. (through-bond, red, and through-space, blue) for each configuration. (d) The intrinsic charge separation rate (kCS,int) for the CdSe QD-viologen complexes in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  The influence of different adsorption configurations of spectator ligands on the charge transfer process of PbS QDs. (a) Chemical structures of spectator ligands and a PDI electron acceptor. (b) Energy-minimized structures of PbS:PDI QDs capped with 2,6-F-CA- and 4-CF3-CA-spectator ligands. (c) The kET,int values of PbS:PDI QDs with different spectator ligands and the spatial separation data of PDI:PbS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electron transfer behaviour of CdSe QDs capped by HS–(CH2)n–COOH− with different chain lengths. (a) Structure of the CdSe QDs capped with HS–(CH2)n–COOH; reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) The relationship between the ligand chain length and electron transfer rate. n is the number of methylenes in the HS–(CH2)n–COOH ligand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

1	1.23	0.17	—	—	0.42	1.3	—	—
2	1.51	0.06	—	—	0.37	2.5	—	—
5	1.02	0.22	—	—	0.63	2.2	—	—
7	0.92	0.25	—	—	0.83	7.8	—	—
10	0.21	0.25	0.28	0.24	3.3	27.5	222	2884
15	0.22	0.27	0.21	0.30	1.2	18.2	305	6072

 	Fig. 8  The influence of the ligand chain length of CdS QDs. (a) Schematic diagram of CdS QDs for a hydrogen production system. (b) The effect of the ligand length dependence on electron transfer and the efficiency of H2 production. The n is the amount of CH2 in the alkyl chain. (c and d) Distribution of surface ligands HS–(CH2)n–COOH and redox mediator PDQ2+ when 2 ≤ n ≤ 7 (c) and n ≥ 10 (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Influence of the concentration of V2+ ligands on the charge transfer process of CdS QDs. (a and b) The kinetic analysis of the GSB signal in the TA spectra of CdS QDs with different amounts of electron acceptor ligands in the timescale of the (a) 0–75 ps and (b) 0–3000 ps region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Relationship of the concentration of surface-bound ligands and electron transfer rate ket. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  NMR and photocatalytic properties of CsPbBr3 QDs with different ligand concentrations. (a) 1H-NMR spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs with different ligand concentrations. The ligand concentration decreased from CsPbBr3-1 to CsPbBr3-3. (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of various samples (visible light >420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Energy level of CdSe QD (orange), HOMO and LUMO energy levels of various ligands (black) and the corresponding electron transfer rate from the three inorganic ligand capped CdSe QDs to TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  The influence of different S2− concentrations on CdSe QDs capped with MPA for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  The correlation between the carrier transfer process and photocatalytic hydrogen production activity with InP/ZnS QDs. (a) TRIR differential kinetic trace (6000–5580 nm) of QDs capped with different ligands and the corresponding schematic of the hole injection dynamics. (b) Hole related carrier dynamics in QDs capped with S2− (c) photocatalytic activity of QDs capped with different ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2022, Science China Press.	 

 	Fig. 14  Different reaction mechanisms and activities for photocatalytic CO2 reduction with CdTe QDs. (a) QDs with MPA ligands. (b) QDs with a bridging L-cysteine ligand. (c) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity in the absence or presence of Fe ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Photocatalytic oxidation of formic acid by CdS QDs with different surface ligands. (a) Scheme of the influence of ligands on the reaction selectivity. (b) Reaction activity of CdS QDs with ligand MPA on (QD-MPA) or off (QD-BF4) in different solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  The influence of TEOA ligands on the stability of CdS QDs for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
