From graphite to graphene : direct liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce single- and few-layered pristine graphene  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA12212C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12212C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10592-10606Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFrom graphite to graphene: direct liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce single- and few-layered pristine graphene

        
          
            Wencheng 
            Du
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lihua 
            Zhu
          
        
      b
aJiangsu Key Laboratory of New Power Batteries, College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University, 122 Ninghai Road, Nanjing 210097, P.R. China. E-mail: jiangxiaoqing@njnu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 25 85891767
bDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P.R. China
Received 
      7th June 2013
    , Accepted 15th July 2013First published on 15th July 2013AbstractGraphene, a two-dimensional crystalline form of carbon, has attracted wide and intense interest owing to its excellent physical properties and because its surface and edges can be chemically modified readily. Development of a method for producing high-quality graphene in large quantities is essential for further investigation of its properties and applications. The direct liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce graphene is a convenient method for generating ideal graphene samples in large quantities. This direct method, which involves the use of colloidal suspensions, is based on the one-step physical transformation of graphite into graphene and has many unique advantages. A large number of liquids have been employed as exfoliation media and show a range of exfoliation efficiencies. In this review, we highlight the recent progress made on the exfoliation of bulky graphite powders or flakes into single- and few-layered graphene sheets in various liquids, including organic solvents, ionic liquids, and water/surfactant solutions. The qualities and yields of the exfoliated graphene samples, as well as their use in various applications, are also reviewed. Furthermore, future research directions for the development of novel exfoliation media and more efficient techniques for producing well-exfoliated pristine graphene are proposed.Wencheng DuWencheng Du received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from the Changsha University of Science and Technology in 2008, and Master's degree from the Department of Chemistry and Materials Science at Nanjing Normal University in 2013. His research interests include preparation of high-quality graphene, defect-free graphene-based nanomaterials, energy storage and conversion. Currently, he is focusing on liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce pristine graphene. He will begin his PhD studies at Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing (with Lijun Wan) in the fall of 2013.Xiaoqing JiangXiaoqing Jiang received her MS degree from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 1990 and her PhD degree from the Hiroshima University in 2003. She worked in the Chemistry Department, Nanjing Normal University as an Assistant (1990) and a Lecturer (1993). From 2003 to 2005 she worked in the Graduate School of Engineering, Hiroshima University as an Assistant Professor. Then she moved to College of Chemistry and Materials Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, where she was successively appointed as Associate Professor (2005) and Professor (2008). Liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce pristine graphene is among her research interests and projects.
1 Introduction
Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) crystalline material that consists of a single atomic layer of carbon bonded together in a hexagonal lattice resembling a honeycomb. It is considered as the parent of other low-dimensional carbon allotropes such as fullerene (0D) and carbon nanotubes (1D).1 Graphene has attracted a lot of attention and has been the subject of numerous theoretical and practical investigations owing to its extraordinary physical and chemical properties. These properties include the manifestation of an unusual quantum Hall effect,2 a tenable band gap,3 high mobility of charge carriers (10000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature;4 the theoretical limit at low temperatures is 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 5)), excellent thermal conductivity (5000 W m−1 K−1 and 10 times higher than that of copper)6 and high optical transparency (∼97.7%).7 It also exhibits a high theoretical specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1)8 and remarkable mechanical strength and flexibility (Young's modulus ∼ 1 TPa).9 In addition, graphene can be tailored and modified through a variety of chemical interactions so as to form numerous graphene-based derivatives with desirable properties.10 Graphene and its derivatives are promising candidates as novel functional materials in physical, chemical, and biological applications, including as semiconductor materials in transistors,11 liquid crystal devices,12 electrochemical biological sensors,13,14 hydrogen-based energy storage devices,15 supercapacitors, batteries, solar cells, and fuel cells.16
Over the past few years, numerous methods, including micromechanical cleavage,17 chemical vapour deposition (CVD),18 epitaxial growth on SiC substrates,19 and the chemical reduction of graphene oxide (GO),20 to name a few, have been used to produce pristine graphene or graphene-like materials such as graphene oxides and reduced graphene oxides. The graphene-type carbon nanomaterials obtained using these approaches have been widely investigated, and many new discoveries, and even significant breakthroughs, have been made in a wide range of areas. However, the thus-produced graphene-type materials are of less than desirable quality or can be synthesised only in low quantities. For example, the micromechanical cleavage method as well as CVD-like growth processes can generate pristine graphene sheets but in rather limited quantities. Although the CVD method is promising for the mass production of large-area graphene sheets for application in electronics, the complexity of the process, the harsh conditions (such as the high temperature and vacuum), high costs associated with it, and the difficulties encountered in transferring the produced sheets between various substrates limit its applicability. On the other hand, methods based on the reduction of graphene oxide are able to produce graphene samples on an industrial scale; however, these samples have significant compositional and structural defects, which greatly affect their electronic and electrical nature20,21 and thus result in degraded performances, although the chemical modification of the sheets and their transfer between various substrates can be done with ease, given that the techniques are based on wet chemistry. These intractable problems have slowed the development of applications and devices based on pristine graphene. As a result, the development of an alternative approach for producing high-quality graphene in large quantities is essential and of urgency.
A new synthesis route, namely the liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite through the sonication of graphite powder in well-chosen liquids, such as common organic solvents and aqueous surfactant solutions, was developed by Coleman et al. in 2008–2009.22,23 The method builds on the results of previous theoretical and experimental studies on the dispersion of carbon nanotubes in solvents24 and enables one to transform graphite into graphene. Coleman and co-workers physically characterised the synthesised graphene in detail and provided conclusive evidence regarding the presence of mono- and multilayered graphene sheets in the resulting graphene suspensions. More importantly, they corroborated that the synthesised graphene samples were free from oxides and structural defects. Thin graphene films could be fabricated by vacuum filtration of the as-obtained graphene dispersions; these films exhibited high conductivity.22,23 In addition, graphene/polymer composites could be prepared readily by adding polymers into the as-prepared graphene dispersions. These composites show great promise as highly conductive materials that can replace other carbonaceous composites in the design of microelectronic devices. In addition, graphene mono- and multilayers could be deposited on certain substrates such as SiO2 surfaces by spray coating.22 The direct exfoliation method is thus a simple and cost-effective way of producing high-quality graphene on a large scale using colloidal suspensions and deserves to be investigated further. In fact, such efforts have led to increases in exfoliation efficiency and graphene yield. Finally, since this technique is based on the mild wet chemistry of graphite and graphene, the directly exfoliated graphene (DEG) layers remain intact and thus retain their original nature.
Here, we present an overview of the most recent developments in the direct liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite using a variety of exfoliating reagents to yield high-quality graphene. The quality and yield of the exfoliated graphene, its electrical and optical properties, as well as a few of its applications are also discussed. The drawbacks of the reported exfoliation systems are discussed and methods to improve them are proposed. The electrical conductivity of DEG is compared with that of chemically converted graphene (CCG) reported in the literature.
2 Graphene from graphite
As the most common form of carbon, graphite has been known and used throughout the ages in a variety of applications, including in pencils and as solid lubricants. On the other hand, though graphene is a relatively new form of carbon, it has become the most popular nanomaterial owing to its unique and remarkable properties. It is well known that graphite is crystalline with a layered structure,25 as can be seen in Fig. 1a. Each layer of graphite is a 2D carbon monolayer composed of sp2-hybridised, hexagonally bonded carbon atoms. Each such layer constitutes graphene. Graphite can be considered as a regularly stacked entity comprising graphene sheets held together by the van der Waals forces between the π–π stacked graphene layers, which have an interlayer spacing of 0.34 nm.26
 Fig. 1  Graphite structure with ABA stacking of carbon layers (a); SEM image of graphite (b) and TEM image of exfoliated single-layer graphene (c); dispersed graphene concentration obtained by the liquid-phase exfoliation method as a function of solvent surface tension/energy (d). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright: 2008 Nature Publishing Group.) Zeta potentials of exfoliated graphene dispersions plotted against donor numbers (blue, shaded squares) and acceptor numbers (red, open squares) for 10 different organic solvents (e). (Reproduced from ref. 43.) 
The molecular attractive force between adjacent layers of graphite is relatively weak27 and can be surmounted by an external mechanical force. It can also be weakened or even completely reduced by increasing the interlayer distance between the graphite layers, since the van der Waals force is proportional to 1/r6, where r is the distance between the molecules.28 It has been reported that the van der Waals force becomes zero for interlayer spacings greater than 5 Å.29,30 This can be realized by intercalating the graphite interlayers with various atomic or molecular species; this process is known as graphite intercalation. These facts suggest that it is possible to disaggregate graphite into individual graphene monolayers. In fact, mono- and multilayered graphene samples have been generated by the Scotch tape method,17 the ball milling technique,31,32 and the graphite intercalation approach.33
As mentioned above, graphite can also be exfoliated or dissolved in certain liquids to directly yield graphene sheets (Fig. 1b and c).34 This procedure can be considered a quasi-dissolving process quite similar to the dissolution of polymers in special liquids. The mechanism underlying the liquid-phase exfoliation process can be elucidated from a thermodynamic perspective in terms of the enthalpy of mixing, as well as the charge transfer between the carbon layers of graphite and the solvent molecules.22,35 In the case of the former, an approximate expression, given below, was proposed by Coleman et al.22 in order to account for their experimental results that those organic solvents the surface tensions or energies of which are similar to that of graphene were likely to be effective dissolution media (∼40–50 mJ m−2)22,35 (as shown in Fig. 1d).  where ΔHmix is the enthalpy of mixing, Vmix is the volume of the mixture, TNS is the thickness of a graphene nanosheet, ES,S and ES,G are the surface energies of the solvent and graphene, respectively, and ϕG is the volume fraction of graphene dispersed. It is clear that ΔHmix will have the minimal value when ES,S is close or equivalent to ES,G, implying that exfoliation occurs readily in this case owing to the minimal energy cost and can be induced by mild sonication. The equation is useful for the preliminary selection of reagents that can serve as suitable exfoliation media from a large number of common and special organic solvents. By using the equation, certain reagents, including benzyl benzoate, 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP), γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA), N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone (NVP), and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), the surface energies of which match with that of graphene, could be classified as good exfoliating reagents, while others such as ethanol, acetone, and water, the surface energies of which were significantly lower than that of graphene, were determined to be poor media for graphite exfoliation.22,23,36 With respect to the latter, Bourlinos et al.37 found that a few aromatic and nonaromatic solvents with either strong electron-withdrawing or electron-donating functional groups can be used as media for exfoliating and stabilizing graphene. It has been proposed that the charge transfer between the solvent molecules and graphite layers, which act either as donors or acceptors, is what allows graphite to be exfoliated. Such donor–acceptor interactions are very common during graphite intercalation processes38–40 as well as during interactions between solvent molecules and other graphitic carbons such as carbon nanotubes41 and fullerene (C60).42 It has been demonstrated that exfoliated graphene sheets are either negatively or positively charged when dispersed in organic solvents;43 this was done on the basis of electrophoresis and zeta potential measurements of the dispersions. It has been proposed that the charge transfer between the graphitic carbon sheets and the solvent molecules is responsible for this phenomenon. Graphene was found to be negatively or positively charged depending on the solvent used, which had different donor and acceptor numbers, resulting in stable dispersions that exhibited different zeta potentials (Fig. 1e). The electrostatic repulsion between the charged graphitic layers facilitates the disaggregation of graphite and stabilises the exfoliated graphene sheets dispersed in the solvent. It has been reported that charged carbon atoms in graphite do not participate in the π-bonding network owing to their changed electronic structure,44 which results in a significant decrease in the van der Waals forces between the graphite interlayers. The charge transfer mechanism may be responsible for the efficient exfoliation of graphite in ionic liquids45,46 and chlorosulphonic acid,47 both of which exhibit strong charge interactions with the π electrons of graphite/graphene owing to their own high ionicities. In addition, stabilisers such as surfactants and polymers are essential for the efficient exfoliation of graphite in certain solvents and, in particular, water.23,48,49 Such stabilisers when decorated on the graphite/graphene surfaces can adjust the surface wettabilities and prevent large graphene sheets from aggregating via electrostatic repulsion or the steric stabilization effect, which plays an important role in determining the yield of the exfoliation process and the stability of the exfoliated sheets. However, it is difficult to determine exactly what happens between the different molecules in the various phases during the exfoliation process on a microscopic or molecular level. Detailed studies of the exfoliation process, especially those that have a molecular focus, will be a challenge but are essential for exploring and designing media suited for the large-scale production of pristine graphene through green chemistry techniques.
Since exfoliation methods based on the wet chemistry of graphene do not involve strong oxidants and are often performed at room temperature, the resulting graphene sheets are expected to remain intact and as pristine as the original carbon layers in the initial graphite sample. The quality of graphene obtained from such liquid phase-based exfoliation methods has been analyzed in detail by a variety of physical characterization modalities, including high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The results of these characterizations revealed the absence of oxides or defects on the surfaces of the obtained graphene samples and indicated that the samples were free from compositional and structural defects. A large number of studies have labelled such graphene samples as pristine graphene, indicating that its features remain intact and that it compares favourably with the high-quality graphene samples obtained by the micromechanical cleavage method or through CVD-based methods. More importantly, its original electronic structure and electrical conductivity are maintained since its basal plane remains unimpaired.
3 Suitability of various liquids as exfoliation media
Homogeneous colloidal suspensions of exfoliated graphene (in varying yields) in various organic solvents, ionic liquids, and aqueous solutions can be obtained by the simple sonication or dissolution of pristine graphite in the liquid media. In addition, certain assistive techniques can be adopted in order to increase the exfoliation efficiency as well as yields. Bulky graphite particles disaggregate into mono- and multilayered graphene sheets with lateral dimensions ranging from several nanometres to tens of micrometres. The concentrations of the graphene dispersions and the yields of the single-layered graphene sheets vary under different exfoliation conditions and can be adjusted or optimised by changing the sonication time, centrifugal rotational speed, and amount of graphite added to the media, among others. Table 1 lists different exfoliating reagents reported in the literature, concentrations of the graphene dispersions, and lateral dimensions and heights of the exfoliated graphene sheets.
Table 1 Comparison of various routes to prepare colloidal dispersions of pristine graphene sheets




Starting materials
Exfoliation conditions
Yield
Dimensions (lateral size and thickness)
Ref.





Organic solvent systems



Graphoil or microcrystalline graphite (25 mg mL−1) + chlorosulphonic acid
Spontaneous dissolution CF: 5000 rpm, 12 h
∼2 mg mL−1
Average 300 nm (for micro-crystalline graphite), 900 nm (for graphoil); single-layer (70%), 0.5 nm

47



Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + NMP
Bath sonication, 30 min CF: 500 rpm, 90 min
∼0.01 mg mL−1
Hundred nanometers to tens of microns; monolayer: ∼28%, 1–5 nm

22



Microcrystalline synthetic graphite or expanded graphite (500 mg) + ODCB (100 mL)
Cup-horn sonication, 30 min CF: 4400 rpm, 30 min
0.02–0.03 mg mL−1
100–500 nm; average 7–10 nm

71



Graphite flakes (50 mg) + organic solvent (10 mL) + NaOH flakes
Bath sonication, 1.5 h CF: 3000 rpm, 60 min
0.05–0.07 mg mL−1
<8 μm; 1–5 nm

55



Graphite fine powder (5 mg) + particular aromatic solvents (1 mL)
Ultrasound bath, 135 W, 1 h left for 5 days
0.05–1 mg mL−1
Submicrometer-to micrometer-sized nanosheets; 0.5–1 nm

37



Natural flake graphite or HOPG (50 mg mL−1) + C6H6/C6F6
Simple sonication
50 mg mL−1
Micrometer-sized nanosheets; contain single-and multi-layered graphene

61



Graphite powder (3.3 mg mL−1) + IPA or chloroform or acetone
Bath sonication, 16 W, 48 h CF: 500–5000 rpm, 45 min
0.01–0.5 mg mL−1
0.35–1.1 μm; 7 or less layers

67



Natural graphite flakes (10 mg) + styrene (15 mL)
Titanium horn sonication, 50 W, 2 h, 0 °C, under Ar, CF: 1000 rpm, 5 min
∼10%
0.1 to several micrometers; <5 layers: 80%, 1.0–1.4 nm

69



Graphite (0.1 mg mL−1) + porphyrin (0.1 mg mL−1) + TBA (10 mg mL−1) + NMP
Ultra-sonication, 30 min stand for ca. 1 week, CF: 500 rpm, 90 min
0.05 mg mL−1
Several micrometers; 1–2 nm

56



Graphite powder (120 mg) + MSA (60 mL)
Low power sonic bath, 2 h CF: 3000 rpm, 90 min
0.2 mg mL−1
Hundred nanometres to micro-metres; few-layers (n < 10), average 1–3 nm

62



Graphite powder (50 mg) + CSA solution (99.9 wt%) (6 mL) + H2O2 (30 wt%)(3 mL)
—
High-yield (95%), 3 mg mL−1
<2 μm; ∼1 nm

65



Graphite flakes (0.3 g) + NMP (50 mL)
Sonication, 12 h, thermal treatment, 400–800 °C sonication, another 3 h CF: 2000–8000 rpm
0.05–1 mg mL−1
<3 μm; 0.6–1.4 nm

58



HOPG flake (100 mg) + CTAB (0.5 M) + glacial acetic acid
Sonication, 4 h refluxed for 48 h under N2 CF: 20000 rpm, 45 min
∼10%
Average 0.5–0.7 μm; 1.18 nm

66



Graphite powder (3.3 mg mL−1) + NMP
Bath sonication, 23 W, 460 h CF: 500 rpm
1.2 mg mL−1
0.3–1μm; monolayer: ∼4 wt%

54



Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + 1-propanol
Bath sonication, 320 W, 20 min CF: 4500 rpm, 10 min
0.025 mg mL−1
A few to tens of micrometers; 1–5 nm, average 0.83 nm

68



Natural graphite powder (10 mg mL−1) + organic salt (20 mg mL−1) + organic solvent
Bath sonication, 100 W, 2 h CF: 3000 rpm
0.1–1 mg mL−1
Tens of nanometers to several micrometers; average 1.01 nm

60



 



Aqueous solution systems



Graphite (0.1–14 mg mL−1) + SDBS (5–10 mg mL−1) + water (25 mL)
Low power sonic bath, 30 min CF: 500 rpm, 90 min
0.002–0.05 mg mL−1
<1 μm; 1.5 nm, <5 layers: 43%, monolayer: 3%,

23



Natural graphite powder (100 mg mL−1) + Pluronic P-123 (0.5–1 wt%) or other surfactant
Bath sonication, 2–5 h CF: 5000g, 5 min
0.9–1.5 mg mL−1
Between 50 and several hundred nm; 1–3 nm

76



Graphite fine powder (250 mg) + deionized water (50 mL) + PVP (1 g)
Bath sonication, 135 W, 9 h CF: 1500 rpm, 30 min
0.1 mg mL−1
Lateral dimensions of these flakes are in the micron to sub-micron range; average <1 nm (0.7–0.9 nm)

74



Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + Py-NH2 or Py-SO3 (0.4 mg mL−1) + deionized water
Bath sonication, 130 W, 0 °C, 1 h CF: 4000 rpm, 20 min
—
Several hundred nm, average 0.9 ± 0.3 nm

80



Graphite (5 mg mL−1) + NaC (0.1 mg mL−1) + water (400 mL)
Bath sonication, 80 W, 430 h CF: 500–5000 rpm, 30–90 min
0.05–0.3 mg mL−1
0.3–1.2 μm; monolayer: ∼10% (1500 rpm) monolayer: ∼19% (5000 rpm)

72



Expandable graphite (2 mg) + RB (0.5 mg) + 10% DMA aqueous solution
Bath sonication, 250 W, 6–10 h CF: 500–9000 rpm, 20–30 min
12 wt%
From 200 nm to more than 1 μm; average 2–3 nm

83



Graphite powder (100 mg) + PCA (16.5 mg) + methanol (50 mL) + distilled water (200 mL)
Bath sonication, 45 min + 1 day settle overnight
1 wt%
100 of nanometers to a few microns; monolayer: ∼10%

78



 



Ionic liquid systems



Graphite flakes (5.0 wt%) + HMIH
Ultrasonic bath, 550 W, 24 h; CF: 4000 rpm, 30 min
5.33 mg mL−1
3–4 μm; average 2 nm

46



Natural graphite flakes (20 mg) + [Bmim][Tf2N] (10 mL)
Tip sonication, 750 W, 60 min; CF: 10000 rpm, 20 min
0.95 mg mL−1
With micrometer-long edges; <5 layers

45





3.1 Organic solvents
Organic solvents were first chosen as exfoliation media since graphite is hydrophobic in nature. Moreover, previous studies on the formation of dispersions of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), a form of carbon that is similar to graphite and graphene, were valuable references. Indeed, the solvents used for forming dispersions of CNTs are also suitable for use with graphite/graphene. The concentrations of exfoliated graphene dispersed in a wide range of organic solvents have been measured, and the results suggest that a solvent suitable for forming a graphene dispersion should have a specific surface tension22 as well as the appropriate Hansen solubility parameters.50
NMP, a representative suitable solvent for graphene, is the most widely used organic exfoliation medium, not only for its well matched surface tension and Hansen solubility parameters but also since it affords the exfoliated graphene excellent stability.50,51 Coleman et al. have investigated the exfoliation of graphite in NMP in detail.22 Graphene dispersions with a concentration of 0.01 mg mL−1 could be achieved by the mild sonication of graphite powder for 30 min and subsequent centrifugation at 500 rpm for 90 min to remove any unexfoliated graphite particles. Mono-, bi-, and multilayered graphene sheets could be obtained, as demonstrated by a series of characterizations, including on the basis of edge identification in TEM images of the sheets, shapes of the 2D band of the sheets in their Raman spectra, heights of the sheets as observed in atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the sheets, and the relative intensities of the {1100} and {2110} diffraction peaks in the electron diffraction patterns of graphene sheets. That the quality of the exfoliated graphene was high was confirmed by Raman spectroscopy and XPS, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. The absence of a D band, which is closely related to the degree of disorder,52 and as well as C–O peaks, which are often observed in GO and reduced GO samples,53 confirmed the defect-free nature of the exfoliated graphene. Thus pristine graphene could be achieved through the direct liquid-phase exfoliation technique. Thin graphene films fabricated by vacuum filtration of the obtained exfoliated graphene dispersions on the alumina membrane and subsequent thermal annealing exhibited high conductivity (6500 S m−1).
 Fig. 2  Raman (a) and XPS (b) spectra of exfoliated graphene samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright: 2008 Nature Publishing Group. 
Thus, solvent-based exfoliation of graphite can produce high-quality graphene that is free from structural defects. However, the exfoliation efficiencies of these selected solvents are rather low in practice. In addition, it is necessary to further improve the yields of exfoliated graphene when it comes to large-scale applications. To this end, several approaches, including increasing the sonication time, introducing assistants, and incorporating additional thermal treatments, have been proposed.
For instance, graphene dispersions with a concentration of 1.2 mg mL−1 can be achieved by the sonication of graphite in NMP for 460 h.54 Such a process would, however, be too time and energy consuming to be practical. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the size of the thus-prepared graphene sheets will drop with the increase in sonication time owing to sonication-induced scissions.35 Other alternative approaches have been developed to improve the exfoliation efficiency. Liu and Wang55 reported that the addition of NaOH can improve the exfoliation efficiencies in the case of a few solvents, including NMP, DMA, and cyclohexanone, owing to intercalation. By adding NaOH to a mixture of NMP and graphite and sonicating the mixture mildly for 1.5 h, the yield could be increased to approximately 3 times that without NaOH under the same conditions. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the obtained graphene sample showed a slight downshift in the diffraction angle of the sample, implying that a small, expanded interlayer spacing was generated owing to the intercalation of NaOH into the graphite.
Geng et al.56 reported that another intercalant, tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBA), which is an organic ammonium compound, could improve the exfoliation yield of graphene in NMP, with the obtained graphene exhibiting an undisturbed sp2 carbon network. In addition, along with porphyrin, TBA acts as a stabiliser to increase the solubility of the graphene sheets in NMP. A graphene dispersion with a concentration of 0.05 mg mL−1 could be achieved this way. Experiments showed that for the exfoliation of graphene to be efficient, TBA and porphyrin should be added simultaneously to NMP, for the phenomenon of exfoliation consists of two processes that occur in succession: the intercalation of the organic ammonium ions, which is similar to that noticed in the case of graphite oxide,57 and the subsequent porphyrin-induced exfoliation of graphene via the π–π interactions between the graphene and the electron-abundant aromatic rings of porphyrin, which have been modified with alkyl chains, resulting in an increase in the solubility of graphene in NMP.
In addition to the intercalation method, thermal treatments also can increase the interlayer spacing of graphite, making exfoliation easier. Oh et al.58 reported an increase in the exfoliation efficiency in the case of NMP on the incorporation of a thermal treatment. This enhanced exfoliation process consisted of the following three steps. (1) The dispersion of graphite in NMP: the graphite flakes were first dispersed in NMP under sonication at room temperature, and the resultant suspension was filtered, yielding NMP-treated graphite (NTG). (2) Thermal treatment of NTG: the NTG samples were heated for a short period in an argon atmosphere. (3) The redispersion process: the resultant thermal-treated NTG samples were sonicated in NMP for another 3 h and subsequently centrifuged. The approach was able to significantly improve the graphene yields. The improvement could be ascribed to the increase in the interlayer spacing in graphite. The HR-XRD spectra of an NTG sample showed that it shifted from 26.6° to 23.3° after the thermal treatment, indicating that the interlayer distance of graphite was increased by the thermal treatment. The interlayer spacings for non-heat treated NTG (NTG25) and an NTG sample heat treated at 800 °C (NTG800) were 0.34 nm and 0.39 nm, respectively. This increase in the interlayer distance weakens the van der Waals force between the graphite interlayers, thus facilitating graphite exfoliation. AFM images of the NTG800 sample suggested that the heat-treated graphite was almost completely exfoliated. XPS analysis showed that the percentages of C–C and CC bonds in the graphene sheets obtained from NTG25 and NTG800 were 93.9% and 94.2%, respectively, indicating that the thermal treatment did not cause significant oxidation. A dispersion of defect-free graphene with a concentration as high as 1 mg mL−1 could be achieved after sonication for 15 h. The thus-obtained graphene films when deposited on a transparent polymer substrate by vacuum filtration exhibited low sheet resistance (2.8 kΩ □−1) and high transmittance (80%).
The intercalation- and thermal treatment-based exfoliation techniques mentioned above can only result in small increases in the graphite interlayer spacing. Park et al.59 proposed a new method for the large-scale exfoliation of graphite to produce defect-free graphene based on the use of an eutectic salt (KCl–NaCl–ZnCl2) as an intercalant. The complete intercalation of the eutectic salt into the graphite interlayers was performed at 350 °C in an autoclave vessel containing 90 wt% of the salt and 10 wt% of pristine graphite. The fact that the XRD spectrum of the resulting product did not contain a diffraction peak at 26.4° (corresponding to an interlayer distance of 3.34 Å) for graphite and the presence of a new diffraction peak at 15.5° (interlayer distance of 5.71 Å) proved that fully intercalated graphite was achieved. It has been reported that the van der Waals force between graphite interlayers become zero if the interlayer distance exceeds 5 Å.29,30 Therefore, the resultant fully intercalated graphite could be dissolved in pyridine by sonication for 30 min, resulting in a graphene dispersion. The obtained graphene flakes had an average size of ∼500 nm and thicknesses of 0.4–10 nm, indicating the presence of mono- and few-layered graphene sheets. It was demonstrated that the concentrations of C and O in the thus-prepared graphene sample were the same as those in pristine graphite. Transparent graphene films were fabricated using a modified Langmuir–Blodgett method; these exhibited low average sheet resistance (∼930 Ω □−1) and high conductivity, with the maximum being ∼91000 S m−1, after a thermal annealing treatment at 300 °C.
Stabilisers can also improve the exfoliation efficiencies of the organic solvents mentioned above, such as NMP. We have previously shown that common organic salts such as potassium sodium tartrate (C4H4KNaO6·4H2O), sodium tartrate (Na2C4H4O6·2H2O), sodium citrate (C6H5Na3O7·2H2O), and edetate disodium (C10H14N2Na2O8·2H2O) provide excellent support for the exfoliation of graphite in common organic solvents, including NMP, DMF, and DMSO.60 The exfoliation efficiencies were enhanced significantly (by more than one hundred times) in our experiments, in which only a mild sonication treatment (2 h in a bath sonicator) was needed. Graphene dispersions with concentrations close to 1 mg mL−1 could be obtained, and the obtained graphene sheets were free from basal-plane defects and contained absorbates in negligible quantities. This method is thus a simple, efficient, safe, and economical way of producing high-quality graphene.
These improved exfoliation methods, which either involved the use of intercalants and stabilisers or the incorporation of an additional thermal treatment, could produce defect-free graphene in increased yields. However, in addition to common organic solvents, a few featured organic reagents have also been used as exfoliation media.
Bourlinos et al.37 proposed a series of electron-rich and electron-deficient aromatic and nonaromatic solvents as effective media for the exfoliation of graphite, producing solubilised graphene samples. These media include perfluorinated aromatic solvents such as hexafluorobenzene (C6F6), octafluorotoluene (C6F5CF3), pentafluorobenzonitrile (C6F5CN), and pentafluoropyridine (C5F5N). Solubilised graphene in concentrations ranging from 0.05–0.1 mg mL−1 and yields from 1–2% has been produced via sonication using these solvents. Once sonicated, the mixtures are left to rest for long periods in order to remove the graphite-like species by natural sedimentation. The colloid formed using C6F5CN resulted in the highest concentration and solubilization yield (0.1 mg mL−1 and 2%, respectively). Apart from these perfluorinated aromatic solvents, a few common aromatic organic solvents such as pyridine and benzylamine, as well as nonaromatic organic solvents such as ethyl acetate, vinyl acetate, methyl chloroacetate, 2-methoxyethyl ether, acetylacetone, and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylenediamine,37 can also be used as effective media for the liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite. The solubilization of graphene might be ascribed to the matching surface energies of the solvent and graphene, as well as charge transfer between the electron-rich graphitic layers and electron-deficient aromatic molecules through π–π stacking. Such donor–acceptor interactions are considered to be the driving force for the intercalative derivatization of graphite.38–40
Very recently, Oyer et al.61 reported that an equimolar mixture of C6H6–C6F6 is an excellent medium for dissolving and stabilizing graphene sheets. The solvent molecules self-assemble into periodic layers on both sides of the graphene sheets. Hysteresis measurements of the mixed solvent containing the graphene sheets suggested that there was high affinity between the graphene sheets and the solvent molecules. The thus-solvated graphene is thermodynamically stable as its aggregation would be a nonspontaneous process in terms of the Helmholtz free energy. Using the C6H6–C6F6 mixture, rather stable and concentrated suspensions of graphene, with concentrations of up to 50 mg mL−1, can be achieved after simple sonication. Another merit of this mixed solvent medium is that it has a low boiling point (∼78 °C) and thus can be removed easily.
Organic acids are other media that have been used for dispersing or dissolving graphite. A suspension (0.2 mg mL−1) of high-quality graphene sheets (with lateral dimensions ranging from hundreds of nanometres to micrometres) was produced by sonicating graphite in methanesulfonic acid (60 mL for 0.12 g of graphite powder) for 2 h in a low-power sonic bath using sealed glass vials.62 The resulting graphene sheets were reported to be 1–3 nm in thickness on average, as measured by AFM. The prepared graphene/methanesulfonic acid solution was tested as a reaction medium for the in situ polymerization of poly[2,2′-(p-oxydiphenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole] (OPBI), yielding OPBI/graphene nanocomposites with highly improved mechanical strength.62
Chlorosulfonic acid has been reported to be a highly suitable solvent for graphene.47 Graphene solutions with concentrations of up to 2 mg mL−1 can be prepared using this superacid without sonication. It is suggested that the protonation of the graphitic layers induces repulsion between the layers and results in the spontaneous dispersion of graphene sheets. Similar protonation is also to be found in the case of CNTs.63 Up to 70% of the thus-obtained graphene sheets were found to be single layered, using HRTEM and electron diffraction analysis. The Raman spectrum and results of the XPS analysis of the sheets demonstrated that these sheets remain intact in the superacid medium. Thin films fabricated by filtering the graphene solution showed extremely high electrical conductivity (110000 S m−1). Lu et al.64 used chlorosulfonic acid and H2O2 as exfoliating agents to develop a simple and rapid (time frame of a few seconds) approach for the large-scale production of high-quality graphene with high yields (95%). Graphite expands dramatically after treatment with chlorosulfonic acid and H2O2, probably owing to the fact that a large amount of heat is released during the formation of Caro's acid by the mixing of chlorosulfonic acid and H2O2.65 The treated graphite can be easily redispersed in chlorosulfonic acid in concentrations of up to 3 mg mL−1, resulting in dark graphene solutions. The quality of the thus-obtained graphene sheets has been confirmed by Raman spectroscopy and AFM. The absence of the D band indicated that no defects were introduced by the process, even though both chlorosulfonic acid and H2O2 are strong oxidisers. The graphene sheets were measured to be ∼1 nm thick, indicating that few-layered graphene (approximately 3 layers in thickness) was achieved. That the electrochemical performance of the obtained graphene sheets was good, owing to their excellent conductivity, was also demonstrated through the electro-oxidation of ascorbic acid.
Colloidal suspensions of defect-free graphene in DMF, stabilised by cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), have been reported.66 Highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), used as the starting material, was sonicated in acetic acid in the presence of CTAB. The HOPG exfoliated into graphene flakes, which were stabilised by the adsorbed CTAB; these flakes could be redispersed in common organic solvents such as DMF, forming a stable dark colloidal suspension with a yield of 10%. The resulting graphene sheets were reported to have an average thickness of ∼1.18 nm on mica and their average size was found to be 0.7 × 0.5 μm, as measured by AFM. The field emission characteristics of the graphene flakes were measured; their turn-on voltage and emission current density were 7.5 V μm−1 and 0.15 mA cm−2, respectively.
Certain extremely common volatile solvents have also been investigated for use as media for the liquid-phase exfoliation of graphene owing to the ease with which they can be removed by simple vaporization; this is a desirable property in practical applications. Coleman et al. studied low boiling point (bp) solvents67 such as isopropanol, chloroform, and acetone for use as exfoliation media. The experimental results suggested that longer sonication times are needed in the case of these low-bp solvents since the dispersibility of graphene flakes in these reagents is often lower than that in high-bp liquids such as NMP and DMF. Graphene dispersions with concentrations of 0.4 and 0.5 mg mL−1 could be obtained using chloroform and isopropanol, respectively, by increasing the sonication time to 360 h.67 Choi et al.68 have reported that 1-propanol (bp: 97 °C) exhibits better exfoliation efficacy than chloroform and isopropanol. Graphene films fabricated by the filtration of the 1-propanol dispersion showed high conductivity (2000 S m−1) after being simply dried at room temperature; neither a thermal annealing treatment nor vacuum drying was required. XPS measurements suggested that the residual solvent molecules were removed almost completely after mere drying in air at room temperature.
The monomers of a few polymers have also been used as exfoliation media to form corresponding polymer-modified graphene nanoflakes on the basis of the sonochemical reaction of the monomer solvent. Polystyrene-functionalised graphene sheets in organic solvents obtained through the sonication of graphite in styrene have been reported by Xu and Suslick.69 In their work, styrene serves both as a good medium for the exfoliation of graphite and the monomer for the formation of polystyrene. The basal planes of the polymer-functionalised graphene were not damaged extensively as evidenced by the fact that the intensity ratio of the D and G bands (ID/IG = 0.78) in the Raman spectrum of the functionalised graphene was significantly lower than that of chemically reduced graphene (ID/IG > 1).20,70 These graphene-based composites showed good stability and solubility in solvents such as DMF, tetrahydrofuran, toluene, and chloroform.

Ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), which has a surface tension of 36.6 mJ m−2, is also a good solvent for the exfoliation of graphite and can be used as the reaction medium for further modifying the exfoliated graphene.71 Three different graphite sources, including thermally expanded graphite, synthetic, microcrystalline graphite, and HOPG, were first homogenised for 1 h and then subjected to cup-horn sonication in ODCB for 30 min. Graphene dispersions with different concentrations (0.03 mg mL−1 for synthetic microcrystalline graphite and 0.02 mg mL−1 for the other two graphite samples) were achieved after centrifugation at 4400 rpm for 30 min. TEM and AFM images of the modified graphene sheets obtained from the HOPG–ODCB dispersion suggested that the sheets mostly comprised less than five layers; the lateral dimensions of the sheets ranged from 100 to 500 nm. Thin graphene films fabricated from the as-prepared graphene/ODCB dispersion by casting exhibited poor electrical conductivity owing to the residual ODCB. After the films had been thermally annealed in a vacuum at 400 °C for 12 h, their conductivity greatly improved to up to 1500 S m−1. Graphene sheets dispersed in ODCB can be functionalised in situ with alkyl iodides and nitrenes.
3.2 Water-surfactant solutions
Water is an ideal solvent for numerous compounds, especially biological ones, owing to its high degree of compatibility and nontoxicity. On the other hand, organic solvents have many serious drawbacks associated with them: they are toxic, expensive, difficult to remove, and are not very biocompatible.35 Thus, water can be a better choice as a medium for graphite exfoliation. However, given the highly hydrophobic nature of graphite and graphene, the use of surfactants or hydrophilic organic molecules is essential for dispersing the graphitic species in water. Adding surfactants to water helps decrease its surface tension to match with that of graphene, making exfoliation feasible. Surfactants can also play two other roles. One is to allow the formation of uniform mixtures of the graphite precursor and water and facilitate sonication; without a surfactant, they exist separately as individual phases. The second and more important role is to stabilise the exfoliated graphene nanosheets and prevent them from aggregating, thus allowing the formation of homogeneous graphene dispersions. It has been demonstrated that graphite can be successfully exfoliated in aqueous media using certain surfactants and bath sonication to yield stable dispersed, defect-free graphene sheets.23,72–83
The most commonly used ionic surfactant, sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS), was tested as a stabiliser for the liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite in water to obtain defect-free graphene.23 Suspensions of SDBS-stabilised graphene with concentrations ranging from 0.002 to 0.05 mg mL−1, depending on the initial concentration of graphite, were prepared by sonicating a mixture of water, graphite, and SDBS for 30 min and subsequent centrifugation at 500 rpm for 90 min. Mono- and few-layered (typically <5 layers) graphene sheets were observed in the TEM images of the obtained suspension. The zeta potential of the fresh graphene dispersion was measured to be −44 mV, which is much lower than −25 mV, the accepted value for colloidal stability, indicating that the SDBS-coated graphene was stably dispersed in water. Graphene films obtained by the vacuum filtration of the thus-produced dispersions showed high sheet resistance (∼970 kΩ □−1) and conductivity (35 S m−1). It is proposed that the residual surfactant has a negative effect on the electrical properties of the as-prepared films. After the thermal annealing of the films at 250 °C in an Ar/N2 atmosphere for 2 h, their conductivity improved and the sheet resistance and conductivity became 22.5 kΩ □−1 and 1500 S m−1, respectively. These values, however, are still inferior to those of graphene films obtained using NMP,22 for the residual surfactant is difficult to remove and lowers the degree of mechanical and electronic contacts between the graphene sheets.
Water-based graphene dispersions having higher concentrations have been reported by the same group,72 who used sodium cholate (SC) as the surfactant. Graphene dispersions with a concentration of 0.3 mg mL−1 were achieved after sonicating graphite in water/SC solutions in a bath for 430 h. Free-standing films composed of the exfoliated graphene showed excellent electrical properties, with the average conductivity being 7000 S m−1 before annealing and 17500 S m−1 after a thermal treatment at 500 °C in an argon/hydrogen atmosphere for 2 h. Green and Hersam73 have also reported the direct exfoliation of graphite in water containing SC by intense ultrasonication using an ultrasonic horn. A black dispersion (0.09 mg mL−1) of SC-decorated graphene flakes in water was obtained by the tip sonication of natural graphite flakes and subsequent centrifugation at a high speed (15000 rpm) for 60 min. Graphene flakes can be sorted by thickness using density gradient ultracentrifugation. Doing so improves the monodispersity of the obtained graphene samples and increases the electrical and optical performances of transparent conductive films composed of the separated graphene samples.
Nonionic polymeric surfactants can also act as stabilisers for the exfoliation of graphene in water. Bourlinos et al.74 have reported the synthesis of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-stabilised water-soluble graphene. A graphene suspension with a concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1 was achieved by sonicating a graphite–PVP mixture in water for 9 h and centrifuging the solution at 1500 rpm for 30 min. AFM showed that the average heights of the thus-obtained graphene sheets on mica were less than 1 nm (0.7–0.9 nm), indicating that single-layered exfoliated graphene can be obtained in large amounts using this method. Since PVP is a biocompatible, safe, and inexpensive polymer, this PVP-assisted approach can be especially useful for producing graphene for biomedical applications and green chemical technologies.74
Smith et al.75 have investigated the effects of 12 types of ionic and nonionic surfactants on the exfoliation of graphite in water. The results showed that dispersibility of graphene in water is proportional to the magnitude of the electrostatic potential and steric potential barriers for the ionic and nonionic surfactants, respectively. The concentrations of the graphene suspensions differ significantly from surfactant to surfactant, varying from 0.011 mg mL−1 for sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) to 0.026 mg mL−1 for sodium cholate (SC); however, the sizes and thicknesses of the exfoliated graphene sheets were similar for all these surfactants.
Guardia et al.76 also studied the exfoliation of graphene in water using a wide range of ionic and nonionic surfactants. They were able to determine which nonionic surfactants afforded higher yields of defect-free graphene. Dispersions of pristine graphene with a concentration of approximately 1 mg mL−1 could be produced by sonicating a mixture of graphite (100 mg mL−1) and Pluronic P-123 (0.5% w/v) for 2 h. The resulting graphene samples were collected on SiO2/Si substrates, and most flakes were found to be 1.0–3.0 nm in height, as measured by AFM. High-resolution scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) images of the paper-like films formed by the vacuum filtration of the concentrated graphene dispersions revealed that the basal surfaces of the films were defect free; these films were also found to have high conductivities (1160 S m−1). Graphene samples exfoliated using nonionic surfactants show great promise in biomedical applications.76
Significant improvements have been made by Notley in the exfoliation of graphite in water/surfactant solutions.77 The surfactants were added to the water-based graphite suspension continuously during the sonication process rather than adding them only all at once, as has been commonly done in previous studies. Doing this helps maintain the surface tension at optimal levels since the surfactant molecules are depleted rapidly from the solution by being adsorbed onto the graphene surfaces, which are generated continuously. Graphene dispersions of very high concentrations (as high as 15 mg mL−1) were produced through the continuous addition of a highly concentrated aqueous solution of Pluronic F108 to the graphite/water suspension under sonication.
Aromatic molecule-coated graphene sheets that are soluble in both water and organic solvents have been reported by Hao et al.40 The exfoliation process used by them consists of three steps: (a) a preliminary thermal treatment of expandable graphite at 1000 °C for 60 s in the forming gas (4% H2 and 96% Ar) atmosphere; (b) mixing the resulting expanded graphite and 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) using a mortar and pestle while adding several drops of DMSO and drying the mixture; (c) sonicating the dried mixture in an aqueous solution containing KOH or other organic solvents. Black suspensions (0.015–0.02 mg mL−1) containing single- or few-layered TCNQ-stabilised graphene sheets could be prepared in different liquids. It was suggested that the adsorbed TCNQ anions were responsible for the formation of the stable dispersions of graphene in water and extremely polar solvents such as DMSO and DMF.
An et al.78 have reported that they were able to synthesise graphene with an undisturbed sp2 network in water using 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid (PCA), which has also been used to disperse single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) in water through π–π noncovalent functionalization between the aromatic rings of PCA and the graphitic surfaces of the SWCNTs.79 First, a graphite powder and PCA were sonicated in methanol, which can completely dissolve PCA and is a medium that aids efficient interaction between PCA and the graphite layers. Then, water was added to the suspension in large amounts and the resulting aqueous solution was sonicated. The water agitates the PCA molecules, which serve as molecular wedges and intercalate into the graphite, resulting in its exfoliation to produce graphene. The graphene–PCA complex could be obtained in yields of approximately 1 wt%, and the concentration of graphene in the water-based dispersions was found to be 0.01 mg mL−1. Zhang et al.80 used other pyrene (Py) derivatives, including 1-pyrene-methylamine (Py-NH2) and 1,3,6,8-pyrenetetrasulfonic acid (Py-SO3), for exfoliating graphite in water to prepare single- and few-layered defect-free graphene. It was suggested that such amphiphilic aromatic molecules play dual roles: they act as both dispersion agents during the exfoliation process and healing agents for the formation of highly conductive graphene films. The obtained graphene films exhibited extremely high electrical conductivity (up to 181200 S m−1) and high transmittance (90%). The conductivity value is the highest reported so far for graphene films fabricated by a top-down approach, and is comparable to that of graphene films based on the CVD method (a bottom-up approach81); the latter exhibits a sheet resistance of 200 Ω □−1 and an optical transparency of 80%.82 It was suggested that the dramatically improved conductivity was due to a soldering effect of Py derivatives on the contact sites between adjacent graphene sheets.
Rose bengal (RB), another amphiphilic aromatic molecule with a hydrophilic oxygen-containing group, has also been used for the exfoliation of graphite in an aqueous system.83 Expanded graphite was used as the precursor and was sonicated in an aqueous 10% N,N-dimethylacetamide solution containing RB molecules. The sonication process was performed for 6–10 h using a 250 W bath sonicator. The yield of graphene products was about 12 wt%, and the resultant graphene flakes had lateral dimensions of a few hundred nanometres and were single-and few-layered in nature. Film-like materials composed of these graphene flakes showed high electrical conductivity (12280 S m−1).
3.3 Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids are special salts that remain liquids at temperatures lower than 100 °C.84,85 The characteristics of ionic liquids include high ionicity, nonvolatility, excellent thermal and chemical stability,86 surface tensions similar to that of graphite,87 and good compatibility with many organic and inorganic solvents.88 Certain ionic liquids have been used as solvents or assistants for dispersing CNTs89 and for the electrochemical synthesis of graphene.90 In these studies, the electrostatic interactions between the charged ionic species and the π electrons of the graphitic planes were considered as being the factor responsible for the successful exfoliation and stabilization of the graphitic nanomaterials.91,92
Two ionic liquids, 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide ([Bmim][Tf2N]) and 1-hexyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hexafluorophosphate (HMIH), were used as exfoliation media for the exfoliation of graphite under sonication. Wang et al.45 studied the tip sonication of natural graphite flakes in [Bmim][Tf2N] to prepare exfoliated graphene sheets. A stable, concentrated suspension (0.95 mg mL−1) containing nonoxidised few-layered (less than 5 layers) graphene sheets with micrometre-scale dimensions was achieved after tip sonication for 60 min and subsequent centrifugation at 10000 rpm. In another study,46 a high-concentration suspension (5.33 mg mL−1) of few-layered graphene flakes could be produced under bath sonication. The exfoliation procedure involved the preliminary grounding of a mixture of graphite flakes and HMIH, its subsequent sonication in an ultrasonic bath (550 W, 25 °C) for 24 h, and, lastly, centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 30 min. The resulting graphene sheets had lateral dimensions of 3–4 μm and an average apparent height of 2 nm, as determined using AFM, indicating that they were few-layered in structure. Powdered graphene could be achieved by washing the as-made suspension with organic solvents such as chloroform to remove the ionic liquid species. Apart from the exfoliation of graphite by sonication, electrochemical techniques have also been used to exfoliate graphite in ionic liquids. Ionic liquid-assisted electrochemical exfoliation of HOPG was proposed by Loh et al.93 In their work, HOPG was used as the anode and was electrochemically exfoliated in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([BMIm][BF4]) containing a certain amount of water. Using this process, exfoliated products of different shapes, including carbon nanoribbons, nanoparticles, and graphene, could be obtained through a controlled reciprocal interaction involving the anodic oxidation of water and the intercalation of the BF4− anions.
4 Applications of directly exfoliated graphene (DEG)
When DEG is obtained by the direct cleavage of graphite in the absence of oxidation, the pristine graphitic basal plane of DEG is retained. Hence, the electrical conductivity of DEG should also remain unaffected. In fact, numerous reports have suggested that films formed from DEG exhibit higher conductivity (see Table 2 and Fig. 3) than films composed of chemically converted graphene (CCG),94–107 the electronic properties of which are often negatively affected by defects. These studies on highly conducting graphene thin films suggest that graphene is suitable for application in transparent electrodes and other electronic and electrical devices.
Table 2 Comparison of electrical properties of conductive DEG- and CCG-based materials




Forms
Electrical properties
Ref.





DEG-based conductive materials



Thin films (8 μm thick) on Teflon substrate free-standing transparent films (10 nm thick)
Conductivity: 110000 S m−1, sheet resistance: 1000 Ω □−1, conductivity: 80000–95000 S m−1 (dried at 150 °C)

47



Thin films (30 nm thick) on the alumina membrane
Conductivity: 6500 S m−1 (dried at ∼300 °C)

22



Thin films (10 μm thick) on the alumina membrane
Sheet resistance: 60 Ω □−1, corresponding conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (vacuum dried at 100 °C and then annealed at 400 °C)

71



Thin films on the polymer substrate
Sheet resistance: 2800 Ω □−1, (doped with HNO3)

58



Thick, free-standing films (40–80 μm thick)
Conductivity: 1.8 ± 0.1 × 104 S m−1 (no annealing)

54



Thin films on the polyvinylidene fluoride membrane filter
Conductivity: 2000 S m−1 (air dried)

68



Thin films (∼30 nm thick) on the alumina membrane
Sheet resistance: 970 kΩ □−1, corresponding conductivity: 35 S m−1 (before annealing); sheet resistance: 22.5 kΩ □−1, corresponding conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (annealed at 250 °C)

23



Free-standing graphene/surfactant composite paper-like films
Conductivity: 3600 S m−1, 1160 S m−1, 190 S m−1 (air dried)

76



Thin films on the Anodisc 47 inorganic membranes
Conductivity: ∼2000 S m−1, (air dried)

80



Drop-cast transparent films on quartz
Conductivity: 8400 S m−1, (dried at 1000 °C for Py-NH2/graphene film) conductivity: 181200 S m−1, corresponding 778 Ω □−1 (dried at 1000 °C for a Py-SO3/graphene film)

80



Free-standing films
Conductivity: ∼7000 S m−1, (before annealing), ∼17500 S m−1, (dried at 500 °C)

72



Multilayer graphene films
Sheet resistance: 30.27, 0.78, 0.16 kΩ □−1 (corresponding conductivity: 12280 S m−1) (vacuum dried at 70 °C)

83



 



CCG-based conductive materials



Free-standing films (ca. 6 μm thick)
Conductivity: 11800 S m−1, (annealed at 220 °C), 35100 S m−1, (annealed at 500 °C)

94



Free-standing films
Conductivity: 7200 S m−1 (air dried)

95



Reduced graphene oxide transparent films on quartz slides
Conductivities: ∼100000 S m−1 (graphitization at 1100 °C)

96



Thin evaporated films (∼3 μm thick) deposited on a glass slide
Conductivity: 1250 S m−1 (dried at 120 °C)

97



Free-standing graphene paper
Conductivity: 690 S m−1

98



Free-standing graphene films
Conductivity: 200 S m−1

99



Compressed graphene pellets
Conductivity: 8.23 S m−1, 1660 S m−1, 20200 S m−1 (annealed at 1100 °C)

100



Free-standing paper-like films
Conductivity: 9960 S m−1

101



Graphene paper
Conductivity: 6500 S m−1 (dried at 50 °C)

102



Graphene paper
Conductivity: 200 S m−1

103



Graphene papers (0.3 mm thick)
Conductivity: ∼800 S m−1 (dried at 80 °C)

104



Graphene paper
Conductivity: 14.1 S m−1

105



Compressed graphene pellets
Conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (dried at 60 °C)

106



Pressed graphene disks
Conductivity: 2100 S m−1 (dried at 90 °C)

107





 Fig. 3  Reported electrical conductivities of DEG- and CCG-based graphene materials. For comparison, logarithm processing of datum shown in Table 2 was done, and rearranged from the lowest to the highest. 
In addition, DEG and DEG-based composites have been explored for use as electrode materials (i.e., nanofillers) that exhibit desirable electronic, mechanical, and thermal properties in practical applications, owing to their pristine and highly conducting nature.
DEG obtained by sonicating graphite in DMF was used as a clean (i.e., free from oxygenated functionalities) electrode material for the electrochemical detection of β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), which is an important cofactor in dehydrogenase-based biosensors.108 The DEG-based electrode could perform as a very stable and sensitive sensor for NADH, owing to the rather low oxygen content in the DEG sample. A similar DEG-based electrode was also tested as an ascorbic acid sensor;109 this sensor generated a high level of electroactivity during the oxidation of ascorbic acid for concentrations of 0.4–6.0 mM and had a detection limit of 0.12 mM. The sensors based on DEG were found to be highly sensitive and selective for sensing water vapour, CO2, and, in particular, ethanol (exhibiting a rapid change in resistance of >10000%),78 while the ultracapacitors based on the same DEG exhibited excellent performances in terms of specific capacitance (∼120 F g−1), power density (∼105 kW kg−1), and energy density (∼9.2 W h kg−1).78
Composites with improved mechanical and conducting properties were obtained by mixing DEG with various materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and polymers. Coleman et al.110,111 have reported that films composed of CNTs and doped with DEG have better mechanical and conducting properties than those consisting only of CNTs. Mixing DEG with poly(vinyl alcohol) and polyurethane can result in strong, polymer-based composites.112,113 DEG-based liquid crystal devices have been reported by Novoselov et al.114 Their work showed that DEG is very promising as an electrode material for fabricating photonic devices with high conductivity, transparency, and chemical stability. Graphene samples obtained by the exfoliation of expanded graphite in ethanol have been used in photovoltaic devices115 and as sponge-like absorbents.116 Few-layered DEG nanosheets functionalised with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) have been used to fabricate photovoltaic devices and exhibit improved hole-transporting ability and enhanced power conversion efficiency. A sponge-shaped graphene material exhibited extremely high absorption capacities (up to 165 times its own weight) and should be very useful for removing organic contaminants such as oils and toxic organic solvents from water owing to its high selectivity, good recyclability or stability, lightweight nature, and robustness. Although applications of DEG have been limited thus far, it can be expected that it will be used in many applications in the future as exfoliation methods develop further.
It should be noted that the lateral size of DEG is small (mostly less than 1 μm); this results in a decrease in its performance. For example, DEG-based films based on small-sized DEG samples may exhibit limited conductivity owing to the interflake junction resistances of the samples. This phenomenon mainly results from a sonication-induced cleavage effect, as well as owing to the high centrifugation speeds.35 Thus, in order to obtain DEG sheets with larger (or specified) sizes, new methods that involve short sonication treatments, or no sonication treatment at all, as well as “soldering” techniques that can integrate small DEG flakes into a single, large graphene sheet should be developed in the future.
5 Conclusion
In the past few years, significant efforts have been devoted to the low-cost liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce high-quality pristine graphene. It has also been shown that the thus-obtained pristine graphene and its derivatives exhibit highly desirable properties and performances in numerous applications. However, the techniques discussed have several shortcomings: (1) the graphene yields of the techniques are still low; (2) the thus-obtained graphene exhibits polydispersibility in terms of the number of layers and lateral dimensions; (3) the exfoliating media required are often expensive or have high boiling points; (4) assistants such as surfactants are often difficult to remove from the final graphene samples; (5) sonication, especially for long periods, can reduce the size of the resultant graphene sheets.
An important challenge in the large-scale production of pristine graphene is to select or design the proper exfoliating reagents, including the right solvents and assistants. An ideal exfoliation system should involve the use of a commonly available solvent, an assistant that can be removed easily, and low-cost natural graphite powder. A deep understanding of the mechanisms of the exfoliation of graphite will be essential to the design and discovery of efficient exfoliation systems.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 20773066), the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, the Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Biomedical Functional Materials, and the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (Grant no. 2012AA06A304).
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Han, B. Öezyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. L. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
P. Blake, P. D. Brimicombe, R. R. Nair, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, S. V. Morozov, H. F. Gleeson, E. W. Hill, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704–1708 CrossRef .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kimmel, G. LeBlanc, M. E. Meschievitz and D. E. Cliffel, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 685–707 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Du, Z. H. Zhu and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2876–2877 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, S. M. Liu and L. J. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eizenberg and J. M. Blakely, Surf. Sci., 1970, 82, 228–236 CrossRef .
C. Berger, Z. M. Song, X. B. Li, X. S. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. B. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Bernal, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1924, 106, 749–773 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. L. Chung, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 1475–1489 CrossRef CAS .

          N. B. Brandt, S. M. Chudinov and Y. G. Ponomarev, Semimetals, 1. Graphite and Its Compounds, North-Holland, Amsterdam,  1988 Search PubMed .

          P. Atkins and J. D. Paula, Atkins' physical chemistry, Oxford University Press, 8th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
L. Spanu, S. Sorella and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 196401–196404 CrossRef .
S. D. Chakarova-Kack, E. Schroder, B. I. Lundqvist and D. C. Langreth, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 146107–146110 CrossRef .
V. León, M. Quintana, M. Antonia Herrero, J. L. G. Fierro, A. de la Hoz, M. Prato and E. Vázquez, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10936–10938 RSC .
Y. G. Yao, Z. Y. Lin, Z. Li, X. J. Song, K.-S. Moon and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13494–13499 RSC .
W. J. Fu, J. Kiggans, S. H. Overbury, V. Schwartz and C. D. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5265–5267 RSC .
X. Cui, C. Z. Zhang, R. Hao and Y. L. Hou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2118–2126 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 14–22 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, A. C. Coleman, N. Katsonis, W. R. Browne, B. J. van Wees and B. L. Fering, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7539–7541 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis and A. K. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Inagaki, New Carbons: Control of Structure and Functions, Elsevier, Oxford,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. Inagaki, J. Mater. Res., 1989, 4, 1560–1568 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hao, W. Qian, L. Zhang and Y. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6576–6578 RSC .
Y. Sun, S. R. Wilson and D. I. Schuster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5348–5349 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and Y. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9022–9026 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Liu, J. N. Wang and X. X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 425–428 RSC .

          I. Pocsik, M. Veres, M. Fule, S. Toth and M. Koos, cond-mat/0307476,  July 2003.
X. Q. Wang, P. F. Fulvio, G. A. Baker, G. M. Veith, R. R. Unocic, S. M. Mahurin, M. F. Chi and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4487–4489 RSC .
D. Nuvoli, L. Valentini, V. Alzari, S. Scognamillo, S. B. Bon, M. Piccinini, J. Illescas and A. Mariani, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3428–3431 RSC .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, J. M. Tour and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Pupysheva, A. A. Farajian, C. R. Knick, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21083–21087 CAS .
P. May, U. Khan, J. M. Hughes and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11393–11400 CAS .
Y. Hernandez, M. Lotya, D. Rickard, S. D. Bergin and J. N. Coleman, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3208–3213 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Shih, S. C. Lin, M. S. Strano and D. Blankschtein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14638–14648 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Cançado, M. A. Pimenta, B. R. A. Neves, M. S. S. Dantas and A. Jorio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 247401–247404 CrossRef .
S. J. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
U. Khan, A. O'Neill, M. Lotya, S. De and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2010, 6, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Liu and J. N. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6888–6890 RSC .
J. X. Geng, B.-S. Kong, S. B. Yang and H.-T. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5091–5093 RSC .
P. K. Ang, S. A. Wang, Q. L. Bao, J. T. L. Thong and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3587–3594 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Oh, S. H. Kim, Y. S. Chi and T. J. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 8837–8844 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Park, B. H. Kim, S. H. Song, J. Y. Kwon, B. S. Kong, K. Kang and S. Jeon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2871–2876 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Du, J. Lu, P. P. Sun, Y. Y. Zhu and X. Q. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 568–569, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Oyer, J. Y. Carrillo, C. C. Hire, H. C. Schniepp, A. D. Asandei, A. V. Dobrynin and D. H. Adamson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5018–5021 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. X. Shi, J. H. Fang, H. J. Xu, X. D. Ma and J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 505–512 RSC .
V. A. Davis, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, M. J. Green, P. K. Rai, N. Behabtu, V. Prieto, R. D. Booker, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, W. Zhou, H. Fan, W. W. Adams, R. H. Hauge, J. E. Fischer, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, R. E. Smalley and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 830–834 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Lu, S. Liu, X. Y. Qin, L. Wang, J. Q. Tian, Y. L. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. P. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8775–8777 RSC .
D. L. Ball and J. O. Edwards, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 1125–1129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vadukumpully, J. Paul and S. Valiyaveettil, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3288–3294 CrossRef CAS .
A. O'Neill, U. Khan, P. N. Nirmalraj, J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5422–5428 CAS .
E.-Y. Choi, W. S. Choi, Y. B. Lee and Y.-Y. Noh, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 365601–365607 CrossRef .
H. G. Xu and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9148–9151 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Hamilton, J. R. Lomeda, Z. Z. Sun, M. Tour and A. R. Barron, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3460–3462 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lotya, P. J. King, U. Khan, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3155–3162 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4031–4036 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis, A. K. Stubos and C. Trapalis, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 2172–2176 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Smith, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, New J. Phys., 2010, 12, 125008–125018 CrossRef .
L. Guardia, M. J. Fernández-Merino, J. I. Paredes, P. Solís-Fernández, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1653–1662 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Notley, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 14110–14113 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. An, T. Simmons, R. Shah, C. Wolfe, K. M. Lewis, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak, S. Talapatra and S. Kar, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4295–4301 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Simmons, J. Bult, D. P. Hashim, R. J. Linhardt and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 865–870 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, R. R. Parajuli, D. Mastrogiovanni, B. Dai, P. Lo, W. Cheung, R. Brukh, P. L. Chiu, T. Zhou, Z. Liu, E. Garfunkel and H. He, Small, 2010, 6, 1100–1107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Bang, H.-M. So, M. J. Lee and C. W. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4806–4810 RSC .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. H. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chiappe and D. Pieraccini, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2005, 18, 275–297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Restolho, J. L. Mata and B. Saramago, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 340, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, F. Yan and J. Texter, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 431–448 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Ishimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aidal, Science, 2003, 300, 2072–2074 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Harnisch and M. D. Porter, Analyst, 2001, 126, 1841–1849 RSC .
S. K. Reed, O. J. Lanning and P. A. Madden, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 084704 CrossRef .
J. Lu, J.-X. Yang, J. Z. Wang, A. L. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367–2375 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. B. Muller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. F. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6592–6594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. B. Alemany, L. J. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Fernández-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solís-Fernández, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, L. Yan and P. R. Bangal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19885–19890 CAS .
W. Chen, L. Yan and P. R. Bangal, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1146–1152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112–1114 RSC .
J. Gao, F. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Ma, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2213–2218 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dua, S. P. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. R. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. E. Roberts, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and S. K. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, M. D. Stoller, W. Cai, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1227–1233 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Keeley, A. O'Neill, M. Holzinger, S. Cosnier, J. N. Coleman and G. S. Duesberg, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7747–7750 RSC .
G. P. Keeley, A. O'Neill, N. McEvoy, N. Peltekis, J. N. Coleman and G. S. Duesberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7864–7869 RSC .
U. Khan, I. O'Connor, Y. K. Gun'ko and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2825–2830 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. King, U. Khan, M. Lotya, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4238–4246 CrossRef CAS .
U. Khan, P. May, A. O'Neill and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4035–4041 CrossRef CAS .
P. May, U. Khan, A. O'Neill and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1278–1282 RSC .
P. Blake, P. D. Brimicombe, R. R. Nair, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, S. V. Morozov, H. F. Gleeson, E. W. Hill, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704–1708 CrossRef .
D. D. Nguyen, N. H. Tai, Y. L. Chueh, S. Y. Chen, Y. J. Chen, W. S. Kuo, T. W. Chou, C. S. Hsu and L. J. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 295606 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, N.-H. Tai, S.-B. Lee and W.-S. Kuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7908–7912 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Wencheng Du	Wencheng Du received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from the Changsha University of Science and Technology in 2008, and Master's degree from the Department of Chemistry and Materials Science at Nanjing Normal University in 2013. His research interests include preparation of high-quality graphene, defect-free graphene-based nanomaterials, energy storage and conversion. Currently, he is focusing on liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce pristine graphene. He will begin his PhD studies at Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing (with Lijun Wan) in the fall of 2013.
Xiaoqing Jiang	Xiaoqing Jiang received her MS degree from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 1990 and her PhD degree from the Hiroshima University in 2003. She worked in the Chemistry Department, Nanjing Normal University as an Assistant (1990) and a Lecturer (1993). From 2003 to 2005 she worked in the Graduate School of Engineering, Hiroshima University as an Assistant Professor. Then she moved to College of Chemistry and Materials Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, where she was successively appointed as Associate Professor (2005) and Professor (2008). Liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite to produce pristine graphene is among her research interests and projects.

 	Fig. 1  Graphite structure with ABA stacking of carbon layers (a); SEM image of graphite (b) and TEM image of exfoliated single-layer graphene (c); dispersed graphene concentration obtained by the liquid-phase exfoliation method as a function of solvent surface tension/energy (d). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright: 2008 Nature Publishing Group.) Zeta potentials of exfoliated graphene dispersions plotted against donor numbers (blue, shaded squares) and acceptor numbers (red, open squares) for 10 different organic solvents (e). (Reproduced from ref. 43.)	 

 		 


Organic solvent systems

Graphoil or microcrystalline graphite (25 mg mL−1) + chlorosulphonic acid	Spontaneous dissolution CF: 5000 rpm, 12 h	∼2 mg mL−1	Average 300 nm (for micro-crystalline graphite), 900 nm (for graphoil); single-layer (70%), 0.5 nm	
47

Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + NMP	Bath sonication, 30 min CF: 500 rpm, 90 min	∼0.01 mg mL−1	Hundred nanometers to tens of microns; monolayer: ∼28%, 1–5 nm	
22

Microcrystalline synthetic graphite or expanded graphite (500 mg) + ODCB (100 mL)	Cup-horn sonication, 30 min CF: 4400 rpm, 30 min	0.02–0.03 mg mL−1	100–500 nm; average 7–10 nm	
71

Graphite flakes (50 mg) + organic solvent (10 mL) + NaOH flakes	Bath sonication, 1.5 h CF: 3000 rpm, 60 min	0.05–0.07 mg mL−1	<8 μm; 1–5 nm	
55

Graphite fine powder (5 mg) + particular aromatic solvents (1 mL)	Ultrasound bath, 135 W, 1 h left for 5 days	0.05–1 mg mL−1	Submicrometer-to micrometer-sized nanosheets; 0.5–1 nm	
37

Natural flake graphite or HOPG (50 mg mL−1) + C6H6/C6F6	Simple sonication	50 mg mL−1	Micrometer-sized nanosheets; contain single-and multi-layered graphene	
61

Graphite powder (3.3 mg mL−1) + IPA or chloroform or acetone	Bath sonication, 16 W, 48 h CF: 500–5000 rpm, 45 min	0.01–0.5 mg mL−1	0.35–1.1 μm; 7 or less layers	
67

Natural graphite flakes (10 mg) + styrene (15 mL)	Titanium horn sonication, 50 W, 2 h, 0 °C, under Ar, CF: 1000 rpm, 5 min	∼10%	0.1 to several micrometers; <5 layers: 80%, 1.0–1.4 nm	
69

Graphite (0.1 mg mL−1) + porphyrin (0.1 mg mL−1) + TBA (10 mg mL−1) + NMP	Ultra-sonication, 30 min stand for ca. 1 week, CF: 500 rpm, 90 min	0.05 mg mL−1	Several micrometers; 1–2 nm	
56

Graphite powder (120 mg) + MSA (60 mL)	Low power sonic bath, 2 h CF: 3000 rpm, 90 min	0.2 mg mL−1	Hundred nanometres to micro-metres; few-layers (n < 10), average 1–3 nm	
62

Graphite powder (50 mg) + CSA solution (99.9 wt%) (6 mL) + H2O2 (30 wt%)(3 mL)	—	High-yield (95%), 3 mg mL−1	<2 μm; ∼1 nm	
65

Graphite flakes (0.3 g) + NMP (50 mL)	Sonication, 12 h, thermal treatment, 400–800 °C sonication, another 3 h CF: 2000–8000 rpm	0.05–1 mg mL−1	<3 μm; 0.6–1.4 nm	
58

HOPG flake (100 mg) + CTAB (0.5 M) + glacial acetic acid	Sonication, 4 h refluxed for 48 h under N2 CF: 20000 rpm, 45 min	∼10%	Average 0.5–0.7 μm; 1.18 nm	
66

Graphite powder (3.3 mg mL−1) + NMP	Bath sonication, 23 W, 460 h CF: 500 rpm	1.2 mg mL−1	0.3–1μm; monolayer: ∼4 wt%	
54

Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + 1-propanol	Bath sonication, 320 W, 20 min CF: 4500 rpm, 10 min	0.025 mg mL−1	A few to tens of micrometers; 1–5 nm, average 0.83 nm	
68

Natural graphite powder (10 mg mL−1) + organic salt (20 mg mL−1) + organic solvent	Bath sonication, 100 W, 2 h CF: 3000 rpm	0.1–1 mg mL−1	Tens of nanometers to several micrometers; average 1.01 nm	
60

 

Aqueous solution systems

Graphite (0.1–14 mg mL−1) + SDBS (5–10 mg mL−1) + water (25 mL)	Low power sonic bath, 30 min CF: 500 rpm, 90 min	0.002–0.05 mg mL−1	<1 μm; 1.5 nm, <5 layers: 43%, monolayer: 3%,	
23

Natural graphite powder (100 mg mL−1) + Pluronic P-123 (0.5–1 wt%) or other surfactant	Bath sonication, 2–5 h CF: 5000g, 5 min	0.9–1.5 mg mL−1	Between 50 and several hundred nm; 1–3 nm	
76

Graphite fine powder (250 mg) + deionized water (50 mL) + PVP (1 g)	Bath sonication, 135 W, 9 h CF: 1500 rpm, 30 min	0.1 mg mL−1	Lateral dimensions of these flakes are in the micron to sub-micron range; average <1 nm (0.7–0.9 nm)	
74

Graphite powder (0.1 mg mL−1) + Py-NH2 or Py-SO3 (0.4 mg mL−1) + deionized water	Bath sonication, 130 W, 0 °C, 1 h CF: 4000 rpm, 20 min	—	Several hundred nm, average 0.9 ± 0.3 nm	
80

Graphite (5 mg mL−1) + NaC (0.1 mg mL−1) + water (400 mL)	Bath sonication, 80 W, 430 h CF: 500–5000 rpm, 30–90 min	0.05–0.3 mg mL−1	0.3–1.2 μm; monolayer: ∼10% (1500 rpm) monolayer: ∼19% (5000 rpm)	
72

Expandable graphite (2 mg) + RB (0.5 mg) + 10% DMA aqueous solution	Bath sonication, 250 W, 6–10 h CF: 500–9000 rpm, 20–30 min	12 wt%	From 200 nm to more than 1 μm; average 2–3 nm	
83

Graphite powder (100 mg) + PCA (16.5 mg) + methanol (50 mL) + distilled water (200 mL)	Bath sonication, 45 min + 1 day settle overnight	1 wt%	100 of nanometers to a few microns; monolayer: ∼10%	
78

 

Ionic liquid systems

Graphite flakes (5.0 wt%) + HMIH	Ultrasonic bath, 550 W, 24 h; CF: 4000 rpm, 30 min	5.33 mg mL−1	3–4 μm; average 2 nm	
46

Natural graphite flakes (20 mg) + [Bmim][Tf2N] (10 mL)	Tip sonication, 750 W, 60 min; CF: 10000 rpm, 20 min	0.95 mg mL−1	With micrometer-long edges; <5 layers	
45


 	Fig. 2  Raman (a) and XPS (b) spectra of exfoliated graphene samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright: 2008 Nature Publishing Group.	 


DEG-based conductive materials

Thin films (8 μm thick) on Teflon substrate free-standing transparent films (10 nm thick)	Conductivity: 110000 S m−1, sheet resistance: 1000 Ω □−1, conductivity: 80000–95000 S m−1 (dried at 150 °C)	
47

Thin films (30 nm thick) on the alumina membrane	Conductivity: 6500 S m−1 (dried at ∼300 °C)	
22

Thin films (10 μm thick) on the alumina membrane	Sheet resistance: 60 Ω □−1, corresponding conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (vacuum dried at 100 °C and then annealed at 400 °C)	
71

Thin films on the polymer substrate	Sheet resistance: 2800 Ω □−1, (doped with HNO3)	
58

Thick, free-standing films (40–80 μm thick)	Conductivity: 1.8 ± 0.1 × 104 S m−1 (no annealing)	
54

Thin films on the polyvinylidene fluoride membrane filter	Conductivity: 2000 S m−1 (air dried)	
68

Thin films (∼30 nm thick) on the alumina membrane	Sheet resistance: 970 kΩ □−1, corresponding conductivity: 35 S m−1 (before annealing); sheet resistance: 22.5 kΩ □−1, corresponding conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (annealed at 250 °C)	
23

Free-standing graphene/surfactant composite paper-like films	Conductivity: 3600 S m−1, 1160 S m−1, 190 S m−1 (air dried)	
76

Thin films on the Anodisc 47 inorganic membranes	Conductivity: ∼2000 S m−1, (air dried)	
80

Drop-cast transparent films on quartz	Conductivity: 8400 S m−1, (dried at 1000 °C for Py-NH2/graphene film) conductivity: 181200 S m−1, corresponding 778 Ω □−1 (dried at 1000 °C for a Py-SO3/graphene film)	
80

Free-standing films	Conductivity: ∼7000 S m−1, (before annealing), ∼17500 S m−1, (dried at 500 °C)	
72

Multilayer graphene films	Sheet resistance: 30.27, 0.78, 0.16 kΩ □−1 (corresponding conductivity: 12280 S m−1) (vacuum dried at 70 °C)	
83

 

CCG-based conductive materials

Free-standing films (ca. 6 μm thick)	Conductivity: 11800 S m−1, (annealed at 220 °C), 35100 S m−1, (annealed at 500 °C)	
94

Free-standing films	Conductivity: 7200 S m−1 (air dried)	
95

Reduced graphene oxide transparent films on quartz slides	Conductivities: ∼100000 S m−1 (graphitization at 1100 °C)	
96

Thin evaporated films (∼3 μm thick) deposited on a glass slide	Conductivity: 1250 S m−1 (dried at 120 °C)	
97

Free-standing graphene paper	Conductivity: 690 S m−1	
98

Free-standing graphene films	Conductivity: 200 S m−1	
99

Compressed graphene pellets	Conductivity: 8.23 S m−1, 1660 S m−1, 20200 S m−1 (annealed at 1100 °C)	
100

Free-standing paper-like films	Conductivity: 9960 S m−1	
101

Graphene paper	Conductivity: 6500 S m−1 (dried at 50 °C)	
102

Graphene paper	Conductivity: 200 S m−1	
103

Graphene papers (0.3 mm thick)	Conductivity: ∼800 S m−1 (dried at 80 °C)	
104

Graphene paper	Conductivity: 14.1 S m−1	
105

Compressed graphene pellets	Conductivity: 1500 S m−1 (dried at 60 °C)	
106

Pressed graphene disks	Conductivity: 2100 S m−1 (dried at 90 °C)	
107


 	Fig. 3  Reported electrical conductivities of DEG- and CCG-based graphene materials. For comparison, logarithm processing of datum shown in Table 2 was done, and rearranged from the lowest to the highest.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
