Efficient inverted bulk-heterojunction solar cells from low-temperature processing of amorphous ZnO buffer layers   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA02276A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02276A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13321-13331Efficient inverted bulk-heterojunction solar cells from low-temperature processing of amorphous ZnO buffer layers†

        
          
            Lethy Krishnan 
            Jagadamma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Maged 
            Abdelsamie
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Abdulrahman 
            El Labban
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emanuele 
            Aresu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guy O. 
            Ngongang Ndjawa
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dalaver H. 
            Anjum
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dongkyu 
            Cha
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Pierre M. 
            Beaujuge
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Aram 
            Amassian
          
        
      *ab
aPhysical Sciences and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: aram.amassian@kaust.edu.sa
bSolar and Photovoltaic Engineering Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
cAdvanced Nanofabrication, Imaging and Characterization Laboratory, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      6th May 2014
    , Accepted 12th June 2014First published on 12th June 2014AbstractIn this report, we demonstrate that solution-processed amorphous zinc oxide (a-ZnO) interlayers prepared at low temperatures (∼100 °C) can yield inverted bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells that are as efficient as nanoparticle-based ZnO requiring comparably more complex synthesis or polycrystalline ZnO films prepared at substantially higher temperatures (150–400 °C). Low-temperature, facile solution-processing approaches are required in the fabrication of BHJ solar cells on flexible plastic substrates, such as PET. Here, we achieve efficient inverted solar cells with a-ZnO buffer layers by carefully examining the correlations between the thin film morphology and the figures of merit of optimized BHJ devices with various polymer donors and PCBM as the fullerene acceptor. We find that the most effective a-ZnO morphology consists of a compact, thin layer with continuous substrate coverage. In parallel, we emphasize the detrimental effect of forming rippled surface morphologies of a-ZnO, an observation which contrasts with results obtained in polycrystalline ZnO thin films, where rippled morphologies have been reported to improve efficiency. After optimizing the a-ZnO morphology at low processing temperature for inverted P3HT:PCBM devices, achieving a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ca. 4.1%, we demonstrate inverted solar cells with low bandgap polymer donors on glass/flexible PET substrates: PTB7:PC71BM (PCE: 6.5% (glass)/5.6% (PET)) and PBDTTPD:PC71BM (PCE: 6.7% (glass)/5.9% (PET)). Finally, we show that a-ZnO based inverted P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells maintain ca. 90–95% of their initial PCE even after a full year without encapsulation in a nitrogen dry box, thus demonstrating excellent shelf stability. The insight we have gained into the importance of surface morphology in amorphous zinc oxide buffer layers should help in the development of other low-temperature solution-processed metal oxide interlayers for efficient flexible solar cells.
Introduction
Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPV) have received a great deal of attention in recent years because of the promise of low cost fabrication of efficient modules on large area substrates, including plastics, using solution processing methods.1–3 The OPV field has also benefitted from the ability to design semiconductors with wide-ranging bandgaps, making it possible to fabricate efficient multijunction solar cells as well as semitransparent/transparent device configurations.4,5 Despite these advantages, OPVs are still challenged by their operational or device efficiency, stability and large area mass production. Focusing on device stability, the inverted OPV device structure has been proposed as a more stable alterative to the direct cell architecture.1,6 The conventional, direct structure uses low work-function metals such as Ca and Al as electron-collecting electrodes, which may easily oxidize in the presence of oxygen and/or moisture. The use of PEDOT:PSS as the hole-transporting buffer layer in the direct device structure also favors device degradation due to its inherent hygroscopic and acidic nature.7 In inverted device architectures, charge collection polarity is reversed to allow for high work-function metal electrodes such as Au and Ag to be used as hole-collecting back electrodes, eliminating the use of PEDOT:PSS in the device.8 The inverted structure may additionally benefit from evidence of desirable vertical phase separation of the active layer materials, with the acceptor molecule, PC60BM, segregating near the ZnO-coated cathode and the P3HT found near the anode.9
Several groups have already demonstrated the effectiveness of various binary metal oxides as hole-collecting (V2O5, MoOx, NiOx) and electron-collecting (TiO2, SnOx, ZnO) buffer layers in direct and inverted OPV devices to improve efficiency.10 Among the electron-transporting layers, ZnO has been perhaps the most widely used buffer layer because of its high electron mobility, wide direct bandgap (3.37 eV), environmental stability, low cost, and appropriate energy level alignment with PCBM acceptors in collecting electrons, blocking holes effectively from P3HT. Moreover, the band edge cut-off of ZnO near ∼370 nm helps to block the UV light and protects the photoactive layer.11 Although ZnO layers can be produced from several physical vapor deposition routes, solution-processing has long been an attractive option due to its cost effectiveness and simplicity.12 Solution-processing can also be made compatible with the roll-to-roll fabrication of organic solar cell modules on plastic substrates, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET). However, one key challenge in solution-processed roll-to-roll mass production of OPVs is the attuning of the process temperature of each functional layer, including ZnO, with the glass transition/maximum operating temperature of the plastic substrate employed, without compromising the device's power conversion efficiency (PCE). The upper operating temperature of the most commonly employed flexible substrate, heat stabilized PET, is 150 °C, with lower grade PET operating at 100 °C or even below. Therefore, it is imperative to develop ZnO processing strategies that can be used well below this temperature limit.13 However in most of the previous reports on solution-cast ZnO buffer layers (except the nanoparticle approach) the processing temperature is ≥300 °C to realize crystalline ZnO films with high carrier mobility and to improve OPV device efficiency,6,14–18 and it should be noted that low-temperature solution-processed amorphous ZnO buffer layers have commonly yielded poor device performance18–20 [Fig. 1a]. This high annealing temperature hampers the low temperature processing potential of OPVs on flexible substrates and in some cases the ITO conductivity.17,19 Crystalline nanoparticle-based suspensions of ZnO have been used successfully at low processing temperatures21–24 albeit their complex synthesis step involved.25,26 However, ZnO nanoparticles are sensitive to the presence of moisture and can form aggregates in the absence of appropriate ligands.27 In addition, it has been pointed out that metal oxide nanoparticles can lead to the formation of a porous and poorly interconnected particulate film at low processing temperatures.28 The hydrothermal synthesis of ZnO nanostructures at similarly low temperature has not generally yielded efficient inverted devices either.29–33 Hence, for practical reasons, most direct and inverted device fabrication and optimization efforts have focused on processing ITO-coated glass substrates, with spin-cast PEDOT:PSS or ZnO buffer layers annealed at 140 °C or 200–400 °C, respectively. Low-to intermediate-temperature (150–200 °C) processing of crystalline ZnO buffer layers by sol–gel methods can yield inverted organic solar cells with ca. 3.6% PCE – results that are comparable to the best devices fabricated at high processing temperatures.34,35 This indicates that lower temperature processing of ZnO, which may introduce substantial microstructural and/or morphological imperfections, has the potential to yield efficient inverted organic solar cells if supported with careful examination of the microstructure and morphology.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of organic solar cell power conversion efficiencies (PCE) previously reported for inverted (a) P3HT:PC60BM and (b) PTB7:PC70BM BHJ devices, as well as the present work, plotted as a function of the ZnO processing temperature and method. The maximum processing temperatures of PET, thermally stabilized PET (HT-PET), and PEN are shown. 
In the present study, we investigate the process–microstructure–morphology–performance relationship for a low temperature (∼100 °C) solution processed ZnO thin film interlayer prepared from a zinc acetate dihydrate (ZAD) precursor. The precursor was mixed with 2-methoxyethanol solvent and monoethanol amine (acting as a stabilizer) and hydrolysed in air at RT. The resulting ZnO film is shown to be fully amorphous, a.k.a. a-ZnO, using X-ray diffraction and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron diffraction and has a non-negligible carbon content, as demonstrated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. We focus our investigation towards modifying the substrate coverage and surface morphology of a-ZnO films and identify a morphological “sweet spot” where a-ZnO films are capable of achieving a similar benchmark efficiency of ca. 4.1% and good stability as do polycrystalline or nanocrystalline ZnO when making inverted P3HT:PC60BM solar cells. The morphological “sweet spot” for a-ZnO films differs significantly from crystalline ZnO, where the formation of large ripples favors higher PCE.16,17,19 We extend our application of the a-ZnO buffer layer to low bandgap polymer donor systems, namely PTB7 and PBDTTPD and demonstrate efficient inverted BHJ cells with PC71BM on both glass and PET substrates.36,37 The demonstrated PCE values of PTB7:PC71BM [Fig. 1b] are either better than or comparable to previous reports using higher-temperature-processed crystalline ZnO38,39 or nanoparticle ZnO,40,41 and improve upon previous reports using amorphous ZnO.42–44 The insight gained into the importance of the surface morphology of amorphous ZnO should help in the development and adoption of other low-temperature solution-processed metal oxide buffer layers for efficient flexible solar cells.
Experimental methods
Preparation of a-ZnO buffer layer
The zinc oxide precursor solution was prepared by dissolving equimolar ratios of zinc acetate dihydrate (ZAD) (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Sigma Aldrich 99.9%) and monoethanol amine (MEA) (NH2CH2CH2OH) in 2-methoxy ethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Sigma Aldrich 99.8%) at room temperature (RT). The precursor solution was continuously stirred at RT for ∼24 hours to induce hydrolysis in air. Five different precursor concentrations were considered: 0.07, 0.11, 0.15, 0.23 and 0.46 M. The freshly prepared ZnO precursor solution was spin-coated on cleaned, patterned ITO substrates (15 Ω sq−1) for different spin rates varying from 1500–6000 rpm for 20 s. After the spin-casting process, the ZnO films were annealed in air on a hot plate (PRAZITHERM PZ 28-3TD) at 100–110 °C for 10 min and allowed to cool down at RT.
Fabrication of P3HT:PC60BM, PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTPD:PC71BM based inverted solar cells
Inverted solar cells were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO-coated glass and ITO-coated PET substrates. The ITO-coated glass/PET substrates were subsequently cleaned with detergent (SDS), ultrasonicated in DI water, acetone, isopropyl alcohol and exposed to UV–ozone. The polymer blend solution was prepared by dissolving 25 mg of P3HT and 25 mg of PC61BM in 1 mL of 1,2 dichlorobenzene. The solution was kept under stirring at 60 °C for ∼24 h before deposition. Approximately a 200 nm thick P3HT:PCBM based active layer is spun cast (900 rpm, 45 s) on glass/ITO/ZnO and PET/ITO/ZnO substrates inside a N2 filled glove box and the films were left in a glass Petri dish at RT for 24 h for slow solvent evaporation. This was followed by thermal treatment at 110 °C for 10 minutes on a hot plate.
The photoactive polymer blend solution for the low bandgap material PTB7:PC71BM was prepared by mixing chlorobenzene of 1:1.5 w/w ratio (concentration of 25 mg mL−1) with 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) of 3% volume ratio and stirred overnight at 60 °C. An active layer with an approximate thickness of ∼100 nm was obtained by spin casting the blend solution at 800 rpm for 60 s.
The PBDTTPD:PC71BM blend solution was prepared by dissolving in the ratio of 1:1.5 (by weight), with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene containing 5% (by volume) of 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) additive and kept stirring overnight at 115 °C. The active layers were spun-cast at an optimized speed of 1200 rpm for 45 s, resulting in a film of ∼100 nm thickness.
Later, the structure comprising glass (PET)/ITO/ZnO/organic active layer was transferred to a vacuum thermal evaporator (3 × 10−6 mbar base pressure) for MoOx (3.5 nm) and Au (50 nm) or Ag (80 nm) thermal evaporation, using a shadow mask. The active area of the devices was 0.1 cm2. For all the inverted device structures investigated in this study, all processing conditions related to the active layer spin-casting, to the top MoOx buffer layer deposition and Au/Ag electrode deposition, were kept the same.
Characterization of solar cells
Measurement of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics was performed using a Keithley 2400 source unit. A xenon arc lamp (300 W) served as the light source and the light intensity was calibrated using a KG5 filtered Si diode to reduce the spectral mismatch. Solar cell performance was measured using an Air Mass 1.5 G solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The active area of the devices is 0.1 cm2.
Characterization of the a-ZnO interlayer composition, morphology, and microstructure
Surface morphology of the a-ZnO films was characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM; Agilent, SPM 5400) in tapping mode using a Si cantilever tip [radius – 8 ± 2 nm, nominal force constant – 7.4 N m−1, Model: PPP-XYNCSTR, Nanosensors]. Composition analysis of the a-ZnO films was performed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; Omicron Nano Technology, Germany) using monochromatized Al Kα X-ray photons (hυ = 1486.6 eV) in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber (∼10−10 mbar). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were also carried out in the same UHV chamber using He(I) 21.2 eV photons. For XPS and UPS measurements, the ZnO films were prepared on thin gold foil. To elucidate the elemental percentage details from the XPS data, curve fitting and Shirley background subtraction were done using CASA XPS software (V2.3). The thicknesses of the prepared films vary from 3.5 to 55 nm as measured by variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) [M-2000XI, J. A. Woollam Co., Inc.]. To measure the electron field effect mobility in a-ZnO, bottom-gate, top-contact thin film transistors (TFT) were fabricated on RCA-cleaned highly p-doped monocrystalline Si with a 300 nm thermal oxide, under identical conditions of a-ZnO preparation as used for solar cell fabrication. Al (50 nm) source and drain electrodes were deposited using thermal evaporation and a shadow mask. The channel length (L) and channel width (W) were 50 μm and 500 μm respectively. All the electrical characterizations were performed inside a nitrogen glove box using a Cascade Microtech probe station and a Keithley semiconductor parameter analyser (Keithley 4200-SCS). The optical transmission spectra of the spun cast a-ZnO layers were obtained using a Varian UV-Vis Cary 100 spectrophotometer over the wavelength range between 300 and 900 nm. Cross-section transmission electron microscopy (X-TEM) analysis of samples was performed on a FEI Company's Titan G2 80-300 ST electron microscope by operating it at an accelerating voltage of 300 keV. It should be noted that the X-section specimens of the samples for the TEM analysis were completed by using a focused ion beam (FIB) of Model Helios 450 also from FEI Company. TEM investigations included the analysis of samples by using the techniques of selected area electron diffraction (SAED), high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), and energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) for crystallinity, imaging, and sulfur (S) & carbon (C) elemental mappings, respectively. Both SAED as well as HRTEM micrographs were recorded digitally by using a retractable charged-coupled device (CCD) camera of model US4000 from Gatan, Inc. that was attached below the projection chamber of the microscope. On the other hand, the elemental mappings of S and C were carried out with a post-column energy filter of Model GIF Tridiem 863 also from Gatan, Inc. It should be noted that S–L23 and C–K edges for S and C elements were used to acquire their corresponding elemental maps. Moreover, the so-called 3-window method was adapted to generate these maps45 during the EFTEM analysis and the corresponding electron micrographs were recorded digitally on a CCD camera of model US1000 FT attached at the end of an energy filter.
Results and discussion
Amorphous ZnO structure, chemistry and composition
We have prepared a-ZnO films of increasing mean thickness from 3.5 nm to 54 nm (measured by VASE) using a combination of different solution concentrations and spin-coating conditions. In all cases, we have performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 2a) and demonstrate that all ZnO films prepared in this study are amorphous by XRD. In addition, we have performed high resolution TEM with SAED (Fig. 2b) for thicker and thinner films to confirm the absence of any nanocrystalline order, confirming that they also lack any intermediate order and are indeed fully amorphous. The absence of intermediate and long-range order in these ZnO films is different from the case of polycrystalline films prepared at more elevated temperature either through the same precursor or a different one.6,14–18 Henceforth, we refer to these films as a-ZnO. A typical XPS survey scan of the a-ZnO film is shown in Fig. S1(a).† The survey scan identifies the presence of Zn, O and C elements. High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s peak region reveals a doublet peak at ∼287 and 290 eV (Fig. S1(b)†), which can be assigned to C–H or C–C bonding and CO or COO− groups, respectively.46 This implies the presence of residual organic components in the a-ZnO films prepared at low temperature. During the hydrolysis of ZAD in the presence of an alcohol (2-methoxy ethanol), intermediate complexes such as zinc oxo-acetate and/or Zn(OH)(CH3COO) are likely to be formed. The addition of MEA enhances the hydrolysis of ZAD and the intermediate complexes to yield Zn(OH)2, which subsequently converts to ZnO upon annealing, however some residual intermediate organic complexes can still be present in the film.12,46–48 In the low-temperature processed films, the overall ratio of the residual carbon atoms to Zn and oxygen atoms was estimated from XPS (cross-section weighed) to be ∼15% (inset of Fig. S1(a)†). The C/Zn ratio decreases from the starting precursor ratio of 4 down to 0.42 in the a-ZnO films, indicating a substantial but yet incomplete decomposition of the precursor via hydrolysis at a low processing temperature of ∼100 °C.
 Fig. 2  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the a-ZnO thin films prepared from different precursor concentrations and a spinning speed of 2000 rpm (i) 0.45 M, (ii) 0.23 M, (iii) 0.15 M (iv) 0.11 M and (v) 0.07 M. (b) Representative HR-TEM image and SAED pattern of the a-ZnO thin film. High resolution XPS spectra of (c) Zn2p and (d) O1s core levels combined with peak fits to the spectra. In (c) and (d), the black dots represents the original spectra, green line corresponds to the fitted curve (red represents the component peak) and the pink line represents the background. 
In Fig. 2c, we show the representative Zn2p spectrum. Both Zn2p3/2 and Zn2p1/2 core level spectral lines appear highly symmetric and their binding energy positions are in close agreement with those of Zn2p lines in sol–gel derived ZnO thin films as reported by Sun et al.49 In Fig. 2d, we show a representative core level XPS spectrum of the O1s line in the a-ZnO films. The peak appears to be asymmetric, indicating the presence of more than one oxygen species in the a-ZnO film. The deconvoluted O1s peak has two components at binding energy positions of 531.4 and 533.1 eV.
The component at lower binding energy corresponds to oxygen bonded to Zn in the ZnO matrix, while the component at higher energy has been reported to have different origins, ranging from oxygen-deficient components such as Zn(OH)2 to oxygen belonging to the organic residues C–O and CO.46,49,50 From the estimated elemental analysis given in the inset of Fig. S1(a),† the total oxygen to Zn atomic ratio is 1.25:1 and the relative abundance of the low binding energy oxygen atoms to Zn is 52%. To estimate the relative abundance of each O1s component in the a-ZnO, the atomic percentage of individual components (531.4 and 533.1 eV) is estimated by careful background subtraction and peak fitting and is then compared to that of the Zn atomic ratio estimated from Zn2p peak fitting.
Surface coverage and morphology of a-ZnO on ITO-coated glass
AFM images showing the evolution of surface topography and morphology of the a-ZnO films prepared with different thicknesses are presented in Fig. 3 and 4 along with the equivalent statistical distributions of surface height (SDSH) as measured by the AFM tip. In all cases, we have taken the peak position of the distribution in height to be equivalent to the mean physical thickness, topt, as measured by VASE. The root mean squared (RMS) surface roughness (σrms) of the a-ZnO surface is equivalent to the standard deviation of the SDSH. In Fig. 4a, we plot σrmsversus topt and reveal three thickness regimes. The three thickness regimes correspond to those of Fig. 4b–d; incomplete coverage, compact, and rippled. For low film thicknesses, σrms is initially high and decreases with increasing film thickness until it reaches a depression for films ranging in thickness between 20 and 40 nm; it subsequently increases dramatically into double digit values. The origin of the decreasing surface roughness with increasing thickness can be inferred from a close examination of the SDSH analysis. The deep-lying shoulder in the SDSH – represented as a red Gaussian at the lowest part of the SDSH plot in Fig. 3e–g and schematically represented in Fig. 4d – originates from the exposed ITO surface which is accessible to the AFM tip for low coverage of the ITO surface in the low thickness regime of a-ZnO; the shoulder is clearly visible and decreases for a-ZnO thicknesses of up to 16 nm (Fig. 3e–g) and subsequently disappears, indicating full substrate coverage. As the film thickness increases beyond 40 nm, the deposition conditions are modified such that the surface of the film transforms from a nanoparticulate morphology (Fig. 3c–g) to a rippled morphology (Fig. 3a and b) resulting in a dramatic increase of σrms into double digits without the appearance of additional shoulders. Here, the SDSH becomes skewed toward the surface, indicating a surface with sharp protrusions and shallow valleys [Fig. 4b]. Ripples having two different (lateral and vertical) length scales both lying in the nanoregime are also investigated: lateral scale 200–400 nm and height ∼100 nm, hereafter referred to as large ripples (Fig. 3a) and lateral scale ∼40–200 nm and height ∼55 nm, referred to as small ripples (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a)–(g) AFM images and the respective statistical distribution of surface height (SDSH) of a-ZnO thin films with decreasing film thickness prepared from different spin speeds and precursor concentrations. (a)–(e) correspond to 0.46 to 0.11 M (spin speeds are respectively 1500, 2500, 3500, 5000, and 3000 rpm) (f) & (g) to 0.07 M (3000 and 4000 rpm respectively). 
 Fig. 4  (a) RMS surface roughness of a-ZnO films shown in Fig. 3a–g as a function of film thickness as measured by VASE. Symbols are color coded by morphological regime: uncoated (pink symbol), low coverage (blue symbols), compact (red symbols), and rippled (black symbols). (b)–(d) Schematics showing the three regimes of a-ZnO surface morphology investigated by the AFM tip and the corresponding SDSH curves plotted schematically: (b) rippled, (c) compact with full surface coverage and (d) incomplete surface coverage with partial exposure of the substrate, as represented by the red distribution in the SDSH. 
The development of the rippled morphology observed in Fig. 3a and b is usually associated with a dynamical annealing procedure performed after spin coating.17,35 The slow heating process provides sufficient time for the ZnO particles to relax and self-assemble into ripples. In the present case, we have kept the annealing procedure fully constant and only manipulated the precursor concentration, spinning speed and time in order to transition between the rippled and the granular morphologies. Ripples were produced by combining higher precursor concentration (e.g., 0.46 M in the present case) with lower spinning speed (1500 & 2500 rpm), whereas the granular morphology is obtained under conditions of higher speed (3000–5000 rpm). Recently, Park et al.35 have shown a link between shorter spinning durations and ripple formation in the final crystalline ZnO films. We therefore believe a-ZnO films deposited at lower spinning speed for a shorter duration (20 s in the present case) and processed at low temperature can retain sufficient solvent in the as-spun film to favor chain mobility of nanoparticles (formed during the gelation process) and thus form ripples on the surface. With increasing spinning speed, the residual solvent in the spin cast film is reduced and may restrict the chain mobility of nanoparticles, resulting in the self-assembly of a more quenched film, as seen in the case of spin-cast bulk heterojunction organic semiconductors too.51,52
Charge transport
We have fabricated bottom gate, top contact thin film transistors (TFT) [Fig. S2(a)†] to evaluate electron transport in a-ZnO thin films prepared with different surface coverage and morphologies. Recently Bubel et al.53 have shown that a-ZnO exhibits trap-filled limit mobility through an ionic liquid gating method. However all the mobility values presented here are below the trap-filled limit and determined using a conventional bottom-gate TFT architecture. The saturation electron mobility was estimated from transfer curves (Fig. S2(b)†). The field effect mobility values are found to be in the range of 10−4 to 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, in good agreement with the mobility values previously reported for a-ZnO prepared under low to intermediate temperature conditions.35,49,53 As shown in Fig. 5, the surface morphology of the a-ZnO film impacts carrier mobility, with a-ZnO films having the lowest roughness and also yielding devices with the highest mobility by up to an order of magnitude. The electron mobility of films exhibiting the rippled morphology (black symbols) is lower than that of a-ZnO films with dense nanoparticle morphology (red symbols). For a-ZnO films exhibiting lower substrate coverage (blue symbols), the electron mobility is also low or nonexistent, with all but one ZnO layer thickness (topt ∼ 7.4 nm) failing to show any transistor action. This is due to the loss of lateral connectivity of a-ZnO domains within the channel of the transistor, which results in catastrophic loss of in-plane charge transport at the semiconductor–dielectric interface.
 Fig. 5  Field effect saturation electron mobility in a-ZnO-based TFTs as a function of their RMS surface roughness, as reported in Fig. 3. 
Optimization of a-ZnO for inverted P3HT:PCBM solar cells
By considering the a-ZnO films as ETLs in an inverted solar cell architecture such as the one shown in Fig. 6a, we have considered the energetic landscape of all functional layers within the device, as summarized in Fig. 6b. The valence band maximum (VBM) of the a-ZnO film (fully covering the ITO/Au surface) was determined by UPS measurements to be 7.52 eV (Fig. S3†), while the conduction band minimum (CBM) was estimated to be 4.15 eV by adding the optical bandgap (3.37 eV) to the VBM. The estimated workfunction is ∼3.6 eV (Fig. S3,† UPS measurements), indicating that the Fermi level of a-ZnO is lying inside the conduction band. This has been previously reported for intrinsic and non-intentionally doped ZnO thin films (with a very low conductivity of the order of 1 × 10−6 S m−1) and mainly attributed to the increased amount of native, shallow surface donors mainly in the form of hydroxyl ions; however the exact cause of this behaviour is still under debate.49,54,55 As shown in Fig. 6b, the Fermi energy of the ZnO films is close to the energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PCBM, which should facilitate electron transfer without much energy loss. The VBM of the thermally evaporated MoOx film obtained from UPS is 5.4 eV and is also close to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of P3HT ensuring efficient transfer of holes to the Au electrode.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the P3HT:PCBM based inverted OPV device structure. (b) Energy level diagram of the component materials used in device fabrication. (c) J–V characteristics of OPV devices with an a-ZnO buffer layer (Fig. 3) of different morphologies and ITO surface coverage, as characterized by σRMS and the respective morphology regime [low surface coverage (blue symbols), compact (red symbols), and rippled (black symbols)]. (d) PCE as a function of RMS surface roughness of a-ZnO films. (e) Series and shunt resistance (Rs and Rsh) and (f) variation of OPV performance parameters (Jsc, Voc and FF) of the devices as a function of RMS roughness of the a-ZnO interlayer. 
We have fabricated inverted P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells integrating our a-ZnO ETL as described in the Methods section. The J–V characteristics of the solar cells are shown in Fig. 6c. As expected, solar cells perform poorly in the absence of the ZnO interlayer, resulting in an average device efficiency of only 0.87% as a result of lower Voc and FF. The addition of the ZnO interlayer largely improves OPV device performance. The PCE and the device parameters (Voc, FF, and Jsc) are plotted with respect to the RMS roughness of the ZnO layer in Fig. 6d and f, respectively, while the shunt and series resistance, Rsh and Rs, respectively, are plotted in Fig. 6e. Rsh and Rs were extracted from the inverse slope of the J–V curve at I = Isc (V = 0) and V = Voc (I = 0) respectively.56 The performance improvement is very much dependent on the morphology of the a-ZnO layer used, ranging between 1.92% and 3.85% (Fig. 6d), with the worst results observed for a-ZnO films exhibiting large ripples (Fig. 3a) and the best results observed in the case of compact a-ZnO films exhibiting smooth morphology with good substrate coverage.
Devices based on a-ZnO with large ripples exhibited lower Voc (0.56 V), FF (∼54) and Jsc (∼6 mA cm−2) compared to devices based on a-ZnO with small ripples or compact a-ZnO, where Voc is typically ∼0.61 V. Apart from the HOMO–LUMO difference between the donor and acceptor, Voc can be limited by the charge extraction and recombination losses at the active layer–electrode interface.57 A poor contact quality of the a-ZnO buffer layer with the active layer can result in unfavorable space charge build up (due to high contact resistance) and loss of even the dissociated charge carriers through recombination or trapping, failing their collection at the cathode. The lower shunt resistance (Rsh ∼ 7 kΩ cm2) and higher series resistance (Rs) in the case of devices based on large ripples prove that poor contact between the photoactive and a-ZnO layers is to blame. The observation of low efficiency in the case of large ripple morphology contradicts previous results16,17,35 wherein it was shown that P3HT:PCBM solar cells employing crystalline ZnO buffer layers with rippled morphology (having comparable lateral and vertical length scales) exhibited higher efficiency as compared with the planar granular films. The enhancement was attributed to the increase in the interfacial contact area between ZnO and the photoactive layer, which was found to improve charge extraction. However, a key difference between the previous studies and this work is that the processing temperatures employed in the previous studies were 100 to 250 degrees greater than in the current study. Under these conditions of high processing temperature, ZnO crystallizes14–18 may even assume a different crystalline texture, resulting in large variations in carrier transport.58–60 Structure and texture are both absent in a-ZnO films prepared at 100 °C. It is therefore plausible that low mobility (Fig. 5) combined with large thickness (∼55 nm) of the a-ZnO films exhibiting large ripples (σRMS ∼ 20.5 nm) may be at the origin of the low PCE observed. The film exhibiting smaller ripples was slightly thinner (∼43 nm) and smoother (σRMS ∼ 10.5 nm) and yielded higher PCE, but still less than compact a-ZnO films with full surface coverage.
A significant drop in FF is seen in the case of low coverage a-ZnO films with nanoparticulate morphology, decreasing from 66% to 56%. This drop in FF is in agreement with the observations made by Zhang et al.14 and Liang et al.15 who employed a high temperature ZnO deposition process (350 °C). As the surface coverage of ITO by a-ZnO decreases, this exposes the photoactive layer directly to the ITO substrate, creating leakage current pathways and increasing contact resistance. This can be seen in the comparatively lower shunt resistance and higher series resistance values for low coverage a-ZnO films (Fig. 6e).
It has been suggested in previous reports that the inverted OPV structure benefits from the vertical phase separation of the active layer's organic components with the cathode side becoming acceptor-enriched and the anode more donor-enriched, thus substantially enhancing charge collection at the interface and hence the device performance.61,62 To investigate ZnO layer properties on vertical phase separation of active layer components, energy filtered cross-sectional TEM measurements together with thickness-corrected elemental mappings of carbon (284 eV) and sulfur (165 eV) were carried out. To visualize the elemental distribution clearly, the elemental maps for the P3HT:PCBM active layer are combined into RGB composite images as shown in Fig. S4.† In the presence of a densely packed, a-ZnO nanoparticle morphology, a clear vertical phase separation gradient is observed, with P3HT concentrated near the top half of the BHJ blend and PCBM in the bottom half and near the a-ZnO interface. However with thinner a-ZnO layers with poor surface coverage of the ITO substrate, such vertical segregation appears to be absent but uniform bulk phase separation throughout the film occurs. This observation is in agreement with that of Ibrahem et al.22 where the authors observed the absence of vertical concentration gradient of active layer components when the P3HT:PCBM blend solution is directly deposited on the ITO surface. This could be attributed to the differences in assembly of organic molecules influenced by the surface wettability and hence the surface energy of ZnO and ITO surfaces. However more systematic investigation has to be done on this part.
Since the ZnO interlayers were derived under low-temperature processing conditions, we have explored the OPV performance stability with extended aging in a nitrogen environment (inside a glass Petri dish) without encapsulation. Most of these devices showed an initial increase in PCE. For instance, the device which initially showed a highest PCE of 3.85% improved to 4.08% and retained the same performance even after 3 months [Fig. 7]. Since the initial PCE measurement of the devices was done without light soaking in UV light, the photocurrent response might not have been saturated. However after the light exposure with the initial J–V curve measurement, the unfilled trap states associated with the a-ZnO film might have become occupied, improving the contact quality between the active layer and the ZnO ETL (reflected in the improved FF and Jsc) [Fig. S5†].63 After 13 months wait time [Fig. 7], devices kept in a N2 filled glove box retained between 90% and 95% of their initial PCE, revealing good stability.
 Fig. 7  Variation of PCE for selected devices over several months of aging in an inert atmosphere without encapsulation as a function of (a) RMS surface roughness and (b) aging time. 
Demonstration of efficient PTB7:PC70BM and PBDTTBD:PC71BM solar cells
The optimized morphological and microstructural features of a-ZnO (nano-particulate with full surface coverage) yielding the best performance to P3HT:PC61BM OPVs were extended to PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTPD:PC71BM blends. The J–V characteristics of the solar cells and OPV performance parameters are shown in Fig. 8. The PTB7:PC71BM based inverted solar cells fabricated on glass and flexible PET substrates demonstrate PCE values of 6.5 and 5.6% respectively. The marginally lower performance of the PET/ITO based devices can be accounted by their slightly lower transparency and is reflected in the Jsc of the devices. PET substrates are the most commonly employed flexible substrates in organic electronics, being cheap, resistant to a wide range of chemicals and because of its high mechanical strength.13 The obtained PCE values of PTB7:PC71BM [Fig. 1b] based inverted OPVs are either better or comparable to those fabricated at similar or even higher temperature-processed crystalline,38,39 nanoparticle ZnO40,41 or amorphous ZnO42–44 buffer layers. Fig. 8b shows the J–V characteristics and the OPV performance parameters for the PBDTTPD:PC71BM solar cells. The OPV performance stability testing with extended ageing of 3 months in an nitrogen environment without encapsulation reveals a 90% retention of the original PCE [ESI-Table 1†] for the PTB7 based BHJ system. To the best of our knowledge there is no report on performance stability of both P3HT:PCBM and PTB7:PC71BM based OPVs for these prolonged periods of aging which are fabricated on low temperature processed a-ZnO ETLs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structure of PTB7 (b) PBDTTPD polymers and (c) PC70BM fullerene. J–V characteristics of the (d) PTB7:PC70BM and (e) PBDTTPD:PC70BM BHJ solar cells on glass and PET flexible substrates. OPV performance parameters of each BHJ system is shown in respective tables. 
Conclusion
We have demonstrated a low-temperature solution processed amorphous ZnO (a-ZnO) thin film at ca. 100 °C and incorporated it successfully as the interlayer in P3HT:PCBM, PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTPD:PC71BM inverted solar cells on both glass and PET substrates, resulting in performance characteristics similar to what has typically been possible to achieve under conditions of higher processing temperature which are required to form a crystalline ZnO buffer layer. Efficient inverted solar cells were achieved despite electron mobility values in the a-ZnO buffer layers being several orders of magnitude lower than that in crystalline ZnO. The optimal devices were demonstrated by carefully tuning the a-ZnO surface morphology and coverage of the underlying ITO anode. Contrary to previous studies using crystalline ZnO interlayers, the presence of ripples with lateral length scale >200 nm was found to yield lower efficiency. A comparison with previous results achieved using crystalline ZnO films implies that the morphology, energy level alignment, substrate coverage and the contact quality (roughness) of the a-ZnO with the active layer at the interface with the organic BHJ are more significant factors in determining the performance of OPV devices. All P3HT:PCBM devices tested for their stability presented excellent stability in terms of device performance, maintaining between 90% and 95% of their starting efficiency even after three to thirteen months of storage without encapsulation inside a nitrogen glove box.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Authors would like to thank the KAUST Office of Competitive Research Funding. Authors thank Dr Liyang Yu for help with the contact angle measurements, as well as Muhammad Rizwan Khan Niazi and Dr Kui Zhao for helpful discussions and training.
References
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 462 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 813 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, S. E. Shaheen and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Beiley, M. G. Christoforo, P. Gratia, A. R. Bowring, P. Eberspacher, G. Y. Margulis, C. Cabanetos, P. M. Beaujuge, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater, 2013, 25, 7020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Shrotriya, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schumann, D. R. Campo, B. Illy, A. C. Cruickshank, M. A. McLachlan, M. P. Ryan, D. J. Riley, D. W. McComb and T. S. Jones, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2381 RSC .
L. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
N. Grossiord, J. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, L. Chen, G. Yang, C. Huang, J. Hou, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meyer, S. Hamwi, M. Kroger, W. Kowalsky, T. Riedly and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, I. Gereige, A. El Labban, D. Cha, T. T. Isimja and P. M. Beaujuge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2219 CAS .
L. Znaidi, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 174, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. MacDonald, M. K. Looney, D. MacKerron, R. Eveson, R. Adam, K. Hashimoto and K. Rakos, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2007, 15/12, 1075 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, H. You, Z. Lin and Y. Hao, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 082302 CrossRef .
Z. Liang, Q. Zhang, O. Wiranwetchayan, J. Xi, Z. Yang, K. Park, C. Li and G. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2194 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lim, W. H. Shim, K.-D. Kim, H. O. Seo, J.-H. Lim, Y. D. Kim and K. H. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sekine, C.-H. Chou, W. L. Kwan and Y. Yang, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Kang, K. Lim, S. Jung, D.-G. Kim, J.-K. Kim, C.-S. Kim, S. Kim and J.-W. Kang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shiratori and K. Muraguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 095803 CrossRef .
T. Stubhan, H. Oh, L. Pinna, J. Krantz, I. Litzov and C. Brabec, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Mbule, T. H. Kim, B. S. Kim, H. C. Swart and O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ibrahem, H.-Y. Wei, M.-H. Tsai, K.-C. Ho, J.-J. Shyue and C. W. Chu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wilken, D. Scheunemann, V. Wilkens, J. Parisi and H. Borchert, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Ntwaeaborwaa, R. Zhoub, L. Qianb, S. S. Pitalea, J. Xue, H. C. Swart and P. H. Holloway, Acta Phys. Pol., B, 2012, 407, 1631 Search PubMed .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. Yang and R. A. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Y. Thomann, R. Thomann and J. W. Andreasen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424013 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jeong and M. Jooho, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1243 RSC .
K. H. Lee, B. Kumar, H.-J. Park and S.-W. Kim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai, T. M. Jin, V. Chellappan, R. Jose, S. K. Palaniswamy, S. Jayaraman, H. K. Raut and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9396 CAS .
D. C. Iza, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 359 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, R. Gao, J.-L. Lan, O. Wiranwetchayan, Q. Zhang, C. Li and G. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takanezawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 8049 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ka, E. Lee, S. Y. Park, J. Seo, D.-G. Kwon, H. H. Lee, Y. Park, Y. S. Kim and C. Kim, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Park, D. Lim, K.-D. Kim and S.-Y. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6327 CAS .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. Fre'chet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cabanetos, A. El Labban, J. A. Bartelt, J. D. Douglas, W. R. Mateker, J. M. Fre'chet, M. D. McGehee and P. M. Beaujuge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Lee, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Thambidurai, Y. J. Kim, J. Song, Y. Ko, H. Song, C. Kang, N. Muthukumarasamy, D. Velauthapillai and C. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 8161 RSC .
Z. Wu, T. Song, Z. Xia, H. Wei and B. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 484012 CrossRef PubMed .
J. You, C.-C. Chen, L. Dou, S. Murase, H.-S. Duan, S. A. Hawks, T. Xu, H. J. Son, L. Yu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Lee, H. Choi, B. Walker, T. Kim, H. B. Kim and J. Y. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4791 RSC .
S. H. Liao, H.-J. Jhuo, Y.-S. Cheng and S.-A. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lampande, G. W. Kim, J. Boizot, Y. J. Kim, R. Pode and J. H. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6895 CAS .

          R. F. Egerton, Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer New York,  2011 Search PubMed .
L. G. Mar, P. Y. Timbrell and R. N. Lamb, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 223, 341 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahadur, A. K. Srivastava, R. K. Sharma and S. Chandra, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 469 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Gattorno and G. Oskam, ECS Trans., 2006, 3, 23 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Feng, K. Jiang, J. Huang, X. Zhang, W. Song and R. Tan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Perez, K. W. Chou, J. A. Love, T. S. van der Poll, D.-M. Smilgies, T.-Q. Nguyen, E. J. Kramer, A. Amassian and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Chou, B. Yan, R. Li, E. Q. Li, K. Zhao, D. H. Anjum, S. Alvarez, R. Gassaway, A. Biocca, S. T. Thoroddsen, A. Hexemer and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bubel, S. Meyer, F. Kunze and M. L. Chabinyc, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 152102 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Gwinner, Y. Vaynzof, K. K. Banger, P. K. H. Ho, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3457 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Allen, C. H. Swartz, T. H. Myers, T. D. Veal, C. F. McConville and S. M. Durbin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 075211 CrossRef .
K. Ishibashi, Y. Kimura and M. Niwano, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 094507 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sims, H.-J. Egelhaaf, J. A. Hauch, F. R. Kogler and R. Steim, Comprehensive Renewable Energy, 2012, 1, 439 Search PubMed .
B. S. Ong, C. S. Li, Y. N. Li, Y. L. Wu and R. Loutfy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha, A. Pimentel, A. Goncalves, A. Marques, L. Pereira and R. Martins, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 487, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Znaidi, G. J. A. Soler Illia, S. Benyahia, C. Sanchez and A. V. Kanaev, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 428, 257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L.-M. Chen, G. Yang, C.-H. Huang, J. Hou, Y. Wu, G. Li, C.-S. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2009, 19, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Lloyd, C. H. Peters, A. Garcia, I. V. Kauvar, J. J. Berry, M. O. Reese, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: X-ray diffraction pattern, TEM image, UPS spectra, transfer characteristics of the a-ZnO TFT structure and the variation of the PCE with aging over months. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02276aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of organic solar cell power conversion efficiencies (PCE) previously reported for inverted (a) P3HT:PC60BM and (b) PTB7:PC70BM BHJ devices, as well as the present work, plotted as a function of the ZnO processing temperature and method. The maximum processing temperatures of PET, thermally stabilized PET (HT-PET), and PEN are shown.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the a-ZnO thin films prepared from different precursor concentrations and a spinning speed of 2000 rpm (i) 0.45 M, (ii) 0.23 M, (iii) 0.15 M (iv) 0.11 M and (v) 0.07 M. (b) Representative HR-TEM image and SAED pattern of the a-ZnO thin film. High resolution XPS spectra of (c) Zn2p and (d) O1s core levels combined with peak fits to the spectra. In (c) and (d), the black dots represents the original spectra, green line corresponds to the fitted curve (red represents the component peak) and the pink line represents the background.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a)–(g) AFM images and the respective statistical distribution of surface height (SDSH) of a-ZnO thin films with decreasing film thickness prepared from different spin speeds and precursor concentrations. (a)–(e) correspond to 0.46 to 0.11 M (spin speeds are respectively 1500, 2500, 3500, 5000, and 3000 rpm) (f) & (g) to 0.07 M (3000 and 4000 rpm respectively).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) RMS surface roughness of a-ZnO films shown in Fig. 3a–g as a function of film thickness as measured by VASE. Symbols are color coded by morphological regime: uncoated (pink symbol), low coverage (blue symbols), compact (red symbols), and rippled (black symbols). (b)–(d) Schematics showing the three regimes of a-ZnO surface morphology investigated by the AFM tip and the corresponding SDSH curves plotted schematically: (b) rippled, (c) compact with full surface coverage and (d) incomplete surface coverage with partial exposure of the substrate, as represented by the red distribution in the SDSH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Field effect saturation electron mobility in a-ZnO-based TFTs as a function of their RMS surface roughness, as reported in Fig. 3.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the P3HT:PCBM based inverted OPV device structure. (b) Energy level diagram of the component materials used in device fabrication. (c) J–V characteristics of OPV devices with an a-ZnO buffer layer (Fig. 3) of different morphologies and ITO surface coverage, as characterized by σRMS and the respective morphology regime [low surface coverage (blue symbols), compact (red symbols), and rippled (black symbols)]. (d) PCE as a function of RMS surface roughness of a-ZnO films. (e) Series and shunt resistance (Rs and Rsh) and (f) variation of OPV performance parameters (Jsc, Voc and FF) of the devices as a function of RMS roughness of the a-ZnO interlayer.	 

 	Fig. 7  Variation of PCE for selected devices over several months of aging in an inert atmosphere without encapsulation as a function of (a) RMS surface roughness and (b) aging time.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Chemical structure of PTB7 (b) PBDTTPD polymers and (c) PC70BM fullerene. J–V characteristics of the (d) PTB7:PC70BM and (e) PBDTTPD:PC70BM BHJ solar cells on glass and PET flexible substrates. OPV performance parameters of each BHJ system is shown in respective tables.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: X-ray diffraction pattern, TEM image, UPS spectra, transfer characteristics of the a-ZnO TFT structure and the variation of the PCE with aging over months. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02276a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
