Towards new efficient dye-sensitised solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C000474J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C000474J
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 891-904Towards new efficient dye-sensitised solar cells

        
          
            Julien 
            Preat
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Denis 
            Jacquemin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Eric A. 
            Perpète
          
        
      
National Fund for Scientific Research, Unité de Chimie Physique Théorique et Structurale (UCPTS), Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix (FUNDP), rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium. E-mail: julien.preat@fundp.ac.be
Received 
      8th January 2010
    , Accepted 9th March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      14th May 2010
    AbstractThe technology to convert sunlight into electric current by employing organic photovoltaic systems has been an issue of an intensive research over the last two decades and nowadays receives an increasing industrial interest. Dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs) provide a technically and economically credible alternative to the present well-known p–n junction or thin film photovoltaic devices. In this Perspective, we review the basic concepts of DSSCs and we specifically discuss the recent theoretical research aimed at optimising DSSC's properties, as well as several of the controversial and emerging issues in this field.
Julien Preat
Julien Preat is currently a postdoctoral researcher of the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS) at the University of Namur. From 2008 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Innovation in Materials and Molecular Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya in Barcelona. He obtained his BA, MS and PhD in chemistry from the University of Namur. His research interests and expertise currently center on the theoretical investigation of the third-generation DSSCs at the QM, MM and MD level.
1. Introduction
The present energetic and environmental crisis has stimulated interest in the design of renewable energy sources. Indeed, with the foreseen 1013 watts of new power needed for the coming 50 years, the carbon dioxide concentration resulting from the fossil fuel-based energy generation will exceed the current level (∼400 ppm) that should be maintained if not decreased. The development of carbon-free sources of energy that are also scalable in order to meet increasing societal demands is probably the most important scientific challenge of this century. In this framework, solar photovoltaic devices are likely to be leading technologies in a promising “low-carbon level” future.1–8
The photovoltaic effect, i.e. the conversion of light into electricity, was first reported in the work of Chaplin and coworkers9 in which a silicon-based single p–n junction device showed a Solar Power Conversion Efficiency (SPCE)10,11 of about 6%. This innovative study led to the first-generation photovoltaics that currently dominate the solar technologies market as wafer-size single-junction cells based on crystalline silicon assemblies. This generation is expensive but is very efficient in terms of conversion (with a maximal SPCE of 33%). Though in 2007, first-generation solar cells accounted for 89.6% of the commercial production, the is market share is now declining. The manufacturing processes that are used to produce these cells are inherently expensive, meaning that they may take years to pay for their purchasing and energetic costs. Nevertheless, major efforts have been performed in order to significantly reduce the cost of power production by : (i) increasing the SPCE; (ii) modifying the semiconductor (SC) nature in order to reduce the amount of light-absorbing compounds and; (iii) lowering the assembly cost of the solar cells modules.4,12–15
Second-generation solar cells (also referred to as thin film technology) which were under intense development in the 1990s and early 2000s, are significantly cheaper to produce than first-generation cells, but present lower efficiencies. These are most frequently associated with thin film solar cells, that use minimal materials and cheap manufacturing processes. The most popular materials used for this second-generation designs are copper, indium, gallium, selenide and cadmium telluride (e.g.II–VI semiconductors), combined with amorphous silicon and micromorphous silicon. Whilst the controlled production of second-generation cells remains a challenge, their commercial use is still growing, due to one of the great advantages of thin films: their flexibility. Also, this thin film technology has spurred lightweight, aesthetically pleasing solar innovations such as solar shingles or solar panels that can be rolled out onto a roof or on other surfaces.16,17
Concurrently, over the past 20 years, the science and design of organic semiconducting materials has progressed very rapidly, leading to the production of a large panel of organic-based solid-state devices with multiple applications like light-emitting diodes,18 photodiodes and transistors,19,20 as well as photovoltaic cells.21 The ability to significantly modify the chemical and physical properties of organic compounds by a fine tuning of their structures constitutes the principal reason for expanding research and increased industrial interest in organic photovoltaics. The organic-based approach, and all those which are not directly related to a single p–n junction are referred to as third-generation devices and they include: (i) multijunction cells derived from group IV and III–V semiconductors;22 (ii) hybrid approaches that are related to the combination of nanostructured inorganic semiconductor such as titanium dioxide (TiO2) with organic materials;23,24 (iii) more elaborate hybrids, in which inorganic quantum dots are doped into a semiconducting polymer matrix;25–27 (iv) organic solid-state approaches with organic molecular and polymeric semiconductor forming films, thanks to a large variety of non-covalent interactions;28–30 and (v) the dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs), that have been pioneered by Grätzel in the last ten years.31,32 In this article, we will mainly focus on this latter case. The dye sensitised solar cells are composed of a wide band gap semiconductor deposited on a translucid conducting substrate, an anchored molecular sensitiser, and a redox electrolyte (usually the I−/I3− couple is found in most of the “conventional” DSSCs). In such systems, titanium dioxide is the semiconductor of choice because of its many advantages: low cost, wide availability, non-toxic, biocompatiblity, and wide use in domestic applications such as paint pigmentation.33
The first reliable and consistent experimental tests dealing with the operating mechanism of electron injection from photoexcited dye molecules into the conduction band of n-type semiconductor substrates were obtained in the 1960s.34 The standard dye at that time was tris(2,2′–bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II) (also known as panchromatic sensitiser), the carboxylate ensuring chemisorption (see Section 2 for further details). Advances were rather slow, until the early 90s report of a DSSC showing a 7.1% SPCE.35 Currently in the DSSC field, the Ru complexes photosensitisers such as the N3 compound (see Scheme 1) [cis-di(thiocyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II)] remain the most popular category of dyes as they have a solar energy-to-electricity conversion efficiency close to 10%.36–41 Meanwhile, an increasing interest in purely organic DSSCs as substitutes for Ru complexes has occurred in recent years due to the crucial advantages they bring: high molar extinction coefficient, simple and relatively inexpensive preparation processes, as well as compliance with environmental and health issues.42 Moreover, the solid-state DSSCs based on organic dyes show good performances, suggesting promising commercial applications.43 Therefore, metal-free dyes like triphenylamine,44 coumarin,45,46 merocyanine,47 indoline,48 xanthene,49 hemi-cyanine,50 perylene and fluorene51–53 are good potential candidates for building DSSCs.
 Scheme 1  Chemical structure of the N3 ruthenium complex. 
While the physics of p–n junction and thin film cells is reasonably well-understood, the understanding and optimisation of the processes governing organic DSSCs are far less converged and remain an intense topic of research, and are the focus of the present article.54 We certainly do not intend to provide a detailed description of the wide panel of organic photovoltaic materials that have been developed in the past 20 years; this can be found in notable recent contributions.29,55–58 Nowadays, molecular modelling techniques and especially quantum chemistry (QM), offer competitive alternatives for the interpretation of the experimental data arising from industrial interests and developments. The improvements in CPU resources over the past 10 years allow the study, at various levels of approximation, of the structural and electronic properties of large panel molecular species. In particular, one can now consider the study of the dyes used in DSSC applications at the ab initio level, allowing a better comprehension of the processes and the role played by the different partners (dye, semiconductor, electrolyte, see Section 2 for more details) involved when running a dye-sensitised solar cell.
Our objective in this Perspective is to introduce the reader to the recent progress and theoretical research in the DSSC field. To this end, the present contribution is organized as follows: In Section 2 we discuss the engineering aspects related to a conceptual dye-sensitised solar cell with an emphasis on the physical process and the resulting energetic balance involved in the actual device. In Section 3, we present recent DSSC theoretical research and developments in an appropriate historical context, and we consider the controversial and emerging issues in the field. Section 4 offers new insights into the DSSC field with the presentation of new unpublished data from our own recent results. Future prospects and challenges in the DSSC domain conclude this work.
2. Description and operation principle of a DSSC
The detailed operating scheme of DSSCs is still extensively studied to identify the processes that actually limit their performance.32,33,57,59–61 A schematic representation of the principles ruling a DSSC is depicted in Fig. 1. The “core” of the system is constituted by a mesoporous oxide layer, generally TiO2 (anatase) although alternative oxides (with a wide band gap) such as ZnO or NB2O5 can be used as well. A monolayer of the sensitiser dye is grafted on this nanocrystalline material, and the photoexcitation of the dye (that yields dye*) results in the injection of an electron from the donor orbital of the excited dye to the conduction band (CB) of the oxide semiconductor film (Injection). Unfortunately, the injected electron can recombine with the oxidized sensitiser dyes (Recombination). This impeding reaction is in competition with the regeneration of the oxidized dyes by the redox mediator which is usually an organic solvent containing a redox system, such as the iodide/triiodide couple (Regeneration). The remaining electrons can be transported (Diffusion) in the semiconductor film as the conducting electrons (CEs). Unfortunately, before reaching the counter electrode, these CEs can also react with the redox mediator molecules or with solvated compounds during the diffusion process (Leak reaction) and these reactions that occur in the vicinity of the TiO2 surface are induced by dispersion and electrostatic forces as well as by complex formations. Finally, the remaining CEs flow into the external circuit, and the iodide can be regenerated in turn by the reduction of triiodide at the counter electrode (of platinium, in our case). The maximum voltage under illumination (also referred to as the open-circuit photovoltage Voc) therefore corresponds to the difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron in the TiO2 CB and the redox potential of the electrolyte. Of course, the balance of these processes is essential to achieve high performance and it is obvious that both the rate and the efficiency of the full procedure tremendously depend on the nature of the sensitiser dye and semiconductor film.
 Fig. 1  Principle of operation and energy balance scheme of the dye-sensitised solar cell. The photoexcitation of the sensitizer (S) is followed by electron injection into the semiconductor (TiO2) conduction band (CB). The dye molecule is regenerated by the iodine/triiodide couple, which is regenerated at the counter platinum (Pt) electrode by the current electrons passing through the load. Potentials in electron volt (eV) in the scheme are with reference to the Normal Hydrogen Electrode (NHE). 
2.1 Critical factors
The solar power conversion efficiency is the algebraic product of the short-circuit current density (Jsc), the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc in Volts), and the fill factor FF, according to the following: (1)where Pinc. corresponds to the incident solar power on the cell. In view of eqn (1), the obvious way to improve the conversion efficiency is to increase Jsc, Voc, and/or FF. The fill factor measures the ratio of the maximum power of the solar cell to the product of Jsc and Voc, and has typical values ranging from 0.75 to 0.85.32 It is important to underline that the FF is strongly attenuated by the total series resistance of the cell, including (i) the sheet resistance of the substrate; (ii) the charge transfer resistance from the anode to the cathode; (iii) the electron transport resistance through the photoanode; and (iv) the ion transport resistance.
The SC conduction band (and consequently the Voc) is shifted (ΔCB) with respect to the adsorbed dye redox potential as a function of its dipole moment:62 (2)where q is the electron charge, γ measures the dye's surface concentration, and  is the component of the dipole moment of the individual molecule perpendicular to the SC surface. ε and ε0 are the dielectric constant of the monolayer and the permittivity of the vacuum, respectively. Regarding this equation, it is obvious that a dye presenting a huge  will induce a important variation of the DSSC Voc. The sign of the variation depends upon the direction of , i.e. the positive (negative) dipole moment is defined as the dipole moment pointing towards (outwards from) the SC surface. Thus, according to eqn (2), the CB of the semiconductor moves towards higher energy levels for a dipole moment pointing outwards from the layer surface.
The Jsc factor for a given dye and cell design can be determined by integrating the Incident Photon to Current Efficiency (IPCE) on the energetic space: Jsc = ∫λIPCE(λ)dλ(3)where the IPCE is given by: IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)Φinject.ηcollect. = LHE(λ)APCE(λ)(4)in this equation LHE(λ) is the Light Harvesting Efficiency at a given wavelength, Φinject. is the electron injection efficiency, ηcollect. is the charge collection efficiency, and the product of Φinject. and ηcollect. gives the Absorbed Photon to Current Efficiency (APCE). In eqn (4), LHE(λ) corresponds to the fraction of photons absorbed at a specific λ, and can be quantified by using the Beer's law: LHE(λ) = 1–10−ε(λ)DLC(5)where ε(λ) is the molar extinction coefficient, DL is the adsorbing electrode thickness, and C is the concentration of dye grafted on the anode.
The electron injection efficiency, Φinject., is related to the injection rate constant by:63,64 (6)where kextinct. incorporates both the recombination and the leak reaction rates, while kinject. is the injection rate constant that can be derived from the Marcus theory for electron transfer (see Figs. 2 and 3):64 (7)
 Fig. 2  Diabatic free energy curves and resulting free energy for the electron injection reaction. 
 Fig. 3  Diabatic free energy curves and related reorganisation energies for the electron injection reaction. χ is the dye+/dye* reorganisation energy. 
In eqn (7), kinject. is the rate constant of the electron injection from the dye excited state to the semiconductor CB; VRP is the coupling constant between the reagent and the product potential curves; ΔGinject. is the free enthalpy related to the electron injection, kBT is the Boltzmann thermal energy, ℏ is related to the Planck constant (ℏ = h/2π) and χ is the reorganisation energy of the system. The relation in eqn (7) is valuable if one assumes that the injection is restricted to energy levels close to the conduction band edge, and that the density of acceptor states in this energy range remains constant.64 Moreover, though eqn (7) underestimates the injection rate at high potential, it prevails to fit the experimental data at low potentials. Indeed, as one enters the inverted region, the actual rate slowly increases instead of rapidly decreasing,64 and the region which is not fitted by eqn (7) is the region of the photovoltaic cell operation, as illustrated in Fig. 4. This figure clearly shows that for ΔGinject. > χ, there is no inverted region: the injection rate tends to a constant value.
 Fig. 4  Plot of log kinject.vs. the free enthalpy for the injection from the excited state of the dye into the semiconductor conduction band. The solid line is related to Marcus theory whereas the dotted line corresponds to the experimental behaviour, i.e. to the region of operation of the cell (i.e., the region for which kinject. becomes constant, independently of the ΔGinject. value). The values presented in this graph are arbitrary. 
The coupling constant of eqn (7) is provided by: |VRP| = 〈ΨR|H|ΨP〉(8)where ΨR and ΨP are respectively associated to the reagents and products states, whereas H is the operator describing all the interactions between the particles composing the investigated system. The value of VRP defines the adiabatic or non-diabatic character of the electron transfer (see Fig. 5), these two descriptions being conveniently considered as the limiting cases of a transition state formalism. We invite the reader to consult the seminal papers dealing with the subject.63,64
 Fig. 5  Diabatic free energy curves interaction and the related VRP coupling constant for an electron injection reaction. 
The free energy change for the electron injection can be expressed as:33 ΔGinject. = Edye*OX − ESCCB(9)where Edye*OX is the oxidation potential of the dye in the excited state, and ESCCB is the reduction potential of the conduction band of the semiconductor. Whilst it is difficult to reach accurate experimental estimates for ESCCB as this parameter is highly sensitive to the surface conditions, as well as to the solution pH, the ESCCB values have been reported for several materials, and a value of ESCCB = 4.0 eV is often used as a best estimate for TiO2.65
A couple of models can be used for the evaluation of Edye*OX.33 The first implies that the electron injection occurs from the un-relaxed excited state. For this reaction path, the excited-state oxidation potential can be extracted from the redox potential of the ground state (GS) EdyeOX, and the absorption energy associated with the photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) according to :33 Edye*OX = EdyeOX − ΔESICT(10)where ΔESICT is the S0 → SICT excitation energy corresponding to the λmax (i.e. in practice, the electronic excitation of lowest energy that shows the greatest absorption intensity). Note that this relation is only valid if the entropy change induced by the photon absorption is neglected. For the second model, one assumes that the electron injection occurs after relaxation. Given this condition, Edye*OX is expressed as:33 Edye*OX = EdyeOX − Edye0–0(11)where Edye0–0 is the energy difference between the dye's ground state and its relaxed excited state. Fig. 6 depicts the parameters that are involved in the injection process. EdyeOX (S/S+) as well as ΔESICT (hν) are directly provided by the experiment, whereas Edye0–0(D*/D+) and ΔGinject. can be indirectly evaluated by using eqns (10) and (9), respectively.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the energetic balance related to electron injection reaction. 
To evaluate the 0–0 “absorption” line of a closed shell molecule, we need both the S0 (singlet ground state) and the SICT (ICT singlet excited state) equilibrium geometries. Experimentally, this data is deduced from the intersection of the absorption and the fluorescence spectra. For these purposes, the 0–0 transition energy can be expressed as: (12)with (13)and ESICT(QS0) = ES0(QS0) + ΔESICT(14)QS0and QSICT are the equilibrium geometries for the S0 and SICT states, respectively, whereas ESICT(QS0) and ESICT(QSICT) denote the internal energies for the SICT state calculated at QS0 and QSICT, respectively.
2.2 DSSC efficiency improvement: the key parameters
In practice, the simplest way to increase Jsc is to increase the absorption band height (and width) of the dye, that is to “force” the dye to absorb a greater fraction of the incident light by increasing the oscillator strength f, which can be defined as:66 (15)where μ0–ICT is the dipolar transition moment associated to the electronic excitation. In order to obtain a huge f, ΔESICTand  must be large and the photon absorption process has to imply a GS and a excited sate (ES) of identical spin parity, i.e., for a closed-shell system, the excited state must be a singlet.66,67 In that context, if only one absorption occurs for electron injection, eqn (5) can be approximate by: LHEICT ≃ 1–10−f(16)where LHEICT corresponds to the light harvesting ability of the dye related to the ICT transition.
A second direct solution to optimise the efficiency of DSSCs is to increase the Φinject. and consequently make the injection reaction more exoenergetic. To this end, we must raise the excitation energy of the dye without substantially altering EdyeOX.
A third option for improving the DSSC operation is to increase Voc. At open circuit, the rate of the electron injection and recombination/interception are equal, and their values determine both the steady-state electron concentration in the SC, and the quasi-Fermi level of the latter (also referred to as the electron chemical potential by the chemists).68 The quasi-Fermi level, and thus Voc, can be increased by: (i) increasing kinject. and/or decreasing kextinct.; (ii) using alternative redox couples with a more positive potential;32 (iii) shifting the CB to higher level but this solution is not recommended because it would reduce Jsc. Indeed, an increase of the SC quasi-Fermi level corresponds to a decrease of the overlap between the acceptor state density and the donor orbital(s) of the excited dye.63,64
2.3 Organic sensitisers
The basic structure of most of organic sensitisers is composed of a donor (D), a bridge (B, typically a π-spacer), and an acceptor (A), which are usually combined following a D–π–A rod-like configuration (Fig. 7) in order to improve the efficiency of the UV–VIS (Ultra Violet VISible) photoinduced ICT. We have nevertheless to point out the specific case of the panchromatic sensitisers, for which no typical B and A groups can be pinpointed. For this kind of dye, the D chromophoric unit (i.e., the structural part of the molecule which is the most affected by the electronic excitation) is directly linked to the semiconductor through the carboxylates, so that the molecule is adsorbed onto the oxide substrate.
 Fig. 7  Typical elements of a rod-like chemical structure in a dye-sensitised solar cell. In this scheme, the donor is a triphenylamine (TPA) moiety, linked to the acceptor (phenyl-cyanoacetic acid moiety) via a (poly)thiophene bridge. 
To further design and develop more efficient metal-free dyes for DSSCs, appropriate DBA systems with sharply tunable properties need to be designed by applying the adequate structural modifications. For instance, the D moiety is expected to greatly confine the cationic charge from the semiconductor surface and to efficiently hamper the recombination. It should also offer steric obstruction, so to impede the unfavourable dye aggregation on the semiconductor surface.69 The bridging groups fix the light-absorbing regions of the DSSCs, and subsequently the scale of the electron injection from the dye excited state to the semiconductor surface. Note that the A group is commonly functionalized by one or several carboxylate group(s).
Generally, the factors having a critical impact on the sensitisation are : (i) the excited state redox potential has to match the energy of the semiconductor CB edge; (ii) the HOMO of the dye (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) must fit the iodine/triiodide redox potential, and the corresponding LUMO (Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital) has to be higher in energy than the semiconductor conduction band edge; (iii) a large light-harvesting ability of the dye is crucial to get a substantial photocurrent response; (iv) an efficient conjugation is needed across the donor and anchoring groups to ensure the charge transfer (CT) character of the electronic transition; (v) the electronic coupling strength between dye's LUMO and the semiconductor CB is of course a key property for an efficient electron injection from the dye onto the semiconductor surface. On top of that, the formation of dye aggregates tends to lead to low conversion efficiency for many organic dyes in DSSCs. The same holds for charge recombination between the CB electrons and the cationic dye or the electrolyte.70–72
3. Modern DSSC theoretical research
In this section, we intend to review the principal theoretical studies of DSSCs that have appeared over the last decade. Most works have aimed to provide a better understanding of the role of (i) the sensitiser; (ii) the solvent; (iii) the electrolyte; and (iv) the semiconductor film, all taking part in the operational principles of a DSSC. Of course, literature provides such a large number of investigations that we certainly do not intend to cover them all in this Section. Let us first trace herein the history of the different investigations performed on very popular classes of panchromatic dyes (also known as Grätzel′s dyes) as well as recent studies of very promising metal-free organic dyes (e.g. coumarins, perylenes, triphenylamines) in DSSC applications. Both families of dyes have been widely studied with the help of a large panel of theoretical tools and procedures, including QM theories, molecular mechanics (MM), or molecular dynamics (MD) approaches.
In most DSSC devices studied so far, light is absorbed by a ruthenium-based molecular dye, such as N3 (see Scheme 1). The first theoretical investigations on this type of dye sensitiser date from the late 1990s and early 2000s, and were mainly performed by means of semi-empirical,73–76 Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations,77 and more recently by Time-Dependent DFT (TDDFT).66,78 Indeed, numerous investigations of ruthenium-based sensitisers have appeared in the literature since 2002.79–87 These works essentially include a combined theoretical/experimental effort aimed at providing a better understanding of the role of the sensitiser, and specifically, the impact of ground and excited state electronic structure and properties are the efficiency of the DSSC devices.
In particular, Fantacci and coworkers,81,83,84 as well as Guillemoles et al.80 have shown that the inclusion of solvation effects, within the Polarisable Continuum Model (PCM) framework,88 is crucial when describing the electronic structures and absorption spectra of Ru(II)-polypyridil complexes. As an illustration, large differences are found in the electronic structures and spectra of the N3 derivative simulated in vacuo79 or in solution.82 Note that solvation effects have also been found to be crucial to reach a correct description of dye-sensitised TiO2 nanoparticles.85 In a recent work, Nazeerudin et al.89 carried out (TD)DFT calculations taking into account solvation effects, of the geometries, electronic structures and optical absorption spectra of derivatives of the N3 and the N621 dyes. They compared the theoretical results with the outcome of electrochemical and spectroscopic studies. Moreover, they extensively investigated the effects on their electronic structures and optical properties of the terminal carboxylic group protonation as well as the presence of counterions on the electronic structure and optical properties of the two kinds of dyes. They have also analysed the line-up of the dyes' energy levels within the semiconductor band edges of a model TiO2 nanoparticle. From this joint theoretical and experimental effort, significant insights into the nature of the excited states involved in the electron injection process, and the role of dye protonation on the device performances have been unravelled. In particular, some general trends can be inferred though the results have been obtained considering the non-interacting dye and semiconductor systems: (i) the hypsochromic shift of the excitation energies occurs with increasing deprotonation; (ii) for both N3 (4 protons) and N621 (2 protons) derivatives, the fully protonated or fully deprotonated (N3−4) and N621−2) species show the smallest and largest first excitation energies, respectively; (iii) the monoprotonated and diprotonated forms of the N3 derived dyes constitute an optimal choice with respect to the fully protonated and deprotonated species due to the good compromise between their light-harvesting capability and the alignment of their excited states with the TiO2 conduction edge.
Several theoretical studies based upon more elaborate interacting dye-SC models can be found in the literature.90–95 Specifically, De Angelis and coworkers90 performed a comparative study of the electronic structure and excited states of the N3-TiO2 and N719-TiO2 supramolecular edifices within a combined PCM-TDDFT and MD Car–Parrinello96 framework. More precisely, the authors investigated the alignment of the sensitiser excited states with the TiO2 conduction band. This quantity determines the rate of electron injection together with the electronic coupling between the dye and the semiconductor, and has therefore a central role in DSSCs. In their work, the authors were the first to determine the excited state oxidation potential for the isolated dyes and TiO2 nanoparticles in solution, by expressing the Edye*OX as the difference between the EdyeOX and Edye0–0 (see eqn (11)), and using different approximations for the two latter quantities. The resulting Edye*OX values are found to agree very well with the available experimental data. Next they compared the alignment for the non-interacting dye and SC to the results of calculations performed for the explicitly coupled system. Interestingly, the latter results appear to be very close to the non-interacting case (within ∼0.1 eV). The excellent agreement of their results with experimental data indicates that both the uncoupled and coupled approaches of their work could be selected to help designing dye-sensitised solar cells.
In spite of their important SPCE, the interest in Ru-derived sensitisers tends to fall off and this decrease of popularity can mainly be interpreted as a consequence of the very expensive production costs of such dyes, as ruthenium is not abundant in nature.97 Consequently, metal-free sensitisers such as organic dyes and natural dyes have been investigated as alternative molecules for DSSC applications.97
Present-day literature frequently claims achievements of ∼8% efficiency with metal-free organic dyes.42–53,98,99 Currently, DFT, TDDFT as well as LRC-TDDFT (Long-Range-Corrected TDDFT)78,100–103 theoretical studies can provide valuable and reliable informations on the first elementary steps of the DSSC mechanism (for instance the absorption and fluorescence spectra, the interactions with the redox mediator, and the influence of the solvent bath on the efficiency of a DSSC). Several papers have recently been devoted to simulations of organic dyes at the atomistic level.44,102,104–108 However, only a few papers have treated the dye-SC system, most of them being limited to the study of edifices made of N3 and TiO2.109–112 In spite of the inherent limitations of TDDFT for the modelisation of supramolecular edifices (clusters), such theoretical studies have provided valuable insights and play a central role in improving solar cells performances.
In agreement with these previous investigations, Labat et al.113 recently used DFT techniques within a periodic approach to provide a detailed investigation of the eosin-Y dianion (EYD) assembled with a ZnO cluster (wurtzite).114–116 This system has been fully characterised at the geometric, energetic and electronic levels. In order to check the feasibility of an electron transfer from the absorbate to the dye, the authors considered a reduced form of the EYD/ZnO assembly for which the electronic structure analysis includes densities of states (DOS) calculations and spin densities analysis. The main conclusions of this work can be summarised as follows: (i) EYD tightly adsorbs to ZnO, and the UV–VIS spectral signature of the isolated dye is conserved once adsorbed on the semiconductor surface; (ii) both the HOMO and the LUMO of the dye lie within the ZnO band gap and are exclusively localized on the dye. Thus, direct HOMO → LUMO excitation does not lead to electron injection into the semiconductor. Only when an electron is injected in the LUMO + 1 level, the first unoccupied orbital with significant contributions from the ZnO, can a direct injection take place. This conclusion is fully consistent with experimental measurements (that found a maximal SPCE of only ∼2%);115 (iii) a two-electron mechanism is proposed in order to rationalize the low efficiency of the EY/ZnO solar cells. In addition, Labat's team suggests two strategies to improve the cell operation: (i) the addition of a remote electron-donating group and; (ii) the appropriate chemical modifications of the dye to tune the LUMO energetic level and bring it above the bottom of the CB of ZnO, which should result in a direct injection process. For a rational design of the dye-SC interactions, the authors underline that the choice of the anchoring group can be of major importance, although this group remains optically inactive.
Along the same lines, we have to evoke the recent contribution of Srinivas, et al.117 who report the synthesis and theoretical investigations of a series of four newly-designed anthracene derivatives. The theoretical investigation of the electronic excitations was performed at the PCM-TDDFT and DFT levels of theory, whereas the modelisation of the adsorption modes of the dyes on the TiO2 anatase surface has been carried out using the periodic DFT scheme implemented in the PWscf code.118 The experimental data show that all four investigated anthracenes have reasonable conversion efficiencies (with a maximal IPCE of ∼6%). On the other hand, the theoretical investigations have shown that the binding of the cyanoacrylic acid group to the SC surface is up to 6 kcal mol−1 more favorable than the malonic acid group complexation. This larger binding energy seems to be the main reason for the higher efficiency of the sensitisers functionalized with a cyanoacrylic acid acceptor group.
Aside from the “traditional” QM approaches like TDDFT, numerous explicit time domain simulations can be found in the literature. These approaches most directly mimic the time-resolved experimental data and provide a detailed description of actually-occuring mechanisms. Indeed, the ultra-fast time of the electronic and vibrational processes at the dye–SC interface make it difficult to invoke the standard theories summarized above. In this context, we would like to highlight the works published by Prezhdo's crew,119–128 and in particular, one of their most recent contributions127 in which the authors expand on their earlier investigations and study the relaxation of the injected electron inside the TiO2 CB, the back electron transfer reaction from the semiconductor to the alizarin, as well as the regeneration of the neutral chromophore. They consider the geometric and electronic structures of the interface optimised at zero Kelvin and study the thermal fluctuations that may substantially affect the interface electronic structure and activate atomic vibrations, to eventually focus on each relaxation process.128 Besides the QM approaches, time-resolved calculations are of particular interest for elucidating the ultra-fast electron transfer processes that show a variety of individual events with well-defined dynamical signatures.129–131 Moreover, such a description of the interface induces intuitive representations appreciated by most chemists and creates a clear understanding of the effects of atomic structure, binding, chemical functions, and electronic interactions, occurring through bonds and through space. It is important to underline that such simulations are still uncommon and require a huge computational effort. Nevertheless, the field is rapidly progressing and state-of-the-art techniques for the dynamics simulations are being energetically expanded. As the theoretical research advances, larger systems and longer time scales will become accessible, allowing to probe more examples and to obtain finer details of the chemical dynamics.
The last topic we retain in this Section concerns the simulation at an extended scale of DSSC performances using the MM and MD schemes performed by Chen et al.132 They investigated, at the atomic scale, the transport phenomena of the iodide/triiodide redox couple in the ionic liquid electrolyte of a DSSC model. More precisely, the authors successfully reproduced the molecular diffusion mechanism of the redox couple, which partly limits the solar cell performances, and have proposed an optimal composition for the ionic liquid. Their results were turned into a prototype of a solar cell and it has been concluded that the maximum power and photocurrent efficiency both coincide with the experimental data collected by Grätzel and Nazeeruddin.133,134
4. The route to new improvements
A DSSC comprises four major components: (i) the dye, (ii) the redox shuttle, (iii) the SC photoanode and (iv) the cathode. In order to induce significant improvements in device efficiency, however, it is obviously necessary to alter at least one of these four major components and we will now present a specific way to upgrade the dye sensitiser properties.
4.1 Triphenylamines: optimal structures
Recently, it has been found that triphenylamine (TPA)-like moieties and the cyanoacetic acid group (see Fig. 7) are units of choice as electron donor and electron acceptor/anchoring groups, respectively.69,70 We have reported on the design of new molecules44 derived from several organic dyes recently synthesised by Tian et al.135 The investigated dyes consist of TPAs connected to the acceptor (cyanoacetic acid or rhodanine-3-acetic acid) moiety by a phenylene. In our work, a TDDFT-based theoretical procedure that leads to an accurate description of the excited states of D–π–A rod-like organic dye has been used in order to offer new insights into the geometrical and electronic structure of the TPA-based dyes, and to propose the adequate structural modifications required to optimise the properties of TPA-based DSSCs. In particular, we focused on the free energy of the electron injection onto the TiO2 substrate (ΔGinject.) and the light-harvesting abilities (or LHE) of the dyes. Starting with the TPA-1 structure (see Scheme 2), we have demonstrated that the following modifications help to improve the properties of the DSSC:
 Scheme 2  Chemical structures of TPA-1 (with numbering labels) and TPA-5. 
1. An extension of the bridging group length by adding an ethylene between the two phenyl groups (TPA-2).
2. The 16-COOH, 15-OMe, 1a,6-diCN functionalizations (TPA-3).
3. The displacement of the terminal –CN group from the position 16 to 15, combined with the substitution of the hydrogen atoms by two –OMe functions in positions 11 and 13.
4. Grafting of two –CN groups in positions 1a and 6 of the TPA moiety (TPA-4).
5. The above changes induce a maximal increase of the LHE and provide a highly exoenergetic free enthalpy of injection (−1.30 eV, see Table 1).
Table 1 Estimated variations (Δ) of λ(1)max, EdyeOX and ΔGinject. (in eV) when going from the free molecules in solution to the 1 Ti model. These theoretical variations are also compared to the experimental dataa




Compounds

λ
Freemax


λ
1Ti max



Δλ(1)max
Δλexp.max135,b
ΔGfreeinject.44
ΔΔGinject.c

E
dye–FreeOX
44


E
dyeOX








a The theoretical parameters are obtained at the restricted and unrestricted levels using the B3LYP functional combined with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set. All Δλ(1)max values are obtained at the TDB3LYP/6-311+G(2d,2p) level. For both the ground and excited states, the solvation has been taken into account by using the PCM model. For all the compounds the solvent is dichloromethane.135
b Δλmax = λ1Timax− Δλfreemax.
c ΔΔGinject. = ΔG1Tiinject. − ΔGfreeinject..
d 
E
dyeOX = Edye–1TiOX − Edye–freeOX.
e 11,14-diCl-TPA-1.
f 11,14-diCN-TPA-1.
g Triphenyl rhodoznine.





TPA-1
2.03
2.05
0.02
0.10
−1.14
0.15
4.89
0.17


TPA-5
2.34
2.50
0.16
—
−1.30
0.14
5.04
0.30


TPA-6e
1.86
1.94
0.08
0.10
−0.90
0.10
4.96
0.18


TPA-7f
1.70
1.78
0.08
0.10
−0.70
0.17
5.00
0.25


TPR-1g
1.86
1.97
0.11
0.06
−1.09
0.12
4.77
0.23




6. Finally, we considered the additional structure resulting from the “chemical addition” of TPA-2 and TPA-4, to give TPA-5 (see Scheme 2) which benefits from improvements of both the LHE and the ΔGinject. parameters.
4.2 Effects of the semiconductor
Let us now turn to the study of the dye bound to the semiconductor. Accordingly with the model recently proposed by Peng et al.,136 we consider as a first approximation that the dye is connected to one or two Ti atoms, a set of water molecules and hydroxyl ligands added to ensure the whole complex neutrality. The experiment has shown that for dyes such as TPA-1, a bidentate bridging (2 Ti) or a bidentate chelating (1 Ti) structure is suggested for the majority of the binding modes between SC and the anchored dye (Scheme 3).135 Results stemming from our extended procedure are presented as follows: first, we evaluate the SC effects on the key parameters (λmax, EdyeOX and Edye*OX) required to estimate the free energy change related to the injection. In the second step, we discuss the impact of the SC and the chemical modifications on the ΔGinject. parameter.
 Scheme 3  Bidentate chelating (left, 1 Ti) and bidendate binding (right, 2 Ti) modes for the carboxylate unit on TiO2 surface. 
For the TPA derivatives, theoretical investigations have demonstrated that two allowed excited states characterised by large transition probabilities appear in the UV–VIS region.44 This is in complete agreement with the experimental findings, since measurements show an intense first absorption band [λ(1)max] in the 400–600 nm region, and a second absorption band [λ(2)max] of high intensity close to 300 nm. These λ(1)max and λ(2)max are associated with excitations predominantly employing three molecular orbitals: HOMO-1, HOMO and LUMO. As depicted in Fig. 8, λ(1)max (HOMO → LUMO) corresponds to an ICT between the TPA donor and the SC, whereas λ(2)max (HOMO-1 → LUMO) can be assigned to a π → π* transition. Therefore, λ(1)max witnesses the electronic excitation that activates the energy-to-electricity conversion process of these DSSCs.
 Fig. 8  HOMO-1 (bottom), HOMO (middle) and LUMO (top) of TPA-1 linked to a Ti atom (B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level with a isosurface threshold value of 0.05 atomic units). 
We list in Table 1 the key parameters (λ(1)max and the corresponding oscillator strength, EdyeOX, and Edye*OX) required to evaluate the ΔGinject. and the LHE of a series of 6 dyes. The LHE factor has been calculated with eqn (16), whereas the ΔGinject. is obtained using eqns (9) and (10). Indeed, though electron injection from unrelaxed excited states has been observed in TiO2137 and SnO2,138 the relative contribution of an ultrafast injection path is not clear, and the experimenters usually assume that electron injection dominantly occurs after relaxation.33 However, the results obtained in our previous methodological investigations have revealed that the absolute difference between the relaxed and unrelaxed ΔGinject. is constant and amounts to ∼0.5 eV, which is of the same order of magnitude as the average theory–experiment error obtained for EdyeOX and Edye*OX.44 Consistently, in order to keep a fast and simple character of the methodology, we strive for the unrelaxed path of injection for the ΔGinject. evaluation of new dyes. The relative free energies of injection (RΔGinject.) correspond to the ratio ΔGdyeinject./ΔGTPA–1inject., whereas the relative LHE (RLHE) is also obtained using eqn (16) with the ratio fdye/fTPA–1 instead of f. For TPA-1, all parameters listed in Table 2 have been evaluated using the 1 Ti and 2 Ti models. On the other hand, we also present in Table 1 the estimated variations of λ(1)max, EdyeOX and ΔGinject. (in eV) when going from the free molecules in solution to a 1 Ti model, and the theoretical variations are compared to the experimental data as well. From the results listed in both Tables 1 and 2 we can conclude that: (i) the differences between 1 Ti and 2 Ti parameters are negligible and the first approach is adequate to describe the SC effects; (ii) both λ(1)max and EdyeOX are affected by the titanium complex; (iii) when the dyes are attached on the TiO2 surface, the experimental absorption spectra are blue-shifted (with respect to the free dyes) by ∼0.1 eV, and this blue-shift is partially reproduced by the theory which strongly overestimates (underestimate) the Δλ(1)max for TPR-1 (TPA-1); (iv) the effect of the SC is larger for EdyeOX, as we noticed an anodic displacement (∼0.2 eV) when going from the free dyes to the complexed structures; (v) the 1 Ti EdyeOX values are in slightly better agreement with experiment than those obtained upon free dye calculations (the average error is 0.40 eV instead of 0.50 eV44 for the free dye model); (vi) when going from the free dye in solution to the 1 Ti model, one observes that Δλ(1)max < ΔEdyeOX, consequently leading to a ΔGinject. decrease (that now steadily amounts to ∼0.15 eV), which suggests that our former procedure dealing with free dyes in solution tends to only slightly overestimate the free enthalpy of the electron injection. As a consequence, the resulting ΔGinject. ranking is: TPA-5 > TPA-1 ≃ TPR-1 > TPA-6 > TPA-7, similar to the free solvated dyes classification;44 (vii) TPA-5 shows the best RΔGinject. factor (1.17) but at the price of reduced RLHE factor. This decrease is related to the broken coplanarity between the –CHCN–CHCOOH anchoring group and the dimethoxy-phenyl group (≃60°). Indeed, for organic dyes, non-planar conformations tend to hamper the electronic conjugation (between the donor and the acceptor, see TPA-5) and result in a decrease of the (ICT) oscillator strength.139
Table 2 Estimated (relative) ΔGinject. (RΔGinject.), EdyeOX and the corresponding experimental value (Edye–Exp.OX), and Edye*OX (in eV) for the structures grafted to Ti(OH)3H2O (1 Ti model) and to Ti2O(OH)5(H2O)3 (2 Ti model). For each compound, we also provide the λ(1)max (in eV), the related oscillator strength (f), and the relative light harvesting efficiency (RLHE). All the electrochemical parameters obtained for the new structures are compared to the TPA-1 propertiesa




Compounds
ΔGinject.

E
dyeOX


E
dye–Exp.OX
131


E
dye*OX


λ
(1)max


f

RLHE
RΔGinject.





a The theoretical parameters are obtained at the restricted and unrestricted levels using the B3LYP functional combined with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set. All λ(1)max are obtained at the TDB3LYP/6-311+G(2d,2p) level. For both the ground and excited states, the solvation has been taken into account by using the PCM model. More details about the procedure can be found in our previous methodological investigations.44 For all the compounds the solvent is dichloromethane.135
b 11,14-diCl-TPA-1.
c 11,14-diCN-TPA-1.





Ti(OH)3H2O


TPA-1
−0.99
5.06
5.47
3.01
2.05
1.21
0.90
1.00


TPA-5
−1.16
5.34
-
2.84
2.50
0.83
0.79
1.17


TPA-6b
−0.80
5.14
5.56
3.20
1.94
1.17
0.89
0.81


TPA-7c
−0.53
5.25
5.57
3.47
1.78
1.21
0.90
0.54


TPR-1
−0.97
5.00
5.47
3.03
1.97
1.23
0.90
1.03


Ti2O(OH)5(H2O)3


TPA-1
−1.01
5.06
5.47
2.99
2.03
1.23
0.90
1.00




Using eqn (2), we have also estimated the SC conduction band shift when TPA-1, TPA-5 and TPR-1 are adsorbed on the TiO2 surface. Remarkably, the investigated dyes possess negative normal dipole moments when bound to TiO2 and then, according to eqn (2), the TiO2 CB would be shifted towards higher energy levels. The theoretical RΔCB obtained in solution (|, assuming that γ and ε are identical for each dye) values 1.00, 0.97 and 0.29 for TPA-1, TPA-5 and TPR-1, respectively. For the latter, the angle between the SC plan and  is small (≃20°) (see Fig. 9) as a result of the –CH2– group between the anchoring and the rhodamine units, and it consequently yields a smaller  (3.34 Debye in CH2Cl2) contribution, with respect to TPA-1 (11.47 Debye in CH2Cl2) and TPA-5 (9.57 Debye in CH2Cl2). This analysis perfectly fits the experimental trends: VTPA–1OC (760 × 10−3 V) > VTPR–1OC (590 × 10−3 V).135 We present in Figs. 10, 11 and 12 the dye-TiO2 and the dye-projected UMO (Unoccupied Molecular Orbitals) – DOS (Density Of States). From these figures, it can be seen that the lowest quasi-Fermi level calculated for the TPR-1-TiO2 system is −2.70 eV whereas it amounts to −2.59 eV (−2.62 eV) for TPA-1 (TPA-5). This is also in good agreement with the Voc from experimental methods. Moreover, from the comparison between Figs. 10, 11 and 12, it is clear that the overlap (SLF) between the adsorbed-projected LUMO and the dye-TiO2 quasi-Fermi level is more important in the TPA-1 and TPA-5 cases than for TPR-1. Note that high SLF can be directly related to huge ηcollect. parameters (see Section 2.1), as confirmed by the measurements.135
 Fig. 9  Schematic difference of dipole moments of TPA-1, TPA-5 and TPR-1 when anchored to a TiO2 surface. 
 Fig. 10  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPA-1,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset. 
 Fig. 11  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPR-1,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset. 
 Fig. 12  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPA-5,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset. 
5. Conclusions and prospects
This Perspective proposed to introduce the reader to the recent progress and theoretical research in the DSSC field. The first objective was to discuss the engineering science related to a conceptual dye-sensitised solar cell with an emphasis on the physical process, as well as on the resulting energetic balance involved in the actual device. Afterwards, we presented selected recent DSSC theoretical research and developments in order to outline the controversial and emerging issues in the field. Most of the work presented herein aimed to provide a better understanding of the function of (i) the sensitiser; (ii) the solvent; (iii) the electrolyte; and (iv) the semiconductor film that are all involved in the operating principles of a DSSC. In Section 3, we traced the history of the modern investigations performed on the very popular classes of panchromatic dyes and on the recent studies of the very promising metal-free organic dyes. Both families of dyes have been widely studied with the help of a large panel of various theoretical tools and procedures, deriving from QM theories, molecular mechanics (MM) or molecular dynamics (MD) approaches. In Section 4, we came up with new insights into the DSSC area through the presentation of new unpublished data form our recent research. In order to achieve a 10% energy conversion efficiency, we have shown that the configuration of current generation DSSCs has been efficiently and amazingly well optimised. As suggested by T. W. Hammann et al. in a recent publication,32 in order to realise the full promise of DSSCs as high-efficiency energy conversion devices, it is necessary to simultaneously modify at least two of the four major components (the dye, the redox shuttle, the SC photoanode and the cathode). In this context, we have presented in this Perspective article a fundamental-level understanding of the electronic excitation and electron injection processes to allow a smart optimisation strategy. More precisely, we have herein presented a procedure that offers new insights into the geometrical and electronic structures of the triphenylamine (TPA) derivatives and brings out the efficient structural modifications needed to improve both the free energy of the electron injection onto the TiO2 substrate and the light harvesting abilities of the dyes. It is our hope that such study on the ICT and about the electron injection processes may act as a guide for the design and synthesis of efficient organic dyes. For instance, TPA-5 shows the best key parameters values (ΔGinject., LHE, Voc and SLF) and is therefore expected to be a very promising molecule in the DSSC field.
Similarly, we want to underline the recent work by Hagfeldt and Tian et al., who report the synthesis of a novel dye containing two TPA units connected by a vinyl group, linked to a rhodanine-3-acetic acid moiety as electron acceptor. This dye has been synthesised as a reference to study the intramolecular energy transfer (IET) and charge transfer (ICT) processes and the results suggest that both processes show a positive effect on the performance of DSSCs.140
Undoubtedly, the close future of organic solar cells relies on their economic potential that depends upon several critical factors like the efficiency, the manufacturing costs, as well as sustainability, weight, scalability or lifetime. At this point, a couple of conditioning techniques can be foreseen: solvent and solvent-free processing. The first process offers a remarkable efficiency and are low-cost. However, these cells use volatile solvents in their electrolytes, which is problematic for outdoor solar panels applications, in view of the need for a robust encapsulation. Therefore, solvent-free ionic liquids have been looked for to obtain attractive solutions. Device efficiencies of over 8% were recently achieved by using some low-viscosity formulations containing a ternary melt of imidazolium iodure.141 This result is of great importance in the perspective of large-scale real-life applications of DSSCs. Nevertheless, whilst such a strategy has been widely applied for Ru(II)-based organic cells, this process has not yet been transferred to metal-free organic solar cells like triphenylamine. In such a context, simulations of the interactions between the dye and the ionic solvent would be warmly welcomed to allow a clear optimisation strategy.141–143
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FRS-FNRS) for their respective positions. All calculations were performed on the Interuniversity Scientific Computing Facility (ISCF), installed at the Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix (Namur, Belgium), for which the authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the FNRS-FRFC and the “Loterie Nationale” for the convention number 2.4578.02 and of the FUNDP.
References
J. P. Holdren, Science, 2008, 319, 424 CrossRef CAS .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Climate Change 2007 – Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, G. Benford, D. R. Criswell, C. Green, H. Herzorg, A. K. Jain, H. S. Khesghi, K. S. Lackner, J. S. Lewis, H. D. Lightfoot, W. Manheimer, J. C. Mankins, M. E. Manuel, J. L. Perkins, M. E. Schlesinger, T. Volk and T. M. Wigley, Science, 2002, 298, 981 CrossRef CAS .

          M. C. Green, Power to the People: Sunlight to electricity using Solar Cells, University of South Wales Press, Sydney, Australia,  2000 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel and J. Mason, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 64 CrossRef .
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 548 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kammen and S. Pacca, Annu. Rev. Environ. Science, 2004, 301, 29 Search PubMed .
E. A. Alsema, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2000, 8, 17 Search PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676 CAS .

ASTM G 173-03, Standard Tables for References Solar Spectral Irradiances: Direct Normal and Hemispheral on 37 degree Tilted Surface (Withdarwn 2005), American Society for Testing and Materials,  2003 Search PubMed .

          http://www.astm.org/
        .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2005 Search PubMed .

          R. H. Bube, Photovoltaic Materials, Imperial College Press, London, UK,  1998 Search PubMed .

          http://iea-pvps.org/
        .

          http://solar.calfinder.com/
        .
S. Hegedus, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 393 Search PubMed .
A. Slaoui and R. T. Collins, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 211 .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier and R. Hajlaoui, Science, 1994, 265, 1684 .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dimroth and S. Kurtz, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 230 CAS .
K. M. Coakley, Y. X. Liu, M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 301 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley, Y. X. Liu, C. Goh and M. D. McGehee, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 37 CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, I. Gur and A. P. Alivisatos, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 41 CAS .
J. L. Brédas, J. Cornil and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 447 CAS .

          S. S. Sun and N. S. Saricifti, Organic Photovoltaics: Mechanism, Materials and Devices, Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, USA,  2005 Search PubMed .
J. L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 RSC .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, G. Fujihashi, S. Takano, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4818 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer and H. Tributsch, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1968, 72, 437 CAS .
R. Amadelli, R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi and F. Scandola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7099 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Heimer, E. J. Heilweil, C. A. Bignozzi and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4256 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1161 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, M. Haria and S. Hotchandani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, S. Ruehle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, R. Katoh, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12583 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, M. Kasuya, A. Furube, N. Fuke, N. Koide and L. Han, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 698 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, K. J. Jiang, Y. F. Li, S. L. Li and L. M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11591 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, T. Bessho and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, C. Michaux, D. Jacquemin and E. A. Perpète, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16821 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Wang, Y. Cui, K. Hara, Y. Dan Oh, C. Kasada and A. Shinpo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kandavelu, H. S. Huang, J. L. Jian, T. C. K. Yang, K. L. Wang and S. T. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 574 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, K. Hara, N. Mori, M. Satsuki, S. Suga, S. Tsukagochi, Y. Abe, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1173 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, T. Horiguchi, T. Kinoshita, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 64, 115 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos, P. Lianos, A. Laschewsky, O. Ouari and P. Van Cleuvenberg, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3888 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrere, A. Zaban and B. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrere and B. Gregg, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1155 RSC .
T. Edvinsson, C. Li, N. Pschirer, J. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, R. Sens, G. Boschloo, A. Herrman, K. Müllen and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15137 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251 RSC .
J. Nelson, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 87 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cahen, G. Hodes, M. Grätzel, J. F. Guillemoles and I. Riess, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2053 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tennakone, G. R. R. Kumara, I. R. M. Kottegoda and V. S. P. Perera, Chem. Commun., 1999, 15 RSC .
K. Sayama, H. Suguhara and H. Arakawa, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3825 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rühle, M. Greenstein, S. Chen, A. Merson, H. Pizem, C. S. Sukenik, D. Cahen and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18907 CrossRef .
P. F. Barbara, T. J. Meyer and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148 CrossRef CAS .
D. Matthews, P. Infelta and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 119 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, Y. Q. Wang, E. Hao, H. Ghosh and T. Lian, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2001, 27, 393 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Cassida, recent Advances in density Functional Methods: Time Dependent Density Functional response Theory for Molecules, DP Chong, Singapore,  1995 Search PubMed .

          D. C. Harris and M. D. Bertolucci, Symmetry and Spectroscopy, Dover, New York US,  1998 Search PubMed .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630 RSC .
Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, W. Wu, H. Pei and H. Tian, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 3791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, R. W. Fessenden, G. L. Hug and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
B. Burfeindt, T. Hannappel, W. Storck and F. Willig, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 16463 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, S. Tsukagochi, K. Hara, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpou, Y. Abe, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rensmo, S. Södergren, L. patthey, K. Westmark, L. Vayssieres, O. Khole, P. A. Brühwiler, P. A. Hagfeldt and H. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 274, 51 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, S. I. Goreslky, A. B. P. lever and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 208, 213 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cecchet, A. M. Gioacchini, M. Marcaccio, F. Paolucci, S. Roffia, M. Alebbi and C. A. Bignozzis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3926 CrossRef CAS .
T. Renouard, R. A. Fallapuor, M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, S. I. Goreslky, A. B. P. Lever and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Daul, E. J. Baerends and P. Vernooijs, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 3538 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. G. Peach, P. Benfield, T. Helgaker and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 044118 CrossRef .
J. E. Monat, J. H. Rodriguez and J. K. McCusker, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 7399 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, V. Barone, L. Joubert and C. Adamo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 11354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis and A. Selloni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4381 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Selloni, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 389, 204 CrossRef .
S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, A. Sgamelotti and N. Re, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 396, 43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, A. Sgamelotti, A. Marrone and N. Re, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14144 CrossRef .
F. De Angelis, A. Tilocca and A. Selloni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rekhis, F. Labat, O. Ouamerali, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 13106 CrossRef CAS .
E. Finazzi, C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 154113 CrossRef .
J. Tomasi, B. Mennucci and R. Cammi, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2999 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Tilocca, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Selloni, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424002 CrossRef .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14156 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavone, P. Cimino, F. De Angelis and V. Barone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4338 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crescenzi, M. Pavone, F. De Angelis and V. Barone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavone, C. Benzi, F. De Angelis and V. Barone, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 120, 8632 .
F. De Angelis, A. A. Jarzcecki, R. Car and T. G. Spiro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3065 CrossRef CAS .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Gonçalves, V. D. Z. Bermudez, H. A. Ribeiro and A. M. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 655 RSC .
L. Giribabu, C. V. Kumar and P. Y. Reddy, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsui, H. Mase, J. Y. Jin, K. Funabiki, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, Dyes Pigm., 2006, 70, 48 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Wong and J. G. Cordaro, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 214703 CrossRef .
M. Chiba, T. Tsuneda and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 144106 CrossRef .
D. Jacquemin, V. Wathelet, E. A. Perpète and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 2420 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Vydrov, J. Heyd, A. V. Krukau and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 074106 CrossRef .
D. Jacquemin, E. A. Perpète, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 326 CrossRef CAS .
L. Joubert, J. F. Guillemoles and C. Adamo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 371, 378 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Perpète, F. Maurel and D. Jacquemin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5528 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, D. Jacquemin, J. Burton, D. Vercauteren and E. A. Perpète, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 81, 97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Preat, C. Michaux, A. Lewalle, E. A. Perpète and D. Jacquemin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 451, 37 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson, M. J. Lundqvist, R. Ernstorfer and F. W. W. A. III Goddard, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 441 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Abuabara, L. G. C. Rego and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 18234 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3189 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson and M. J. Lundqvist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11918 CrossRef CAS .
F. Labat, I. Ciofini, H. P. Hratchian, M. Frisch, K. Raghavachari and C. Adamo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14290 CrossRef CAS .

          V. R. Saunders, R. Dovesi, C. Roetti, R. Orlando, C. M. Zicovich Wilson, N. M. Harrisson, K. Doll, B. Civalleri, I. Bush, P. D'Acro and M. Llunel, Crystal 03 User's Manual, Università di Torino, Torino,  2003 Search PubMed .
T. Oekermann, T. Yoshida, H. Minoura, K. G. U. Wijayantha and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jacquemin, B. Champagne, J. M. André, E. Deumens and Y. Öhrn, J. Comput. Chem., 2002, 23, 1430 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivas, K. Yesudas, K. Bhanuprakash, V. Jayathirtha Rao and L. Giribabu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20117 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.pwscf.org/
        .
W. Stier and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8047 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stier and O. V. Prezhdo, Isr. J. Chem., 2002, 42, 213 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stier, W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duncan, W. Stier and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7941 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17998 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 365 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duncan, C. F. Graig and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8528 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo, W. Duncan and V. V. Prezhdo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 339 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Craig, W. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 163001 CrossRef .
K. Drukker, J. Comput. Phys., 1999, 153, 225 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 206 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kondov, M. Thoss and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 1364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen, W. H. Chen and C. W. Hong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, P163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, R. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11023 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, S. Yang, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 034305 CrossRef .
G. Benkö, J. Kallioien, J. E. I. Korppi Tommola, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 489 CrossRef .
C. Bauer, G. Boschloo, E. Mukhtar and A. Hagfeldt, J. Int. Photochem., 2002, 4, 17 Search PubMed .
D. Jacquemin, J. Preat, V. Wathelet, J. M. André and E. A. Perpète, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 405, 429 CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, J. Pang, R. Chen, M. Liu, Q. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Y. Cao, J. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Li, P. Whang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 626 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2694 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7164 CrossRef CAS .
The DOS has been built up using Lorentzians with a full width at half maximum of 0.25 eV..

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Julien Preat
	Julien Preat is currently a postdoctoral researcher of the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS) at the University of Namur. From 2008 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Innovation in Materials and Molecular Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya in Barcelona. He obtained his BA, MS and PhD in chemistry from the University of Namur. His research interests and expertise currently center on the theoretical investigation of the third-generation DSSCs at the QM, MM and MD level.

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structure of the N3 ruthenium complex.	 

 	Fig. 1  Principle of operation and energy balance scheme of the dye-sensitised solar cell. The photoexcitation of the sensitizer (S) is followed by electron injection into the semiconductor (TiO2) conduction band (CB). The dye molecule is regenerated by the iodine/triiodide couple, which is regenerated at the counter platinum (Pt) electrode by the current electrons passing through the load. Potentials in electron volt (eV) in the scheme are with reference to the Normal Hydrogen Electrode (NHE).	 
	(1)
	(2)
Jsc = ∫λIPCE(λ)dλ	(3)
IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)Φinject.ηcollect. = LHE(λ)APCE(λ)	(4)
LHE(λ) = 1–10−ε(λ)DLC	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Diabatic free energy curves and resulting free energy for the electron injection reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Diabatic free energy curves and related reorganisation energies for the electron injection reaction. χ is the dye+/dye* reorganisation energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plot of log kinject.vs. the free enthalpy for the injection from the excited state of the dye into the semiconductor conduction band. The solid line is related to Marcus theory whereas the dotted line corresponds to the experimental behaviour, i.e. to the region of operation of the cell (i.e., the region for which kinject. becomes constant, independently of the ΔGinject. value). The values presented in this graph are arbitrary.	 
|VRP| = 〈ΨR|H|ΨP〉	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Diabatic free energy curves interaction and the related VRP coupling constant for an electron injection reaction.	 
ΔGinject. = Edye*OX − ESCCB	(9)
Edye*OX = EdyeOX − ΔESICT	(10)
Edye*OX = EdyeOX − Edye0–0	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the energetic balance related to electron injection reaction.	 
	(12)
	(13)
ESICT(QS0) = ES0(QS0) + ΔESICT	(14)
	(15)
LHEICT ≃ 1–10−f	(16)

 	Fig. 7  Typical elements of a rod-like chemical structure in a dye-sensitised solar cell. In this scheme, the donor is a triphenylamine (TPA) moiety, linked to the acceptor (phenyl-cyanoacetic acid moiety) via a (poly)thiophene bridge.	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structures of TPA-1 (with numbering labels) and TPA-5.	 


TPA-1	2.03	2.05	0.02	0.10	−1.14	0.15	4.89	0.17
TPA-5	2.34	2.50	0.16	—	−1.30	0.14	5.04	0.30
TPA-6e	1.86	1.94	0.08	0.10	−0.90	0.10	4.96	0.18
TPA-7f	1.70	1.78	0.08	0.10	−0.70	0.17	5.00	0.25
TPR-1g	1.86	1.97	0.11	0.06	−1.09	0.12	4.77	0.23

 	Scheme 3  Bidentate chelating (left, 1 Ti) and bidendate binding (right, 2 Ti) modes for the carboxylate unit on TiO2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 8  HOMO-1 (bottom), HOMO (middle) and LUMO (top) of TPA-1 linked to a Ti atom (B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level with a isosurface threshold value of 0.05 atomic units).	 


Ti(OH)3H2O
TPA-1	−0.99	5.06	5.47	3.01	2.05	1.21	0.90	1.00
TPA-5	−1.16	5.34	-	2.84	2.50	0.83	0.79	1.17
TPA-6b	−0.80	5.14	5.56	3.20	1.94	1.17	0.89	0.81
TPA-7c	−0.53	5.25	5.57	3.47	1.78	1.21	0.90	0.54
TPR-1	−0.97	5.00	5.47	3.03	1.97	1.23	0.90	1.03
Ti2O(OH)5(H2O)3
TPA-1	−1.01	5.06	5.47	2.99	2.03	1.23	0.90	1.00

 	Fig. 9  Schematic difference of dipole moments of TPA-1, TPA-5 and TPR-1 when anchored to a TiO2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 10  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPA-1,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset.	 

 	Fig. 11  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPR-1,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset.	 

 	Fig. 12  Gas-phase dye-SC DOS (blue) and the adsorbed-projected DOS (red) for TPA-5,144 as well as the SLF parameter in offset.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
