Retracted Article: Recent advances of metal–metal oxide nanocomposites and their tailored nanostructures in numerous catalytic applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02116J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02116J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9465-9487Retracted Article: Recent advances of metal–metal oxide nanocomposites and their tailored nanostructures in numerous catalytic applications

        
          
            Chaiti 
            Ray
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tarasankar 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur-721302, India. E-mail: tpal@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in
Received 
      9th March 2017
    , Accepted 18th April 2017First published on 18th April 2017AbstractThe skilful synthesis of nanohybrids composed of noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt and Pd, as well as AuAg alloy) and metal oxides (ZnO, TiO2, Cu2O, MnO2, Fe2O3, WO3 and CeO2) has received considerable attention for applications in photocatalysis, solar cells, drug delivery, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy and many other important areas. The overall architecture of nanocomposites is one of the most important factors dictating the physical properties of nanohybrids. Noble metals can be coupled to metal oxides and metal chalcogenides to yield diverse nanostructures, including noble metal decorated-metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs), nanoarrays, noble metal/metal oxide core/shell, noble metal/metal oxide yolk/shell and Janus noble metal–metal oxide nanostructures. In this review, we focus on the significant application based advances in neat and tailored nanostructures of noble metal–metal oxide nanohybrids and touched upon chalcogenides also. The improvement in performance in representative energy conversion, electrochemical water splitting, photocatalytic hydrogen generation, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSCs) applications is discussed. Finally, we conclude with a perspective on the future direction and prospects of these controllable nanohybrid materials.Chaiti RayDr Chaiti Ray, MSc (Chemistry) graduated from the University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India. Dr Ray received her PhD degree in 2016 working under the supervision of Prof. Tarasankar Pal of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India. She is now a post-doctoral researcher at Yonsei University, South Korea. Her current research interests are focused on the development of highly efficient functionalized flexible electrodes for energy conversion and electrocatalytic overall water splitting.Tarasankar PalProfessor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc graduated in chemistry from the University of Burdwan, India. He is the senior professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He is a fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published over 360 papers. The ACS has recognized him amongst 20 Indian authors for high-quality research and Scopus has highlighted him among the top three material scientists in India. His current interest lie in catalysis involving metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, micelle catalyzed reactions, etc. His research also includes modified hydrothermal reactions, interfacial reactions, one-pot organic reactions on solid supports, ion-exchange based nanoparticle synthesis, application of stable fluorescent coinage metal clusters, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and gel based sensors for explosives. Recently he has widened his field further into electrochemical energy conversion and development of novel 2D materials for charge storage devices. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst’ deserve special mention.
1. Introduction
Noble metal nanomaterials have received much attention in the past decade because of their unique chemical and physical properties, and they have been widely applied in the industrial arena.1–9 Exploiting noble metal based nanomaterials, environment friendly catalysis resulting in degradation of pollutants, waste minimization, energy conversion, water splitting and new synthetic routes that circumvent modern synthetic techniques such as Sonogashira, Heck and Miyaura–Suzuki-type reactions is easily rationalized.10–12 However, for most technologically important chemical processes, noble metal catalysts spontaneously aggregate and grow to reduce surface energy, which limits the lifetime of nanomaterials and efficiency. The ultra-high prices of noble metals have also seriously limited their further usage. Because of the development of modern industry, there remains a critical need for robust, simple and readily controllable routes to fabricate highly active, stable and recyclable nanomaterials (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various catalytic activities of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites. 
Now catalytic reactions become the fastest growing research area consists of ∼90% chemical process and ∼60% chemicals production.13,14 In order to satisfy the urgent demand for high-performance catalysts with the characteristics of excellent activity, good selectivity and remarkable stability, catalysis, especially heterogeneous catalysis, has been undergoing comprehensive studies and innovative advances accompanied by great promise in nanoscience and nanotechnology over the past decade.15 To maximize the catalytic performance of noble metals and reduce the quantity use, it is necessary to load the active centres on a substrate.16–19 A suitable substrate not only provides a high surface area to stabilize small nanoparticles (NPs) under long-term catalysis but also renders hybrid junctions with rich redox reactions on the two-phase interface.
Innumerable reports are there for the preparation of photocatalysts and maximum efforts have been directed towards producing metal chalcogenides to explicitly understand the mechanism in particular. Metal chalcogenides are ubiquitous and generally robust, but it is very difficult to tune their band gap energy to make them visible light active. To name a few metal chalcogenides, TiO2, ZnO, CdS, and CdSe come to the forefront. A break through report for the application of TiO2, a celebrated photocatalyst, was published by Honda and Fujishima.20 Only recently TiO2 has been produced from commercial TiO2 from a surface reaction in the inorganic chemistry pathway exploiting resin surfaces.21 A large number of plasmonic photocatalysts have been designed by judicious manipulation of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects. The reported plasmonic photocatalysts are mainly from gold and silver. The first report of its kind has been published with copper22 out of a simple glucose mediated reduction. The ternary composite bears an n–p heterojunction together with the pronounced plasmonic effect of Cu nanoparticles (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed charge separation and dye degradation mechanism of Cu–ZnO, Cu–Cu2O–ZnO, and Cu2O–ZnO nanocomposites under visible light irradiation. (b) Representation of the Cu2O–Ag nanohybrid production and its catalytic reduction activity towards 4-nitrophenol. (c) Pictorial depiction of a modified hydrothermal system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21, 22 and 29 respectively. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 American Chemical Society and 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hybrid nanomaterials possessing combined optical, electronic and magnetic properties have attracted much interest in recent years due to their wide-range of applications in environmental remediation and solar energy conversion.23–26 In general, the successful application of such nanohybrids is determined by their structure, composition, particle size and other parameters.27,28 One of the major challenges in this area is the integration of two dissimilar materials with different structures to yield unique hybrid systems with diverse functionality for real time application (Fig. 2b).29–32
So far, several varieties of nanohybrids have been developed.33–38 Among the different kinds of nanomaterials, noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites (NM–MOs) with tailored structures have developed into an important research area due to their attractive photocatalytic,39–41 electronic,42 magnetic,43 and photovoltaic44–46 properties. In recent years, NMs have been found to play important roles in a variety of applications, such as catalysis and photovoltaics.47,48 When MOs are coupled with NMs, the light absorption range of wide band gap MOs can be extended.49 In addition, the formation of Schottky barriers significantly reduces the recombination of photo-excited electron–holes.50 Consequently, NM–MOs become ideal candidates for solar energy related materials.51 Such improved features could also be caused by many other factors, including surface reconstruction around the junction,52 lattice mismatch-induced crystal strain,53,54 and electron interaction/transfer across the interface.55
With the development of synthetic techniques in nanoscience, small noble metal NPs, especially atomically precise metal oxide hybrid nanostructures, have been successfully fabricated very recently, and these materials exhibit remarkably enhanced catalytic activity and selectivity.56,57 However, this simple loading form cannot meet the growing demand for stability, because noble metal catalysts contain numerous exposed surfaces and are always used in harsh environments, such as those with high temperatures and concentrated acidic and alkaline solutions. The lack of surface protection causes noble metal NPs to easily aggregate to minimize the surface energy, which can cause a serious loss of the catalytic active sites, a reduction of the catalytic activity and even complete inactivation. Therefore, improving the stability of noble metal catalysts is one of the most important challenges in nanoscience.
In this review, we highlight the latest literature with clear focus on noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites. In the beginning we reviewed different methods for synthesis of metal–metal oxide nanocomposites. This is followed by an extensive review of the literature about the properties and morphologies of a variety of these nanocomposites. Finally, we present their applications in various fields, such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, conventional electron transfer reactions and sensing.
2. Synthesis of noble metal and metal oxide based nanocomposites (NM–MOs)
Among the variety of nanocatalysts developed, controllable integration of different materials such as noble metals (e.g., Au, Ag, Pt, and Pd) and metal oxides (e.g., TiO2, CeO2, and ZrO2) into single nanostructures has recently become one of the hottest research topics, because they not only combine the function of individual nanoparticles (NPs), but also bring unique collective and synergetic catalytic properties compared with single-component materials. Traditionally, these composites are easily prepared by various methods such as impregnation,58,59 coprecipitation,60 deposition–precipitation,61 and so on. To design high performance catalysts, many strategies have been adopted and can be generally classified into four categories: (1) confinement of noble metal NPs into mesoporous supports;62,63 (2) modification of the supports;64 (3) replacement of mono-component noble metal NPs with alloy NPs;65,66 and (4) encapsulation of noble metal NPs into supports with a core–shell structure.67–71 The various synthetic protocols for the fabrication of NM–MOs are briefly discussed in this section.
2.1. Chemical methods
This is the simplest methodology, comprising the adsorption of metal precursors on the surface of a metal oxide semiconductor followed by chemical reduction in a solution medium. It is worth mentioning that much care has to be taken for chemical reduction of metal precursors. The chosen reductant should be employed judiciously so that desorption of the reduced metal does not take place from the adsorbent surface.72 In the case of Au NPs, there are different reliable methods to prepare colloidal suspensions in suitable solvents. Among them, the citrate reduction method (Turkevich method),73 Brust method74 and reduction by NaBH4 are the most convenient and well-recognized protocols to obtain Au NPs on the surface of semiconductors or these pre-synthesized Au NPs can be adsorbed on the surface of the support by simply mixing an Au colloidal solution with the semiconductor dispersion.75–77 One of the commonly observed disadvantages of this method is the aggregation of NPs during the adsorption stage, thus reducing the efficiency of the desired application. Anchoring of Au NPs onto the chemically modified surface of semiconductors using linker molecules, thereby reducing the aggregation or coalescence of Au NPs, was reported by a few groups.78–80 The polyol process is considered as the most convincing method to prepare Ag NPs, where ethylene glycol (EG) is used as both the solvent and the reducing agent and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is used as the stabilizer. In a typical procedure, EG is added into a round-bottom flask and heated to 160 °C in an oil bath. Then, PVP solution in EG is injected into the flask under stirring followed by the addition of AgNO3 in EG drop by drop under stirring. The colloidal solution thus-obtained was centrifuged and used for the process.81–84 The sonochemical method is another method to obtain Ag NPs deposited on semiconductor surfaces. A ZnO oxide precursor or combined ZnO and metal precursors are dispersed in an appropriate solvent. After sonicating the dispersion for an appropriate amount of time, NaOH is added. The product is recovered by centrifugation.85,86 Anandan et al.87 prepared Au–TiO2 photocatalysts using a sonochemical pathway. Murdoch et al.88 fabricated Au NPs by a deposition–precipitation method over TiO2 anatase and rutile particles prepared by the sol–gel process. Li et al.89 prepared ZnO/Ag sea urchin-like hybrids using a photochemical method. Use of ion exchange resins90 and polymer supports91 is also a neat platform to syntheses.
2.2. Thermal methods
Hydrothermal and solvothermal processes are the two common wet chemical methods that fall into this category. In the hydrothermal process metal oxide or metal oxide precursors are mixed with a metal precursor and a base in water. The thermal treatment of the reaction mixture in an autoclave above the boiling temperature of water has to be performed. During this process metal precursors are reduced and adsorbed simultaneously on the surface of semiconductors.92–94 The same protocol is applied for the solvothermal process except that the aqueous medium is replaced with appropriate solvents. Although these methods are simple and cost effective methods, they often suffer from the problem of aggregation of metal NPs. Thermal evaporation is one of the physical methods to deposit metal NPs on semiconductor surfaces, where a highly pure metal is evaporated at very high temperatures and the metal vapors are allowed to deposit on the surface of a semiconductor.95
Different oxo–hydroxo species96 with improved thermal stability,97 at times pure oxides with hierarchical structures21 and noble metal incorporated composite materials, were successfully obtained from a simple modified hydrothermal (MHT) reaction (Fig. 2c) inside a close wooden box fitted with an electric bulb.
2.3. Deposition–precipitation method
It is reported that this method renders very small metal NPs that are catalytically very active. For instance, pre-grown MOs are dispersed into a Au precursor solution, such as HAuCl4. The precipitates obtained after a period of stirring are then calcined to decompose the Au precursor to the metallic state. However, the pH range used in the deposition–precipitation method is a key factor determining the structures and properties of the resulting NM–MOs.98,99 Damato et al.100 prepared Au NPs decorated on a TiO2 nanocomposite by means of reducing an Au source using ascorbic acid (Fig. 3a). Moreau et al.101 found that Au/TiO2 catalysts prepared by DP at pH = 9 produced the optimum catalytic activity. Since the TiO2 support possesses negative surface charges at this pH, it is unfavorable for the deposition of chlorine ligands which are detrimental to the catalytic properties.102 It has also been demonstrated by the work of Tran et al. that the final pH of the preparation solution strongly influences the Au particle size, Au deposition yield, chlorine removal efficiency and consequently the overall catalyst activity.103 In addition to pH, the choice of precipitation agent is also important. The most common choice is NaOH in which the size of Au NPs can be controlled by varying the solution pH and calcination temperature. However, one problem with the use of NaOH is that not all the Au in the growth solution deposits on the MO support. Some precipitates in free solution. By using urea as the precipitation agent, all Au from the solution was deposited on the MOs without precipitation in the free solution to achieve a higher Au loading.104,105
 Fig. 3  (a) Strategy for the synthesis of TiO2 NPs decorated with Au NPs using the chemical reduction method. (b) Strategy for the synthesis of TiO2 NPs decorated with Au NPs using the photoreduction pathway. (c) Schematic of the preparation procedure of noble metal (M) core–In2O3 shell nanoparticles (M@In2O3, M = Au, AuPd, or Pt). (d) Synthesis of a metal coating using the physical vapor deposition process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, 109 and 111, respectively. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some advantages of this approach include the ability to produce small Au NPs (sizes of less than 10 nm) and a well-defined coupling between the Au NPs and the support can be obtained.106 Small Au NPs decorated on the surface of MOs significantly increase the active sites for the adsorption of reactants during the catalytic process. A well-defined coupling between the two components improves the separation of photoelectrons.
2.4. Photodeposition method
In this methodology, electrons and holes are produced first upon irradiation of TiO2 or ZnO with light. These electrons are then used for the reduction of a metal precursor to metal, which is simultaneously deposited on the surface of a semiconductor. The presence of a hole scavenger such as alcohol is important to avoid the accumulation of positive charge during the photodeposition. Usually the metal oxide nanostructures are dispersed in the metal precursor for the required time to allow the complete adsorption of metal ions on the surface of the support. The product is then exposed to light with appropriate intensity, resulting in the deposition of metal NPs on the semiconductor. The important parameter in this method is the intensity of the light since the average particle size decreases as the intensity of light increases.107,108 As represented in Fig. 3b, Walker et al. designed a synthetic pathway for Au NP deposited TiO2, where the photoreduction technique has been employed to prepare Au NPs over the TiO2 surface.109
2.5. Sputtering method
Here, the metal atoms are ejected from the solid target material due to the bombardment of the target by energetic particles. Sputtered atoms ejected to the gas phase are not in a thermodynamic equilibrium state, so they are easily deposited on the substrate. This whole process is usually performed using argon plasma in a vacuum chamber. A thin film with a uniform thickness of metal layer can be deposited. This method is particularly useful when a metal–semiconductor hybrid system has to be prepared on substrates (Fig. 3c).110–114
2.6. Pulsed electrodeposition
Since most metal oxide nanoarrays are formed on conductive substrates such as silicon wafers, fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO) glass or metal substrates, pulsed electrodeposition (PED) can also be used to construct highly dispersed NMs on nanoarrays.115–118 The density and size of NMs can be tuned by changing the electrochemical parameters such as peak potential, deposition time and pulse cycles. The average size of Ag NPs loaded on the surface of TiO2 nanotube arrays can be precisely controlled from 1.3 nm to 21.0 nm by carefully controlling PED parameters.115 This method can effectively suppress the agglomeration of NMs due to the high nucleation rate under the pulse current at the nanotube entrances to prevent the pores from becoming clogged.
2.7. Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
This method can also be used to deposit NMs on the surface of metal oxide nanoarrays (Fig. 3d). Libuda et al. have grown Pt NPs at the tube openings of TiO2 nanotubular arrays prepared by electrochemical methods using PVD in an ultrahigh vacuum.119 The relationship between the nanostructure of TiO2/Pt and their adsorption kinetics was demonstrated using in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy and molecular beam methods. The results indicated that the distribution of NPs in the nanotubes led to significant differences in adsorption and saturation behavior due to the differences in surface and gas phase transport resulting from the different nanostructures. Thus, it may be possible to tailor the transport processes in catalysts by controlling their structures.
3. Various structure of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites
According to the geometrical configuration of nanohybrids, NM–MOs can be divided into four categories: (1) noble metal-decorated metal oxide nanoarrays; (2) noble metal/metal oxide core/shell nanostructures; (3) noble metal/metal oxide yolk/shell nanostructures; and (4) Janus noble metal–metal oxide nanostructures (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of different structures of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites. 
3.1. Core–shell nanostructures
Enclosing metal NPs in a semiconductor shell is an apt method to reduce aggregation and deterioration of metal NPs due to their contact with harsh chemicals. Bian et al.120 reported on the preparation of Au–TiO2 core–shell structures by consecutive solvothermal and hydrothermal processes. TiO2 and Au precursors were dissolved in a mixture of glycerol and ethyl ether in an autoclave and subjected to the solvothermal process. The solid product was then dispersed in water and treated hydrothermally.
The TiO2 shell inhibits the agglomeration and leaching of Au NPs. Again, Wang et al.121 produced Au/TiO2 core/shell nanoparticles by capitalizing on the star-like block copolymers and metal moieties of precursors. Zhang et al.122 prepared a sandwich-like structure composed of a SiO2 core, a layer of Au NPs and a doped TiO2 shell by the sol–gel process. Compared to a traditional TiO2–Au core–shell structure, in which Au NPs are loosely bound to the surface of TiO2 such that they are unstable during thermal treatment and photocatalysis, the sandwich structures offer extra stability to the Au NPs. Again, Wu et al. synthesized core–shell Au@TiO2 nanoparticles by introducing TiF4 solution in the reddish-brown colored mixture of HAuCl4 solution, sodium citrate solution and ascorbic acid solution. The mixture was subsequently diluted to 90 mL with deionized water and transferred to Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclaves. The hydrothermal reaction was conducted at 180 °C for 48 h.123 Multi-core noble metal/metal oxide shell nanocomposites are an important type of noble metal/metal oxide core/shell nanostructure which can be fabricated via several template methods (carbon, polystyrene and SiO2 spheres) via a similar pathway to that in Fig. 5a.124–127 Multi-Pd core/hollow CeO2 core/shell nanocomposites have been synthesized using PVP-functionalized carbon nanosphere templates.128 The hydrothermal treatment of Ce3+, and the removal of the carbon template and PVP stabilizer can all be achieved in the final calcination process in air (Fig. 5b). This results in the formation of Pd/CeO2 core/shell nanostructures. Song et al. fabricated Au/TiO2 core/shell nanostructures with Au NPs embedded into the inner wall of the mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres using sulfonated-polystyrene spheres (SPSs) as a template.129
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis route for (PS) Au/TiO2 core/shell NPs and (b) the fabrication of a Pd/CeO2 core/shell nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124 and 125. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.2. Yolk–shell nanostructures
NM/MO yolk/shell nanostructures possess a hollow metal oxide shell with a solid NM core that can freely move within the shell. It is easy to encapsulate metal cores within SiO2 shells to form yolk/shell nanohybrids by selectively etching part of the noble metal core of preformed core/shell NPs.130–132 SiO2 hollow shell-based yolk–shell nanostructure becomes popular especially after the pioneering work by the Xia group.133 However, since the SiO2 hollow shell is insulating, it can only be used as a stabilizer. The use of functional MOs, such as ZnO, Fe3O4 and NiO as the shell, adds other properties and functionalities to the overall architecture.134,135 Compared to SiO2, it is more challenging to produce yolk/shell nanostructures with other MO shells because of the corrosion of most MOs during the etching process. As a result, SiO2 is widely used to synthesize NM/MO yolk/shell nanostructures by serving as a sacrificial hard template. Au/ZrO2 yolk/shell catalysts with high-temperature stability have also been synthesized using SiO2 as a sacrificial template.136 Au/SnO2 yolk/shell nanospheres with improved sensing properties have been successfully synthesized by also using Au/SiO2 nanospheres as sacrificial templates.137 Similar to SiO2, carbon can also be used as a hard template to fabricate noble metal/TiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures.138
It is more advantageous to use carbon templates compared to SiO2 since the removal of carbon and crystallization of MOs can be accomplished simultaneously by thermal treatment. Some MOs, such as ZnO and Cu2O, are sensitive to both acidic and alkaline conditions. This makes it impossible to use SiO2 as a template to fabricate yolk/shell nanostructures. Thus carbon is an attractive alternative template for the synthesis of this kind of nanostructure. Li et al. successfully prepared Au/ZnO yolk/shell structures with an average diameter of about 280 nm and an average ZnO shell thickness of 40 nm by coating ZnO on the surface of Au/carbon core/shell nanostructures followed by removal of the sacrificial carbon shell though calcination at high temperatures in air.139
In the area of chemical sensors for example, Au/NiO yolk/shell composite NPs showing a high response to H2S have been fabricated via a precipitation method using carbon encapsulated Au core/shell NPs as a sacrificial template.140 The maximum response of Au/NiO yolk/shell NPs was approximately 4 times higher than that of bare NiO hollow nanospheres due to the hollow spaces that allowed the accessibility of Au NPs to gas molecules. Wang et al.141 prepared yolk@shell nanostructures of Au@r-GO/TiO2 by using a sol–gel coating technique on Au/SiO2 core/shell spheres, followed by calcinations and template removal (Fig. 6a). In this case SiO2 acts not only as a template to produce void space but also promotes coating of r-GO and TiO2 layers. In addition to hard templates, soft templates such as poly-(2-vinyl pyridine)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (PVP-b-PEO) have also been used to fabricate Au/TiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures (Fig. 6b).142 This method is similar to using block copolymers to fabricate core/shell nanostructures. The difference is that the reduction of the Au core precursor is facilitated by a deep UV treatment, and the outer PEO blocks serve as the anchoring sites for the growth of the TiO2 shell thus leading to the formation of Au/TiO2 core/shell nanostructures. The internal cross-linked PVP-b-PEO copolymers are then removed by another deep UV treatment to form Au/TiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures. This method is easy to control and is an alternative way to prepare other kinds of yolk/shell materials sensitive to pH.
 Fig. 6  Proposed formation scheme for Au/TiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures based on the (a) hard template approach and (b) soft template approach. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141 and 142. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2015 American Chemical Society. 
3.3. NM-decorated metal oxide nanoarrays
Recently NMs have been used to decorate different kinds of metal oxide nanoarrays,143–149 including nanorods,150 nanotubes,151 nanowires,152 and nanosheets153 (Fig. 7). Several studies have centred on loading NMs on metal oxide nanoarrays. Chemical reduction154 and photoreduction methods,154–157 which are used for depositing NMs on the surface of metal oxide NPs, can be also used to attach NMs onto metal oxide nanoarrays. By these techniques, the degree of NM coverage on the metal oxide nanoarray surfaces can be readily tuned by adjusting the noble metal precursor amount and immersion time. Au–Pd co-modified TiO2 nanotube films have been synthesized by simultaneous photo-reduction of Au and Pd precursors on TiO2 nanotube arrays.158 One thing to be noted is that high coverage by NMs may lead to the formation of composite nanoarray bundles, especially in the case of nanowires and nanoneedles.152,159 The main reason for this is that the centre of gravity of each composite nanowire or nanoneedle is not aligned with that of their neighbors due to the non-uniform decoration of NMs on the surface of metal oxide nanoarrays at high NM loading. Interestingly, well-aligned vertical ZnO nanowires can be connected with each other by Au nanowires to construct a novel cross-linked structure via the photoreduction method.160
 Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) Au-decorated ZnO nanorod arrays, (b) Ag-decorated TiO2 nanotube arrays, (c) Au-decorated ZnO nanowire arrays and (d) Ag-decorated CuO nanosheet arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150–153. Copyright 2013 Elsevier, 2009 Elsevier, 2010 American Chemical Society and 2014 Elsevier. 
As for nanotube arrays, the critical challenge of NM deposition is the difficulty of filling nano-sized cylindrical pores with large amounts of NMs without clogging the nanotubes.161In situ growth of NMs in metal oxide nanotube arrays from electroless-deposition is simple and cost-effective. It can provide a uniform coating of NMs on the surface of the outer and inner walls of TiO2 nanotube arrays.162
This is in contrast with chemical reduction and photoreduction methods, which typically deposit NMs near the top of the nanotube and less on the inner parts of the arrays. In addition to this, highly dispersed Ag NPs loaded into TiO2 nanotube arrays have been prepared via an ultrasonic-aided photoreduction technique.151 The ultrasonication provides additional driving force for the incorporation of the AgNO3 solution into the pore networks and the subsequent precipitation of Ag NPs.
3.4. Janus noble metal–metal oxide nanostructures
Janus NPs refer to a special kind of material whose compositions contain two or more distinct physical and chemical properties. Since the concept described by De Gennes in 1991,163 various efforts been focused on fabricating different kinds of Janus NPs.164–166 However, there are only a few publications about Janus noble metal/MO nanostructures.167–171 In Seh's work, short and long Au nanorods are first synthesized using seed mediated growth. Then, TiO2 is grown anisotropically on one side of the nanorods by controlled hydrolysis of titaniumdiisopropoxidebis(acetylacetonate) because of its slow hydrolysis rate.172 It is worth mentioning that the manner of addition of the Au precursor was important to the final structure of the products. Pradhan et al. first fabricated Au NPs. Then the two hemispheres of the particles were decorated with hydrophobic and hydrophilic ligands, respectively. Finally, TiO2 NPs were formed on one side of the Au NPs by a surface sol–gel process, leading to the formation of Janus Au–TiO2.173 Li et al. have fabricated asymmetric pyramid-like Au–ZnO nanostructures via a similar method using Au nanocrystals and zinc acetate dihydrate as the starting materials.174 Wang et al. have fabricated non-centrosymmetric Janus Au–Fe3O4, Ag–Fe3O4 and AuAg–Fe3O4 using a general approach. MOs were grown over the pre-synthesized noble metal seeds by thermal decomposition of a metal carbonyl followed by oxidation in air.175 Janus Au–ZnO has been prepared by thermal treatment of a mixture of Au and Zn precursors.169 Specifically, the mixture of HAuCl4 and zinc stearate oleylamine solution was heated to 120 °C for 15 min followed by treatment at 280 °C for 1 hour with the aid of 1-hexadecanol surfactant. Au–ZnO hybrid nano-multipods were obtained with a Au core of about 7–9 nm in diameter and ZnO rods with lengths from 13–30 nm.

Fig. 8 displays synthesis of various types of Janus nanostructures of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites.
 Fig. 8  TEM of (a) Janus Au–TiO2, (b) branched Au–ZnO, (c) linear Au–ZnO and (d) Au–ZnO nanopyramids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170, 172 and 174. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH, 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2011 American Chemical Society. 
4. Catalytic applications of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites
The unique properties of nanomaterials such as surface- and strain-driven lattice distortion, variation in electronic state density and oxidation-induced charge redistribution could also benefit the catalytic performance.176,177 Nowadays, NM–MOs gain tremendous attention because of their mutual and synergetic catalytic properties compared to their single counterparts. With the rapid advances in synthesis chemistry, nanomaterials with well-defined sizes, shapes, crystal facets, structures and compositions have been made available,178,179 which have provided many opportunities for developing catalysts with excellent activity for energetically challenging reactions, high selectivity to valuable products, and long-term stability under tough reaction environments.
4.1. Mechanisms of high performance applications
It is useful to understand the physical mechanisms for the enhancement of various properties when NMs and MOs are combined. The two main phenomena involved in the improved photoreaction are localized surface plasmonic resonance (LSPR) and Schottky barrier formation. Both of these are discussed in the following section.

(a) Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). 
LSPR can be described as the collective oscillation of free electrons induced by incident light inside NMs. When the frequency of incident light matches the natural frequency of free electrons oscillating against the restoring force of positive nuclei, the oscillation amplitude reaches a maximum. The resonant photon wavelength is called the LSPR wavelength, which is different for different NMs, and is also tuned by varying the size and shape of NMs.180 As to NM–MOs, a direct benefit is that the light-absorption spectral ranges of TiO2 and ZnO can be easily extended to visible and even near-infrared regions by the LSPR effect of NMs. Liu et al. reported wide absorption spectra of TiO2 by integrating Au nanorods as antennas.181 The plasmon resonance absorptions of nanostructures can be tuned from 630 nm to 810 nm by manipulating the aspect ratio of the Au nanorods.


(b) Schottky barrier. 
The formation of the Schottky barrier at the NM–MO interface is highly dependent on the work function of the NM (ϕM) and the electron affinity of the MO (XSM). Normally, the value of ϕM is larger than that of XSM, where XSM is the energy difference between the minimum conduction band (CB) and the vacuum (Vac) energy. Also the Fermi level (EF) of NMs is typically lower than that of MOs as shown in Fig. 9.182 When the NMs and MOs come into contact, the electrons in the MOs are transferred to the NMs until they reach equilibrium. This results in the bending of the CB (i.e. Schottky barrier ϕB). More importantly, this charge redistribution leads to a built-in electric field at the interface, which inhibits the recombination of photogenerated charges and improves the performance of devices for solar energy-related applications.182–184
 Fig. 9  Formation of the Schottky barrier between MOs and NMs (a) before contact and (b) after contact. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The formation of the Schottky barrier in ZnO/Au nanocomposites has been investigated using time-correlated single-photon-count (TCSPC) spectroscopy.185,186 Compared to pure ZnO NPs, a slower fluorescence decay associated with the electron recombination process was noticed in the ZnO/Au system. This confirmed the blocking of electron–hole recombination by the Schottky barrier formation.

4.2. Photo-degradation of organic pollutants
Elimination of toxic organic compounds from wastewater is currently one of the most important concerns in water pollution control. In the past few years, there has been tremendous research and development in the area of photocatalysis. Photocatalysis using semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles has attracted increasing interest in solving global pollution problems. One of the major applications of this technology is the degradation of organic pollutants in water.187 The process of photo-degradation of organic pollutants can be described as follows: under illumination of incident light with photon energy higher than the band gap of MOs, the electrons in the valence band (VB) are injected into the conduction band (CB) leaving behind the same number of holes in the VB. The electrons trapped by O2 dissolved in solution form ˙O2− superoxide radicals which subsequently transform into ˙OH radicals. Meanwhile, photo-generated holes react with H2O adsorbed on the surface of MOs to produce ˙OH. Both ˙O2− and ˙OH are highly reactive and can completely degrade most organic waste materials into low toxicity inorganic small molecules. However, the use of bare TiO2 or ZnO is limited due to their wide bandgap and the high recombination rate of photo-generated charges. Coupling with NMs is an emerging strategy to improve the degradation rate of organic pollutants under visible light conditions. NM–MO nanocomposites provide an effective way to tailor the properties of semiconductor metal oxide photocatalysts through promoting interfacial charge-transfer processes and enhancing charge separation. TiO2 is known for its high-quality photocatalytic activity towards water pollutant removal. This photocatalytic process involves excitation of a semiconductor with photons of equal or higher energy than the band gap energy producing electron–hole pairs. These pairs either recombine or react with adsorbed species. An effective photocatalyst is one that can use these electrons and holes efficiently. But in case of TiO2 the band gap value is high for which higher energy is required to excite electrons from the valance band to the conduction band. Moreover, in order to remove pollutant molecules, the presence of a metal is needed to trap the photo-excited electrons from the conduction band and transfer them to the pollutants. The process requires an understanding of the following components: the semiconductor, the metal, the metal/support interface and the interaction of these with chemical reactants. Among noble metals, gold has attracted significant interest. Gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) have been exploited for various purposes, from optics and electrochemistry to environmental engineering, due to their stability, non-toxicity and biocompatibility. The integration of TiO2 and Au could yield a remarkable improvement in the photocatalytic activity because Au can decrease the band gap energy of TiO2. Thus, in the area of photocatalysis, the availability, affordability and lack of toxicity of titanium dioxide (TiO2) as a robust solid with outstanding photochemical stability make it an attractive support for Au NPs.188 Pradhan et al. reported the facile synthesis of Pt deposited α-Fe2O3 nanorods without using any surfactant. Then the as-obtained nanostructures were used as a model system for studying the photocatalytic degradation of phenol, methylene blue, and Congo red. Pt-doping enhances the catalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 nanorods. In the case of α-Fe2O3 nanorods the lower aspect ratio might be responsible for the charge carrier recombination and hence decreases the efficiency of the photocatalyst. The substitutions of Fe3+ by Pt4+ increase the conductivity, enhance the charge transfer and hence decrease the e−–h+ recombination. This is why they shows a higher percentage of photo-degradation.189 Kuvarega et al. prepared nitrogen/palladium co-doped TiO2 photocatalysts by calcination of the hydrolysis product of titanium isopropoxide, Ti(OC3H7)4 with aqueous ammonia. Co-doped TiO2 showed greater photocatalytic Eosin Yellow degradation efficiency compared to singly doped N–TiO2 or Pd–TiO2 under visible light irradiation (Fig. 10a). Here, UV-vis spectra indicate that the nitrogen–palladium co-doping causes the absorption edge of TiO2 to shift to a lower energy region, evidenced by the reduction in the band gaps. The synergistic effects of N and Pd co-doping led to enhanced utilization of solar energy through narrowing of the band gaps. The presence of Pd sufficiently promoted the separation of photogenerated holes and electrons by acting as an electron trap leading to high photodegradation efficiency of EY under visible light irradiation.190 Xiong et al. synthesized a novel class of one-dimensional (1D) plasmonic Ag@Cu2O core–shell hetero nanowires at room temperature for photocatalysis application. The resulting unique heterostructures exhibit greater plasmonic enhancement of photocatalytic activity in MO oxidization than Ag@Cu2O nanoparticles and pure Cu2O under solar light irradiation. The drastic enhancement in photocatalytic activity could be attributed to the surface plasmon resonance and the electron sink effect of the Ag NW cores, and the unique 1D core–shell nanostructure.191 Hollow Au–Cu2O core–shell nanoparticles were synthesized by Lu et al. using hollow gold nanoparticles (HGNs) as plasmon-tailorable cores to direct epitaxial growth of Cu2O nanoshells. The hollow Au–Cu2O core–shell nanoparticles with synergistic optical properties exhibited higher photocatalytic performance in the photo-degradation of methyl orange when compared to pristine Cu2O and solid Au–Cu2O core–shell nanoparticles under visible-light irradiation due to the efficient photo-induced charge separation, which could mainly be attributed to the Schottky barrier and plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer.192
 Fig. 10  (a) Proposed mechanism of the photo-degradation of EY on a Pd–TiO2 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. (b) Possible photocatalytic reaction mechanism of 3DOM Ag/ZrO2. (c) Expected mechanism of photocatalytic decomposition of p-NP by the Pt–TiO2 nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, 193, and 198. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
Zhang et al. prepared a three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) composite, 3DOM Ag/ZrO2, by using polystyrene (PS) colloidal spheres as a template, combined with the one-step method of vacuum impregnation. The composite exhibited a honeycomb like, three-dimensionally ordered macroporous structure that was permeable, open, arranged in order, with holes closely connected with each other, which was a good reproduction of the PS crystal template. The photocatalytic activity of 3DOM Ag/ZrO2 was investigated using Congo red as the model molecule (Fig. 10b). Compared to ZrO2, P25 and Ag/ZrO2, 3DOM Ag/ZrO2 exhibited better photocatalytic activity under multiple modes including UV, visible light, simulated solar light and microwave-assisted irradiation. Moreover, the 3DOM Ag/ZrO2 composite had a positive effect on the degradation of different types of organic pollutants under UV light. In addition, during the study of photocatalytic hydrogen production, the hydrogen yield of the 3DOM Ag/ZrO2 composite was 18 times that of commercial P25, which also showed excellent photocatalytic activity.193 Wu et al. developed a zinc substrate strategy for the solution-phase synthesis of well-defined ZnO nanorods/Pt and ZnO nanorods/Ag heteronanostructure arrays in high yields. The fabricated heteronanostructure arrays show significant structure-induced enhancements of photodegradation for rhodamine B, which are associated with charge separation between ZnO–NRs and Pt or Ag nanostructure as well as the plasmon enhanced effect of the Ag nanostructure and high photocatalytic stabilities, which are very attractive for real photocatalytic applications.194 The optimized geometrical configuration of multiple active materials in hierarchical nanoarchitectures is essential for the creation of photocatalytic degradation systems that can mimic natural photosynthesis. Zhang et al. fabricated a bamboo-like architecture, CuO nanosheets and Ag nanoparticle co-decorated TiO2 nanotube arrays (Ag/CuO/TiO2) by using a simple solution-immersion and electrodeposition process. Under simulated solar light irradiation, the 2,4-dinitrophenol (2,4-DNP) photocatalytic degradation rate over Ag/CuO/TiO2 was about 2.0, 1.5 and 1.2 times that over TiO2 nanotubes, CuO/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2, respectively. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of the ternary Ag/CuO/TiO2 photocatalyst was ascribed to improved light absorption, reduced carrier recombination and more exposed active sites. Moreover, the excellent stability and reliability of the Ag/CuO/TiO2 photocatalyst demonstrated a promising application for organic pollutant removal from water.195
The synergistic advantage of including TiO2 and metal NPs together in the hydrophilic part of an amphiphilic diblock copolymer and the improved photocatalytic properties were demonstrated by the Kim group.196–198 TiO2 sol solutions were prepared using titanium isopropoxide as a TiO2 precursor, which was then mixed with poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO) in appropriate solvents. In order to prepare a TiO2–Ag nanodot array, AgNO3 was sequentially mixed with TiO2 precursors and PS-b-PEO solutions. This was then spin coated on a suitable substrate to induce nanodot arrays. The sample was exposed to UV light in order to reduce AgNO3 to Ag. The photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2 was enhanced by 30%, after the incorporation of Ag. Mesoporous TiO2–Ag was also prepared by mixing TiO2 sol–gel and PS-b-PEO solution at a volume ratio of 50:50, followed by the addition of AgNO3. Thin films were prepared by spin coating the solution onto solid substrates. Subsequent UV exposure led to the reduction of AgNO3 to Ag and the partial removal of the polymer, resulting in the formation of a mesoporous TiO2–Ag hybrid film.197
Similarly, TiO2–Pt nanohybrid films were fabricated by first mixing PS-b-PEO and Pt precursors and then TiO2 precursors were added. A series of samples were prepared by varying the relative amount of TiO2 sol–gel in polymer solution, where a morphology transformation from a nanodot array to a mesoporous structure was obtained. Degradation of para-nitrophenol (p-NP) was demonstrated using the TiO2–Pt thin film obtained. A plausible mechanism for the enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2–Pt was proposed (Fig. 10c).198
Xiong et al. synthesized Plasmonic Ag@ZnO core–shell hybrids including hetero-nanowires and hetero-nanoparticles at room temperature for application in photocatalysis. The resultant Ag@ZnO core–shell hybrids exhibit much higher photocatalytic activity and stability towards degradation of organic contaminants than pure ZnO nanocrystals under solar light irradiation. The drastic enhancement in photocatalytic activity over the Ag@ZnO core–shell hybrids, especially the 1D core–shell hetero-nanowires, could be attributed to the synergistic effects of the surface ZnO and Ag nanowire cores with the surface plasmon resonance and the electron sink effect, as well as the unique 1D core–shell nanostructure for efficient mass transfer.199 For the enhancement of the photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO nanomaterials, we have deliberately introduced plasmonic Au nanoparticles (NPs) into ZnO through a facile, inexpensive one pot hydrothermal approach. The photocatalytic activity of the Au–ZnO nanocomposites was examined by the photo-degradation of a series of cationic and anionic dye molecules such as rhodamine B, Congo red, methyl orange, methylene blue and Rose Bengal. It is interesting to note that with a reasonable increase in the Au concentration the shape of the nanocomposites remains unaltered but the visible light driven photocatalytic activity is enhanced.200
4.3. Photocatalytic H2 generation
Photovoltaic cells are the most direct way to capture solar energy, but the electricity converted from solar energy must be used immediately or stored in some form.201 Hydrogen is one kind of alternative energy resources that is both renewable and environment friendly. Since the pioneering work of Honda and Fujishima on photocatalytic H2 generation on TiO2 electrodes in 1972,20 it has been recognized as a promising strategy for storing solar energy in chemical bonds without the production of harmful by-products.202 The mechanism for photocatalytic H2 generation is similar to that for photocatalytic degradation including the absorption of solar light, generation of electrons and holes and catalytic reactions for H2 or O2 evolution. The difference between them is the requirement of a semiconductor band gap. For H2 generation, the bottom of the CB should be lower than that of the H+/H2 redox couple (0.0 V vs. the NHE) and the top of the VB should be higher than that of the H2O/O2 redox couple (+1.23 V vs. the NHE).203 It is hard for a single semiconductor to meet all the requirements for photocatalytic H2 generation. Hence, co-catalyst composites have been extensively studied. NM–MO nanocomposites as co-catalysts have received a great deal of attention because the incorporation of NMs can broaden the absorption range to include visible light and reduce the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes.
Wu et al. investigated H2 generation via photocatalytic reforming of methanol on TiO2/Au composites.204 The rate of H2 production was greatly increased and the concentration of by-product CO decreased with the reduction of the Au particle size, because smaller Au particles switch the decomposition reaction mainly to H2 and CO2 products while suppressing the formation of CO and H2O. Silva et al. fabricated Au-decorated P25 TiO2 composites with Au loading in the range 0–2.2 wt%. The highest initial H2 generation rate (4 × 10−2 mL min−1) and the largest final H2 volume (4 mL) at 3 h were obtained for the catalyst with 0.25 wt% Au loading. Considering the low Au loading in such composite materials, it can be considered a low cost method for improving H2 generation rates.205 In Murdoch's work, the H2 production rate of Au-decorated anatase TiO2 was almost 100 times higher than that of Au-decorated rutile TiO2.88 The average size of the Au particles decorated on anatase TiO2 is consistently smaller than that of those supported on rutile TiO2. This may contribute to a higher hydrogen yield for anatase TiO2-based composite photocatalysts. Wang et al. fabricated an assembly of Pt/TiO2–rGO as a catalyst for H2 evolution under solar light.206 From Fig. 11a it is clearly understandable that a metal oxide containing a noble metal shows excellent H2 generation performance compared to the corresponding metal oxide.
 Fig. 11  (a) Depiction of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution using Pt/TiO2 interfaced with rGO. (b) Illustration of the photocatalytic CO2 conversion activity of CuPt–TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206 and 224. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
An improved photocatalytic H2 production rate of 592 mmol h−1 cm−2 under 320 mW cm−2 irradiation was achieved by the composite nanoarrays facilitated by the charge transfer of photo-induced electrons from the TiO2 nanotubes to Pd NPs and the high activity of the Pd NP photocatalytic centres. Janus Au–TiO2 nanocomposites with 50 nm Au NPs have been synthesized for efficient visible light water splitting.167 The H2 generation rate of Janus Au–TiO2 was about 1.7 times higher than that of Au/TiO2 core/shell nanostructures. This is attributed to a reduced charge-carrier recombination due to the shorter diffusion distance for generated electrons and enhanced energy absorption due to the stronger localization of the plasmonic near-field in the Janus nanostructures.
4.4. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
Photo-catalytic CO2 reduction not only offers another strategy for converting solar energy into chemical energy, but is also a promising approach to reduce a greenhouse gas produced by human industrial activities.207–209 Unlike photo-catalytic H2 generation, which only requires solar energy and water, photo-reduction of CO2 requires both energy and a hydrogen source.210–212 Suppressing the H2 generation process is an efficient strategy to improve the photo-reduction of CO2 due to the competition between them in the presence of water.213 Since the first observation of photoelectrocatalytic reduction of CO2 over semiconductor powders in water by Inoue's group,214 continuous efforts have been devoted to photocatalytic CO2 conversion.215–217 In solar energy harvesting, charge separation and transportation are two crucial factors in the photo-catalytic CO2 reduction system. The design of NM-decorated MOs is one of the several approaches to improve the efficiency in these two factors.
TiO2 is frequently used in photo-catalytic CO2 reduction because of its abundance, stability, high UV photo-reactivity, low cost, and low toxicity.218,219 Deposited NMs acted as co-catalysts and have been shown to be beneficial for the efficiency of photo-catalytic CO2 reduction due to the improved charge separation, facilitated CO2 activation, and the presence of active catalytic sites for the reduction process similar to photocatalytic degradation and H2 generation.220 The rate of CO2 reduction was found to correlate with the work function of the NM decorated on the surface of the MOs.221 It was suggested that the function of NMs was to extract electrons from TiO2, thus promoting the performance of CO2 reduction.222 The presence of binary NMs on MOs, such as AuPt, AuAg, CuPt and AuCu, also enhanced the CO2 conversion to valuable hydrocarbons due to the synergy of two different NMs (Fig. 11b).223–227 It has been reported that the deposition of Au and Cu co-catalysts on commercial P25 increases the efficiency of photocatalytic CO2 reduction in which the Au enabled response to visible light. Specifically, the Au–Cu co-catalysts exhibited the largest amount of CH4 production, 8 and 11 times larger than that obtained with single-component Au and Cu-loaded P25, respectively. Ovcharov et al. have done some research on photocatalytic CO2 conversion using TiO2 modified with bimetallic Au–Cu.228 Tu et al. have fabricated Au/TiO2 yolk/shell hollow spheres as photo-catalysts for catalytic CO2 reduction due to the enhanced generation of electron–hole pairs.138 In addition to the improvement of the photo-reduction yield of CO2, chemical reactions involving multiple e−/H+ transfer processes enable the formation of high-grade carbon species (C2H6) due to the abundant charge-carriers generated by the electric field surrounding Au NPs. Zhai et al. fabricated core/shell Pt/Cu2O-decorated TiO2 by a photo-deposition method using CuSO4 and Pt/TiO2 as the precursor and template respectively.223 It has been proposed that the Pt core extracted the photogenerated electrons from TiO2, and the Cu2O shell provided sites for the preferential activation and conversion of CO2 molecules in the presence of H2O.
4.5. Fuel cell
A fuel cell utilizes the chemical energy of another fuel, which is chemically stored in electrochemical cells to produce electricity (Fig. 12).229 Unlike batteries or other energy storage devices, it generates electricity through the reaction between a fuel (anode) and an oxidant (cathode), such as hydrogen/oxygen or methanol/oxygen, etc. A wide application of platinum electrocatalysts in fuel cells has been hampered by their high costs and poor utilization coefficients. This can be overcome by using metal oxide supports. Yu et al. introduced a CeO2/rGO/Pt sandwich nanostructure which was successfully fabricated through a facile hydrothermal approach and exhibited a higher catalytic activity and stability compared to Pt/rGO, CeO2/Pt and Pt/C catalysts when applied as an electrocatalyst for the oxidation of methanol in DMFCs.230 Qu et al. reported synthesis of Pt/TiO2-decorated reduced graphene oxide composite as catalyst for methanol electrooxidation with three phase junction structure by UV photoreduction (denoted as p-Pt/rGO@TiO2).231
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol in a direct methanol fuel cell. 
Videla et al. reported synthesis of a Pt NP deposited C–MnO2 hybrid material by the polyol method. The synthesized Pt/C–MnxO1+x catalyst shows good catalytic activity towards the MOR as well as good stability compared to commercial Pt/C based catalysts. The enhancement of the electrochemical performance of the Pt/C–MnxO1+x was mainly due to the optimized dispersion and smaller particle size of Pt nanoparticles favored by the presence of a mixture of Mn2O3 and Mn3O4, as well as synergistic integration of nanomaterials.232 Huang et al. introduced a ternary Pt/MnO2/graphene sheet (Pt/MnO2/GS) nanohybrid by a facile and cost-effective method, in which each component provides unique and critical function to achieve optimized utilization of metallic platinum, allowing it to exhibit ultrahigh electrocatalytic activity in methanol oxidation in comparison with Pt/graphene sheets (Pt/GS), Pt/Vulcan XC-72 (Pt/XC-72) and Pt/MnO2/XC-72 catalysts.233 Again, Huang et al. reported a facile strategy to fabricate a ternary nanocomposite based on Pd/MnO2 nanolamella–graphene sheets (Pd/MNL/GS) and demonstrate its application as a multifunctional catalyst for both the direct formic acid fuel cell (DFAFC) and the direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC). Here, MnO2 nanolamellas (MNLs) act as a promoter in formic acid and methanol electro-oxidation.234 Hu et al. prepared Pd electrocatalysts supported on carbonized TiO2 nanotubes (Pd/TiO2C) and used for the oxidation of ethanol in alkaline media. The as-prepared Pd/TiO2C electrocatalyst not only shows superior activity for ethanol oxidation but also is more stable during constant current density polarization in alkaline media in comparison with Pd/C electrocatalysts.235 Pd nanoparticles supported on the WO3/C hybrid are prepared by Feng et al. using a two-step procedure where phosphotungstic acid (PWA) and sodium tungstate are the tungsten source and the catalysts are studied for the electrooxidation of formic acid. The Pd–WO3/C catalyst prepared from PWA shows the best catalytic activity and stability for formic acid oxidation; it also shows the maximum power density when tested with a small single passive fuel cell. The increase of electrocatalytic activity and stability is ascribed to the interaction between the Pd and WO3, which promotes the oxidation of formic acid in the direct pathway.236 Xu et al. synthesized Pd–Co3O4/C nanocomposites by a multistep process. The as-obtained electrocatalyst shows excellent activity towards methanol, EG and glycerol oxidation.237 Huang et al. synthesized Pt–Ni(OH)2–graphene ternary hybrids by a two step synthesis protocol and employed the composite as an electrocatalyst for the MOR. The incorporation of highly defective nickel hydroxide nanostructures is believed to play the decisive role in promoting the dissociative adsorption of water molecules and subsequent oxidative removal of carbonaceous poison on neighboring platinum sites. As a result, the ternary hybrids exhibit exceptional activity and durability towards efficient methanol oxidation reactions.238 Zanata et al. reported a fast method of producing rhodium-decorated platinum nanoparticles (NPs) containing iridium oxides (IrOx) to be used in the glycerol electrooxidation reaction. We synthesize Pt–IrOx/C electrocatalysts of different atomic compositions dispersed on carbon Vulcan XC-72R® by using the fast polyol method assisted by microwaves. Afterwards, Pt–IrOx/C was potentiodynamically decorated with Rh (Rh/Pt–IrOx/C). The electrochemical stability of Rh/Pt–IrOx/C NPs was evaluated by following a degradation test protocol, which consists of exhaustive cyclic voltammetries. They indicated that the presence of iridium oxides in the architecture of platinum enhances the electrochemical stability of the catalyst by avoiding agglomeration effects. Moreover, the presence of rhodium catalyzes the glycerol electrooxidation reaction.239 Wang et al. described hydrothermal synthesis of manganese dioxide (MnO2) and its application as a platinum nanoparticle (Pt NPs) support for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). In this case, hydrothermally synthesized MnO2 may offer useful applications as a reliable, cost-effective and morphology controllable support for PtNPs as an efficient ORR catalyst.240 Yu et al. prepared MnO2-doped Ag@Pt/MWCNT composites by ultrasonic treatment and used them as an electrocatalyst for the ORR. Particularly, α-MnO2 nanorods appear to have the highest catalytic activity and stability because of their crystal phase/morphology in an appropriate oxygen adsorption mode, and the EAS of the various nanocomposites is the highest of all the electrocatalysts in this case.241 Again, Kim et al. reported a Pt deposited Mn3O4 nanocomposite by the galvanic exchange reaction. The resulting Pt/Mn3O4 nanocomposite showed highly enhanced specific activity and durability, compared with commercial Pt/C catalysts.242 Recently, Ramani et al. carried out a comprehensive study on the electrocatalytic behavior of Pt nanoparticle decorated CeO2 nanoboxes towards formic acid oxidation. Because of CO poisoning, Pt NPs face deactivation after few catalytic cycles and they are prone to get dissolved in acidic media during the catalysis process. The use of CeO2 as a Pt NP support helps to overcome these limitations and enhances the activity as well as stability of the composite.243
4.6. Electrochemical H2 and O2 generation
Electrochemical hydrogen production from water is an attractive clean energy generation process that has enormous potential for sustainable development. However, noble metal catalysts are most commonly used for such electrochemical hydrogen evolution making the process cost ineffective. Therefore the design of hybrid catalysts with minimal use of noble metals using a suitable support material is a prime requirement for the electrolysis of water. In this regard, Roy et al. demonstrated the superior hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity of platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) supported on faceted titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanocrystals (Pt–TiO2) and a nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide (N–rGO) based TiO2 nanocomposite (Pt–TiO2–N–rGO). The ternary Pt–TiO2–N–rGO nanocomposite exhibits a superior HER activity with a small Tafel slope (∼32 mV dec−1), exchange current density (∼0.22 mA cm−2), and excellent mass activity (∼3116 mA mgpt−1) at 300 mV overpotential. The excellent HER activity of the ternary Pt–TiO2–N–rGO nanocomposite is ascribed to the presence of Ti(III) states and enhanced charge transportation properties of N–rGO.244 Khdary et al. developed a synthetic approach to produce highly disperse, low loading (3.28 wt%) Pt nanoparticle incorporated silica (Pt–NP–S) with an average diameter of 3.5 nm using economical and simple surface chemical modification and reduction processes. Pt nanoparticle supported silica catalysts exhibit very high and stable electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen production with a mass activity of 11.9 A gPt−1 mV−1.245 Zhang et al. loaded Pt nanoparticles with a size of 5–8 nm uniformly on SnO2 (flower) supports, which is adopted as the electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction in acidic media. The voltammetric results indicated that the Pt/SnO2 (flower) electrocatalyst exhibits higher activity for the HER due to its larger specific surface area and porous structure.246 We have fabricated tiny Pd NP deposited Mn3O4 nano octahedrons (PMOs) by combining a redox-mediated reaction and modified hydrothermal pathway. The PMO nanocomposites exhibit outstanding electrocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in acidic media with a lower overpotential (14 mV), smaller Tafel slope (42 mV dec−1) and high exchange current density (7.74 mA cm−2) (Fig. 13). Moreover, they display exceptional durability on conducting 5000 CV cycles as well as long-term stability for 36 h (97% activity retention). This remarkable stability of PMO electrocatalysts under acidic conditions may be attributable to the interaction between Pd NPs and Mn3O4 nano octahedrons, which enhances the stability of PMO nanocomposites during electrocatalysis (Fig. 13a).247
 Fig. 13  (a) Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction by a Pd–Mn3O4 nanocomposite. (b) The schematic presentation of the plausible pathway of the OER on the Pd–Mn3O4/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247 and 248. Copyright 2016 and 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Li et al. reported the use of carbon black as a conducting scaffold to support highly-active Pd and Mn3O4 nanoparticles, and demonstrated their enhanced electro-activity for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Benefiting from the synergistic effect, the as-prepared Pd–Mn3O4/carbon black catalyst showed substantially higher OER activity and stability than Pd–Mn3O4 and Pd/C catalysts (Fig. 13b).248
Xia et al. synthesized Au–NiCo2O4 supported on a three-dimensional hierarchical porous graphene-like (3D HPG) material where the 3D HPG material as a support for Au–NiCo2O4 gives good activity and stability for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The 3D HPG material is induced into NiCo2O4 as a conductive support to increase the specific area and improve the poor conductivity of NiCo2O4. The activity and stability of NiCo2O4 significantly are enhanced by a small amount of Au for the OER. Au is a highly electronegative metal and acts as an electron adsorbate, which is believed to facilitate the generation and stabilization Co4+ and Ni3+ cations as active centers for the OER.249 Zhang et al. prepared carbon spheres (CSs) with an average diameter of around 500–700 nm by an extended Stöber method. Urchin-like MnO2 nanorods were deposited on the carbon spheres by a hydrothermal method and the thickness of the α-MnO2 shell is about 700–800 nm. Pd particles with a diameter of around 8–15 nm are dispersed on the surface of vertically aligned α-MnO2 rods which have a diameter of 40–50 nm. Three-dimensional (3D) Pd–MnO2/CS shows better activity and stability than Pd/CS and MnO2/CS for the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in water electrolysis, which shows that Pd-doped urchin-like CS–MnO2 core–shell structure materials would be a superiority catalyst for the OER. The onset potential shifts negatively and current density improves on the Pd–MnO2/CS for the OER, showing a synergistic effect between Pd and MnO2.250
4.7. Photoelectrochemical water splitting
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen is an important approach to convert solar energy into chemical energy.251–253 The performance of PEC water splitting largely depends on the efficiency and stability of photoanodes where metal oxide semiconductors are mainly used for promoting oxidation reactions. In order to achieve better efficiency in oxidation reactions, photoanode materials consisting of oxide semiconductors should possess the following characteristics: (1) efficient absorption of solar photons, (2) suitable band alignment with respect to the oxygen evolution reaction, (3) efficient electron–hole separation to facilitate redox reactions, and (4) high chemical and photostability.253–256 However, most of the semiconductors do not possess either the desirable band gap or the reduced charge carrier recombination rate; the combination will impede their performance in PEC water splitting reactions.252,254–257 Among various semiconductor photoanode materials, metal oxides such as titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), tungsten trioxide (WO3), and hematite (α-Fe2O3) have been widely studied for their high photoelectric performance.257–261 To circumvent these challenges, many materials have been developed among which semiconductor–metal/metal oxide heterostructures exhibit promising performance because of the improved solar light absorption and effective separation of generated charge carriers at the heterojunction which therefore increases the reduction/oxidation reaction at the heterostructure surface.262 Wu et al.263 reported a novel match-like ZnO/Au plasmonic heterostructure for PEC solar hydrogen production. This novel heterostructure is synthesized via a facile hydrothermal and photodeposition reduction process. Importantly, such a novel heterostructure compared with other related materials presents some prominent merits: (1) in situ growth of the ZnO/Au heterostructure is simpler and more controllable; (2) the photoreduction process is green without use of any surfactants; (3) the plasmonic effects of the tipped Au nanoparticles greatly promote light harvesting and accelerate charge transportation, which are important for enhancing the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency. Upadhyay et al. designed a tailored triad heterostructure consisting of Au, rutile-TiO2 and anatase TiO2 on stainless steel and demonstrated its photoelectrochemical water splitting performance (Fig. 14a).264 Zhao et al. reported lower photocurrents after modification of a TiO2 film electrode with a cover layer of Au/TiO2 supported catalyst nanoparticles under UV illumination in a pH 7 buffer solution.265 They attributed this mainly to a reduced charge carrier mobility caused by the formation of a Schottky barrier at the Au–TiO2 interface and to electron–hole recombination at the surface metal particles. Reichert et al. studied photoelectrochemical water oxidation on planar nanocrystalline Au/TiO2 catalyst film electrodes.266 The catalysts were prepared by a photodeposition method and deposited on conductive glass substrates. The Au nanoparticles on TiO2 affect the photoelectrochemical process in different ways, by (i) catalyzing there combination of photogenerated holes and electrons as well as parasitic side reactions (O2 reduction) in the photoelectrochemical water oxidation reaction, by (ii) affecting the selectivity in that reaction, and by (iii) improving the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes by catalyzing the reaction with sacrificial agents such as methanol, thus enhancing the photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photoelectrochemical water splitting activity of Au@R-TiO2@A-TiO2 on an alkyne functionalized stainless steel substrate. (b) Schematic representation of the photoelectrochemical activity of Au-decorated TiO2 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264 and 269. Copyright 2016, and 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Liu et al. reported that the performance of Au NP-deposited TiO2 films under visible light illumination for photoelectrochemical water splitting was enhanced 66-fold.267 This enhancement is due to the SPR induced electric field amplification near the TiO2 surface, which increases the photon absorption rate of TiO2 and thus improves the photoactivity. Zhang et al. demonstrated that Au nanocrystals assembled with a TiO2-based photonic crystal substrate achieved a high photocurrent density of ∼150 μA cm−2 under visible-light illumination.268 These results derived from the matching of the Au SPR wavelength with the photonic band gap of TiO2, which significantly increased the SPR intensity to boost hot electron injection and therefore enhance the photoactivity. Pu et al. demonstrate that the photoactivity of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes for photoelectrochemical water oxidation can be effectively enhanced in the entire UV-visible region from 300 to 800 nm by manipulating the shape of the decorated Au nanostructures (Fig. 14b).269 The samples were prepared by carefully depositing Au nanoparticles (NPs), Au nanorods (NRs), and a mixture of Au NPs and NRs on the surface of TiO2 nanowire arrays. The enhanced photoactivity of Au NP-decorated TiO2 nanowires in the UV region is due to effective surface passivation as well as electric-field amplification effects, while the photoactivity enhancement in the visible region for Au nanostructure-decorated TiO2 samples is mainly caused by the electrical field amplification effect and hot electron generation upon SPR excitation.
4.8. Solar cells
In addition to photo-catalysis, another emerging application for MOs is in photovoltaic solar cells, which can directly convert sunlight into electricity. Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) are one kind of third generation solar cell possessing high efficiency and low cost. The efficiency of DSSCs is mainly decided by the collection of incident light and charge separation efficiency in the cell. The anode is comprised of a metal oxide (such as TiO2, ZnO etc.), which is sensitized by a dye. The electrons are injected from the excited dye into the metal oxide during the absorption of light. The holes in the dye are then neutralized by a redox-based mediator such as I−/I3−.270–272 Although there are intense efforts to maximize the performance, the highest efficiency reported so far is only 11% and there is no marked improvement in the efficiency which was achieved in the 1990s. Even though there is enough scope for improving the photocurrent and fill factor as well, the parameter which consumes the major part of the research activity is the photovoltage.10 The enhancement in photovoltage can be achieved by decreasing the cell dark current, which can be obtained by the incorporation of dyes with a larger absorption cross section or by coupling dyes with plasmonic metal NPs, since they are considered as two complimentary approaches to achieve high photovoltage.273–275 Therefore, plasmon enhanced dye absorption became one of the recent topics that researchers have been working on to enhance the light absorption and photocurrent generation in DSSCs. The introduction of NMs into DSSCs to boost performance has attracted increasing attention. Noble metal NPs enhance the efficiency of DSSCs by the following mechanisms: (1) light scattering by incorporated NPs: effective scattering of light is a very important factor in increasing the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs, since it can increase the path length of photons by multiple scattering and can concentrate the incoming light by effective trapping. (2) Near field enhancement by plasmonic antenna: the near field enhancement by the excitation of LSPR of plasmonic NPs can increase the charge carrier generation, resulting in enhancement of the photocurrent. (3) Surface plasmon polariton (SPP) mode at the interface of metal/semiconductor. The propagated electromagnetic waves along the metal surface can intensify the field of light and thus light penetration depth can be increased.272 Generally, two different approaches have been adopted to combine NMs with DSSCs. (1) Noble metal NPs with different sizes are first prepared and then mixed with commercial or homemade TiO2 NPs with subsequent thin film processing on a conductive substrate.273,276,277 (2) Prior to fabrication into films on FTO glass, various NM–MO composites (e.g., Au NP decorated anatase TiO2 NPs, Au NP decorated-ZnO nanotube arrays and Ag/TiO2 core/shell NPs) are fabricated as photo-anode materials.278–281 Chen et al.282 prepared ZnO nanorods coated with Au NPs and found that the efficiency of the DSSC increased from 0.7% to 1.2% after the incorporation of Au NPs. The presence of Au NPs enhanced the optical absorption in the visible range due to the SPR effect. The excited electrons in Au can be transferred to the CB of ZnO and drop to the bottom of the ITO substrate. The reverse flow of electrons from ZnO to Au was restricted by the Schottky barrier between the ZnO and Au interface. The positive charge in Au was compensated by the redox species in the electrolyte. Reineck et al.283 proposed a plasmon-induced charge separation process in a solid-state plasmonic solar cell, which has a plasmonic photoanode consisting of Au or Ag NPs self-assembled on a TiO2 surface via electrostatic interactions. The hot electrons generated by excitation of the SPR can be transferred to the TiO2 CB, while the hole can be injected into the hole transport material. Consequently, a plasmonic photocurrent is generated and the spectral photocurrent behavior corresponds closely to the characteristic LSPR band of metal NPs. Recent investigation showed promise towards utilization of metal doped semiconductor particles for possible fabrication of solar cell devices which would exclude dye molecules.284,285 Recently, Zhao et al. constructed a highly efficient quantum dot sensitized solar cell (QDSC) based on Ag NP decorated TiO2/ZnO nanorod arrays (NAs) (Fig. 15). The QDSCs employing TiO2/ZnO NAs modified with Ag NPs have achieved much higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) than the QDSCs without Ag NPs. The incorporation of Ag NPs into TiO2/ZnO NA photoelectrodes can offer several advantages: (1) enhancing the light absorption, (2) increasing the electron injection rate, (3) suppressing the charge recombination, and (4) prolonging the electron lifetime.286
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the structure, charge separation and transportation of QDs/TiO2/Ag/ZnO NAs as a QDSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
4.9. Other electron transfer reactions

(a) Oxidation of CO. 
Among the oxidation processes, oxidation of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide has been extensively studied because of the high toxicity of carbon monoxide and its importance in fuel cell technology, where the preferential oxidation of carbon monoxide in excess of hydrogen is a key process for the production of clean fuel.287 Imamura et al. synthesized a Pd/Mn2O3 catalyst with high CO oxidation activity.288 The role of Mn2O3 would be to permit the incorporation of O2. The slow step would be the surface reaction of CO, which is promoted by Pd. Du et al. designed a simple, one-pot method to fabricate ordered, monodispersed Pd–CeO2 colloidal assembled spheres (CASs), which was developed using the surfactant-mediated solvothermal approach, which involves a tunable self-assembled process by carefully controlling different chemical reactions. For CO oxidation, this CAS nanocatalyst exhibited much higher catalytic activity and thermal stability than Pd/CeO2 prepared by an impregnation method. The enhanced catalytic performance for CO oxidation could be attributed to the synergistic effect of both metal and metal oxide (Fig. 16a).289
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic presentation of Pd/CeO2 nanocomposites and their catalytic CO oxidation activity. (b) CO oxidation activity of Pt/TiO2 nanocatalysts. (c) Catalytic activities in mesoporous SnO2-coated metal NPs. (d) Synthesis and catalytic performance of Pt/meso-CeO2. (e) Proposed reaction mechanism for the photo-alkylation of aniline over Au–TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 289, 291, 292, 294 and 296. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Najafishirtari et al. reported the synthesis of dumbbell-like Au0.5Cu0.5@Fe3O4 nanocrystals (AuCu@FeOx NCs), exploiting a gold–transition metal alloy as a seed to grow an iron oxide domain on top of it.290 The AuCu@FeOx sample showed CO oxidation reaction rates similar to those measured over a Au@FeOx dumbbell-like catalyst having a similar Au domain size, highlighting the dominant role of the Au–iron oxide interface in this reaction. The nanosized support resulted in a strong thermal stability of the metallic domains and the sintering of the Au domains was effectively prevented. This in turn yielded a higher activity of the AuCu@FeOx dumbbells when compared against a bulk Fe3O4 supported AuCu NC catalyst. Kim et al. prepared Pt/TiO2 by various thermal treatments.291 They show excellent CO oxidation to CO2 at room temperature (Fig. 16b).


(b) 4-Nitrophenol reduction. 
Mesoporous SnO2-coated Au nanorods were successfully prepared by Zhou et al.292 A SnO2 shell was coated onto metal NPs by a simple one-pot hydrothermal reaction. The SnO2 shell helps to protect the metal NPs from aggregation in harsh environments, which significantly improves their stability. Applications of these materials as catalysts have been demonstrated in the reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4. SnO2-coated anisotropic Au NRs displayed much better catalytic activities than the corresponding spherical Au nanoparticles. The catalytic activities of different metal NPs were significantly enhanced upon coating with a mesoporous SnO2 shell due to improvement in the charge transfer mechanism (Fig. 16c). Larsen et al. described a straight forward synthesis of hybrid Fe2O3–Au catalysts.293 The Fe2O3–Au nanoparticles are multifunctional, exhibiting the plasmonic and catalytic properties of Au and the magnetic properties of Fe2O3. These multifunctional properties have been exploited to create structures that are more economical and active than pure Au nanoparticle catalysts for 4-nitrophenol reduction. Wang et al.294 synthesized PAMAM dendrimer-stabilized Pt NPs immobilized on ordered mesoporous CeO2. This Pt-based composite material combined the merits of the hyperbranched structure of dendrimers and the unique physicochemical properties of ordered mesoporous CeO2. In the case of reduction of 4-nitrophenol, Pt/meso-CeO2 shows higher catalytic activity corresponding to 6.03 × 10−3 s−1 compared to other Pt based catalysts (Fig. 16d). Besides, the fabricated catalyst showed high stability with conversion yield of more than 90% even after five repetitive cycles.


(c) Coupling reaction. 

In situ generated Ag@Cu2O NPs have been used by Sharma et al. as efficient photocatalysts for carrying out palladium free Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling and Suzuki type cross-coupling reactions for the first time. In contrast to the traditional conditions, this catalytic system is cheap, easy to prepare, and tolerant to a variety of functional groups and enables efficient light harvesting under ambient conditions.295 Similarly, Stibal et al. reported the photocatalytic N-alkylation of aniline by Au–TiO2 (Fig. 16e).296


(d) Surface plasmon (SP) induced catalysis. 
In catalytic reactions surface plasmons play two types of roles: (1) direct induction of chemical reactions on the surface of metal nanostructures,297 or (2) effective assistance of chemical reactions performed on the surface of semiconductor nanocatalysts.88 Then in situ Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) spectroscopy can be employed to carefully monitor SP induced catalytic reactions, which mainly focuses on photodimerization of amino or nitro groups into azo groups.298 The oxidation of p-aminothiophenol (PATP) to p,p-dimercaptoazobenzene (DMAB) has been widely used as a model reaction to probe the SPR mediated catalytic activities of Au and Ag NPs.299 In this process, O2 molecules in air are activated by adsorbing the hot electrons from the SPR-excited metal NPs, as a result the generated 3O2 species subsequently drive the PATP oxidation.300 Wang et al.301 have shown selective SPR-mediated conversion of PATP to DMAB on the surface of Au–TiO2 NPs. The use of Au–TiO2 NPs benefits one step oxidation of PATP by manipulating the charge state of Au via charge transfer from UV excited TiO2. Recently, Chu et al.302 witnessed Ag/TiO2 nanohybrid catalyzed ultrafast photodimerization of PATP under visible-light excitation. In this work they described that hot electrons generated due to the plasmonic decay is transferred to the conduction band of TiO2 and enabled the generated holes in the metal nanoparticles to facilitate the immediate PATP–DMAB conversion. This ultrafast conversion is monitored by an in situ SERS technique.
The synthesis strategies of various NM–MO nanostructures and their employment in numerous catalytic applications are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 List of various noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposite catalysts with their synthetic route and application




Materials
Synthetic routes
Applications
Literature




TiO2 NP–Au
Photodeposition
Photooxidation of acetone and 2-propanol

107



Au@TiO2
Hydrothermal
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction

138



Au/TiO2
Anodization and photocatalytic reduction
Photoelectrochemical water splitting

156



Ag@Cu2O
Chemical reduction and room temperature aging
Photodegradation of methyl orange

191



Ag@ZnO
Polyol process and room temperature aging
Photodegradation of rhodamine-B

199



Au–ZnO
Hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of methylene blue

200



TiO2/Au
Deposition–precipitation method
Photocatalytic H2 generation

204



Pt/Cu2O–TiO2
Photodeposition
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction

223



CeO2/rGO/Pt
Hydrothermal approach
Oxidation of methanol in DMFCs

230



Pt/rGO@TiO2
UV photoreduction
Methanol oxidation

231



Pt/C–MnxO1+x
Polyol method
Methanol oxidation

232



Pt/MnO2/GS
Hydrothermal
Methanol oxidation

233



Pd/MNL/GS
Hydrothermal
DFAFC and DMFC

234



Pt/CeO2_NBs
Galvanic replacement reaction
Formic acid oxidation

243



Pt/SnO2
Hydrothermal
Electrochemical H2 evolution

245



Pd–Mn3O4
Hydrothermal
Electrochemical H2 evolution

246



Pd–Mn3O4/carbon black
Chemical reduction
Electrochemical O2 evolution

247



ZnO/Au
Hydrothermal and photoreduction
Photoelectrochemical water splitting

262



ZnO/Au
Self-assembly method
Dye sensitize solar cell

282



Pt/CeO2
Solvothermal
CO oxidation

288



Pt/TiO2
Heat treatment
CO oxidation

290



Au–SnO2
Hydrothermal
4-Nitrophenol reduction

291



Fe2O3–Au
Chemical reduction
4-Nitrophenol reduction

292



Ag@Cu2O
Wet-chemical
Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling

294



Au/TiO2
Hydrothermal method
Photocatalytic activity

303



TiO2 NP–Au
Deposition–precipitation method
Photoelectrochemical measurement

304



ZnO NP–Au
Chemical reduction method
Photodegradation of methylene blue

305






5. Conclusion
Rapid population growth and industrialization have raised concerns regarding energy availability and more so environmental pollution.306 Addressing these problems has been the focus of research the world over. Solar energy, a clean and effectively infinite energy source, can be efficiently harnessed by photocatalytic and photovoltaic processes to aid environmental remediation and green energy generation. In recent years, extensive research involving noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites has demonstrated their key role in the conversion of solar energy into electrical and chemical energy because of their prompted and enhanced light harvesting ability and high degree of charge carrier separation. The structure of these composites is critical in determining their photocatalytic and photovoltaic performance. In this review, we mainly centred our focus on the different synthetic strategies and implementation of improved properties of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites with several different nanostructures including noble metal-decorated metal oxide nanoarrays, noble metal/metal oxide core/shell and yolk/shell nanostructures, and Janus noble metal–metal oxide nanostructures in various catalytic applications. The applications of these materials related to solar energy conversion in photocatalytic degradation of environmental contaminants, water splitting into H2, photocatalytic reduction of CO2, dye-sensitized solar cells, conversion of chemical energy to electric energy by fuel cells, electrochemical or photoelectrochemical H2 generation and different catalytic reactions are presented. Finally, the challenges and future directions of these materials are highlighted. We hope that this review will serve as a useful guide in the design of noble metal–metal oxide hybrid nanostructures for various catalytic applications for both experts and novices alike.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur.
Notes and references
M. Garca-Melchor, A. A. C. Braga, A. Lledós, G. Ujaque and F. Maseras, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2626 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. S. Jin, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and Y. N. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Xie and Y. N. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6352 CAS .
W. X. Niu, L. Zhang and G. B. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Crespo-Quesada, A. Yarulin, M. Jin, Y. Xia and L. Kiwi-Minsker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Porter, H. Wu, Z. Quan and Y. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu, D. Y. Kim, H. Zhang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, D. Wang, G. Zhou, R. Yu, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, D. Wang, S. Cai, H. Rong and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xue and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1692 RSC .
C. J. Zhong and M. M. Maye, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zaera, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 621 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lee, M. A. Albiter, Q. Zhang, J. Ge, Y. Yin and F. Zaera, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2449 RSC .
S. Beaumont, G. Kyriakou and R. Lambert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12264 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. J. Shan, Y. Zhu, A. I. Frenkel, A. Patlolla, W. Huang, S. J. Yoon, L. Wang, H. Yoshida, S. Takeda and F. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. An, S. Alayoglu, N. Musselwhite, S. Plamthottam, G. Melaet, A. E. Lindeman and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, A. Patlolla, J. Shan, H. Yoshida, S. Takeda, A. I. Frenkel and F. Tao, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1011 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sinha, S. Jana, S. Pande, S. Sarkar, M. Pradhan, M. Basu, S. Saha, A. Pal and T. Pal, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1210 RSC .
J. Pal, A. K. Sasmal, M. Ganguly and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3780 CAS .
M. Reza Gholipour, C. T. Dinh, F. Beland and T. O. Do, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8187 RSC .
M. Wang, J. Ioccozia, L. Sun, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2182 CAS .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777 RSC .
Z. Liang, Q. Zhang, L. Jiang and G. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3442 CAS .
K. C. Leung, S. Xuan, X. Zhu, D. Wang, C. P. Chak, S. F. Lee, W. K. Ho and B. C. Chung, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1911 RSC .
N. E. Motl, A. F. Smith, C. J. DeSantis and S. E. Skrabalak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3823 RSC .
A. K. Sasmal, J. Pal, R. Sahoo, P. Kartikeya, S. Dutta and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21580 CAS .
A. K. Sasmal, S. Dutta and T. Pal, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3139 RSC .
A. K. Sasmal, C. Mondal, A. K. Sinha, S. S. Gauri, J. Pal, T. Aditya, M. Ganguly, S. Dey and T. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22034 CAS .
J. Pal, M. Ganguly, S. Dutta, C. Mondal, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 883 RSC .
H. Zarrin, J. Fu, G. Jiang, S. Yoo, J. Lenos, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, X. Fu, L. Jing, P. Luan, Y. Feng and H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300995 CrossRef .
J. Ma, Z. Fang, Y. Yan, Z. Yang, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Wang and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1500046 CrossRef .
M. Gou, X. Qu, W. Zhu, M. Xiang, J. Yang, K. Zhang, Y. Wei and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3774 CAS .
L. Fu, K. Tang, H. Oh, K. Manickam, T. Brauniger, C. V. Chandran, A. Menzel, M. Hirscher, D. Samuelis and J. Maier, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jin, K. Adpakpang, I. Young Kim, S. Mi Oh, N. S. Lee and S. J. Hwang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11057 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Zahran, N. M. Bedford, M. A. Nguyen, Y. J. Chang, B. S. Guiton, R. R. Naik, L. G. Bachas and M. R. Knecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, T. He, L. Guo, Y. Yang, L. Guo, Y. Tang and Y. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Costi, G. Cohen, A. Salant, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Figuerola, A. Fiore, R. Di Corato, A. Falqui, C. Giannini, E. Micotti, A. Lascialfari, M. Corti, R. Cingolani, T. Pellegrino, P. D. Cozzoli and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, P. Jing, D. Li, Y. Cao, Z. Liu and Z. Sun, Small, 2015, 11, 2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, S. G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, A. Gulec, A. M. Johnson, N. M. Schweitzer, G. D. Stucky, L. D. Marks and P. C. Stair, Science, 2015, 350, 189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Feng, D. Chen, C. Li, P. Cui and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3182 CAS .
L. Sang, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. B. Huang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16017 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. El-Deab and T. Ohsaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gilbert, F. Huang, H. Zhang, G. A. Waychunas and J. F. Banfield, Science, 2004, 305, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Huang, R. Sun, J. Tao, L. D. Menard, R. G. Nuzzo and J. M. Zuo, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, M. Chen, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang, R. L. White and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, G. Chen, Z. Jiang, R. Jin, Y. Zhu and Y. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3668 RSC .
H. Chong, P. Li, J. Xiang, F. Fu, D. Zhang, X. Ran and M. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7622 RSC .
S. H. Oh and G. B. Hoflund, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 7609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zorn, S. Giorgio, E. Halwax, C. R. Henry, H. Grönbeck and G. Rupprechter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1103 CAS .
J. Guzman, S. Carrettin, J. C. Fierro-Gonzalez, Y. L. Hao, B. C. Gates and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Van de Vyver, K. K. Sharma and Y. R. Leshkov, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 719 RSC .
C. Chen, C. Nan, D. Wang, Q. Su, H. Duan, X. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Chu, W. Song, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Ma, Z. Mu, J. J. Li, Y. G. Jin, J. Cheng, G. Q. Lu, Z. P. Hao and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, B. Qiao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1779 RSC .
X. Liu, A. Wang, X. Wang, C. Mou and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3187 RSC .
J. Feng, C. Ma, P. J. Miedziak, J. K. Edwards, G. L. Brett, D. Li, Y. Du, D. J. Morgan and G. J. Hutchings, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 14498 RSC .
J. Qi, J. Chen, G. Li, S. Li, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8937 CAS .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, S. Q. Bai, Y. Zheng, K. W. Shah and M. Y. Han, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mallik, M. Mandal, N. Pradhan and T. Pal, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, J. Phys. Chem., 1953, 57, 670 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801 RSC .
S. T. Kochuveedu, J. H. Oh, Y. R. Do and D. H. Kim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. F. Chi and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Chen, J. C. S. Wu, P. C. Wu and D. P. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 210 CAS .
S. T. Kochuveedu, D. P. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2500 CAS .
N. Udawatte, M. Lee, J. Kim and D. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4531 CAS .
J. Lee, H. S. Shim, M. Lee, J. K. Song and D. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2840 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9173 CAS .
H. Liu, G. Shao, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Liang, X. Liu, H. Jia and B. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16182 CAS .
P. K. Chen, G. J. Lee, S. Anandan and J. J. Wu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2012, 177, 190 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karunakaran, V. Rajeswari and P. Gomathisankar, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 508, 587 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anandan and M. Ashokkumar, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2009, 16, 316–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. A. Nadeem, J. B. Metson, M. A. Keane, R. F. Howe, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 489 CAS .
R. Li, C. Han and Q. W. Chen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11715–11722 RSC .
S. Pande, A. Saha, S. Jana, S. Sarkar, M. Basu, M. Pradhan, A. K. Sinha, S. Saha, A. Pal and T. Pal, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 5179–5181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saha, A. Pal, S. Kundu, S. Basu and T. Pal, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2885–2893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu and X. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Z. Jiang, Q. Tay, J. Deng, Y. Lai, D. Gong, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9406 RSC .
Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng and K. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pradhan, A. Roy, A. K. Sinha, R. Sahoo, D. Deb and T. Pal, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1889–1899 RSC .
M. Pradhan, A. K. Sinha and T. Pal, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9111–9119 CAS .
Z. Zhong, J. Lin, S. P. Teh, J. Teo and F. M. Dautzenberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1402–1408 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Gomes Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Damato, C. C. de Oliveira, R. A. Ando and P. H. Camargo, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1642–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Moreau, G. C. Bond and A. O. Taylor, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1642–1643 RSC .
H. Kung, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Tran, M. Besson and C. Descorme, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2095–2104 RSC .
R. Zanella, J. Catal., 2004, 222, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. Radnik, L. Wilde, M. Schneider, M.-M. Pohl and D. Herein, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23688–23693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haruta, S. Tsubota, T. Kobayashi, H. Kageyama, M. J. Genet and B. Delmon, J. Catal., 1993, 144, 175–192 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowalska, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2009, 241 RSC .
C. Ren, B. Yang, M. Wu, J. Xu, Z. Fu, T. Guo, Y. Zhao and C. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 182, 123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Walker and J. M. Zaleski, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1535 RSC .
A. Abiyasa, S. Yu, S. Lau, E. S. P. Leong and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 231106 CrossRef .
T. Torimoto, Y. Ohta, K. Enokida, D. Sugioka, T. Kameyama, T. Yamamoto, T. Shibayama, K. Yoshii, T. Tsuda and S. Kuwabata, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6177–6186 CAS .
S. Dhara and P. Giri, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 124317 CrossRef .
I. Alessandri and M. Ferroni, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7990 RSC .
H. Wang, T. You, W. Shi, J. Li and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6490 CAS .
Z. Lian, W. Wang, S. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Cui, D. Zhang, G. Li and H. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie, L. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Lai, M. Wang, H. Chen and C. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, H. Zhuang, K. Xie, D. Gong, Y. Tang, L. Sun, C. Lin and Z. Chen, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 1335 RSC .
J. Li, L. Yang, S. Luo, B. Chen, J. Li, H. Lin, Q. Cai and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 7357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Honciuc, M. Laurin, S. Albu, M. Sobota, P. Schmuki and J. Libuda, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bian, J. Zhu, F. Cao, Y. Lu and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3789 RSC .
M. Wang, X. Pang, D. Zheng, Y. He, L. Sun, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7190 CAS .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. Chi and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wu, H. Y. Song, J. M. Yoon, Y. T. Yu and Y. F. Chen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, X. Pang, M. Wang, Y. He, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5271 CrossRef CAS .
L. De Rogatis, M. Cargnello, V. Gombac, B. Lorenzut, T. Montini and P. Fornasiero, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, G. Duan, G. Zuo, W. Cai and Z. Cheng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 421 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Z. M. Cui, F. Niu, L. Jiang and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6524 RSC .
N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Y. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Liu, P. Li, Z. F. Dou and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3116 RSC .
M. Kim, J. C. Park, A. Kim, K. H. Park and H. Song, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Park, J. U. Bang, J. Lee, C. H. Ko and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1239 RSC .
K. Kamata, Y. Lu and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Liang, J. B. Joo, I. Lee, Y. Yin and F. Zaera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20043 CAS .
L. He, Y. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Xiong, J. Zheng, Y. Liu and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Guttel, M. Paul and F. Schuth, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 895 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Dou, Z. Lou and T. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2686 RSC .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, H. Li, P. Li and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14232–14236 RSC .
X. Li, X. Zhou, H. Guo, C. Wang, J. Liu, P. Sun, F. Liu and G. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18661 CAS .
P. Rai, J. W. Yoon, H. M. Jeong, S. J. Hwang, C. H. Kwak and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8292 RSC .
M. Wang, J. Han, H. Xiong and R. Guo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Fu and H. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2809 RSC .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Yoo, K. Lee, M. Altomare, E. Selli and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. D. Gao, H. F. Liu, C. Y. Li and Y. Y. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 774 RSC .
Z. Lian, W. Wang, S. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Cui, D. Zhang, G. Li and H. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, G. Meng, Q. Huang, Z. Zhang, Z. Huang and C. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 218 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C. J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu and T. S. Chan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4480 CAS .
X. Liu, F. Li, Y. Wang, H. Jin, H. Wang and Z. Li, Mater. Lett., 2013, 94, 19 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, J. Li, C. Wang, S. Li, Y. Lai, H. Chen and C. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 171, 1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, L. Luo, Z. Chen, M. Zhang, J. A. Zapien, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 93 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Li, W. Zhao, C. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2014, 120, 16 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Tang, C. Liu, Y. Leung, G. Yuan, L. Chen, Y. Wang, I. Bello, J. Zapien and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13433 CAS .
X. Zhao, B. Zhang, K. Ai, G. Zhang, L. Cao, X. Liu, H. Sun, H. Wang and L. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5547 RSC .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gu, H. Wu, Y. Zhu and B. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 57937 RSC .
H. Yu, X. Wang, H. Sun and M. Huo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Chen, Y. C. M. Liou, J. Yang and T. Y. Shieh, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2011, 42, 339 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, B. Jin, Z. Jiao, G. Lu, J. Ye and Y. Bi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2103 RSC .
S. Chang, Z. A. Combs, M. K. Gupta, R. Davis and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3333 CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Tian, K. Pan, C. Tian, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, Z. Ren and H. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1020 RSC .
P. G. de Gennes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 842 CrossRef .
F. Liang, C. Zhang and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Walther and A. H. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, S. Zhou, Y. Sun, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4356 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310–2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Herring, K. AbouZeid, M. B. Mohamed, J. Pinsk and M. S. El-Shall, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 15146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, D. Zeng, K. Zhang, A. Lu, L. Wang and D. L. Peng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 874 RSC .
M. N. Tahir, F. Natalio, M. A. Cambaz, M. Panthofer, R. Branscheid, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9944 RSC .
K. X. Yao, X. Liu, L. Zhao, H. C. Zeng and Y. Han, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4195 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, S. Y. Zhang, M. S. Bharathi, H. Ramanarayan, M. Low, K. W. Shah, Y. W. Zhang and M. Y. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pradhan, D. Ghosh and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2060 CAS .
P. Li, Z. Wei, T. Wu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Yin, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chiesa, M. C. Paganini, E. Giamello, D. M. Murphy, C. D. Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, B. Li, K. Onda, M. Feng and H. Petek, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Roucoux, J. Schulz and H. Patin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Khan, T. W. Chuan, A. Yousuf, M. N. K. Chowdhury and C. K. Cheng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2522 CAS .
W. He, H. K. Kim, W. G. Wamer, D. Melka, J. H. Callahan and J. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920 RSC .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bora, H. H. Kyaw, S. Sarkar, S. K. Pal and J. Dutta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Malato, P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Maldonado, J. Blanco and W. Gernjak, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ayati, A. Ahmadpour, F. F. Bamoharram, B. Tanhaei, M. Manttari and M. Sillanpaa, Chemosphere, 2014, 107, 163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Pradhan and K. M. Parida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 317 CAS .
A. T. Kuvarega, R. W. M. Krause and B. B. Mamba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22110 CAS .
J. Xiong, Z. Li, J. Chen, S. Zhang, L. Z. Wang and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15716 CAS .
B. Lu, A. Liu, H. Wu, Q. Shen, T. Zhao and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Li, S. Wang, T. Huang, Y. Hao and Y. Qi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13991 RSC .
Z. Wu, Y. Xue, H. Wang, Y. Wu and H. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 59009 RSC .
X. H. Zhang, L. L. Wang, C. B. Liu, Y. B. Ding, S. Q. Zhang, Y. X. Zeng, Y. T. Liu and S. L. Luo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 313, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kannaiyan, M. A. Cha, Y. H. Jang, B. H. Sohn, J. Huh, C. Park and D. H. Kim, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2431 RSC .
M. A. Cha, C. Shin, D. Kannaiyan, Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7245 RSC .
Y. J. Jang and D. H. Kim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, Q. Sun, J. Chen, Z. Li and S. Dou, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1713 RSC .
C. Mondal, J. Pal, M. Ganguly, A. K. Sinha, J. Jana and T. Pal, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2999–3005 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787 RSC .
J. Chen, D. Wang, J. Qi, G. Li, F. Zheng, S. Li, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Small, 2015, 11, 420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. Babu, S. Vempati, T. Uyar and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2960 RSC .
G. Wu, T. Chen, W. Su, G. Zhou, X. Zong, Z. Lei and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1243 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Gomes Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 595 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, N. M. Dimitrijevic, A. Y. Chang, R. D. Schaller, Y. Liu, T. Rajh and E. A. Rozhkova, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7995–8002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, K. Li and T. Peng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2481 CAS .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217 CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177 CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. H. Chan and Q. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8663 RSC .
M. Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 185 RSC .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112 CAS .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, P. Reunchan, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642 CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rasko, Catal. Lett., 1998, 56, 11 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3644 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee, K. Lee, W. K. Bae, J. H. Moon, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10043 RSC .
S. Neatu, J. A. Macia-Agullo, P. Concepcion and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, S.-W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939 CAS .
R. Su, R. Tiruvalam, A. J. Logsdail, Q. He, C. A. Downing, M. T. Jensen, N. Dimitratos, L. Kesavan, P. P. Wells and R. Bechstein, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Ovcharov, V. V. Shvalagin and V. M. Granchak, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2014, 50, 53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. S. Casalongue and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, L. Kuai and B. Geng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5738 RSC .
Y. Qu, Y. Gao, F. Kong, S. Zhang, L. Du and G. Yin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 12310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Videla, L. Osmieri, R. Esfahani, J. Zeng, C. Francia and S. Specchia, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Q. Chen, M. He, X. Sun and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 189 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Huang and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10367 RSC .
F. P. Hu, F. W. Ding, S. Q. Song and P. K. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 415 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, L. Yan, Z. Cui, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2469 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Z. Tian, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2610 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, P. N. Duchesne, D. Muir, P. Zhang, N. Han, F. Zhao, M. Zeng, J. Zhong, C. Jin, Y. Li, S. T. Lee and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Zanata, P. S. Fernández, H. E. Troiani, A. L. Soldati, R. Landers, G. A. Camara, A. E. Carvalho and C. A. Martins, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 445 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, L. Jing, Y. Zhao, Y. Yan and K. Sun, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 35 Search PubMed .
S. P. Yu, R. T. Liu, W. S. Yang, K. F. Han, Z. M. Wang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5371 CAS .
K. W. Kim, S. M. Kim, S. Choi, J. Kim and I. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramani, S. Sarkar, V. Vemuri and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017 10.1039/c6ta06339j .
N. Roy, K. T. Leung and D. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19117 CAS .
N. H. Khdary and M. A. Ghanem, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 50114 RSC .
H. Zhang, C. Hu, S. Chen, K. Zhang and X. Wang, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 809 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ray, S. Dutta, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6095 RSC .
Z. Y. Li, Z. L. Liu, J. C. Liang, C. W. Xu and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18236 CAS .
W. Y. Xia, N. Li, Q. Y. Li, K. H. Ye and C. W. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zhang, J. Y. Feng, T. Zhu, Z. L. Liu, Q. Y. Li, S. Z. Chen and C. W. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044 CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180 CAS .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, Z. B. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. L. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Qin, C. L. Tao, S. A. Friesen, T. H. Wang, O. K. Varghese, N. Z. Bao, Z. Y. Yang, T. E. Mallouk and C. A. Grimes, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 729 RSC .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, H. Deng and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. de Mendonca, C. J. Dalmaschio, E. R. Leite, M. Niederberger and C. Ribeiro, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2216 CAS .
M. Wu, W. J. Chen, Y. H. Shen, F. Z. Huang, C. H. Li and S. K. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15052 CAS .
A. P. Upadhyay, D. K. Behara, G. P. Sharma, M. Gyanprakash, R. G. S. Pala and S. Sivakumar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 4511 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 277, 147 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reichert, Z. Jusys and R. J. Behm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24750 CAS .
Z. W. Liu, W. B. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. VanRyswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 CAS .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357 RSC .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nahm, H. Choi, J. Kim, D. R. Jung, C. Kim, J. Moon, B. Lee and B. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 253107 CrossRef .
N. Chander, A. F. Khan, E. Thouti, S. K. Sardana, P. S. Chandrasekhar, V. Dutta and V. K. Komarala, Sol. Energy, 2014, 109, 11 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tian, L. Wang, L. Jia, Q. Li, Q. Song, S. Su and H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6369 RSC .
C. Fang, H. Jia, S. Chang, Q. Ruan, P. Wang, T. Chen and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3431 CAS .
M. Ghaffari, M. B. Cosar, H. I. Yavuz, M. Ozenbas and A. K. Okyay, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Tang, C. Liu, Y. Leung, G. Yuan, L. Chen, Y. Wang, I. Bello, J. Zapien and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13433 CAS .
P. Reineck, G. P. Lee, D. Brick, M. Karg, P. Mulvaney and U. Bach, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hazarika, A. Layek, S. De, A. Nag, S. Debnath, P. Mahadevan, A. Chowdhury and D. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 267401 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Debnath, S. Maiti and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, F. Huang, J. Hou, Z. Liu, Q. Wu, H. Cao, Q. Jing, S. Peng and G. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26675 CAS .
M. Homel, T. M. Gur, J. H. Koh and A. V. Virkar, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Imamura, Y. Tsuji, Y. Miyake and T. Ito, J. Catal., 1995, 151, 279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, G. Lu, Y. Guo, Y. Guo and X. Gong, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Najafishirtari, T. M. Kokumai, S. Marras, P. Destro, M. Prato, A. Scarpellini, R. Brescia, A. Lak, T. Pellegrino, D. Zanchet, L. Manna and M. Colombo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28624 CAS .
G. J. Kim, D. W. Kwon and S. C. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17996 CAS .
N. Zhou, L. Polavarapu, Q. Wang and Q.-H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4844 CAS .
G. K. Larsen, W. Farr and S. E. H. Murph, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15162 CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Xue, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, X. Sheng and N. Kui, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 730 RSC .
K. Sharma, M. Kumar and V. Bhalla, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12529 RSC .
D. Stibal, J. Sa and J. A. van Bokhoven, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 94 CAS .
J. Y. Park, S. M. Kim, H. Lee and I. I. Nedrygailov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2475 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. van Schrojenstein Lantman, T. Deckert-Gaudig, A. J. G. Mank, V. Deckert and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Huang, H. P. Zhu, G. K. Liu, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Li, H. Xu and M. Sun, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7737 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, R. A. Ando and P. H. C. Camargo, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 7013 CrossRef .
J. Chu, P. Miao, X. Han, Y. Du, X. Wang, B. Song and P. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hussain, M. Ahmad, A. Nisar, H. Sun, S. Karim, M. Khan, S. D. Khan, M. Iqbal and S. Z. Hussain, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1424 RSC .
T. Kiyonaga, Q. Jin, H. Kobayashi and H. Tada, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2935 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Makhal, T. Bora, S. Baruah and J. Dutta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12488 RSC .
R. Shaoo, A. Roy, C. Ray, C. Mandal, Y. Negishi, S. M. Yusuf, A. Pal and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11485 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Chaiti Ray	Dr Chaiti Ray, MSc (Chemistry) graduated from the University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India. Dr Ray received her PhD degree in 2016 working under the supervision of Prof. Tarasankar Pal of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India. She is now a post-doctoral researcher at Yonsei University, South Korea. Her current research interests are focused on the development of highly efficient functionalized flexible electrodes for energy conversion and electrocatalytic overall water splitting.
Tarasankar Pal	Professor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc graduated in chemistry from the University of Burdwan, India. He is the senior professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He is a fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published over 360 papers. The ACS has recognized him amongst 20 Indian authors for high-quality research and Scopus has highlighted him among the top three material scientists in India. His current interest lie in catalysis involving metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, micelle catalyzed reactions, etc. His research also includes modified hydrothermal reactions, interfacial reactions, one-pot organic reactions on solid supports, ion-exchange based nanoparticle synthesis, application of stable fluorescent coinage metal clusters, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and gel based sensors for explosives. Recently he has widened his field further into electrochemical energy conversion and development of novel 2D materials for charge storage devices. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst’ deserve special mention.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various catalytic activities of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed charge separation and dye degradation mechanism of Cu–ZnO, Cu–Cu2O–ZnO, and Cu2O–ZnO nanocomposites under visible light irradiation. (b) Representation of the Cu2O–Ag nanohybrid production and its catalytic reduction activity towards 4-nitrophenol. (c) Pictorial depiction of a modified hydrothermal system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21, 22 and 29 respectively. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2016 American Chemical Society and 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Strategy for the synthesis of TiO2 NPs decorated with Au NPs using the chemical reduction method. (b) Strategy for the synthesis of TiO2 NPs decorated with Au NPs using the photoreduction pathway. (c) Schematic of the preparation procedure of noble metal (M) core–In2O3 shell nanoparticles (M@In2O3, M = Au, AuPd, or Pt). (d) Synthesis of a metal coating using the physical vapor deposition process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, 109 and 111, respectively. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of different structures of noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis route for (PS) Au/TiO2 core/shell NPs and (b) the fabrication of a Pd/CeO2 core/shell nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124 and 125. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed formation scheme for Au/TiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures based on the (a) hard template approach and (b) soft template approach. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141 and 142. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) Au-decorated ZnO nanorod arrays, (b) Ag-decorated TiO2 nanotube arrays, (c) Au-decorated ZnO nanowire arrays and (d) Ag-decorated CuO nanosheet arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150–153. Copyright 2013 Elsevier, 2009 Elsevier, 2010 American Chemical Society and 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM of (a) Janus Au–TiO2, (b) branched Au–ZnO, (c) linear Au–ZnO and (d) Au–ZnO nanopyramids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170, 172 and 174. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH, 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Formation of the Schottky barrier between MOs and NMs (a) before contact and (b) after contact. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Proposed mechanism of the photo-degradation of EY on a Pd–TiO2 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. (b) Possible photocatalytic reaction mechanism of 3DOM Ag/ZrO2. (c) Expected mechanism of photocatalytic decomposition of p-NP by the Pt–TiO2 nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, 193, and 198. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Depiction of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution using Pt/TiO2 interfaced with rGO. (b) Illustration of the photocatalytic CO2 conversion activity of CuPt–TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206 and 224. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol in a direct methanol fuel cell.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction by a Pd–Mn3O4 nanocomposite. (b) The schematic presentation of the plausible pathway of the OER on the Pd–Mn3O4/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247 and 248. Copyright 2016 and 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photoelectrochemical water splitting activity of Au@R-TiO2@A-TiO2 on an alkyne functionalized stainless steel substrate. (b) Schematic representation of the photoelectrochemical activity of Au-decorated TiO2 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264 and 269. Copyright 2016, and 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the structure, charge separation and transportation of QDs/TiO2/Ag/ZnO NAs as a QDSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic presentation of Pd/CeO2 nanocomposites and their catalytic CO oxidation activity. (b) CO oxidation activity of Pt/TiO2 nanocatalysts. (c) Catalytic activities in mesoporous SnO2-coated metal NPs. (d) Synthesis and catalytic performance of Pt/meso-CeO2. (e) Proposed reaction mechanism for the photo-alkylation of aniline over Au–TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 289, 291, 292, 294 and 296. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society, and 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

TiO2 NP–Au	Photodeposition	Photooxidation of acetone and 2-propanol	
107

Au@TiO2	Hydrothermal	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	
138

Au/TiO2	Anodization and photocatalytic reduction	Photoelectrochemical water splitting	
156

Ag@Cu2O	Chemical reduction and room temperature aging	Photodegradation of methyl orange	
191

Ag@ZnO	Polyol process and room temperature aging	Photodegradation of rhodamine-B	
199

Au–ZnO	Hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of methylene blue	
200

TiO2/Au	Deposition–precipitation method	Photocatalytic H2 generation	
204

Pt/Cu2O–TiO2	Photodeposition	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	
223

CeO2/rGO/Pt	Hydrothermal approach	Oxidation of methanol in DMFCs	
230

Pt/rGO@TiO2	UV photoreduction	Methanol oxidation	
231

Pt/C–MnxO1+x	Polyol method	Methanol oxidation	
232

Pt/MnO2/GS	Hydrothermal	Methanol oxidation	
233

Pd/MNL/GS	Hydrothermal	DFAFC and DMFC	
234

Pt/CeO2_NBs	Galvanic replacement reaction	Formic acid oxidation	
243

Pt/SnO2	Hydrothermal	Electrochemical H2 evolution	
245

Pd–Mn3O4	Hydrothermal	Electrochemical H2 evolution	
246

Pd–Mn3O4/carbon black	Chemical reduction	Electrochemical O2 evolution	
247

ZnO/Au	Hydrothermal and photoreduction	Photoelectrochemical water splitting	
262

ZnO/Au	Self-assembly method	Dye sensitize solar cell	
282

Pt/CeO2	Solvothermal	CO oxidation	
288

Pt/TiO2	Heat treatment	CO oxidation	
290

Au–SnO2	Hydrothermal	4-Nitrophenol reduction	
291

Fe2O3–Au	Chemical reduction	4-Nitrophenol reduction	
292

Ag@Cu2O	Wet-chemical	Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling	
294

Au/TiO2	Hydrothermal method	Photocatalytic activity	
303

TiO2 NP–Au	Deposition–precipitation method	Photoelectrochemical measurement	
304

ZnO NP–Au	Chemical reduction method	Photodegradation of methylene blue	
305


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
