Rationally segmented triboelectric nanogenerator with a constant direct-current output and low crest factor   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01382C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01382C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4523-4532Rationally segmented triboelectric nanogenerator with a constant direct-current output and low crest factor†

        
          
            Pengfei 
            Chen‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            An‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Renwei 
            Cheng‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Sheng 
            Shu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Andy 
            Berbille
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Jiang
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Zhong Lin 
            Wang
          
        
      *abcd
aCAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Beijing Key Laboratory of Micro–Nano Energy and Sensor, Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: jiangtao@binn.cas.cn
bSchool of Nanoscience and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
cCUSTech Institute, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325024, P. R. China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA. E-mail: zhong.wang@mse.gatech.edu
Received 
      8th May 2021
    , Accepted 18th June 2021First published on 18th June 2021AbstractDespite the great potential of triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) as a promising energy harvesting technology, their practical applications are still hindered by their pulsed outputs with a high crest factor. Here, through a simple and easy method involving electrode misalignment (EM) and circuit connection, an exceedingly stable direct current (DC) multi-phase TENG (MP-TENG) with a high average output power at a constant current is developed. The MP-TENG obtained by rectifying and superimposing TENG units with phase difference in parallel can realize an ultra-low crest factor of 1.05 and an average power increase of 40.1%, compared with conventional single-phase TENGs. Besides, when using rotator grids with different sizes from the electrodes and the EM method, the common materials in daily life such as wood and cloth fabrics have been applied to generate DC-like outputs with a crest factor of less than 1.1, which expands dramatically the selection range of TENG materials. Due to the excellent DC performance of the MP-TENG, 1000 LEDs and 54 bulbs can be easily lighted up without any flickers, and commercial electronics can be driven continuously to work stably. This work provides a paradigm shift to achieve a high-output constant direct current, which has widespread application prospects in the field of energy harvesting.

Broader context
With the rapid development of the Internet of Things, a large amount of information is provided through widely distributed sensors and microelectronic devices, which has greatly facilitated and enriched our lives. However, environmental pollution caused by the widespread use of batteries for supporting this huge information network has become increasingly severe. A possible solution is to make each device self-powered by harvesting energy from the environment through using triboelectric nanogenerators. However, the further practical applications of TENGs are restricted by their pulsed outputs with a high crest factor. In this work, a multi-phase TENG (MP-TENG) with a constant DC output and high average output power is prepared only through simple electrode division and a circuit connection method. Moreover, electrode misalignment (EM) is first proposed to further improve the output of the MP-TENG. Such a TENG with an ultra-low crest factor can easily light up 1000 LEDs and 54 bulbs without any flickers, and can also drive continuously commercial electronics to work stably. Our systematic research shows that this MP-TENG with the merits of both a low crest factor and wide selection range of materials, as well as stable DC outputs, may significantly promote the practical applications of TENGs in energy harvesting.

Introduction
Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), as a promising and effective technology that converts ambient mechanical energy into electricity, provide a new approach for the realization of the Internet of Things (IoT).1–3 Based on the coupling of triboelectrification and electrostatic induction,4,5 TENGs exhibit superiorities of cost-effectiveness, easy fabrication, high efficiency, lightweight, and a wide choice of materials.6–8 Among the four basic working modes of a TENG,9 the freestanding mode usually achieves the highest energy conversion efficiency and represents the easiest way to scavenge regular motion energy through an advanced structural design.10–13 Moreover, the output power of a freestanding TENG can be enhanced by fining the grids of the constructed grating structure.14 But the grid size of the freestanding layer with a metal or polymer material is often matched with the electrode size,15 and increasing the grid number a lot will lead to a very small central angle.16 In such cases, the fabrication of a segmented freestanding layer using synthetic polymers or natural materials is rather challenging, severely limiting the choice of available materials. And using metal materials with less outstanding electropositivity also restricts the improvement in output power.17
A significant limitation of TENGs for practical applications is that the generated instantaneous pulse signals have a large ratio of peak value to root-mean square (RMS)/effective value (defined as the crest factor, CF = Imax/IRMS), which may be even larger than 6.18,19 It is a key metric of the power supply's ability to drive a load without distortion. For example, the crest factors of constant direct current (DC) and commercial alternating current (AC) are 1.00 and 1.41, respectively. Such TENGs with a high crest factor cannot power small electronics directly and are unfavorable for charging batteries/supercapacitors, because of exceptional energy losses and decreased energy storage efficiency.20 Therefore, stable DC generating systems are desirable to be developed to overcome the limitations for practical applications, and make charging of batteries as we do in general cases without a power management system.
In previous studies, intensive exploration has been dedicated to generating DC, especially constant DC, through the methods of phase coupling,18,20–22 electrostatic breakdown23 and sliding Schottky nanocontact.24 For ensuring the stable outputs of TENGs based on electrostatic breakdown, it is crucial to form and maintain a tiny gap between the charge collection electrode and the tribo-material, which has high requirements for the manufacturing process.23,25 In addition, for the continuous DC output realized by the sliding Schottky nanocontact technique, the output voltage is too low (∼8 mV) to power electronics directly.24,26 Therefore, many attempts have been devoted to achieving constant DC with a decreased crest factor through the phase coupling method. An approach of integrating multiple TENGs in parallel, each of which was connected to an individual rectifier, was utilized to greatly decrease the crest factor of current to 1.31,20 while that of parallel TENGs connected with only one rectifier is larger than 6. Moreover, for a rotating TENG, an asymmetrical spatial arrangement between the rotator and stator was explored to generate regular phase-shifted alternative currents.18,22 After the full-wave rectification and superimposition, the crest factor of current was decreased to 1.26 and 1.1, respectively. However, the complex structural design and higher speed requirements make it difficult to envisage practical scenarios. Besides, the crest factor can be further decreased to 1.08 by a phase coupling approach through introducing multiple phases and groups in a cylindrical TENG.21 But a problem exists, that is, the average output power decreases sharply with the increasing phase number. These previous reports indicate that it is urgent to develop a universal TENG design with a low crest factor on the premise of maintaining high output performance.
Herein, a rationally segmented multi-phase triboelectric nanogenerator (MP-TENG) with high performance and a low crest factor was developed through an extremely simple manufacturing method. Each electrode of the traditional TENG was divided into several pieces, and multiple phases were formed by independently connecting each electrode pair. After rectifying the TENG units with phase differences separately and superimposing them in parallel, the MP-TENG can convert mechanical energy into high DC electrical outputs. The influence of the phase number on the output current and transferred charges at a low torque of 0.05 N m was systematically discussed. The crest factor of the current can be greatly reduced to 1.05 for the TENG with more than 6 phases, while the 2-phase TENG with a relatively higher crest factor can achieve the maximum average output power, which is increased by 40.1% relative to common TENGs. Moreover, the crest factor and output power of the 2-phase TENG can be further improved by a novel electrode misalignment method. Due to the stable DC outputs of the MP-TENG, 1000 LEDs and 54 bulbs were lighted up without any flickers. Electronic devices such as watches and calculators were also powered continuously and directly without storage capacitors. Finally, a self-powered motion monitoring system was established by harvesting rotational mechanical energy, demonstrating the widespread applications of the MP-TENG for power sources.
Results and discussion
Structure and working principle of the MP-TENG
The structure and working principle of a universal MP-TENG are schematically shown in Fig. 1. Taking the rotating MP-TENG with 4 phases (4P-TENG) as an example, the exploded view in Fig. 1a presents the hierarchical structures of the rotator and stator. The rotator consists of four sectored rabbit furs arrayed in a circle on the acrylic substrate. And the stator fabricated by the printed circuit board (PCB) technology is made up of 32 sector-shaped copper electrodes, which are attached to a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) film. Different from a common freestanding TENG structure completely, the grid number of the rotator is no longer half of the number of complementary electrodes in the stator. One power generation unit of the MP-TENG is composed of one fur grid in the rotator and 4 pairs of highlighted multi-color electrodes of the stator (respectively blue, orange, green, and red) to distinguish from other units (the electrode color of the other units is gold), as shown in Fig. 1a. The highlighted electrodes sharing the same color are defined as one phase of the 4P-TENG. Different from the work of Ryu et al.,18 where the continuous movement of the triboelectric materials with different triboelectric properties causes the electric potential change at each electrode to generate one signal, thereby forming multiple phases through many electrodes, the basic working mechanism of the MP-TENG obtained through rational electrode division is illustrated in Fig. 1b. The triboelectrification between the fur brushes and the PTFE film generates positive electrostatic charges on the furs and negative charges on the PTFE surface with equivalent charge amounts. In the initial state (state i), the sectored furs, that can be replaced by any other triboelectric material, cover the 4 electrodes completely. When the rotator moves a distance corresponding to one electrode's width, due to the electrostatic induction, electrons flow between the first pair of electrodes (blue) through an external circuit. Similarly, with the movement of the rotator, the second-fourth pairs of electrodes (orange, green, and red) will generate sequentially charge flow and then uninterruptedly output electrical energy (states ii–iv).
 Fig. 1  Architecture and mechanism of the MP-TENG. (a) Schematic diagram of the hierarchical structure of the rotating MP-TENG with 4 groups and 4 phases. (b) General working principle of the 4P-TENG. (c) Materials of rotator originating from the nature with wide raw material sources. (d) Normalized triboelectric potential difference of each phase as a function of the rotating period of the rotator obtained by simulations. 
In such a TENG structure, the grid size of the rotator does not have to be the same as the electrodes, greatly expanding the material's selection range of TENGs (Fig. 1c). All the triboelectric materials can be sourced from the nature according to specific needs to facilitate degradation,27 including cellulose, rice paper, and silk fibroin. Cellulose can be extracted from natural plants, such as wood and cotton, while rice paper and silk fibroin can be collected from wheat and cocoon, respectively. Furthermore, any common materials with good triboelectric properties can be applied as we want, such as animal furs, fabrics25 and synthetic polymers,28,29 without considering the issue of miniaturization. Besides, the working process of the MP-TENG was also confirmed through finite element simulations using COMSOL, reflected by the change of the potential difference between the two electrodes, as shown in Fig. 1d and Fig. S1 (ESI†). The results show that such structures can achieve electrical outputs with a regular phase difference, which is essential for generating DC outputs with a low crest factor.
Electrical characterization for the MP-TENG
A sliding MP-TENG made of a copper film with a regular shape was designed to reveal the output characteristics of the TENG structure. The schematic diagrams of the power generation units for the 1P- and 4P-TENG are shown in Fig. 2a and b, respectively, using the copper film and PTFE as the triboelectric materials. The main difference between the two TENGs is the number and width of the electrodes in the stationary part. A sponge was added between the copper film and acrylic substrate to optimize the contact intimacy between the tribo-layers. The detailed fabrication processes of the devices are presented in the Experimental section. In the experiments, the slider was driven by a linear motor to achieve linear reciprocating motions at a frequency of 3 Hz and a pressure of 15 N. Noted that when adjusting the phase number from 1P to 9P, the electrodes of the stationary part have fixed total effective area, and the slider is identical. The moving distance of the slider was set to be 18 mm to form a complete cycle, which is the width of the slider electrode.
 Fig. 2  Influence of phase number on the output performance of a sliding MP-TENG at the frequency of 3 Hz. Schematic diagram of the structural unit of (a) 1P-TENG and (b) 4P-TENG. (c) Output current and (d) transferred charge of the 4G1P-TENG. (e) Output current and (f) transferred charge for each phase of the 4G4P-TENG. (g) Transferred charge of the 4G-TENG with various phase numbers. (h) Rectified current of the 4G-TENG with respect to the phase number. (i) Accumulated charge amount of the TENG with different phase numbers. 
The output current and transferred charge of the single-phase TENG and MP-TENG with 4 groups of power generation units (defined as 4GMP-TENG) were measured and compared, as shown in Fig. 2c–f and Fig. S2 (ESI†). Generally, the short-circuit current (ISC) and transferred charge (QSC) for a freestanding-mode TENG can be expressed as:30 ISC = dQSC/dt(1) QSC = σS/(1 + Cr)(2)where σ is the surface charge density, S is the contact area, and Cr is the ratio of formed capacitances between the different electrodes and the same slider. It can be seen that the current values are determined by the charge density, contact area and time. So, the output current of each phase of the 4G4P-TENG is close to that of the 4G1P-TENG, which can reach about 6.59 μA. But the total transferred charge amount of 692 nC for the 4G4P-TENG is larger than the 466 nC of the 4G1P-TENG by calculating the accumulated value of the short-circuit transferred charges of each phase. Moreover, with the increasing phase number, the 4G9P-TENG exhibits the highest outputs of 1016 nC (Fig. 2g). This is because, due to the edge effect, the slider with the same size induces a relatively higher transferable charge density between the smaller electrode pairs compared to the electrode pairs of the single-phase TENG.31 When rectifying each phase separately and integrating them in parallel, the superposed current with 9 phases rises to 9.6 μA, which is an enhancement of 46.0% relative to the 4G1P-TENG (Fig. 2h and Fig. S3) (ESI†). In addition, the charge accumulation rate of the 9P-TENG is increased by 74.9% (Fig. 2i), demonstrating excellent application potential compared with the traditional single-phase TENG. Note that the output of each phase of the MP-TENG is not exactly the same, especially for the 9P-TENG with a smaller electrode width, resulting from the edge effect of edge electrodes (Fig. S4) (ESI†). Also, the acceleration and deceleration time of the slider driven by the linear motor becomes non-negligible during the reciprocating motion for smaller electrodes. And choosing a rotating MP-TENG structure can effectively avoid this problem.
A rotary disk multi-phase TENG, which can eliminate the edge effect of edge electrodes in the sliding type, was designed. The output performance of the rotating MP-TENG with copper as the rotator material for different phase numbers was measured using a standardized dynamic torque measurement system, and the results at a torque of 0.2 N m are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). Similar to our previous work, the rotating speed and torque were controlled by the motor and XY-direction platform that can be accurately positioned.32 The output of each phase is relatively uniform compared to the sliding MP-TENG. Then, similar to the work of Chen et al.,32 rabbit furs with excellent electropositivity were used as the rotator material for lowering the material wear and improving the durability. The torque was chosen as 0.05 N m in the following experiments, a value that can be easily overcome by ambient mechanical energy sources, such as wind, water flow, etc.Fig. 3a shows the instantaneously transferred charges of each phase for the 4G4P-TENG (Fig. 1a) with rabbit furs as the rotator material, which were measured synchronously at 300 rpm. A phase difference of π/n can be observed between the adjacent phases (where n is the phase number), which is in agreement with the previous simulations, and the transferred charges and output current of each phase remain consistent. The results are similar for the MP-TENG with other phase numbers (Fig. S6, ESI†). Thus, an almost DC output can be obtained by connecting each phase with full-wave rectifier bridges and superposing them in parallel, as presented in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 3  Output performance of the rotating MP-TENG with rabbit furs as the rotator material at a torque of 0.05 N m. (a) Transferred charge of each phase for the 4G4P-TENG under simultaneous measurements. (b) Output current of each phase and the rectified and superposed output of the 4G4P-TENG. (c) Output current after rectification and superposition of each phase output for the 4G-TENG with different phase numbers at the rotating speed of 300 rpm. (d) The crest factor of the rectified and superposed current for the MP-TENG with different phase numbers. The inset shows the output current of the 4G6P-TENG. (e) Accumulated charge amount per second and the RMS value of rectified current with respect to the phase number. (f) Average power–resistance relationships for the MP-TENG with different phase numbers. (g) The crest factor of this work compared with that reported by others. (h) Comparison of the rectified superposed current of the 4P-TENG with different groups at 300 rpm. (i and j) Comparison of DC output characteristics of multi-phase and single-phase TENGs, where (i) 1000 LEDs and (j) 54 LED bulbs can be lighted up easily by the 4G4P-TENG without any flickers. (k) Photograph of an electronic meter driven directly by the 4G4P-TENG at 30 rpm. (l) Photograph of a commercial calculator powered by the MP-TENG at 150 rpm to work stably. 
Subsequently, the influence of the phase number on the DC outputs was investigated. As the phase number increases from 1 to 9, more stable DC outputs can be achieved, and the crest factor reduces from 1.3 to 1.05 (Fig. 3c, d and Fig. S7, ESI†). The amount of charge accumulation per second is also increased from 13.8 to 21.26 μC and the RMS value of the DC current arrives at 21.28 μA, which are increased by 54.1% and 42.1%, respectively (Fig. 3e). Fig. 3f shows the average power behavior with respect to the load resistance for the rotating MP-TENG with different phases. The average power can be calculated by (3)where I(t) is the current across the resistor at the time t, R is the resistance, and T is the period. It can be found that a maximum average power of 8.98 mW can be obtained for the 4G1P-TENG, while the 4G2P-TENG can reach 12.58 mW, achieving an increase of 40.1%. The corresponding average power density is 1.11 W m−2 under the adopted torque condition. It is the result of the combined effect of the edge effect for smaller electrodes and the reduction of the generator capacitance due to its structure.31 The matched resistance increases slightly from 60 MΩ to 90 MΩ with the increasing phase number, which is also consistent with the previous studies.14 Here, a new record of an ultra-low crest factor of 1.05 for DC-TENG with multiphase coupling is achieved, whose maximum average power of 271 mW m−2 Hz−1 is quite competitive at the torque of only 0.05 N m (Fig. 3g and Fig. S8, Table S1, ESI†). Besides, the average power and output current can also be improved by increasing the number of groups, rotating speed and torque,32 as shown in Fig. 3h and Fig. S9, 10 (ESI†).
Based on the excellent DC output performance of the MP-TENG, 1000 LEDs and 54 commercial bulbs can be lighted up easily without any flickering, which indicates that the outputs have extremely low current ripple, as demonstrated in Fig. 3i, j and Movies S1, S2 (ESI†). The high-quality DC output signals produced by the MP-TENG make it safe for electronic equipment. Moreover, when powering lighting equipment, the stroboscopic effect that is unpractical for human use and causes damage to human eyes can be avoided. In addition, the high output DC of the MP-TENG enables it to directly drive small electronics without any energy storage component. An electronic watch and a commercial calculator can work continuously by using the 4G4P-TENG at the rotating speed of 30 rpm and 150 rpm, respectively, at a low torque of 0.05 N m (Fig. 3k, l and Movies S3, S4, ESI†). These demonstrations illustrate the broad practical application prospects of MP-TENGs in our daily lives.
Electrical characterization of the EMMP-TENG
According to the above study, the two-phase TENG produces the highest output power, but the crest factor of its output current remains at a relatively high level. Here, an electrode misalignment (EM) method was proposed for the first time to solve this issue, as schematically shown in Fig. 4a. For the normal two-phase TENG that contains two groups of power generation units (2G2P, Fig. 4a-i), the EM degree was represented by the displacement of the right slider moving forward toward the left slider, which was chosen as 1/3, 1/2, and 3/4 of one electrode width (Fig. 4a-ii–iv). In such situations, the four TENGs become different, and the phase number is changed from 2 to 4. The signals generated by the two units without electrode misalignment are completely synchronized, namely, no. 1 and no. 3, no. 2 and no. 4, as indicated in Fig. 4b and Fig. S11a, b (ESI†). However, with EM, the forward movement of the right slider changes the phases of no. 3 and no. 4 signals. Therefore, there exists a phase difference between the 4 sets of current signals according to the EM degree (Fig. 4c), which can also be verified by the simulated voltage profiles of the four phases (Fig. S11c, ESI†). The detailed working mechanism for the electrode-misaligned MP-TENG (EMMP-TENG) can be seen in Fig. S12 (ESI†), and the measured output voltage, current and transferred charge of each phase were compared for the normal MP-TENG and EMMP-TENG with 1/3 electrode misalignment (Fig. S13, ESI†). Owing to the phase difference, the crest factor of the rectified superposed current drops markedly from 1.15 to 1.05 when the slider moves forward by 1/3 of one electrode width (Fig. 4d and e). The enlarged diagram of the output current in Fig. 4e also proves this point.
 Fig. 4  Mechanism and output performance of an electrode-misaligned MP-TENG. (a) Schematic diagram of an electrode-misaligned MP-TENG designed with different degrees of misalignment. (b and c) Output current of each phase for the 2G4P-TENG (b) without electrode misalignment and (c) with 1/3 electrode misalignment under simultaneous measurements. (d and e) Influence of different electrode misalignment degrees on the (d) rectified superposed current and (e) crest factor. An enlarged view of the output current for the TENG with 1/3 electrode misalignment is shown in the inset of figure (e). (f) Average output power with respect to the load resistance for the MP-TENG with different electrode misalignment degrees. (g) Output current of the EMMP-TENG made of a variety of common materials after electrodes are dislocated (wood, nylon fabrics, printer paper, polyester fabrics, rabbit fur, etc.). (h) The crest factor of the output current for the EMMP-TENG with different materials. 
The average power of the EMMP-TENG with different EM degrees as a function of the load resistance was plotted, indicating an increase of 19.5% for the 2G4P-TENG with 1/3 electrode misalignment relative to the normal 2G4P-TENG without EM (Fig. 4f). Also, the charging speed to a fixed capacitor was found to be increased by 9.7% (Fig. S14, ESI†). As we can see, a more stable DC output with a lower crest factor can be realized only through simple slider/rotator position change and circuit connection on the premise of high output power, which is essential for the practical applications of MP-TENGs. Here, the common materials in our daily life have been selected and used, such as wood, nylon fabrics, printer paper, and polyester fabrics, for comparison with the results of using rabbit furs. Interestingly, all MP-TENGs with these materials show excellent DC output performance (Fig. 4g), and the crest factor for all the materials can be reduced to be below 1.1 when the electrode is misaligned (Fig. 4h). The rabbit fur material can achieve the lowest crest factor of 1.05. These results demonstrate the wide applicability of the EMMP-TENG structure.
Application of EMMP-TENG
With the increasing attention to environmental pollution, the realization of a lifestyle relying on smart electronics, powered by clean and renewable energies, has become an objective for lots of consumers. However, in the smart world of IoT, the power supply problem arising from widespread sensors has always been an insurmountable gap in the process of realizing a both smarter and greener life. Although solar cells and electromagnetic induction-based equipment can meet some requirements, these technologies will undoubtedly be affected by the weather or have the fatal problems of high-frequency requirements and bulky equipment. Besides, the TENG technology that can collect mechanical energy from its own motion is also limited by the high crest factor of outputs. The EMMP-TENG we designed based on the principle of electrode misalignment and fur brush, exhibiting the advantages of a lower crest factor, higher charging efficiency and more stable output, is expected to solve this problem. It is worth noting that the EMMP structure can be applied to any rotation or even sliding motion (Fig. 2), including wind- and water drop-driven motions, due to its easy manufacturability. Fig. 5a shows the schematic diagram of the proposed concept for smart green travel based on the EMMP-TENG.
 Fig. 5  Application of the EMMP-TENG for collecting rotational mechanical energy. (a) The proposed concept of applying the EMMP-TENG in smart green travel. (b) Digital photograph of an ordinary bicycle equipped with the EMMP-TENG (two sets of 2G4P units) on its rotating part and a cyclocomputer for facilitating the demonstration. The photographs of the (i) rotator part and (ii) stator part are also shown (scale bar: 3 cm). (c) Charging curves of the EMMP-TENG to various capacitors at manual speed. (d) Charging and discharging processes for a 680 μF capacitor to power the wired cyclocomputer, which can continue working stably as long as one keeps riding. The inset shows the photograph of the wired cyclocomputer in the working state. (e) Voltage profile on a 470 μF capacitor charged by the EMMP-TENG to power the signal transmitter, which can measure the rotating speed and transmit it wirelessly to the cyclocomputer in real time. 
Here, to demonstrate the application of the EMMP-TENG in environmental energy harvesting, a 2*2G4P EMMP-TENG, by connecting two sets of 2G4P units in parallel, was fabricated and installed on an ordinary bicycle to collect the energy of braking or spinning (Fig. 5b). The detailed structural settings can be found in Fig. S15 (ESI†). During riding, the RMS value of the rectified superposed current for the EMMP-TENG can reach 27.85 μA, and the crest factor can be stabilized at about 1.05 (Fig. S16, ESI†). The charging performance of the device to various capacitors was also explored, as presented in Fig. 5c. The voltage on the capacitor of 470 μF can be charged to 3.0 V within 52 s, showing an excellent energy harvesting ability. Due to the excellent performance of the EMMP-TENG, a self-powered wired cyclocomputer can work continuously by collecting energy from the rotation of the wheels. It can display instantaneous speed and other parameters such as total riding distance, calorie consumption, etc. Interestingly, the voltage on the capacitor keeps increasing as long as we keep riding (Fig. 5d and Movie S5, ESI†), which means that the energy harvesting speed exceeds the consumption speed. We believe that this performance will become more outstanding by introducing the power management system.33 Moreover, a wireless cyclocomputer consisting of a signal transmitter and a receiver can also be driven through charging the capacitor (Fig. 5e and Fig. S17, Movies S6, S7, ESI†). This device can be easily assembled and provides a stable power supply in other application scenarios. For example, it can be installed on street lamps or flagpoles to collect wind energy,34 or installed in water channels to collect water flow energy. These will further promote the realization of a sustainable smart life.
Conclusions
In summary, we have constructed an MP-TENG only through a simple electrode division and circuit connection method, which exhibits the merits of both a low crest factor and wide selection range of materials, as well as stable DC outputs. The rotator grids do not have to match with the electrodes in size, greatly simplifying the manufacturing process of TENGs and expanding the selection scope of materials. The materials that are common in our daily life, such as wood and cloth fabrics, can be easily used to generate DC-like outputs with a crest factor of less than 1.1. Moreover, an almost constant DC output with an ultra-low crest factor of 1.05 and an average power increase of 40.1% can be achieved through rectifying and superimposing TENGs with phase differences in parallel. These characteristics make the design of the EMMP/MP-TENG a universally applicable design. Based on the stable DC electrical outputs of the MP-TENG, 1000 LEDs and 54 bulbs can be lighted up easily without any flickers at a torque of only 0.05 N m. And commercial electronics, such as wearable electronics and cyclocomputers, can also be driven continuously to work. This work provides a new and valid strategy for a high output direct-current, showing a wide range of application prospects.
Experimental
Fabrication of sliding MP-TENG
Two pieces of acrylic boards as substrates with dimensions of 16.4 cm × 9.5 cm × 5 mm were cut using a laser cutter (PLS6.75). For each structural unit of the slider, a copper film of 18 mm × 75 mm × 35 μm, with a chamfer of 1 mm, was adhered to a 5-mm-thick sponge that was glued to an acrylic substrate for improving the material contact. For the stator, the epoxy glass fiber substrate with copper layers (35 μm in thickness) was fabricated by the PCB technique. Each group of electrodes was divided into several pieces to form multiple phases. For example, the electrode number of the 4P-TENG is 8 in each group, and each electrode has a chamfer of 1 mm, length of 75 mm, and width of 3.85 mm. Note that when varying the phase number, the total electrode area was guaranteed to be the same. Then, an 80-μm-thick PTFE film was adhered to the copper layers as the triboelectric layer.
Fabrication of rotating MP-TENG
The rotating MP-TENG is composed of two parts: a rotator disk with different materials and a stator electrode disk. For the disk with rabbit furs, as an example, four sectored furs with equal-degree radially arrayed sectors (4G) were pasted on the acrylic substrate. The outer and inner diameters of the sectored furs are 120 mm and 23 mm, respectively, similar to the previous work. The same acrylic substrate and 9-mm-long rabbit furs were used in this work. Similarly, other materials, such as wood and nylon fabrics, were cut into the target shape using a laser cutter and then glued to the acrylic substrate together with the sponge. For the electrode disk with different electrode numbers fabricated by the PCB technology, the inner and outer diameters are the same as the rotator disk. All the electrode materials are the same, copper. Moreover, regardless of the phase number, the entire electrode area was fixed as well as the sliding MP-TENG. Finally, an 80-μm-thick PTFE film was adhered to the copper layers as the triboelectric layer.
Fabrication of rotating EMMP-TENG
The fabrication method of EMMP-TENG is similar to that of the rotating MP-TENG. The only difference is that the positions of rotator sectors with different materials are changed to form electrode misalignment.
Electrical measurements of the TENG device
The sliding motion was conducted using a linear motor (TSMV120-1S), and the rotary motion was carried out using a rotational motor (60ST-M01930). The torque was measured using a commercial torque sensor (DYN-200). The torque used in the experiments is 0.2 N m for all the materials except for the rabbit fur brush which adopts 0.05 N m. The transferred charge and output current were measured using several current preamplifiers (Keithley 6517 System Electrometer), while the output voltage was measured using a high-voltage probe (internal impedance: 500 MΩ) and a mixed domain oscilloscope (HVP, Tektronix MDO3000s).
Author contributions
P. C. and Z. L. W. conceived the idea. T. J. and Z. L. W. conducted the work and supervised the experiments. P. C. and T. J. prepared the manuscript. P. C. designed and fabricated the device and performed the electrical measurements. J. A. and R. C. helped in the electrical measurements and application demonstration. S. S. assisted with the experiments. A. B. helped modify the manuscript. All the authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Project from the Ministry of Science and Technology (2016YFA0202704), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51432005, 51702018, and 51561145021) and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association, CAS. The authors also thank Jia Jia Han and Hao Pang for device fabrications and measurements.
References
R. Hinchet, H.-J. Yoon, H. Ryu, M.-K. Kim, E.-K. Choi, D.-S. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Science, 2019, 365, 491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rodrigues, D. Nunes, D. Clemente, N. Mathias, J. M. Correia, P. Rosa-Santos, F. Taveira-Pinto, T. Morais, A. M. Pereira and J. Ventura, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2657–2683 RSC .
W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Deng, M. Leung, Z. Yang, R. X. Xu, Z. L. Wang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Wang, Nature, 2020, 578, 392–396 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zi, H. Guo, Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4797–4805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, P. Cui, X. Chen, J. Wang, K. Parida, M. F. Lin and P. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4280 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Guo, J. Chen, L. Wang, A. C. Wang, Y. Li, C. An, J.-H. He, C. Hu, V. K. S. Hsiao and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Sustainability, 2020, 4, 147–153 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250–2282 RSC .
Y. Xie, S. Wang, S. Niu, L. Lin, Q. Jing, J. Yang, Z. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6599–6607 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, X. Mei, D. Yurchenko, S. Zhou, S. Theodossiades, K. Nakano and E. M. Yeatman, Joule, 2021, 6, 1–45 Search PubMed .
W. He, W. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Pu, H. Yang, Q. Tang, H. Yang, H. Guo and C. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lei, Y. Shi, Y. Ding, J. Nie, S. Li, F. Wang, H. Zhai, X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2178–2190 RSC .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, T. Zhang, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3426 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cheng, W. Ding, Y. Zi, Y. Lu, L. Ji, F. Liu, C. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3733 CrossRef .
T. Jiang, X. Chen, C. B. Han, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2928–2938 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, P. Wang, X. He, G. Dai, H. Zheng, C. Chen, A. C. Wang, C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1427 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ryu, J. H. Lee, U. Khan, S. S. Kwak, R. Hinchet and S.-W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2057–2063 RSC .
X. Liang, T. Jiang, G. Liu, Y. Feng, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 277–285 RSC .
X. Li, X. Yin, Z. Zhao, L. Zhou, D. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. Li, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Xu, J. Zhou, T. Cheng, H. Zhao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904227 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. I. G. Dharmasena, H. M. Cronin, R. A. Dorey and S. R. P. Silva, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104887 CrossRef CAS .
L. Di, Y. Xing, G. Hengyu, Z. Linglin, L. Xinyuan, Z. Chunlei, W. Jie and W. Zhong Lin, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6437 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, A. Goswami, K. Jiang, F. Khan, S. Kim, R. McGee, Z. Li, Z. Hu, J. Lee and T. Thundat, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 112–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, K. Dong, P. Chen, C. Ning, X. Peng, Y. Zhang, D. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2460–2471 RSC .
J. Liu, F. Liu, R. Bao, K. Jiang, F. Khan, Z. Li, H. Peng, J. Chen, A. Alodhayb and T. Thundat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35404–35409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Li, J. Tian, B. Shi, Y. Zou, H. Ouyang, C. Zhao, L. Zhao, R. Sun, H. Zheng, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801895 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Fan, H. Chen, J. Nie, Y. Liang, X. Tao, J. Zhang, X. Chen, E. Fu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 896–907 RSC .
S.-F. Leung, H.-C. Fu, M. Zhang, A. H. Hassan, T. Jiang, K. N. Salama, Z. L. Wang and J.-H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1300–1308 RSC .
S. Niu, Y. Liu, X. Chen, S. Wang, Y. S. Zhou, L. Lin, Y. Xie and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 760–774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, S. Wang, Z. Cao, R. Ding and X. Ye, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J. An, S. Shu, R. Cheng, J. Nie, T. Jiang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003066 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Liu, W. He, H. Guo, L. Long, Y. Xi, X. Wang, A. Liu and C. Hu, Joule, 2021, 5, 441–455 CrossRef .
C. Ye, K. Dong, J. An, J. Yi, X. Peng, C. Ning and Z. L. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1443–1452 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01382c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
With the rapid development of the Internet of Things, a large amount of information is provided through widely distributed sensors and microelectronic devices, which has greatly facilitated and enriched our lives. However, environmental pollution caused by the widespread use of batteries for supporting this huge information network has become increasingly severe. A possible solution is to make each device self-powered by harvesting energy from the environment through using triboelectric nanogenerators. However, the further practical applications of TENGs are restricted by their pulsed outputs with a high crest factor. In this work, a multi-phase TENG (MP-TENG) with a constant DC output and high average output power is prepared only through simple electrode division and a circuit connection method. Moreover, electrode misalignment (EM) is first proposed to further improve the output of the MP-TENG. Such a TENG with an ultra-low crest factor can easily light up 1000 LEDs and 54 bulbs without any flickers, and can also drive continuously commercial electronics to work stably. Our systematic research shows that this MP-TENG with the merits of both a low crest factor and wide selection range of materials, as well as stable DC outputs, may significantly promote the practical applications of TENGs in energy harvesting.


 	Fig. 1  Architecture and mechanism of the MP-TENG. (a) Schematic diagram of the hierarchical structure of the rotating MP-TENG with 4 groups and 4 phases. (b) General working principle of the 4P-TENG. (c) Materials of rotator originating from the nature with wide raw material sources. (d) Normalized triboelectric potential difference of each phase as a function of the rotating period of the rotator obtained by simulations.	 

 	Fig. 2  Influence of phase number on the output performance of a sliding MP-TENG at the frequency of 3 Hz. Schematic diagram of the structural unit of (a) 1P-TENG and (b) 4P-TENG. (c) Output current and (d) transferred charge of the 4G1P-TENG. (e) Output current and (f) transferred charge for each phase of the 4G4P-TENG. (g) Transferred charge of the 4G-TENG with various phase numbers. (h) Rectified current of the 4G-TENG with respect to the phase number. (i) Accumulated charge amount of the TENG with different phase numbers.	 
ISC = dQSC/dt	(1)
QSC = σS/(1 + Cr)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Output performance of the rotating MP-TENG with rabbit furs as the rotator material at a torque of 0.05 N m. (a) Transferred charge of each phase for the 4G4P-TENG under simultaneous measurements. (b) Output current of each phase and the rectified and superposed output of the 4G4P-TENG. (c) Output current after rectification and superposition of each phase output for the 4G-TENG with different phase numbers at the rotating speed of 300 rpm. (d) The crest factor of the rectified and superposed current for the MP-TENG with different phase numbers. The inset shows the output current of the 4G6P-TENG. (e) Accumulated charge amount per second and the RMS value of rectified current with respect to the phase number. (f) Average power–resistance relationships for the MP-TENG with different phase numbers. (g) The crest factor of this work compared with that reported by others. (h) Comparison of the rectified superposed current of the 4P-TENG with different groups at 300 rpm. (i and j) Comparison of DC output characteristics of multi-phase and single-phase TENGs, where (i) 1000 LEDs and (j) 54 LED bulbs can be lighted up easily by the 4G4P-TENG without any flickers. (k) Photograph of an electronic meter driven directly by the 4G4P-TENG at 30 rpm. (l) Photograph of a commercial calculator powered by the MP-TENG at 150 rpm to work stably.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Mechanism and output performance of an electrode-misaligned MP-TENG. (a) Schematic diagram of an electrode-misaligned MP-TENG designed with different degrees of misalignment. (b and c) Output current of each phase for the 2G4P-TENG (b) without electrode misalignment and (c) with 1/3 electrode misalignment under simultaneous measurements. (d and e) Influence of different electrode misalignment degrees on the (d) rectified superposed current and (e) crest factor. An enlarged view of the output current for the TENG with 1/3 electrode misalignment is shown in the inset of figure (e). (f) Average output power with respect to the load resistance for the MP-TENG with different electrode misalignment degrees. (g) Output current of the EMMP-TENG made of a variety of common materials after electrodes are dislocated (wood, nylon fabrics, printer paper, polyester fabrics, rabbit fur, etc.). (h) The crest factor of the output current for the EMMP-TENG with different materials.	 

 	Fig. 5  Application of the EMMP-TENG for collecting rotational mechanical energy. (a) The proposed concept of applying the EMMP-TENG in smart green travel. (b) Digital photograph of an ordinary bicycle equipped with the EMMP-TENG (two sets of 2G4P units) on its rotating part and a cyclocomputer for facilitating the demonstration. The photographs of the (i) rotator part and (ii) stator part are also shown (scale bar: 3 cm). (c) Charging curves of the EMMP-TENG to various capacitors at manual speed. (d) Charging and discharging processes for a 680 μF capacitor to power the wired cyclocomputer, which can continue working stably as long as one keeps riding. The inset shows the photograph of the wired cyclocomputer in the working state. (e) Voltage profile on a 470 μF capacitor charged by the EMMP-TENG to power the signal transmitter, which can measure the rotating speed and transmit it wirelessly to the cyclocomputer in real time.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01382c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
