Fabricating flexible conductive structures by printing techniques and printable conductive materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC01168A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01168A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 9441-9464Fabricating flexible conductive structures by printing techniques and printable conductive materials

        
          
            Jiazhen 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Sun
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Jia
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mengdi 
            Ma
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yanlin 
            Song
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking, Faculty of Light Industry, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China. E-mail: jiazhensun@qlu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Green Printing, Beijing Engineering Research Center of Nanomaterials for Green Printing Technology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: ylsong@iccas.ac.cn
Received 
      22nd March 2022
    , Accepted 29th May 2022First published on 6th June 2022AbstractFlexible electronics have attracted great attention with the enhanced flexibility of electronic devices, which could be used as flexible sensors, flexible batteries, electronic skin, soft robots, and so on. They play a crucial role in realizing human-machine interactions and developing wearable devices. The stable flexible conductive structure (FCS) with bending, folding, and stretching is necessary for these flexible electronics. As a type of solution processing method, printing techniques have been widely used in fabricating FCSs by printing conductive inks on flexible surfaces. The printable conductive materials are critical for fabricating FCSs by the printing techniques. In this review, the printing techniques for fabricating FCSs are described with inkjet printing, extrusion printing, screen printing, gravure printing, and micro-contact printing. Moreover, the printable conductive materials for fabricating FCSs are presented, including organic conductive materials, inorganic conductive materials, and metallic materials. Meanwhile, the synergistic effects for fabricating FCSs are discussed among printing techniques, printable conductive materials, and flexible substrates. Finally, the remaining challenges and prospects are proposed for fabricating FCSs, which would provide a valuable reference for constructing flexible electronics.
Jiazhen Sun
Jiazhen Sun received his BS degree from Qufu Normal University in 2009, MS degree from Beijing Institute of Graphic and Communication in 2012, and PhD degree from Beihang University in 2016. He is now an associate professor of Faculty of Light Industry, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). His research interests include functional ink preparation, wetting interface control, and micro-nanostructure assembly.
Rui Sun
Rui Sun received his BS degree from Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) in 2020. He is an MS degree candidate in the research group of Sun Jiazhen, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). His research interests include functional ink preparation, interface reaction, and flexible electronics.
Peng Jia
Peng Jia received BS degree in Material Chemistry from Xi'an University of Technology in 2011, and PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Jinan in 2019. He has worked as a lecturer in Prof. Xingxiang Ji' group, State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking/MOE Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Science & Technology, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) since 2019. He has become an IOP Trusted Reviewer since 2022. His research interests include the design and synthesis of biomass-based hybrid nanocomposites and biomass-derived carbon-based nanocomposites toward highly efficient catalysis, energy storage, sensing, and environmental remediation.
Mengdi Ma
Mengdi Ma received her BS degree from Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) in 2020. She is now studying for an MS degree at the Faculty of Light Industry, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). Her research interests include functional ink preparation, wetting interface control, and microstructure application.
Yanlin Song
Yanlin Song received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry at Peking University in 1996. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Chemistry of Tsinghua University from 1996 to 1998. He joined the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1998. He is currently a professor and Director of the Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include information function materials, photonic crystals, printed electronics, and green printing materials and technologies.
1. Introduction
Flexible electronics could be bent, folded, and stretched with the maintained functions,1,2 and show a unique mechanical, durability, and sensory properties on human skin3 or other biological tissues.4 Hence, they have attracted considerable attention for their applications in human-machine interactions and wearable devices,5 such as electronic skin,6 intelligent biomedicine,7,8 soft robots,9 and human rehabilitation.10 To satisfy the application performances, the stable flexible conductive structure (FCS) with bending, folding, and stretching is necessary for flexible electronics,11 which could be constructed with flexible conductive polymers (i.e., conductive hydrogel, PEDOT:PSS, and polyaniline) prepared by freeze-drying, compositing, and other methods,12–14 flexible metallic materials and conductive inorganic materials with special dimensions, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene.15,16 In addition, FCSs also could be obtained by depositing a layer of conductive material on the surface of a flexible substrate,17–20 or using natural microstructural surface as the template, such as lotus leaf,21,22 mimosa,23 human skin,24 or etching surface.25,26 Therefore, a high throughput and accurate way for fabricating FCS has an important research significance and application value in constructing flexible electronics.
The printing techniques, including inkjet printing, extrusion printing, screen printing, gravure printing, and micro-contact printing, have been widely used to fabricate flexible functional structures and materials owing to a high throughput deposition of functional ink droplets on nearly any substrate.27–29 In order to precisely design printed structure, the feature and principle of printing process should be mastered.30 Meanwhile, the printability of the functional ink also affects the printed micro-nanostructures.31 The depositing behavior of the functional ink contributes a crucial role in controlling the depositing morphology of functional ink.32,33 Therefore, the printed micro-nanostructures could provide low cost, convenience, flexibility, scalability, and speed for fabricating various high-performance FCSs.
Printable conductive materials could provide conductivity, resolution, and flexibility for fabricating conductive structures.34 Based on the design and preparation of printable conductive materials, high-performance FCSs have been developed by proper printing techniques and synergistic effect among printing techniques, printable conductive materials, and flexible substrates. For example, carbon ink is expected to achieve a high electrical performance and mechanical property.35 Metal ink and conductive polymer ink could also be used to print FCS directly, which also significantly promotes the mechanical properties.36 Overall, printable conductive materials have shown promising prospects in the fabrication of high-performance FCSs and would lead the flexible electronics into a new age of portability and flexibility. Intrinsic flexible materials, such as conductive polymers,37 carbon nanotubes,38 Mxenes,39 and metal nanowires,40 have been used to make printed FCSs. Therefore, high-performance flexible electronics could be achieved by selecting a reasonable printable conductive material and optimizing a suitable printing technique.
In this work, the printing techniques for fabricating FCSs are described with inkjet printing, extrusion printing, screen printing, gravure printing, and micro-contact printing. Moreover, printable conductive materials for fabricating FCSs are presented, including organic conductive materials, inorganic conductive materials, and metallic materials. Meanwhile, the synergistic effects for fabricating FCSs are discussed among the printing techniques, printable conductive materials, and flexible substrates (Fig. 1). Finally, the remaining challenges and prospects are proposed in fabricating FCSs, which would provide a valuable reference for constructing flexible electronics.
 Fig. 1  Fabricating flexible conductive structures by printing techniques and printable conductive materials for constructing flexible electronics. 
2. Printing techniques
As a solution processing method, the printing techniques have been widely used in functional structure manufacturing.41 In the specific printing process, the ink-containing conductive material could be deposited on the substrate to realize a conductive structure.42 Concretely, the printing techniques could be divided into two types: non-plate printing and plate printing. In order to clearly compare the advantages and limitations of printing techniques, a comparison has been added in Table 1.
Table 1 A comparison of printing techniques with advantages and limitations




Printing technique
Feature


Advantages
Limitations




Inkjet printing
High printing precise; Flexible;
Complex nozzle;


Non-plate printing.
Low printing speed.


Extrusion printing
Large scale fabrication; Flexible;
Low printing precise;


Non-plate printing.
Low printing speed.


Screen printing
High printing speed;
Complex printed composite;


Large scale fabrication;
Plate printing;


Extensive ink selection.
Low printing precise.


Gravure printing
High printing speed;
Plate printing;


High printing precise;
Limited ink selection.


Controllable printed thickness.




Micro-contact printing
High printing speed;
Plate printing;


High printing precise.
Limited ink selection;




Thin printed thickness.




2.1 Non-plate printing
Non-plate printing directly transfers functional materials to the substrate without a printing plate, including inkjet printing,43 direct-writing printing,44 and other printing processes.45

2.1.1 Inkjet printing. 
Inkjet printing is a non-contact, full-addition, digitally-controlled technology,46 which controls the ink through electrical signals and deposits the ink directly on the substrate to form a high-quality pattern. Inkjet printing, as the most current digital printing technology, has the advantages of ease of use, low cost, strong flexibility, and fast speed. The diameters of nozzles in inkjet printing could reach 5–10 μm, and the volume of inkjet droplet is in the range of 1–20 pL. As shown in Fig. 2a, inkjet printing has three typical processes: thermal inkjet printing, piezoelectric inkjet printing, and continuous inkjet printing.47 The depositing morphology of inkjet-printed functional materials could be controlled by the substrate, ink rheology, printing equipment, and external fields. In addition, due to its non-contact advantage, it could be theoretically applied to almost all printable electronic components. Tavakoli et al. inkjet printer silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) on tattoo film and coated a thin layer of eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn) on the ink layer for “sintering” to obtain the conductivity of the conductive circuit.48 The tensile strain resistance is extremely impressive, and these mechanically robust thin film circuits are ideal for transfer to highly curved and extensible 3D surfaces, skins, and other soft deformable substrates. Al-Halhouli et al. deposited AgNPs on a stretchable PDMS substrate by inkjet printing to construct a flexible sensor for detecting the respiration rate.49 The flexible wearable sensor is in phase with the reference e-health sensor. Mizukami et al. developed a 3.2-inch flexible color display with a resolution of 50 ppi.50 The display consists of bottom-emitting multiphoton organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), and organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) are composed of inkjet printed organic films with bottom-gate/bottom contact structures. The device could successfully display the color video in a curved state and achieve a maximum brightness of 125 cd m−2 under white light emission conditions. Islam et al. produced an inkjet printed flexible radio frequency identification (RFID) tag antenna for ultrahigh frequency (UHF) sensor applications.51 The tag antenna consists of a modified meander line radiator with a semi-circular feed network. The structure is inkjet printed on photopaper using AgNPs conductive ink. Meng et al. integrated inkjet printed polymer matrix on a flexible PET substrate modified with PDA to form a continuous template, and then chemically deposited an Ag grid to prepare an ultrathin, ultraflexible Ag mesh@polydopamine (PDA)/poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) flexible transparent electrodes (FTEs).52 As shown in Fig. 2b, the polymer solar cell shows superior power conversion efficiency (PCE) and has excellent bending endurance and reliable operation. Although inkjet printing has been widely used in the preparation of various types of FCSs, it still has some deficiencies. It is challenging to develop inkjet inks with suitable viscosity, concentration, and solvent systems.53 In addition, the controls of flying ink phenomenon during ink droplet ejection, film morphology, and layer thickness after wetting and spreading need to be considered,54,55 which directly affect the resolution and performances of FCSs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Three typical processes of inkjet printing: thermal inkjet printing (left); piezoelectric inkjet printing (middle); continuous inkjet printing (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of electroless-assisted inkjet printing process for Ag mesh@PDA/PET FTEs with excellent flexural endurance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


2.1.2 Extrusion printing. 
Extrusion printing extrudes the functional materials from a nozzle with a controlled pressure to deposit a variety of complex structures (Fig. 3a).56 Compared with other rapid prototyping techniques, extrusion printing has significant advantages, such as short production cycle, low cost, flexible production, and high accuracy.57 The most typical extrusion printing process is 3D printing, which is controlled by a computer and extrudes hot-melt materials from the nozzle. The planar structures could be formatted according to the requirements or layer-by-layer deposition could be used to prepare complex three-dimensional structures. The diameter of the nozzle could range from a few micrometers to millimeters with different extrusion types. Tang et al. used extrusion printing to directly write graphene aerogels with multi-dimensions (Fig. 3b).58 Gao et al. used coaxial extrusion printing to produce an integrated wearable sensor array (Fig. 3c and d),59 which has excellent sensitivity and durability. Ma et al. successfully produced a 3D chip-less RFID tag, which has high density, high sensitivity, and other excellent properties.60 Although extrusion printing is a new type for manufacturing a three-dimensional periodic structure, it could form various complex and fine functional materials and structural materials.61 However, there are still many problems worth exploring and researching, including the selection and design of appropriate functional materials, highly conductive structure after molding, more precise mechanical control, precision of the microstructures, and flexibility of processes.
 Fig. 3  (a) Filament-based extrusion writing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. (b) Extrusion printing of graphene aerogels with multi-dimensions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic showing the extrusion printing process. (d) Schematic of the integrated sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019, Wiley. 

2.2 Plate printing
Plate printing realizes the deposition of functional materials with the help of a printing plate. According to the plate type, it mainly involves the traditional four major printing technologies—screen printing, gravure printing, micro-contact printing, and lithographic printing.

2.2.1 Screen printing. 
Screen printing uses screen as an ink carrier, which includes the flat pressing method round the pressing method (Fig. 4a).62 The components of the screen-printing machine, which are simple, include a screen plate, rubber squeegee, ink return knife, and suction table.63 When the printed ink is squeezed by a doctor blade, the ink in the graphic part is transferred to the substrate through a mesh under pressure. Screen printing has the characteristics of low cost, high resolution, high precision, and multi-layer structure of printing, along with the strong adaptability to the ink and substrate, thick ink layer, and little spontaneous movement of the ink. The printed dimensions could reach a few micrometers in width with a millimeter-level thickness. Screen printing is the most widely used technique in plate printing flexible electronics.64 Sinha et al. used screen printing to prepare a PEDOT:PSS electrode on textile to realize a wearable heart.65 The signal generated by this sensor is comparable to the Ag/AgCl electrode. Meanwhile, the textiles could be washed with water. Liu et al. used screen printing and sprayed coating to generate multiple functional layers of the electrode and the active material on textiles to fabricate dye-sensitized solar cells.66 Chang et al. used screen printing to prepare a flexible electronic sensor for large-area sensing on two polyimide (PI) sheets, and optimized its flexible structure characteristics with good mechanical and electrical properties.67 Li et al. constructed a high-performance micro-supercapacitor in one step with developed hydrated ruthenium oxide (RuO2·xH2O), silver nanowires (AgNW) and graphene oxide (GO) thixotropic mixed ink using screen printing (Fig. 4b).68 As a planar microelectrode, the obtained capacitor has high resolution, good electrical performances, excellent cycle stability, and mechanical flexibility. Kellomaki et al. made different integrated circuits on two kinds of fabrics by screen printing and confirmed the reliability of the produced RFID tags through humidity and laundry tests.69 Although screen printing is relatively simple, it is not suitable for printing most low-viscosity organic and polymer electronic functional materials.70 In other words, the high-viscosity ink is suitable for screen printing. There are many factors that affect the screen-printing quality and characteristics for fabricating flexible electronics, such as the viscosity of the ink, printing speed, squeegee angle and geometry, distance between the screen and the substrate, mesh size, and printing materials.71,72 Notably, the ink exposed to the air induces a quickly dry and a blocked mesh during screen printing, which should be paid attention to fabricate flexible electronics.
 Fig. 4  (a) Flatbed screen printing with planar substrates under a screen and squeegee for solution dispensing, and the screen printed structure could be adjusted with the ink and the plate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes for screen-printed all-functional nanocomponents-based flexible MSCs devices in the top image. Optical images of flexible interdigitated RArG-4 MSCs array printed on filter paper substrates in bent states in the image. Optical microscopy images of single RArG-4 MSC with different widths of the electrodes in the right image. The scale bar in the left image is 1 cm, and the scale bar in the right image is 500 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.2 Gravure printing. 
In gravure printing, the ink is scraped off with a squeegee to move it to the graphic part on the concave plate and then transferred directly under printing pressure to the substrate. It has many advantages in the production of flexible electronics, which is suitable for inks with lower viscosity and good compatibility. By adjusting the parameters such as the shape, area, and depth of the opening of the cell, the amount and area of the ink could be controlled to obtain an ideal thickness and fineness of the printed morphology.73 The printed dimension could reach a few nanometers in width and height. Zhu et al. proved the feasibility of printing flexible RFID antennas for various electronic equipment applications by gravure printing on nanopaper.74 Bariya et al. proposed a type of gravure-printed electrode with stability in the application of high-performance electrochemical sensors for detecting ions, metabolites, heavy metals, body fluids, etc.75 Koo et al. used roll-to-roll (R2R) gravure printing system and successfully produced flexible electronics based on fully printed thin film transistors (TFTs).76 Tekoglu et al. produced small molecule-based flexible organic light-emitting diodes (SMOLEDs) through gravure printing.77 The gravure-printed SM:UHMW-PS device exhibited 67% higher luminance efficiency compared with the spin-coated pristine SM device. Kim et al. used the advantages of gravure printing to fabricate layers with any shape and size, and proposed a process based on gravure printing (Fig. 5a and b).78 The carving patterns on PET substrates were realized to prepare a perovskite solar energy battery with good efficiency. Kim et al. used the capillary force of the PDMS seal to ensure that the ink penetrated the microchannel. The channel is like the gravure groove, which could form various graphic patterns by providing a centrifugal force (Fig. 5c).79 Compared with non-plate printing technology, gravure printing has many instability factors with a high initial investment for most scientific research institutions. Although the gravure printing process is very suitable for the large-scale production of flexible electronics, it needs a large output to obtain economic benefits.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram represents gravure printing on a flexible substrate. (b) The images of the printing plate with a flower-shape engraved pattern and the resulting printed pattern of the perovskite on the PET substrate. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c) Schematic description of the novel patterning process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.3 Micro-contact printing. 
Micro-contact printing uses a printing plate with a graphic part higher than a non-graphic part.80 The graphic part of the printing plate directly contacts the substrate, and then the functional material of the graphic part directly adheres to the substrate after detaching the printing plate.81 At present, the most widely used processes of micro-contact printing include roll-to-roll printing (Fig. 6a)82 and flat printing (Fig. 6b),83 which need rubber and photosensitive resin plate and the low-viscosity ink. Micro-contact printing also has the characteristics of wide printable materials, low printing pressure, complex plate making, low cost, smooth pattern surface, and sharp edges. Micro-contact printing uses a soft plate to generate a thin film; thus, it is mostly used to print the self-assembled layer and plays an auxiliary role in the flexible electronic manufacturing process. Higuchi et al. used a micro-contact printing method to manufacture the high-mobility carbon nanotube thin film transistors, which could present a combination of transfer and high-speed in the fabrication process.84 Alem et al. demonstrated that the poly(N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT) could be micro-contact printed in the fabrication of photovoltaic cells and patterned as high-throughput active layers with a low cost.85 Su et al. used a dewetting micro-contact printing to prepare nanoparticles into a nanoscale wire by transferring silver conductive ink (Fig. 6c).86 The controlling process of nanoparticles or molecules is induced by the hydrophobic and hydrophilic acting force with a dynamic depositing assemble. The printed dimension could reach one line of nanoparticles or molecules. There are relatively few reports on the preparation of flexible electronic devices by micro-contact printing due to the complexity of the micro-contact printing equipment, the large minimum demand for materials, and the poor printing durability of flexible printing plates. The biggest challenge of micro-contact printing is the deformation of the pattern that may be caused by the soft elasticity of printing plates.
 Fig. 6  (a) Roll-to-roll micro-contact printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) Flat micro-contact printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Dewetting micro-contact printing to prepare nanoparticles into nanoscale wire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3. Printable conductive materials
The printing technique provides a valuable and effective way to pattern functional materials into high-performance micro-nanostructure.87 The printable flexible conductive structure is usually composed of a printable conductive material and its micro-nanostructure, which could supply many high-performances in the flexible electronics area. Therefore, printable conductive materials are presented for fabricating high-performance FCSs. Meanwhile, a list of printable conductive materials has been added with printing techniques and its applications are given in Table 2.
Table 2 A list of printable conductive materials with printing techniques and its applications




Printable conductive material
Feature


Printing technique
Applications




PEDOT:PSS
Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.
Energy store; sensor; electrode.


PANI
Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.
Energy store; sensor; electrode.


PPy
Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.
Energy store; sensor; electrode.


Graphene
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.


Carbon nanotube
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.


Carbon black
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.


MXenes
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.


Liquid metal
Extrusion printing; Micro-contact printing.
Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.


Metal nanowire
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.


Metal composite
All kinds of above printing techniques.
Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.




3.1 Printable organic conductive materials
Various conjugated polymers could be transformed into conductors with doping. As intrinsically conductive and stretchable materials, organic conductive materials have gained wide attention for fabricating flexible electronics owing to their good conductivity and mechanical properties, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS),88 polyaniline (PANI),89 polypyrrole (PPy),90 polyacetylene (PA),91 and polythiophene (PTi),92 which have a conductivity of up to 100 S cm−1 and could be stretched up to 10% without cracking. The conductive circuit of PA could be generated on a flexible substrate via the inkjet printing of a coordination polymerization catalyst.93 Sensors could also be fabricated by inkjet printing PTi onto the array of transduction electrodes, which could demonstrate the sensitivity and selectivity of detection and discrimination of volatile organic compounds with the electrochemical property of PTi.94 In addition, the organic conductive material could be used in optoelectronic devices with a good light transmittance,95,96 while the conductivity of the organic conductive material is still far below that of the metal. Therefore, many studies have been devoted to composite other conductive materials with organic conductive materials to obtain good properties for fabricating flexible electronics.97,98

3.1.1 PEDOT:PSS. 
PEDOT:PSS is composed with a positively charged conductive conjugate of PEDOT and negatively charged insulation PSS polyelectrolyte (Fig. 7a).99 PSS could increase the carrier density of PEDOT, and the hydrophilicity of PSS could stabilize PEDOT chain dispersed in water.100 Hu et al. demonstrated an electrode that reduces this performance gap in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by regulating the phase separation of a conducting polymer network using a fluorosurfactant dopant.101 Zhao et al. used PEDOT:PSS/single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) to form a double material transformation mechanism; a transparent electronic skin sensor was prepared with a high sensitivity, which could be stretched to 150% (Fig. 7b).102 Naderi et al. prepared MnO2/PEDOT:PSS-rGO ternary binder nanocomposites in the carbon fiber substrate (Fig. 7c). The fiber electrode could realize a specific capacitance of 2.9 F cm−2 (194 F cm−3, 550 mF cm−1) under the current density of 5 mA cm−2, and showed a capacitance retention of 95% in the 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte circulated for 5000 cycles.103 Wang et al.104 used a regenerable cellulose film as the flexible substrate and PEDOT:PSS as the ink to produce a synergistic effect of coordination complexation and hydrogen bonding. A stable performance was presented after 60 days at a high humidity of 90% relative humidity and a temperature of 65 °C. Meanwhile, on repeated bending for 500 times, peeling more than 400 times, or soaking in water for 30 days, the composite film still exhibited a stable high conductivity.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Highly stretchable and fully transparent pressure sensor under discriminable strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Scheme of preparation of the MnO2/PEDOT:PSS-rGO@CF electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.2 PANI. 
PANI is a conductive polymer with alternating benzene rings and nitrogen atoms on the main chain, which has been widely studied and applied in the field of flexible electronics because of its advantages of available raw materials, simple synthesis process, and good chemical and environmental stability. PANI is particularly easy to deposit into various micro-nanostructures. Zheng et al. reduced the GO and PANI nanorod array into a fabric fiber (PANI/RGO/textile). The high-performance piezoresistive sensor was formed with a conductive fabric fiber (Fig. 8a) and could be used in the actual application for detecting all kinds of human movement.105 Zhang et al. chose porous polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as a framework, and then an in-situ polymerization method was successfully adopted on PET fiber by winding a thin polyaniline coating. Polyaniline composited with paper showed a durability of strong bending and effective ability of electromagnetic interference shielding (Fig. 8b).106 Hu et al. grew an ordered and high-density PANI nanorod array on the surface of carbon nanofibers (CNFs) to form the PANI@CNFs composite material through a simple one-step chemical oxidation method. Under a current density of 0.5 A g−1, the prepared symmetric supercapacitor had good electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance of 285 F g−1 (Fig. 8c).107
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the PANI/rGO/textile composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Multifunctional PET/PANI composite paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) PANI@CNFs composite material preparation diagram and all-solid flexible supercapacitor manufacturing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.1.3 PPy. 
PPy is a typical conjugated polymer, which has a low cost, high electrical conductivity in doped states (100–10000 S m−1), and ease of large-scale fabrication.108,109 Hu et al. used the highly conductive PPy tubes to run through the MOF particles, which not only increase the electron transfer between the MOF particles and maintain the high effective porosity of the MOFs but also endow the MOFs with flexibility.110 Zhang et al. show the cooperation of hydraulic pressure under liquid phase and liquid-like property of the gel surfaces, which could dramatically eliminate the local pinning effect and enhance the advancement of the three-phase contact line, thus forming stable and homogeneous superspreading liquid layers. The layer could be converted into PPy film with controlled thicknesses (nm- to mm-scale) through the one-step polymerization of the reactants (Fig. 9a).111 Wang et al. fabricated conductive PPy microelectrodes utilizing surface tension-confined liquid patterns with a vapor phase method, which could be used to realize various polymer patterns for flexible electronics (Fig. 9b).112
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram for the superspreading process of the gel surface (left), the fabricating process of the PPy film with a reaction process (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) Precursor pattern fabricated with a special wetting surface (left), the fabricated PPy pattern with a vapor phase method (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Printable inorganic conductive materials
The increase of carbon and graphene-like nanomaterials provide new development strategies for fabricating FCSs. Such nanomaterials could be dispersed in different solvents to prepare various inks, and a variety of printing techniques could be conveniently combined with the substrate to fabricate FCSs. The fine geometric size, excellent electrical conductivity, and high mechanical strength of carbon nanomaterials are used to realize the characteristics of electrical conductivity and flexibility. At present, carbon and graphene-like nanomaterials have been widely used for fabricating FCS with the printing technique, including graphene, carbon nanotube, carbon black, and two-dimensional transition metal carbides/carbonitrides or nitrides (MXenes).113,114

3.2.1 Graphene. 
Graphene is a special 2D conductive carbon material and is composed of a hexagonal honeycomb structure with periodically stacked sp2 hybrid carbon atoms. It is the thinnest two-dimensional material known in the world with a thickness of 0.35 nm.115 Due to its unique structure, graphene has excellent optical, electrical, thermal, and flexible mechanical properties, such as excellent transmittance (97.7%),116 thermal conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1),117 electronic mobility 2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, and conductivity (∼106 S m−1).118 The preparation of graphene is the basis and premise for scientific research and wide application in various fields. At present, the preparation methods of graphene mainly include mechanical stripping, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), epitaxial growth, and oxidation-reduction. Graphene obtained by different preparation methods has different quality and yield, which present different application fields.119 At present, the main research direction of the preparation methods of graphene is high yield, controllability, and environmental friendliness. One famous experiment of mechanical peeling is that Novoselov et al. peeled HOPG with an adhesive tape to get graphene.120 Graphene obtained by this method is the highest quality at present; thus, it is widely used in the basic research of physical and chemical properties of intrinsic graphene. However, there are some problems in the mechanical stripping process, such as time-consuming process, low yield, and difficulty of controlling the size and lamellae of graphene. The redox method is a widely used preparation method at present.121 The method has advantages of low preparation cost, short reaction period, and large production, which is widely used in the preparation of graphene and its composites. Graphene has an important application prospect in energy storage,122 composite materials,123 wearable devices,124 and biomedicine.125 Graphene is also one of the most widely used materials in the field of flexible electronics due to the large specific surface area and the van der Waals force between the layers. Graphene is easy to agglomerate, and its performance is closely related to the number of layers. Only single- and few-layer graphene flakes could exhibit high performances. In addition, due to the stable chemical property and weak interaction with other media, graphene is only soluble in several specific strong polar solvents, and is difficult to dissolve in water and common organic solvents, which limits the research and application of graphene in the conductive ink.126 Therefore, in the preparation of flexible electronic devices, composites and modified strategies are usually used to process graphene and multidimensional assembly (films, fibers, aerogels, etc.) to meet various requirements in the performances. Through flexible pattern design and precise microstructure assembly operation, various graphene devices have been realized such as circuits, supercapacitors, and wearable sensors. Li et al. inkjet printed Ag@Au NPs-rGO ink on a viscoelastic substrate and reduced Ag@Au NPs-rGO to a flexible conductive film (Fig. 10a).127 Due to the stability of the core@shell structure model, the agglomeration of graphene sheets could be effectively prevented, and the conductive stability of the Ag@Au NPs-rGO film could be improved.128 The synergistic effects of Ag, Au, and graphene could make electron transport between Ag@Au and graphene easy and make an excellently conductive film. The transparent conductive films showed a high transparency (∼98%) and high-resolution line rGO of ∼7 μm width. This research provides a promising strategy for highly stable integrated circuits and highly transparent devices. An et al. reported the fabrication of neat graphene aerogel with microextrusion printing to generate an electronic sensor with 3D nanostructure.129 This method could yield arbitrary two-dimensional patterns and three-dimensional morphology with facile and efficient operation. The printing graphene aerogel has good electrical conductivity (130 S m−1) and reversible mechanical deformation. With multichannel monitoring, the sensor could accomplish the monitoring changes of seven different gestures, which were monitored at five figure joints (Fig. 10b). As shown in Fig. 10c, Li et al. prepared a high conductivity graphene film by the direct printing of the giant graphene oxide (GGO) ink.130 Benefiting from the synergistic effect of printing-induced orientation and evaporation-induced interface assembly, the GGO film has more compact stacking and lower chip-to-chip contact resistance; thus, that it has stable high conductivity. Followed by chemical reduction with hydroiodic acid (HI), the conductivity of graphene electrode reaches 4.51 × 104 S m−1, and it could still maintain stable conductivity under bending condition. Based on the good conductivity and mechanical flexibility of the graphene electrode, a large area and uniform pattern are obtained in the flexible circuit. Therefore, it could be used in electrically-driven soft actuator with the double-layer structure of RGO/PDMS to achieve controllable deformation under low driving voltage. Inspired by the structure-activity relationship of discrepant microstructures of spiral and radial threads in a spider web, Liu et al. designed and printed graphene porous and dense-packing microstructure to integrate a multi-resolution graphene tactile sensor (Fig. 10d).131 The printed pattern was reduced by HI, and graphene ribbon exhibits an excellent electrical conductivity up to 4.40 × 104 S m−1, which could smoothly transmit the sensing signal. Then, they designed a graphene simulated skin with a densely packed and porous structure that enables mechanized fingers to be controlled individually. Due to its excellent conductivity and flexibility, graphene-based electronics have better mechanical and electrical properties and more extensive applications than traditional electronic devices. Thus, the printing technology manufactures advanced electronic devices more conveniently and efficiently.
 Fig. 10  (a) Flexible transparent conductive film was prepared by inkjet printing with Ag@Au NPs-rGO ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Graphene aerogel sensors and analyses of their electronic sensors with different hand gestures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Large-area flexible RGO circuits prepared and integrated with LED chips and hand-shaped actuator with its various gestures by independent control of the fingers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Graphene tactile sensor assembly and position electronic discriminant analysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.2 Carbon nanotube. 
Carbon nanotube (CNT) is a hollow and closed one-dimensional carbon material composed of curled graphite sheets. The outer diameter of the CNT is generally several nanometers to dozens of nanometers, and the length is generally at the micron level, giving a very high aspect ratio. According to the number of surface carbon atomic layers, CNT could be divided into single-walled CNT and multi-walled CNT. Compared with multi-walled CNT, single-walled CNT has fewer defects in the surface structure and better performances. With the decrease in the number of walled layers, the van der Waals force binding is closer, showing that single-walled CNT is more difficult to disperse in solution. Owing to the surface defects, the multiwalled CNT is easy to functionally modify, and then, the dispersion and interface binding of modified carbon nanotubes are greatly improved. CNT is usually prepared by arc discharge, laser evaporation, chemical vapor precipitation, and other methods.132,133 CNT has good conductivity, thermal conductivity, mechanical properties, and chemical stability, and has been widely used in the field of flexible electronic devices,134 flexible energy storage devices,135 wearable devices,136 medical devices,137etc. However, due to the large surface tension and specific surface area, CNTs tend to agglomerate in the matrix, which limits their application in the conductive ink. At present, there are three main methods to prepare CNTs conductive ink: (1) dispersing CNTs in neat organic solvent or superacid;138 (2) dispersing CNTs in aqueous solution with dispersant or surface modifier;139 (3) grafting-modified group on CNTs surface to disperse it in aqueous solution.140 Han et al. synthesized water-based conductive CNTs ink with single-walled CNTs and sodium dodecylbenezenesulfonate (SDBS) as surfactants (Fig. 11a).141 The CNTs ink could be written directly on cellulosic paper through pen and ink cartridge, and has excellent adhesion and good robustness to mechanical stresses such as bending, folding, and wrinkling. The dual-side and multi-layer paper circuit boards were demonstrated by direct writing as a chemical sensor, which showed a good response down to 10 ppm of ammonia vapor in air. Hu et al. proposed to add CNTs into Ag ink and fabricated CNTs-enriched silver (Ag-CNTs) electrode films on the polyimide substrate by simple screen-printing method. It could be sintered at relatively low temperature to improve the conductivity and reliability of the Ag electrode film in the printing process (Fig. 11b).142 The resistivity of the electrode film was 7.26 mΩ cm, which is significantly lower than that of the silver electrode film (19.24 mΩ cm). After 1000 bending cycles with a 4 mm bending radius, the electrical resistivity of the Ag-CNTs films was 1.49 mΩ cm−1, which was significantly decreased by 16.8% compared with that of Ag films (1.79 mΩ cm). The Ag-CNTs films exhibited excellent conductivity and flexibility, and was very promising for wearable flexible electronic devices.143 Alshammari et al. prepared the conductive ink by adding carbon nanotubes into aqueous PEDOT:PSS assisted by surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Fig. 11c).144 Then, the conductive film was obtained by inkjet printing with a concentration of CNTs between 0.01 wt% and 0.05 wt%. With a DC electric field applied during the printing process, the carbon nanotubes in the conductive pattern were arranged in an orderly manner, and the conductivity of the conductive film was greatly improved from 4.4 to 6.7 S cm−1. As shown in Fig. 11d, Molina-Lopez et al. used layer-by-layer inkjet printing to prepare the stretchable conductive material into a triode structure.145 PVDF-HFP was used as the gate electrolyte, and PEDOT:PSS was used as the source electrode in inkjet printing after plasma activation. Then, SC-SWCNTs and conjugated polymers were used as semiconductor channels, and then PEDOT:PSS and PVDF-HF were printed on them to form a sandwich structure. The I–V transfer characteristic curve showed high field-effect mobility with an average of 27 ± 5 cm2 V−1 s−1, and its switching current ratio could be up to 104.
 Fig. 11  (a) Carbon nanotube ink is stably dispersed and written on fiber paper and paper cups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the specific preparation process of Ag-CNTs films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Images of original MWCNTs and SDS-MWCNTs dissolved in water and alignment technique of CNT in the printed PEDOT:PSS/MWCNT samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (d) Electronic device designed with drawing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019, Nature. 


3.2.3 Carbon black. 
Carbon black (CB) is also one of the common carbon nanomaterials for printing and manufacturing FCSs. CB is a kind of amorphous carbon with light weight, loose, good conductivity, and small particle size (up to 10 nm). CB is produced by the incomplete combustion or thermal decomposition of carbon-containing substances (coal, natural gas, etc.). The methods of dispersing CB in water are as follows: I. adding dispersant; II. surface grafting polymerization of hydrophilic monomers; III. treatment of organic compounds containing hydrophilic functional groups; IV. direct surface oxidation.146 In addition, when CB is used in combination with other carbon materials, fine CB particles could be dispersed between gaps of other materials, reduce the gap between conductive particles, and improve the conductivity.147,148 Therefore, CB has been widely used in energy storage,149 biosensor,150 wearable devices,151 and other fields. Liu et al. prepared RGO and CB ink with graphene powders containing thicker smaller-area flakes and carbon black fraction of 15% in the total conductive fillers, which could realize 90 μm line width and electrical conductivity of 2.15 × 104 S m−1 at 7 μm thickness with outstanding mechanical property (Fig. 12a).152 As shown in Fig. 12b, Liao et al. used multiwalled CNTs, graphene, and carbon black as conductive fillers and water-based acrylic resin as adhesive to prepare highly conductive carbon-based aqueous inks (HCCA inks).153 The prepared conductive ink has a good conductivity and mechanical stability, which could be used to make electrodes for thin-film batteries, supercapacitors, and flexible circuits with elastic fabrics. They printed flexible circuits on paper with a minimum resistivity of 29 Ω sq−1 and a very high folding period (>2000 cycles). Wei et al. combined spin coating and inkjet printing to prepare perovskite solar cells. They first spin-coated PbI2 film on the surface of FTO conductive glass deposited with a dense TiO2 layer, and then inkjet printed a mixed ink of CB and CH3NH3I, CH3NH3I, and PbI2. The rapid reaction converts it into a perovskite, which enables the perovskite layer and the carbon black layer to form an interpenetrating interface.154
 Fig. 12  (a) Scheme for producing conductive ink and application example with the screen printing of carbon black. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Bending test of the paper-based flexible circuit and the relationship between resistance and bending angle of the paper-based flexible circuit, and EL devices prepared based on the HCCA-inks as a back electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.4 MXenes. 
The transition metal carbides/carbonitrides or nitrides (MXenes) are an emerging type of 2D material, which are produced by selectively etching a layer from Mn+1AXn (n = 1–3) MAX phase precursor, where M represents an early transition metal (such as Sc, Ti, Zr, V, Nb, Cr, or Mo), A is generally from the group IIIA or IVA (i.e., Group 13 or 14), and X is carbon and/or nitrogen.155 Naguib et al. firstly reported that hydrofluoric acid (HF) could etch the Al layer of Ti3AlC2 to produce graphene-like Ti3C2 MXene,156 and the surface of the produced Ti3C2 layer was chemically terminated with O, OH, and/or F atoms. In recent years, various MXenes were designed, including Ti2C, Nb2C, and Ti3CN, using a corresponding MAX phase stripped with HF, ammonium difluoride (NH4HF2), etc.157 There are two forms of MXenes with different M: solid solutions and ordered phases. In a solid solution, random arrangements of two different transition metals are observed in the M layer. In contrast, in the ordered phase, a single or double layer of transition metal is sandwiched between layers of the second transition metal in the 2D structure.158 It is predicted that there are more than 30 different MXenes. The general formula of MXenes is Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–4), where M represents the transition metal, X denotes carbon or nitrogen, and T is the multiple terminations (O, OH, and/or F atoms).159,160 The possible constituent atoms of MAX are shown in Fig. 13a. Benefiting from their metallic conductivity, high density, and hydrophilic nature, MXenes, exceedingly most previously reported materials, have been an important material for fabricating electronics.161 Generally, the conductive structure was made of layered materials by the restacking of 2D nanosheets, which could be used as super belt containers for the fabrication of FCS.162,163 Li et al. designed a soft actuator based on a PET-supported MXene/cellulose/polystyrene sulfonic acid composite membrane (MCPM). This actuator can capture the humidity energy and convert it to mechanical power by the asymmetric swelling and expansion of MCPM under moisture gradient.164 Yan et al. studied the fabrication of a flexible and highly conductive MXene/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) film by electrostatically self-assembling negatively charged MXene nanosheets and positively charged rGO nanosheets. The obtained MXene/rGO composite could effectively relieve the self-capture of rGO and MXene and maintain an ultrahigh conductivity (2261 S cm−1) and high density (3.1 g cm−3).165 Zheng et al. reported multitasking aqueous printable MXene inks as an additive-free high-capacitance electrode, sensitive pressure-sensing material, highly conducting current collector, metal-free interconnector, and conductive binder. By directly screen printing MXene inks, MXene-based micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) and lithium-ion microbatteries (LIMBs) are delicately fabricated on various flexible substrates (Fig. 13b).166
 Fig. 13  (a) The possible constituent atoms of MAX in the element table. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of printable MX-MSCs, MX-LIMBs, and all-flexible self-powered integrated system.166 Copyright 2021, Wiley. 

3.3 Printable metallic materials
Metallic bulk materials have good luster, ductility, thermal transmission, electrical conductivity, and other properties,167–169 which is difficult to be directly used in fabricating FCSs due to their high Young's modulus. To improve the flexibility of metallic materials, several studies have been carried out for the application of liquid metal,170,171 metal nanowire,172–176 and metal composite.177–179 Thus, metal materials could be used to fabricate various FCSs with printing techniques.

3.3.1 Liquid metal. 
A kind of liquid metal material with low melting point at or near room temperature and infinite deformability180,181 has been widely used for fabricating flexible electronics,182 benefitting from the high electrical conductivity, favorable fluidity, and super compliance. However, liquid metals are not directly used because of the high surface tension and large dimension-induced dexterity limitation. To address this challenge, liquid metal has been manipulated by the printing technique, which makes the liquid metal present various properties in flexible electronics. Direct printing, screen printing, and spray printing have been reported with liquid metal ink for fabricating flexible electronics.183 Generally, five metallic elements are regarded as low-melting liquid metals, namely, francium (Fr, 27 °C), caesium (Cs, 28.5 °C), rubidium (Rb, 38.89 °C), mercury (Hg, −38.84 °C), and gallium (Ga, 29.76 °C). Compared with other four elements, Ga and its alloys have greater application prospects in the fields of flexible, stretchable, and reconfigurable electronics because of their lower toxicity and higher safety.184 Zheng et al. used direct printing to pattern liquid metal (Fig. 14a).185 In this printing process, liquid metal is needed to be pre-oxidized for increasing adhesion between the liquid metal and the substrate to resist the large surface tension. To skip the pre-oxidized procedure of liquid eutectic gallium-indium (EGaIn) inks, Park et al. demonstrate a new patterning technique for gallium-based liquid metals on flat substrates, which could realize a high pattern resolution (∼20 μm) and alignment precision as required for highly integrated circuits. (Fig. 14b).186 In this method, liquid metal was printed in the patterning of the liquid metal film by photolithography and lift-off process, the liquid metal layer was painted over the whole substrate area, which could be selectively removed by dissolving the underlying photoresist layer and leaving behind robust liquid patterns, as defined by photolithography.
 Fig. 14  (a) 3D diagram of the low-cost computer-controlled printer to illustrate the tapping mode movement of the printing head, the composite fluid mechanics to deliver, transfer, and adhere liquid metal ink to the substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of patterning the liquid metal with photolithography and obtaining a high pattern resolution and alignment precision. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2 Metal nanowire. 
Due to the shape anisotropy, high mechanical strength, and high conductivity, the metal nanowires have more complex physical properties and self-assembly behavior. In particular, the metal nanowires have been widely used for fabricating flexible electronics and applied in catalysts, adsorbents, and other aspects.187 Metal nanowires include gold nanowire (AuNW), silver nanowires (AgNW), and copper nanowires (CuNW). Among them, AgNW is the most widely used due to its highest conductivity, moderate price, and excellent antioxidation property.188 Metal nanowires have good flexibility mainly due to their scale effect of Young's modulus, i.e., the overall Young's modulus decreasing with the decreasing diameter. The structural design with a custom geometry, such as serpentines, wrinkles, meshes, and microcracks, could improve the essentially rigid materials with a good flexibility.189 Fan et al. prepared a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) solution and covered a wrinkled AgNW network by a simple spin-coating method.190 This semi-embedded and wrinkled structure not only enhanced the adhesion of AgNW to the PDMS substrate and ensured the uniform bending/unbending of AgNW without a AgNW fracture caused by tension. The AgNW/PDMS composite had good electrical conductivity even at 60% strain (Fig. 15a). However, this method requires complex structural design, complex process, or large consumption due to scalable interconnection, which brings some challenges to high-density integration, packaging, related high cost, and large-scale production. Su et al. guided silver nanoparticles into an array of curves on the flexible substrate through pillar-patterned template printing.191 The printable NP curves provided a high performing sensitive and stable resistance response with deformations (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of the preparation of the stretchable AgNW/PDMS composite films. Reproduced with permission. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The schematic illustration of the NP curve array printed and used for the multi analysis for skin micromotion sensing. Reproduced with permission. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 


3.3.3 Metal composite. 
The axial tensile rate of free metal film is generally 1–2%, and the elongation of the metal film deposited on a certain thickness and the stiffness of the flexible substrate could be greatly increased. Hence, the composite structure has a good application prospect for fabricating flexible electronics. In the process, the flexible material could well disperse the high Young's modulus of the metal material. Meanwhile, the bio-based materials could provide a synergistic effect to fabricate FCSs.192–194 However, the huge mechanical imbalance between rigid metal materials (e.g., gold with modulus of GPa magnitude) and flexible materials (e.g., polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with modulus of MPa magnitude)195,196 results in a stability problem, e.g., poor interfacial adhesion during long-term usage. To solve this problem, Liu et al. constructed an interlocking layer between PDMS and gold by employing a semi-polymerized PDMS substrate to encapsulate the gold clusters/atoms during thermal deposition (Fig. 16a).197 However, it is difficult to form a required pattern. The printing technique provides a facile way to make a precise pattern. As shown in Fig. 16b, Jiang et al. fabricated an embedded circuit with AgNPs into PDMS by inkjet printing.198 Notably, there was no apparent resistance increase after the PDMS film was bended 3000 times compared with silver tracks inkjet printed on the PET surface using the same AgNPs ink (Fig. 16c) because the silver cable is wrapped with the PDMS film to prevent the silver cable from breaking.
 Fig. 16  (a) Thermal radiation-assisted metal encapsulation of gold and polymer at the interface to tune the strain distribution in the metal film and enhance the interfacial adhesion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2016, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of inkjet-printed embedded silver microcables. (c) Comparison of resistance increment versus bending times of the embedded silver microcables and silver lines inkjet printed on PET film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 

4. Conclusion and outlook
In this paper, the recent advances in fabricating FCSs with printing technique, printable conductive materials, and synergistic effect have been reviewed. The advantages of the printing technique in fabricating FCSs are summarized with traditional and emerging techniques, comprising inkjet printing, extrusion printing, screen printing, gravure printing, and micro-contact printing. Moreover, various printable conductive materials for fabricating FCSs are presented, including organic conductive materials, inorganic conductive materials, and metallic materials. Meanwhile, the synergistic effects in fabricating FCSs are discussed among the printing technique, printable conductive material, and special surface. Based on the printability and electrical performance of conductive materials, various high-performance FCSs have been fabricated by printing techniques. Despite the numerous studies that have been devoted to printed FCSs with conductive nanomaterials, there are still many challenges to realize high-performance FCSs in some areas. For detailed studies on the correlation between the evaporation of printed droplets and the structure of the deposited materials, the external fields and special printing apparatuses would enhance the controllability of micro-nanostructures of conductive materials in FCSs. Moreover, the theoretical studies on solute distribution in the coalesced droplets is necessary for printing precise 2D sheets or organic molecules or the 3D printing of FCSs. In addition, the studies on flexible and stretchable sensing materials have become an advanced research hotspot in the field of flexible and wearable devices. Flexible conductive structures with response performance and high precision could play an important role in application in the life sciences field, such as transient electrons and nanorobots. Therefore, printing techniques and printable conductive materials would bring many excellent performances of flexible and wearable devices. The promising applications of printed high-performance flexible electronics could be foreseen in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21703110), the Key Research and Development Project of Shandong Province of China (No. 2019GGX102037), the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking of Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) of China (No. ZZ20210110, ZZ20210111).
References
T. Someya, Z. N. Bao and G. G. Malliaras, The rise of plastic bioelectronics, Nature, 2016, 540, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, S. B. Ji, Y. F. Luo, F. L. Zhang, Z. H. Liu, C. X. Wang, Z. S. Lv, Y. Jiang, M. Wang, Z. Q. Cui, G. L. Li, L. T. Jiang, Z. Y. Liu and X. D. Chen, A mechanically interlocking strategy based on conductive microbridges for stretchable electronics, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2101339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, Y. Wang, H. Y. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Skin electronics: next-generation device platform for virtual and augmented reality, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009602 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakata, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Wearable, flexible, and multifunctional healthcare device with an ISFET chemical sensor for simultaneous sweat pH and skin temperature monitoring, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 443–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang, M. Hassan, J. W. Liu and S. Hong, Nanowire assemblies for flexible electronic devices: recent advances and perspectives, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803430 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Sun, Y. Z. Guo, B. Cui, F. Q. Chu, H. Z. Li, Y. Li, M. He, L. H. Li and Y. L. Song, Inkjet printing bendable circuits based on an oil–water interface reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 445, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pang, G. Y. Lee, T. Kim, S. M. Kim, H. M. Kim, S. H. Ahn and K. Y. Suh, A flexible and highly sensitive strain-gauge sensor using reversible interlocking of nanofibres, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 795–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, Y. Lee, K. W. Cho, J. H. Koo and D. H. Kim, Wearable and implantable soft bioelectronics using two-dimensional materials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 52, 73–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhan, R. Lin, V. T. Tran, J. An, Y. Wei, H. Du, T. Tran and W. Lu, A paper-carbon nanotube based wearable pressure sensor for physiological signal acquisition and soft robotic skin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37921–37928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Lu, Y. Chen and X. Feng, Biocompatible and ultra-flexible inorganic strain sensors attached to skin for long-term vital signs monitoring, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37, 496–499 CAS .
J. Qin, L. J. Yin, Y. N. Hao, S. L. Zhong, D. L. Zhang, K. Bi, Y. X. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z. M. Dang, Flexible and stretchable capacitive sensors with different microstructures, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, K. C. Guo, D. Bukhvalov, X. F. Zhang, W. Z. Zhu, J. F. Yao and M. He, Cellulose hydrogels by reversible ion-exchange as flexible pressure sensors, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000358 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Wang, Y. Cong and J. Fu, Stretchable and tough conductive hydrogels for flexible pressure and strain sensors., J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3437–3459 RSC .
J. Y. Huang, D. W. Li, M. Zhao, H. Z. Ke, A. Mensah, P. F. Lv, X. J. Tian and Q. F. Wei, Flexible electrically conductive biomass-based aerogels for piezoresistive pressure/strain sensors, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1357–1366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Y. Lee, J. Hong, M. Ha, Y. D. Jung, H. Lim, S. Y. Kim and H. Ko, Giant tunneling piezoresistance
of composite elastomers with interlocked microdome arrays for ultrasensitive and multimodal electronic skins, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4689–4697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Sun, J. Q. Zhuang, S. Venkatesh, Y. Zhou, S. T. Han, W. Wu, K. W. Kong, W. J. Li, X. F. Chen, R. K. Y. Li and V. A. L. Roy, Highly sensitive and ultrastable skin sensors for biopressure and bioforce measurements based on hierarchical microstructures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4086–4094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Qi, Z. Y. Liu, M. Yu, Y. Liu and Y. X. Tang, Highly stretchable gold nanobelts with sinusoidal structures for recording electrocorticograms, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3145–3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Ultrathin and lightweight organic solar cells with high flexibility, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. P. Lacour, J. Jones and S. Wagner, Stretchable interconnects for elastic electronic surfaces, Proc. IEEE, 2005, 93, 1459–1467 CAS .
C. H. Yun, F. Q. Chu, B. Cui, X. Wang, G. P. Liu and J. Z. Sun, Enhanced flexibility of conductive layer with inkjet-imprinted microstructure surface, Mater. Lett., 2020, 266, 127461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, Z. Qiu, Y. Hong, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Liu, Z. Wu and C. F. Guo, A highly sensitive flexible capacitive tactile sensor with sparse and high-aspect-ratio microstructures, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700586 CrossRef .
J. D. Shi, L. Wang, Z. H. Dai, L. Y. Zhao and M. D. Du, Multiscale hierarchical design of a flexible piezoresistive pressure sensor with high sensitivity and wide linearity range, Small, 2018, 14, 1800819 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Su, S. Gong, Z. Ma, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, Mimosa-inspired design of a flexible pressure sensor with touch sensitivity, Small, 2015, 11, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, X. Xie, Q. Gao, H. Hu and R. Chen, Design of biomimetic human-skin-like tactile flexible sensor, Sens. Rev., 2019, 39, 397–406 CrossRef .
M. Acuautla, L. Patout, L. Gallais, S. Bernardini and M. Bendahan, Ozone flexible sensors fabricated by photolithography and laser ablation processes based on ZnO nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 203, 602–611 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Fu, Y. Ying, L. Chao, M. Yue, X. Zhao, Y. Hu, Z. Lei, H. Jian and C. Wei, Large-scale fabrication of high-performance ionic polymer-metal composite flexible sensors by in situ plasma etching and magnetron sputtering, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9146–9154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Su and Y. Song, Printable smart materials and devices: strategies and applications, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 5144–5164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Sun, Y. Li, G. P. Liu, S. R. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Chen, F. Q. Chu and Y. L. Song, Facile fabrication of patterned conductive surface by inkjet printing water-soluble sacrificial layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Sun, Y. Li, G. P. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. S. Tian, F. Q. Chu and Y. L. Song, Patterning a superhydrophobic area on a facile fabricated superhydrophilic layer based on an inkjet-printed water-soluble polymer template, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 9952–9959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Yu, X. T. Gong, C. Podder, B. Ludwig, I. M. Chen, W. Shou, A. Alvidrez, G. D. Chen, X. Huang and H. Pan, Additive manufacturing of sandwich-structured conductors for applications in flexible and stretchable electronics, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2021, 23, 2100286 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jung, Y. H. Jung, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. C. Feng, Y. Yang, M. Kim, H. Y. Tsai, T. Tanaka, J. Shin, K. Y. Kim, H. Choi, J. Rho and M. Choi, Three-dimensional nanoprinting via charged aerosol jets, Nature, 2021, 592, 54–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Wang, H. J. Cui, S. Li, X. W. Feng, J. Aghassi-Hagmann, S. Azizian and P. A. Levkin, Facile approach to conductive polymer microelectrodes for flexible electronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21661–21668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Sun, B. Cui, F. Q. Chu, C. H. Yun, M. He, L. H. Li and Y. L. Song, Printable nanomaterials for the fabrication of high-performance supercapacitors, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 528 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Abdolmaleki, P. Kidmose and S. Agarwala, Droplet-based techniques for printing of functional inks for flexible physical sensors, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Liang, H. F. Li, J. X. Dou, Q. Wang, W. Y. He, C. Y. Wang, D. H. Li, J. M. Lin and Y. Y. Zhang, Stable and biocompatible carbon nanotube ink mediated by silk protein for printed electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Zhu, Y. H. Tang, C. X. Lin, X. Y. Liu and Y. H. Lin, Recent advances in patterning natural polymers: from nanofabrication techniques to applications, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2001060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Luo, L. Jin, X. Gu, S. Chen, V. R. Feig, J. W. F. To, S. Rondeau-Gagné, J. Park, B. C. Schroeder, C. Lu, J. Y. Oh, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Kim, H. Yan, R. Sinclair, D. Zhou, G. Xue, B. Murmann, C. Linder, W. Cai, J. B.-H. Tok, J. W. Chung and Z. Bao, Highly stretchable polymer semiconductor films through the nanoconfinement effect, Science, 2017, 355, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuhisa, X. D. Chen, Z. N. Bao and T. Someya, Materials and structural designs of stretchable conductors, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2946–2966 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, L. Q. Yao, X. C. Li, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Printed supercapacitors: materials, printing and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3229–3264 RSC .
B. Cui, F. Q. Chu, H. Z. Li, C. H. Yun, S. Li, G. P. Liu and J. Z. Sun, Inkjet printing porous graphene/silver flexible electrode with enhanced electrochemical performance based on vapor phase reduction, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 10795–10802 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nayak, S. Mohanty, S. K. Nayak and A. Ramadoss, A review on inkjet printing of nanoparticle inks for flexible electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8771–8795 RSC .
X. W. Yu, X. T. Gong, C. Podder, B. Ludwig, I. M. Chen, W. Shou, A. Alvidrez, G. D. Chen, X. A. Huang and H. Pan, Additive manufacturing of sandwich-structured conductors for applications in flexible and stretchable electronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21661–21668 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wen, X. Wang, L. Liu, C. Hu, C. Sun, Y. R. Wu, Y. L. Zhao, J. X. Zhang, X. D. Liu and G. B. Ying, Inkjet printing transparent and conductive MXene (Ti3C2Tx) films: a strategy for flexible energy storage devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 17766–17780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ye, Y. J. Ding, Y. Q. Duan, J. T. Su, Z. P. Yin and Y. A. Huang, Large-scale direct-writing of aligned nanofibers for flexible electronics, Small, 2018, 14, 1703521 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gonzalez-Macia, A. Morrin, M. R. Smyth and A. J. Killard, Advanced printing and deposition methodologies for the fabrication of biosensors and biodevices, Analyst, 2010, 135, 845–867 RSC .
X. W. Wen, B. Y. Zhang, W. P. Wang, F. Ye, S. Yue, H. Guo, G. H. Gao, Y. S. Zhao, Q. Y. Fang, C. Nguyen, X. Zhang, J. M. Bao, J. T. Robinson, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, 3D-printed silica with nanoscale resolution, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1506–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Li, B. X. Liu, B. Pei, J. W. Chen, D. Z. Zhou, J. Y. Peng, X. Z. Zhang, W. Jia and T. Xu, Inkjet bioprinting of biomaterials, Chem. Rev., 2020, 19, 10793–10833 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tavakoli, M. H. Malakooti, H. Paisana, Y. Ohm, D. G. Marques, P. A. Lopes, A. P. Piedade, A. T. de Almeida and C. Majidi, EGaIn-assisted room-temperature sintering of silver nanoparticles for stretchable, inkjet-printed, thin-film electronics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801852 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Al-Halhouli, L. Al-Ghussain, B. S. El, H. P. Liu and D. C. Zheng, Fabrication and evaluation of a novel non-invasive stretchable and wearable respiratory rate sensor based on silver nanoparticles using inkjet printing technology, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mizukami, S. I. Cho, K. Watanabe, M. Abiko, Y. Suzuri, S. Tokito and J. Kido, Flexible organic light-emitting diode displays driven by inkjet-printed high-mobility organic thin-film transistors, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39, 39–42 CAS .
M. T. Islam, T. Alam, I. Yahya and M. Cho, Flexible radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag antenna for sensor applications, Sensors, 2018, 18, 4212 CrossRef PubMed .
X. C. Meng, Y. F. Xu, Q. X. Wang, X. Yang, J. M. Guo, X. T. Hu, L. C. Tan and Y. W. Chen, Silver mesh electrodes via electroless deposition-coupled inkjet-printing mask technology for flexible polymer solar cells, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 9713–9720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Moonen, I. Yakimets and J. Huskens, Fabrication of transistors on flexible substrates: from mass-printing to high-resolution alternative lithography strategies, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5526–5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Zhao, H. Z. Li, A. Li, W. Fang, Z. R. Cai, M. Z. Li, X. Q. Feng and Y. L. Song, Breaking the symmetry to suppress the Plateau–Rayleigh instability and optimize hydropower utilization, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, H. Z. Li, M. Z. Li, Y. N. Li, S. R. Chen, B. Bao and Y. L. Song, Rayleigh instability-assisted satellite droplets elimination in inkjet printing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41521–41528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lewis, Direct-write assembly of ceramics from colloidal inks, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Aeby, A. Poulin, G. Siqueira, M. K. Hausmann and G. Nyström, Fully 3D printed and disposable paper supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Tang, H. Zhou, Z. C. Cai, D. D. Cheng, P. S. He, P. W. Xie, D. Zhang and T. X. Fan, Generalized 3D printing of graphene-based mixed-dimensional hybrid aerogels, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3502–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, G. Yu, T. Shu, Y. Q. Chen, Y. W. Zhen, Y. Liu, J. Long, W. Xiong and F. Z. Xuan, 3D printed coaxial fibers for integrated wearable sensor skin, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900504 CrossRef .
Z. H. Ma and Y. F. Jiang, High-density 3D printable chipless RFID tag with structure of passive slot rings, Sensors, 2019, 19, 2535 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Zhang, L. H. Qi, H. C. Lian and J. Luo, Fabricating patterned microstructures by embedded droplet printing on immiscible deformable surfaces, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 105, 138–145 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, M. J. Yu, X. L. Chen, S. H. Nie, W. Y. Lai, W. M. Su, Z. Cui and W. Huang, Screen-printed poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) grids as ITO-free anodes for flexible organic light-emitting diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705955 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Fabrication and processing of polymer solar cells: A review of printing and coating techniques, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zavanelli and W. H. Yeo, Advances in Screen Printing of Conductive Nanomaterials for Stretchable Electronics, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 9344–9351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Sinha, Y. Noh, N. Reljin, G. M. Treich, S. Hajeb-Mohammadalipour, Y. Guo, K. H. Chong and G. A. Sotzing, Screen-printed PEDOT:PSS electrodes on commercial finished textiles for electrocardiography, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37524–37528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Liu, Y. Li, M. L. Li, S. Arumugam and S. P. Beeby, Processing of printed dye sensitized solar cells on woven textiles, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9, 1020–1024 Search PubMed .
W. Y. Chang, T. H. Fang, H. J. Lin, Y. T. Shen and Y. C. Lin, A large area flexible array sensors using screen printing technology, J. Disp. Technol., 2009, 5, 178–183 Search PubMed .
H. P. Li, S. R. Liu, X. R. Li, Z. S. Wu and J. J. Liang, Screen-printing fabrication of high volumetric energy density micro-supercapacitors based on high-resolution thixotropic-ternary hybrid interdigital micro-electrodes, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 626–635 RSC .
T. Kellomaki, J. Virkki, S. Merilampi and L. Ukkonen, Towards washable wearable antennas: w comparison of coating materials for screen-printed textile-based UHF RFID Tags, Int. J. Antenn Propag., 2012, 5, 1186–1189 Search PubMed .
R. R. Suresh, M. Lakshmanakumar, J. B. B. A. Jayalatha, K. S. Rajan, S. Sethuraman, U. M. Krishnan and J. B. B. Rayappan, Fabrication of screen-printed electrodes: opportunities and challenges, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 8951–9006 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Guo, H. D. Li, H. R. Wang, X. Y. Zhao, H. Yu and Q. Ye, Polydimethylsiloxane-assisted catalytic printing for highly conductive, adhesive, and precise metal patterns enabled on paper and textiles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 56597–56606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Jabbour, R. Radspinner and N. Peyghambarian, Screen printing for the fabrication of organic light-emitting devices, IEEE. J. Selected Top Quant., 2001, 7, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Ramm, S. Lim, W. Xie, B. Y. Ahn, W. C. Xu, A. Mahajan, W. J. Suszynski, C. Kim, J. A. Lewis, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, Wettability contrast gravure printing, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7420–7425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, B. B. Narakathu, Z. Fang, A. T. Aijazi, M. Joyce, M. Atashbar and L. Hu, A gravure printed antenna on shape-stable transparent nanopaper, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9110–9115 RSC .
M. Bariya, Z. Shahpar, H. Park, J. F. Sun, Y. Jung, W. Gao, H. Y. Y. Nyein, T. S. Liaw, L. C. Tai, Q. P. Ngo, M. H. Chao, Y. B. Zhao, M. Hettick, G. Cho and A. Javey, Roll-to-roll gravure printed electrochemical sensors for wearable and medical devices, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6978–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koo, W. Lee, Y. Choi, J. Sun, J. Bak, J. Noh, V. Subramanian, Y. Azuma, Y. Majima and G. Cho, Scalability of carbon-nanotube-based thin film transistors for flexible electronic devices manufactured using an all roll-to-roll gravure printing system, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tekoglu, G. Hernandez-Sosa, E. Kluge, U. Lemmer and U. Mechau, Gravure printed flexible small-molecule organic light emitting diodes, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3493–3999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Kim, T. Y. Yang, R. Suhonen, M. Valimaki, T. Maaninen, A. Kemppainen, N. J. Jeon and J. Seo, Gravure-printed flexible perovskite solar cells: Toward roll-to-roll manufacturing, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802094 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kim and J. W. Park, Novel patterning method for nanomaterials and its application to flexible organic light-emitting diodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9704–9717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Chen, Z. P. Zhu, X. Y. Jiang and L. Jiang, Superhydrophobic-substrate-assisted construction of free-standing microcavity-patterned conducting polymer films, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Geng, H. F. Gao, Y. C. Wu and L. Jiang, Patterning of polymer functional materials and their applications in optoelectronics, Acta. Polym. Sin., 2020, 51, 421–433 CAS .
D. Deganello, J. A. Cherry, D. T. Gethin and T. C. Claypole, Patterning of micro-scale conductive networks using reel-to-reel flexographic printing, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6113–6116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaufmann and B. J. Ravoo, Stamps, inks and substrates: polymers in microcontact printing, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 371–387 RSC .
K. Higuchi, S. Kishimoto, Y. Nakajima, T. Tomura, M. Takesue, K. Hata, E. I. Kauppinen and Y. Ohno, High-mobility, flexible carbon nanotube thin-film transistors fabricated by transfer and high-speed flexographic printing techniques, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 085101 CrossRef .
S. Alem, N. Graddage, J. P. Lu, T. Kololuoma, R. Movileanu and Y. Tao, Flexographic printing of polycarbazole-based inverted solar cells, Org. Electron., 2018, 52, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
B. Su, C. Zhang, S. R. Chen, X. Y. Zhang, L. F. Chen, Y. C. Wu, Y. W. Nie, X. N. Kan, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, A general strategy for assembling nanoparticles in one dimension, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2501–2507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Dong, M. J. Vuckovac, W. J. Cui, Q. Zhou and R. H. A. Ras, 3D printing of superhydrophobic objects with bulk nanostructure, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2106068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, J. A. Lee, M. Vosgueritchian, C. K. Tee, J. A. Bolander and Z. Bao, Electronic properties of transparent conductive films of PEDOT:PSS on stretchable substrates, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
H. Stoyanov, M. Kollosche, S. Risse, R. Waché and G. Kofod, Soft conductive elastomer materials for stretchable electronics and voltage controlled artificial muscles, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 578–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Cui, J. F. Hetke, J. A. Wiler, D. J. Anderson and D. C. Martin, Electrochemical deposition and characterization of conducting polymer polypyrrole/PSS on multichannel neural probes, Sens. Actuators, A, 2001, 93, 8–18 CrossRef CAS .
U. Riaz, N. Singh and S. Banoo, Theoretical studies of conducting polymers: a mini review, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 4954–4973 RSC .
K. H. Xian, Y. Liu, J. W. Liu, J. D. Yu, Y. F. Xing, Z. X. Peng, K. K. Zhou, M. Y. Gao, W. C. Zhao, G. H. Lu, J. D. Zhang, J. H. Hou, Y. H. Geng and L. Ye, Delicate crystallinity control enables high-efficiency P3HT organic photovoltaic cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3418–3429 RSC .
J. Huber, A. Amgoune and S. Mecking, Patterning of polymers on a substrate via ink-jet printing of a coordination polymerization catalyst, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1978–1981 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, S. Santhanam, L. Schultz, M. Jeffries-EL, M. C. Iovu, G. Sauve, J. Cooper, R. Zhang, J. C. Revelli, A. G. Kusne, J. L. Snyder, T. Kowalewski, L. E. Weiss, R. D. McCullough, G. K. Fedder and D. N. Lambeth, Inkjet printed chemical sensor array based on polythiophene conductive polymers, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 123, 651–660 CrossRef CAS .
D. Alemu, H. Y. Wei, K. C. Ho and C. W. Chu, Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS electrode by simple film treatment with methanol for ITO-free polymer solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9662–9671 RSC .
Y. H. Kim, C. Sachse, M. L. Machala, C. May, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS electrode with optimized solvent and thermal post-treatment for ITO-Free organic solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1076–1081 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Liu, H. J. Zhang, W. Q. Han, H. J. Lin, R. Z. Li, J. X. Zhu and W. Huang, 3D printed flexible strain sensors: from printing to devices and signals, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Keneth, A. Kamyshny, M. Totaro, L. Beccai and S. Magdassi, 3D Printing Materials for Soft Robotics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003387 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Deng and Q. Fu, Recent progress on PEDOT:PSS based polymer blends and composites for flexible electronics and thermoelectric devices, Mater. Chem. Front, 2020, 4, 3130–3152 RSC .
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, B. A. Collins, M. Sessolo, E. Stavrinidou, X. Strakosas, C. Tassone and G. G. Malliaras, Structural control of mixed ionic and electronic transport in conducting polymers, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11287 CrossRef PubMed .
X. T. Hu, X. C. Meng, L. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhang, Z. R. Cai, Z. Q. Huang, M. Su, Y. Wang, M. Z. Li, F. Y. Li, X. Yao, F. Y. Wang, W. Ma, Y. W. Chen and Y. L. Song, A mechanically robust conducting polymer network electrode for efficient flexible perovskite solar cells, Joule, 2019, 3, 2205–2218 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, R. Zhang, Y. Tong, X. Zhao and Y. Liu, Strain-discriminable pressure/proximity sensing of transparent stretchable electronic skin based on PEDOT:PSS/SWCNT electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55083–55093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Naderi, S. Shahrokhian and F. Soavi, Fabrication of a 2.8 V high-performance aqueous flexible fiber-shaped asymmetric micro-supercapacitor based on MnO2/PEDOT:PSS-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite grown on carbon fiber electrode, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 19588–19602 RSC .
X. Wang, J. H. Zhou, Y. Zhu, W. K. Cheng, D. W. Zhao, G. W. Xu and H. P. Yu, Assembly of silver nanowires and PEDOT:PSS with hydrocellulose toward highly flexible, transparent and conductivity-stable conductors, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123644 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, X. Wu, Y. Huang, Z. Xu and M. Yang, Multifunctional and highly sensitive piezoresistive sensing textile based on a hierarchical architecture, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 197, 108255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Pan and Z. Yang, Flexible polyethylene terephthalate/polyaniline composite paper with bending durability and effective electromagnetic shielding performance, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124433 CrossRef .
C. L. Hu, X. Y. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Y. Chen, X. Q. Liu, Y. M. Liu, J. Y. Liu and J. Chen, Orderly and highly dense polyaniline nanorod arrays fenced on carbon nanofibers for all-solid-state flexible electrochemical energy storage, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135846 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Polyaniline and polypyrrole pseudocapacitor electrodes with excellent cycling stability, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, S. H. Lim, C. K. Poh, L. Lai, J. Lin and Z. Shen, High performance asymmetric pseudocapacitor cell based on cobalt hydroxide/graphene and polypyrrole/graphene electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 298–304 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Xu, J. Tang, H. Y. Qian, S. J. Hou, Y. Bando, M. S. A. Hossain, L. K. Pan and Y. Yamauchi, Three-dimensional networked metal-organic frameworks with conductive polypyrrole tubes for flexible supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38737–38744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Zhang, F. L. Zhang, C. Q. Zhao, S. T. Wang, M. J. Liu and L. Jiang, Superspreading on immersed gel surfaces for the confined synthesis of thin polymer films, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3615–3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Wang, H. J. Cui, S. Li, X. W. Feng, J. Aghassi-Hagmann, S. Azizian and P. A. Levkin, Facile approach to conductive polymer microelectrodes for flexible electronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21661–21668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Cui, H. Y. Mi, C. C. Ji, F. J. Guo, Y. N. Chen, D. D. Wu, J. S. Qiu and H. J. Xie, A durable MXene-based zinc ion hybrid supercapacitor with sulfated polysaccharide reinforced hydrogel/electrolyte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23941–23954 RSC .
X. Wan, X. Miao, J. Yao, S. Wang, F. Shao, S. Q. Xiao, R. Z. Zhan, K. Chen, X. L. Zeng, X. F. Gu and J. B. Xu, In situ ultrafast and patterned growth of transition metal dichalcogenides from inkjet-printed aqueous precursors, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Z. Zhou and Q. F. Cheng, Chemical strategies for making strong graphene materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18397–18410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake and A. N. Grigorenko, Fine structure constant defines visual transparency of graphene, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh and W. Bao, Superior thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Mayorov, R. V. Gorbachev and S. V. Morozov, Micrometer-scale ballistic transport in encapsulated graphene at room temperature, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2396–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Edwards and K. S. Coleman, Graphene synthesis: relationship to applications, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 38–51 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. E. Jiang and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene and graphene oxide: synthesis, properties, and applications, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, R. Kumar, A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, Advanced materials for printed wearable electrochemical devices, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600260 CrossRef .
V. B. Mohan, K. T. Lau, D. Hui and D. Bhattacharyya, Graphene-based materials and their composites: A review on production, applications and product limitations, Composites, Part B, 2018, 142, 200–220 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, T. Y. Xue, F. Y. Li, W. T. Liu and Y. L. Song, Graphene: Diversified flexible 2D material for wearable vital signs monitoring, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800574 Search PubMed .
G. Reina, J. M. Gonzalez-Dominguez, A. Criado, E. Vazquez, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Promises, facts and challenges for graphene in biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4400–4416 RSC .
D. Konios, M. M. Stylianakis and E. Stratakis, Dispersion behaviour of graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Li, M. Gao, Y. Z. Guo, J. Z. Sun, Y. N. Li, F. Y. Li, Y. L. Song and Y. D. Li, Transparent Ag@Au–graphene patterns with conductive stability via inkjet printing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2800–2806 RSC .
Z. P. Yang, T. T. Qin, Y. T. Niu, Y. Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, P. Li, M. Zhu, Y. H. Jia and Q. W. Li, Flexible visible-light-driven photoelectrochemical biosensor based on molecularly imprinted nanoparticle intercalation-modulated graphene fiber for ultrasensitive urea detection, Carbon, 2020, 157, 457–465 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. An, Y. Ma, W. B. Li, M. Su, F. Y. Li and Y. L. Song, Three-dimensional multi-recognition flexible wearable sensor via graphene aerogel printing, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10948–10951 RSC .
W. B. Li, F. Y. Li and H. Z. Li, Flexible circuits and soft actuators by printing assembly of graphene, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12369–12376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Yu and F. Y. Li, Spider-web inspired multi-resolution graphene tactile sensor, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4810–4813 RSC .
L. X. Kang, S. C. Zhang, Q. W. Li and J. Zhang, Growth of horizontal semiconducting SWNT arrays with density higher than 100 tubes μm−1 using ethanol/methane chemical vapor deposition, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6727–6730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia and F. Wei, Advances in production and applications of carbon nanotubes, Top. Curr. Chem., 2017, 357, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Farahani, M. Dubé and D. Therriault, Three-dimensional printing of multifunctional nanocomposites: manufacturing techniques and applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5794–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. H. Li and Y. L. Song, Inkjet printing wearable electronic devices, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2971–2993 RSC .
W. Gao, H. Ota, D. Kiriya, K. Takei and A. Javey, Flexible electronics toward wearable sensing, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, H. Lee, R. Ghaffari, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Recent advances in flexible and stretchable bio-electronic devices integrated with nanomaterials, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4203–4218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Cheng, S. Debnath, L. O'Neill, T. G. Hedderman, E. Gregan and H. J. Byrne, Systematic study of the dispersion of SWNTs in organic solvents, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4857–4863 CAS .
L. Vaisman, G. Marom and H. D. Wagner, Dispersions of surface-modified carbon nanotubes in water-soluble and water-insoluble polymers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. B. Hu and G. Irvin, Emerging transparent electrodes based on thin films of carbon nanotubes, graphene, and metallic nanostructures, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Han, B. Kim, J. Li and M. Meyyappan, Carbon nanotube ink for writing on cellulose paper, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 249–253 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, W. Zhu, Y. C. Peng, S. F. Shen and Y. Deng, Flexible carbon nanotube-enriched silver electrode films with high electrical conductivity and reliability prepared by facile screen printing, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1113–1119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mattana, A. Loi, M. Woytasik, M. Barbaro, V. Noel and B. Piro, Inkjet-printing: a new fabrication technology for organic transistors, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700063 CrossRef .
A. S. Alshammari, M. Shkunov and S. R. P. Silva, Inkjet printed PEDOT:PSS/MWCNT nano-composites with aligned carbon nanotubes and enhanced conductivity, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
F. Molina-Lopez, T. Z. Gao, U. Kraft, V. R. Feig, Y. Kim, S. Wang, Y. Yun and Z. Bao, Inkjet-printed stretchable and low voltage synaptic transistor array, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okazaki and N. Tsubokawa, Introduction of cationic groups onto carbon black surface and their dispersibility in water, J. Dispers. Sci. Technol., 2000, 21, 511–524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oxfall, G. Ariu, T. Gkourmpis, R. W. Rychwalski and M. Rigdahl, Effect of carbon black on electrical and rheological properties of graphite nanoplatelets/poly(ethylene-butyl acrylate) composites, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2015, 9, 66–76 CrossRef .
C. Phillips, A. Al-Ahmadi, S. J. Potts, T. Claypole and D. Deganello, The effect of graphite and carbon black ratios on conductive ink performance, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 9520–9530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suren and S. Kheawhom, Development of a high energy density flexible zinc-air battery, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 193, 846–850 CrossRef .
F. Arduini, S. Cinti, V. Mazzaracchio, V. Scognamiglio, A. Amine and D. Moscone, Carbon black as an outstanding and affordable nanomaterial for electrochemical (bio)sensor design, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 156, 112033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Colozza, K. Kehe, G. Dionisi, T. Popp, A. Tsoutsoulopoulos, D. Steinritz, D. Moscone and F. Arduini, A wearable origami-like
paper-based electrochemical biosensor for sulfur mustard detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 129, 15–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Liu, Z. G. Shen, X. J. Zhang and H. Ma, Highly conductive graphene/carbon black screen printing inks for flexible electronics, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 528, 12–21 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liao, R. Zhang, H. X. Wang, S. L. Ye, Y. H. Zhou, T. L. Ma, J. Q. Zhu, L. D. Pfefferle and J. Qian, Highly conductive carbon-based aqueous inks toward electroluminescent devices, printed capacitive sensors and flexible wearable electronics, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 15184–15189 RSC .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Inkjet printing and instant chemical transformation of a CH3NH3PbI3/nanocarbon electrode and interface for planar perovskite solar cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2, Adv. Mater., 2011, 42, 4248–4253 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Hybrid density functional study of structural and electronic properties of functionalized Tin+1Xn, (X = C, N) monolayers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 939–949 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Xiong, X. F. Li, Z. M. Bai and S. G. Lu, Recent advances in layered Ti3C2Tx MXene for electrochemical energy storage, Small, 2018, 14, 1703419 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. Man Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Electromagnetic interference shielding with 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide ‘clay’ with high volumetric capacitance, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional, ordered, double transition metals carbides (MXenes), ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hantanasirisakul, M. Q. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, J. Halim, B. Anasori, S. Kota, C. E. Ren, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene transparent thin films with tunable optoelectronic properties, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600050 CrossRef .
P. D. Li, N. Su, Z. Y. Wang and J. S. Qiu, A Ti3C2Tx MXene-based energy-harvesting soft actuator with self-powered humidity sensing and real-time motion tracking capability, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16811–16818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible MXene/graphene films for ultrafast supercapacitors with outstanding volumetric capacitance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
S. H. Zheng, H. Wang, P. Das, Y. Zhang, Y. X. Cao, J. X. Ma, S. Z. Liu and Z. S. Wu, Multitasking MXene inks enable high-performance printable microelectrochemical energy storage devices for all-flexible self-powered integrated systems, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, T. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao and A. Islam, Epidermal Electronics, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Sekitani, J. Reeder, T. Yokota, K. Kuribara, T. Tokuhara, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, I. Graz, S. Bauer-Gogonea, S. Bauer and T. Someya, An ultra-lightweight design for imperceptible plastic electronics, Nature, 2013, 499, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Jia, K. E. Mathewson, K. L. Jang, J. Kim, H. Fu, X. Huang, P. Chava, R. Wang, S. Bhole, L. Wang, Y. J. Na and Y. Guan, Flavin, M.; Han, Z.; Huang, Y.; Rogers, J. A. Soft Microfluidic Assemblies of Sensors, Circuits, and Radios for the Skin, Science, 2014, 344, 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Tang, J. Zhu, V. Sivan, B. Gol, R. Soffe, W. Zhang, A. Mitchell and K. Khoshmanesh, Creation of liquid metal 3D microstructures using dielectrophoresis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4445–4452 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, S. Cheng, L. Zhang, H. Mi, L. Mou, S. Yang, Z. Huang, X. Shi and X. Jiang, Printable metal-polymer conductors for highly stretchable bio-devices, iScience, 2018, 4, 302–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Fan, X. Li, S. Y. Kuang, L. Zhang, Y. H. Chen, L. Liu, K. Zhang, S. M. Ma, F. Liang, T. Wu, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Highly robust, transparent, and breathable epidermal electrode, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9326–9332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, W. H. Yeo, Y. Su, Y. Hattori, W. Lee, S. Y. Jung, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Falgout, M. Bajema, T. Coleman, D. Gregoire, R. J. Larsen, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Fractal design concepts for stretchable electronics, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3266 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liang, W. M. Su, X. Y. Sun, Y. W. Hu and J. A. Duan, Femtosecond laser patterning wettability-assisted PDMS for fabrication of flexible silver nanowires electrodes, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100608 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Guo, Q. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Z. Suo, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Fatigue-free, superstretchable, transparent, and biocompatible metal electrodes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12332–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lamoureux, K. Lee, M. Shlian, S. R. Forrest and M. Shtein, Dynamic kirigami structures for integrated solar tracking, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8092 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, D. Qi, C. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, High-adhesion stretchable electrodes based on nanopile interlocking, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603382 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Tsao, D. Wan, Y.-S. Lai, H.-M. Chang, C.-C. Yu, K.-T. Lin and H.-L. Chen, White-light-induced collective heating of gold nanocomposite/Bombyx mori silk thin films with ultrahigh broadband absorbance, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12045–12059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Wang, P. Huang, J. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Yu, S. Chen, D. Qi, T. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, G. Hu, W. Li, J. Yu, Y. Luo, X. Loh, B. Liedberg, G. Li and X. Chen, Highly stable and stretchable conductive films through-thermal-radiation-assisted metal encapsulation, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901360 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu and L. Yi, Liquid metal biomaterials: a newly emerging area to tackle modern biomedical challenges, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 415–440 CrossRef .
X. L. Wang, R. Guo and J. Liu, Liquid metal based soft robotics: materials, designs, and applications, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800549 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. W. Ai, R. P. Zou and B. Su, Compressible and stretchable magnetoelectric sensors based on liquid metals for highly sensitive, self-powered respiratory monitoring, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15727–15737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Vossen, P. J. G. Schreurs, O. Sluis and M. G. D. van der; Geers, Multi-scale modelling of delamination through fibrillation, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2014, 66, 117–132 CrossRef .
G. Bo, L. Ren, X. Xu, Y. Du and S. Dou, Recent progress on liquid metals and their applications, Adv. Phys.: X, 2018, 3, 1446359 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Z. Z. He, J. Yang and J. Liu, Personal electronics printing via tapping mode composite liquid metal ink delivery and adhesion mechanism, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4588 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Park, Y. G. Moon, H. Seong, S. W. Jung, J. Y. Oh, B. S. Na, N. M. Park, S. S. Lee, S. G. Im and J. B. Koo, Photolithography-based patterning of liquid metal interconnects for monolithically integrated stretchable circuits, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15459–15465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, W. Yuan, C. Ding, S. L. Chen, W. M. Su, H. L. Hu, Z. Cui and F. S. Li, Facile and Efficient Patterning Method for Silver Nanowires and Its Application to Stretchable Electroluminescent Displays, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24074–24085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Xiao, T. Tao, J. W. Yang, H. X. Li, Q. F. Chen, L. L. Huang, Y. H. Ni, L. H. Chen, X. H. Ouyang, X. H. Zhu and J. G. Li, Transparent, smooth, and sustainable cellulose-derived conductive film applied for the flexible electronic device, Carbohyd. Polym., 2021, 260, 117820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Hsu, C. Papakyrikos, D. Liu, X. Wang, M. Raj, B. Zhang and R. Ghaffari, Design for reliability of multi-layer stretchable interconnects, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2014, 24, 095014 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Fan, K. R. Li, Q. Li, C. Y. Hou, Q. H. Zhang, Y. G. Li, W. S. Jin and H. Z. Wang, Prepolymerization-assisted fabrication of an ultrathin immobilized layer to realize a semi-embedded wrinkled AgNW network for a smart electrothermal chromatic display and actuator, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9778–9785 RSC .
M. Su, F. Y. Li, S. R. Chen, Z. D. Huang, M. Qin, W. B. Li, X. Y. Zhang and Y. L. Song, Nanoparticle based curve arrays for multirecognition
flexible electronics, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1369–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jiang, Y. G. Yao, Z. Q. Liang, J. L. Gao, G. G. Chen, Q. Q. Xia, R. Y. Mi, M. L. Jiao, X. Z. Wang and L. B. Hu, Lignin-based direct ink printed structural scaffold, Small, 2020, 16, 1907212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, H. S. Du, H. Y. Liu, W. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, C. L. Si, P. W. Liu and K. Zhang, Advanced nanocellulose-based composites for flexible functional energy storage devices, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stockinger, D. Wirthl, G. Mao, M. Drack, R. Pruckner, S. Demchyshyn, M. Steiner, F. Egger, U. Müller, R. Schwödiauer, S. Bauer, N. Arnold and M. Kaltenbrunner, iSens: a fiber-based, highly permeable and imperceptible sensor design, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Hsu, M. Gonzalez, F. Bossuyt, F. Axisa, J. Vanfleteren and I. D. Wolf, The effect of pitch on deformation behavior and the stretching-induced failure of a polymer-encapsulated stretchable circuit, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 075036 CrossRef .
M. Gonzalez, F. Axisa, M. V. Bulcke, D. Brosteaux, B. Vandevelde and J. Vanfleteren, Design of metal intercomnects for stretchable electronic circuits, Microelectron. Reliab., 2008, 48, 825–832 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Liu, H. Wang, P. G. Huang, J. P. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, M. Yu, S. X. Chen, D. P. Qi, T. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, G. Y. Hu, W. L. Li, J. C. Yu, Y. F. Luo, X. J. Loh, B. Liedberg, G. L. Li and X. D. Chen, Highly stable and stretchable conductive films through thermal-radiation-assisted metal encapsulation, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901360 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Jiang, B. Bao, M. Z. Li, J. Z. Sun, C. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Y. Li, X. Yao and Y. L. Song, Fabrication of transparent multilayer circuits by inkjet printing, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1420–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jiazhen Sun
	Jiazhen Sun received his BS degree from Qufu Normal University in 2009, MS degree from Beijing Institute of Graphic and Communication in 2012, and PhD degree from Beihang University in 2016. He is now an associate professor of Faculty of Light Industry, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). His research interests include functional ink preparation, wetting interface control, and micro-nanostructure assembly.

Rui Sun
	Rui Sun received his BS degree from Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) in 2020. He is an MS degree candidate in the research group of Sun Jiazhen, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). His research interests include functional ink preparation, interface reaction, and flexible electronics.

Peng Jia
	Peng Jia received BS degree in Material Chemistry from Xi'an University of Technology in 2011, and PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Jinan in 2019. He has worked as a lecturer in Prof. Xingxiang Ji' group, State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking/MOE Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Science & Technology, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) since 2019. He has become an IOP Trusted Reviewer since 2022. His research interests include the design and synthesis of biomass-based hybrid nanocomposites and biomass-derived carbon-based nanocomposites toward highly efficient catalysis, energy storage, sensing, and environmental remediation.

Mengdi Ma
	Mengdi Ma received her BS degree from Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) in 2020. She is now studying for an MS degree at the Faculty of Light Industry, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences). Her research interests include functional ink preparation, wetting interface control, and microstructure application.

Yanlin Song
	Yanlin Song received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry at Peking University in 1996. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Chemistry of Tsinghua University from 1996 to 1998. He joined the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1998. He is currently a professor and Director of the Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include information function materials, photonic crystals, printed electronics, and green printing materials and technologies.

 	Fig. 1  Fabricating flexible conductive structures by printing techniques and printable conductive materials for constructing flexible electronics.	 


Inkjet printing	High printing precise; Flexible;	Complex nozzle;
Non-plate printing.	Low printing speed.
Extrusion printing	Large scale fabrication; Flexible;	Low printing precise;
Non-plate printing.	Low printing speed.
Screen printing	High printing speed;	Complex printed composite;
Large scale fabrication;	Plate printing;
Extensive ink selection.	Low printing precise.
Gravure printing	High printing speed;	Plate printing;
High printing precise;	Limited ink selection.
Controllable printed thickness.	

Micro-contact printing	High printing speed;	Plate printing;
High printing precise.	Limited ink selection;

	Thin printed thickness.

 	Fig. 2  (a) Three typical processes of inkjet printing: thermal inkjet printing (left); piezoelectric inkjet printing (middle); continuous inkjet printing (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of electroless-assisted inkjet printing process for Ag mesh@PDA/PET FTEs with excellent flexural endurance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Filament-based extrusion writing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. (b) Extrusion printing of graphene aerogels with multi-dimensions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic showing the extrusion printing process. (d) Schematic of the integrated sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Flatbed screen printing with planar substrates under a screen and squeegee for solution dispensing, and the screen printed structure could be adjusted with the ink and the plate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes for screen-printed all-functional nanocomponents-based flexible MSCs devices in the top image. Optical images of flexible interdigitated RArG-4 MSCs array printed on filter paper substrates in bent states in the image. Optical microscopy images of single RArG-4 MSC with different widths of the electrodes in the right image. The scale bar in the left image is 1 cm, and the scale bar in the right image is 500 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram represents gravure printing on a flexible substrate. (b) The images of the printing plate with a flower-shape engraved pattern and the resulting printed pattern of the perovskite on the PET substrate. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c) Schematic description of the novel patterning process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Roll-to-roll micro-contact printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) Flat micro-contact printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Dewetting micro-contact printing to prepare nanoparticles into nanoscale wire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


PEDOT:PSS	Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.	Energy store; sensor; electrode.
PANI	Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.	Energy store; sensor; electrode.
PPy	Inkjet printing; extrusion printing; screen printing.	Energy store; sensor; electrode.
Graphene	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.
Carbon nanotube	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.
Carbon black	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.
MXenes	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; energy store and conversion; sensor; electrode; robot.
Liquid metal	Extrusion printing; Micro-contact printing.	Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.
Metal nanowire	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.
Metal composite	All kinds of above printing techniques.	Display; lighting; sensor; electrode; robot.

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Highly stretchable and fully transparent pressure sensor under discriminable strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Scheme of preparation of the MnO2/PEDOT:PSS-rGO@CF electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the PANI/rGO/textile composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Multifunctional PET/PANI composite paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) PANI@CNFs composite material preparation diagram and all-solid flexible supercapacitor manufacturing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram for the superspreading process of the gel surface (left), the fabricating process of the PPy film with a reaction process (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) Precursor pattern fabricated with a special wetting surface (left), the fabricated PPy pattern with a vapor phase method (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Flexible transparent conductive film was prepared by inkjet printing with Ag@Au NPs-rGO ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Graphene aerogel sensors and analyses of their electronic sensors with different hand gestures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Large-area flexible RGO circuits prepared and integrated with LED chips and hand-shaped actuator with its various gestures by independent control of the fingers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Graphene tactile sensor assembly and position electronic discriminant analysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Carbon nanotube ink is stably dispersed and written on fiber paper and paper cups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the specific preparation process of Ag-CNTs films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Images of original MWCNTs and SDS-MWCNTs dissolved in water and alignment technique of CNT in the printed PEDOT:PSS/MWCNT samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (d) Electronic device designed with drawing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Scheme for producing conductive ink and application example with the screen printing of carbon black. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Bending test of the paper-based flexible circuit and the relationship between resistance and bending angle of the paper-based flexible circuit, and EL devices prepared based on the HCCA-inks as a back electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The possible constituent atoms of MAX in the element table. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of printable MX-MSCs, MX-LIMBs, and all-flexible self-powered integrated system.166 Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) 3D diagram of the low-cost computer-controlled printer to illustrate the tapping mode movement of the printing head, the composite fluid mechanics to deliver, transfer, and adhere liquid metal ink to the substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of patterning the liquid metal with photolithography and obtaining a high pattern resolution and alignment precision. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematics of the preparation of the stretchable AgNW/PDMS composite films. Reproduced with permission. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The schematic illustration of the NP curve array printed and used for the multi analysis for skin micromotion sensing. Reproduced with permission. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Thermal radiation-assisted metal encapsulation of gold and polymer at the interface to tune the strain distribution in the metal film and enhance the interfacial adhesion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2016, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of inkjet-printed embedded silver microcables. (c) Comparison of resistance increment versus bending times of the embedded silver microcables and silver lines inkjet printed on PET film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
