Photon management in nanostructured solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC32067G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32067G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3144-3171Photon management in nanostructured solar cells

        
          
            Hsin-Ping 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Der-Hsien 
            Lien
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng-Lin 
            Tsai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chin-An 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hung-Chih 
            Chang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun-Yu 
            Lai
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jr-Hau 
            He
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Photonics and Optoelectronics & Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: jhhe@cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-2-23677467;   Tel: +886-2-33669646
bDepartment of Optics and Photonics, National Central University, Chung-Li 320, Taiwan
Received 
      18th October 2013
    , Accepted 12th February 2014First published on 14th February 2014AbstractThe unique geometry and intriguing physical properties of nanostructure-based solar cells gives them great potential to achieve the goals of cost-effectiveness and high-efficiency. With nanostructured solar cells it is expected to be possible to break the Shockley–Queisser limit. This potential has driven widespread research and development in photon management to enhance light absorption over the past decade. However, efficiency is not proportional to light absorption. Nowadays, researchers are starting to address this issue. A thorough understanding of the advantages and the scope of the application of each photon management scheme is critical to finding a breakthrough for this predicament. In this review, we present the theorems and describe recent progresses in primary photon management schemes for nanostructures, including antireflection, light scattering, and resonance (e.g., metallic resonance, dielectric resonance, and photonic crystals). The antireflection effect allows more light to enter the solar cell. Light scattering enhances the interaction between the light and the nanostructure, extending the light propagation paths in the devices. Resonance effects can redirect and precisely confine the light to the region where efficient photoelectric conversion efficiency occurs. Finally, we discuss the challenges of nanostructured solar cells, and indicate potential routes to overcome the performance-limiting problems.Hsin-Ping WangHsin-Ping Wang received her M.S. degree (2011) at the Graduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. She is now a Ph.D. student in Dr Jr-Hau He's group. Her research interests include theoretical and experimental research on the optical properties analysis of nanostructures and solar cells (including conventional Si solar cells, thin-film solar cells, a-Si solar cells, and Si heterojunction solar cells), and solar water splitting cells.Der-Hsien LienDer-Hsien Lien received his B.S. degree (2003) and M.S. degree (2005) at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He is a Ph.D. student at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University. His research interests include the dynamics and applications of nanophotonics, green memory devices, 2D materials physics and flexible optoelectronics.Meng-Lin TsaiMeng-Lin Tsai received his B.S. degree from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He is currently with the Department of Electrical Engineering, and Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.Chin-An LinChin-An Lin received his B.S degree in Physics from the National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 2006. In 2007, he joined Dr Jr-Hau He's group at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, and received his M.S. degree in 2008. He is now Dr Jr-Hau He's Ph. D. student and his current research interests include antireflective coatings in solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells.Kun-Yu LaiKun-Yu Lai is currently an assistant professor at the Department of Optics and Photonics at the National Central University (NCU) in Taiwan. Dr Lai received his Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State University in 2009. After working as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University in 2009–2011, he joined the faculty in the Department of Optics and Photonics at NCU, where he specializes in the growth/fabrication of novel III-nitrides optoelectronic devices and the optical properties of low-dimensional structures, such as quantum wells, quantum dots, and nanowires.Jr-Hau HeJr-Hau He received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1999 and 2005, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics and the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. He is involved in the design of new nanostructured architectures for nanophotonics and the next generation of nanodevices, including photovoltaics, and resistive memory. Prof. He is a recipient of the Outstanding Young Electrical Engineer Award from the Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering (2013), the Outstanding Youth Award of the Taiwan Association for Coating and Thin Film Technology (2012), the Youth Optical Engineering Medal of the Taiwan Photonics Society (2011), and has won numerous other awards and honors with his students in professional societies and conferences internationally.
1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of the human population over the past decades, there has been a steep increase in the global demand for electricity. The demand is expected to be even greater by the year 2100 (46 teraWatt, TW), more than three times the global power consumption today (16 TW).1 An even worse problem that comes with extravagant energy consumption are the associated environmental issues. Based on the latest investigations, the global energy-related CO2 emissions reached a historic high of 31.6 gigatonnes in 2012, which is regarded as a suspected cause of serious climate change.2 To counteract against such problems, the expansion of clean power production methods is indispensable. It is estimated that by 2035 one-third of the total electricity output should be generated from renewable energy.3 Prompted by these demands, exploiting consecutive, eco-friendly and cost-effective energy resources becomes the top priority. The solar cell, which directly converts solar energy into electricity, is one of the most attractive solutions due to the omnipresence and abundance of solar energy. The sun delivers 23000 TW of energy to the earth per year, which is much higher than our annual energy consumption. Moreover, the technology for energy conversion from sunshine is free of noise, toxic pollution, and global warming causing emissions. However, in 2010, the installed capacity of solar power worldwide was only 35 GW. To promote and increase the capacity, costs need to drop below $1/W. Therefore, an improvement of the energy conversion efficiency and reduction in the cost of solar cells are of immediate urgency.
Efficiency can be improved based on the following aspects: (i) absorbing more incident photons to create more photocarriers and (ii) efficiently collecting more photocarriers to generate higher electricity. The employment of nanostructures provides intriguing potential for these purposes due to their unique architectures, large surface-area-to-volume ratio, and quantum confinement effects, which substantially differ from those of bulk materials. From the optical viewpoint, nanostructures show significant photon capturing and photon confinement abilities to enhance light absorption. Better photon management allows for thinner active layers in the solar cells to not only reduce the cost and amount of material used, but also decreases the electrical loss during the photocarrier transport. Solar cells with a thinner active layer thickness, reduced from hundreds of nanometers to a few microns can reduce the material usage by a factor of 100. In order to achieve costs below $1/W, it is suggested that the thickness of Si solar cells should be reduced to 80 μm.4 From the electrical viewpoint, nanoscale structures, such as core–shell structures, radial junctions and arrayed 1D nanowires can effectively shorten the travelling length of minority carriers, thus facilitating carrier collection. The collection efficiency is especially important for those materials that have quite limited carrier diffusion lengths, such as polymers and polycrystalline/amorphous Si. However, despite the rapid progress of nanostructured solar cells in the last decade, the enhancement of efficiency has not been as high as expected. High recombination rates, arising from the excessive bulk and surface defects, are the main reason. Reducing the thickness and lowering the aspect ratio are direct approaches to diminishing both bulk and surface recombination problems. However, it seems that thick materials are required for sufficient light absorption, and lowering the aspect ratio will hinder the light trapping ability of the nanostructure. Solving this problem has become a most daunting challenge, and numerous photon management schemes have emerged, aimed at achieving this goal. First, the extraordinary antireflection (AR) effect of nanostructures allows more light to enter the solar cells. The AR ability of nanostructures, first discovered on the corneas of moth's eyes in 1967,5 has been widely studied for potential applications, from biomimetics to optoelectronics. The efficiency of solar cells can be enhanced by coating the cell surface with nanoscale structures. After years of effort, researchers are able to fabricate nanostructures with excellent AR properties over a broad range of wavelengths and incident angles. Secondly, as the light enters the cell, it must be effectively absorbed. The light scattering effect and resonance absorption can increase the light–medium interaction, enabling a breakthrough over the conventional Lambertian limit.6,7 The effective optical thickness can be enlarged by taking advantage of the scattering effect due to extensive diffraction angles, leading to an increase of the near and below band gap absorption.8,9 Moreover, when the scattering angle is larger than the critical angle of total internal reflection, light can be effectively confined within the active layer, which is strongly desirable for a solar cell.10 Resonance absorption including metallic resonance and dielectric resonance can redirect and precisely confine the light at active regions to enhance absorption. By tuning the size and the pattern of the structures, one can adjust the peak and the bandwidth of the absorption spectrum.
In this review, recent progress in each primary photon management scheme (e.g., AR, light scattering, and resonance) based on nanostructures and nanotechnologies for solar cells will be discussed. This review will cover fundamental theorems, important characterization, and the achievements of nanostructured solar cells. Finally, the challenges facing efforts to achieve higher efficiency and potential routes to overcome the difficulties will be discussed.
2. Photon management
Enhancing light absorption in the active layer of solar devices is critical for achieving high-efficiency and cost-effective photovoltaics. The enhancement of light absorption is mainly performed in two ways: (i) coating AR layers on the surface and (ii) confining light inside the active layers. It has been reported that controlling light using nanostructures theoretically allows the achievement of 50–70% solar cell efficiency, breaking the Shockley–Queisser limit.11 In this section, three photon management schemes using nanostructures are described in detail: AR, light scattering, and resonance (including metallic resonance, dielectric resonance, and photonic crystals).
2.1. AR
The concept of AR coatings (ARCs) was conceived by Lord Rayleigh in the 19th century, who found the transmittance of incident light to be increased by glass with tarnished surfaces.12 Scientists later realized that AR effects can be achieved by destructive interference, and the first ARC was demonstrated by Fraunhofer who used an etched surface to obtain low reflectance.12,13 After a long period of development, the most widely used ARCs in the industry are the quarter-wavelength-thick dielectric layers, due to their simplicity and cost- and time-effective fabrication processes.
However, single quarter-wavelength ARCs only render the minimized reflectance at a narrow wavelength range and at nearly normal incident angles.14 To improve the broadband and omnidirectional capability, double or multi-layered ARCs have been fabricated to suppress reflection over a wide range of wavelengths. The broadband AR ability of a multi-layered structure is attained via the destructive interference among the waves reflected from each layer. To obtain the most effective AR performance, materials for multi-layered ARCs need to be carefully selected with the proper refractive indices. Although multi-layered ARCs increase the range of the working wavelengths, the AR performance is still not sufficient, because of a lack of materials with refractive indices close to the refractive index of air.15–17 Moreover, multi-layered ARCs also suffer from various problems, such as limited working angles, poor adhesion, and thermal instability.18
Therefore, to overcome these problems, nanostructures have begun to receive more attention. The AR effect of nanostructures was first observed in biological systems. In 1973, Clapham et al. prepared arrays similar to the moth's eye to demonstrate the broadband AR effect of the moth eye-like nanostructures, and demonstrated that the reflectance can be reduced to nearly zero if the geometry of the nanostructures is optimized.19 Accordingly, many groups have since developed subwavelength nanostructures for coupling light in solar devices, and the ARC behavior in these nanostructures has been investigated intensively. The surface profile-,20 diameter-,21,22 and length-dependent23 AR properties of nanowires/nanorods have been investigated thoroughly for the design and optimization of the nanostructured ARCs. Chao et al. discussed the correlation between the morphology and the AR characteristics of nanostructures, to greatly improve the structural design of nanostructured optoelectronic devices. Critical AR features related to the morphology of nanostructured ARCs, such as their wavelength-dependent characteristics, incident angle-dependent characteristics, and polarization-dependent characteristics, have been comprehensively characterized.24 Flower-like nanorod arrays with a filling ratio that gradually increases from the top area to the bottom area have been used to improve the AR properties including the broadband working range, omnidirectionality, and polarization-insensitivity, as compared to well-aligned nanorods. Moreover, it has been found that the interfaces (between the air/nanostructure layers and nanostructure layers/substrates) also play an important role in AR characteristics.24 Chang et al. created wafer-scaled nanowire arrays with a micro-roughened interface underlying the etched nanowires fabricated by a one-step galvanic etching method, exhibiting excellent AR properties (Fig. 1).25 This excellent AR performance comes from a continuous gradient of refraction indices. The refractive indices of nanostructured ARCs can be estimated according to the effective medium theory (EMT).26–28 The mathematical models of EMT were first proposed by Garnett and Bruggeman, who calculated the effective refractive index (neff) of a nanostructured ARC with the following equations:26–28
 Fig. 1  Cross-sectional SEM images of Si nanowire array layers fabricated with (a) 20 mM, (b) 30 mM, and (c) 50 mM AgNO3. The inset shows the calculated refractive index profiles of the corresponding Si nanowire arrays. (d) Total reflectance of the nanowire arrays obtained with different AgNO3 concentrations. (e) Total reflectance of the nanowire arrays with abrupt interfaces (AgNO3 20 mM 90 min; height: 5.21 ± 0.09 μm), nanowire arrays with rough interfaces (AgNO3 50 mM 30 min; height: 4.52 ± 0.95 μm), and inverted micropyramid texturing in combination with 100 nm-thick Si3N4 for a commercial Si solar cell (Commercial solar cell; height: 3.68 ± 0.10 μm). (f) A photo of a 5-inch wafer with nanowire arrays with rough interface structures, and a schematic representation of nanowire arrays with rough interface structures. Reprinted with permission from H. C. Chang, K. Y. Lai, Y. A. Dai, H. H. Wang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2863. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.25 
Maxwell–Garnett model: (1)
Bruggeman approximation: (2)where n1 and n2 are the refractive indices of two constituent layers, f1 is the filling ratio of the corresponding volume fractions. With EMT models, one can see that the neff of the ARC can be tuned by altering the filling ratio of the nanostructure. To eliminate surface reflection, the graded index of the nanostructured ARC is attained by a gradual change in geometry from the top to bottom. In Fig. 1a–c, we show that a modulation of the rough interfaces between the air/nanowire array layers and nanowire array layers/substrate, and the decreased nanowire densities can provide a gradual reduction of the neff from the surface to the air, leading to excellent impedance matching between the Si substrate and air. In order to evaluate the effects of interface roughness on the AR performance of nanowire arrays, Chang et al. compared the reflectance of three structures with similar heights: (a) 5.21 ± 0.09 μm nanowire arrays (AgNO3 20 mM 90 min) with abrupt interfaces, (b) 4.52 ± 0.95 μm nanowire arrays (AgNO3 50 mM 30 min) with the rough interfaces, and (c) 3.68 ± 0.10 μm inverted micropyramid texturing combined with a 100 nm Si3N4 layer (commercial solar cell) on the Si solar cell (Fig. 1e). It is found that for the nanowire arrays with rough interfaces, the total reflectance was suppressed to <1.49% in the wavelengths of 200–850 nm, which is superior to that for surfaces purely consisting of longer nanowires up to 5.21 ± 0.09 μm in length. The AR performance of the nanostructures can be further improved by minimizing the slope of the refractive index profile.29 Huang et al. optimized an aperiodic array of Si nanotips with an ultra-smooth refractive index profile, which suppressed the reflectance from 0.2 to 200 μm (from deep ultraviolet to far-infrared regions), which is a world-record broadband AR performance of Si nanostructures.30 As shown in Fig. 2, the average reflectance of the nanotips is less than 1% for wavelengths ranging from 0.5 to 2.5 μm, 2% for the mid-infrared regions, and 30% for far-infrared regions. These impressive results demonstrate that the reflectance can be effectively suppressed by optimum nanostructures, even for a material with a low absorption coefficient (e.g., generally, Si shows low absorption below its band gap at 1.1 eV.).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Total reflectance of Si nanotips with length (L) = 1.6 μm, 5.5 μm, and 16 μm UV, VIS and NIR wavelengths. (c and d) Specular reflectance of the longest Si nanotips (L = 16 μm) compared with polished Si. Reprinted with permission from Y. F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y. J. Jen, C. Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y. K. Hsu, C. L. Pan, H. C. Lo, C. H. Hsu, Y. H. Chang, C. S. Lee, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.30 
Although nanostructured ARCs hold the advantage of a broadband working range, ultra-low reflectance generally requires a longer nanostructure length (>2 μm), which is not only a waste of materials and fabrication time, but also makes them more vulnerable to mechanical damage. To obtain improved AR performance in a cost-effective way, combining quarter-wavelength and nanostructured ARCs has been proposed.31–33 Since a quarter-wavelength layer is typically less than 0.5 μm thick, this can effectively reduce the length of nanostructures in composite ARCs, while maintaining the favorable AR properties. A hierarchical ARC has been fabricated of syringe-like ZnO nanorods and quarter-wavelength Si3N4 thin film on GaAs solar cells.31 The Si3N4 thin film was designed to suppress the reflectance at 750 nm, corresponding to the peak efficiency of the solar cell. The 1.5 μm nanorods were then employed to further reduce the reflectance in broadband wavelengths. An examination of Fig. 3 shows the hierarchical AR structure which effectively reduced the reflectance at the wavelengths of 400–900 nm, corresponding to the range where the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the device were maximized. As a result, the conversion efficiency under the illumination of an air mass of 1.5G was enhanced by 32%. The combination of nanostructures in the ARC layers not only allows shrinkage of the length of nanostructures without sacrificing AR performance, but also tailoring of the light-trapping region, which benefits various kinds of solar cell design. First, the focus in the design of the ARC film via the choice of material and the thickness control of ARC film is on suppressing the reflectance around 500 nm, which is the strongest irradiance region in the solar spectrum. On the other hand, nanostructure design via morphology control are aimed at low EQE regions to broaden the peak of the EQE spectrum of various solar cells (e.g., around 750 nm for GaAs solar cells,31 around 525 nm for organic solar cells).34 In this way, nanostructures combining ARC layers can be designed to serve any specific needs. A similar approach involves first fabricating the nanostructures on the solar cells, then coating the surface of the nanostructures with the ARC layer. Lai et al. were able to control the light trapping regions in the planar Si underneath the nanowire arrays or the core regions of nanowire arrays by tuning the core–shell volume ratios. This was of great benefit to the design of the geometry of planar and radial p–n junction cell structures (Fig. 4).33 This photon management scheme has potential for use in nanostructured photovoltaic applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of syringe-like ZnO nanorods. (b) Reflectance of GaAs solar cells with Si3N4 and syringe-like ARC. (c) EQE and (d) J–V measurement of GaAs solar cells. Reprinted with permission from L. K. Yeh, K. Y. Lai, G. J. Lin, P. H. Fu, H. C. Chang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 505. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH.31 
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of the nanowire arrays annealed for 3 hours at 900 °C in ambient air. (b) TEM image of the 3 hour-annealed nanowire arrays showing a core–shell structure. (c) HRTEM image recorded at the interface area, indicated by the red rectangle in (b). (d) Total reflectance calculated by rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) with a polished surface, as-synthesized and 3 hour-annealed nanowire arrays. The measurement results are also presented for comparison. Time-averaged and normalized TE electric field distribution, |Ez|, simulated by FDTD analysis for (e) polished Si substrates, (f) as-synthesized nanowire arrays, (g) nanowire arrays annealed for 1 hour, (h) nanowire arrays annealed for 3 hours. Wavelength: 650 nm. Reprinted with permission from K. Y. Lai, H. C. Chang, Y. A. Dai and J. H. He, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A255. Copyright 2012 The Optical Society.33 
Numerous types of ARCs have been developed over the last few decades. From quarter-wavelength thin films to hierarchical ARCs, extremely low reflectance has been achieved in broadband wavelengths and for a wide range of incident angles. However, challenges still remain. For instance, although many nanostructures have superior AR properties compared to quarter-wavelength thin films, maintaining the uniformity and the low reflectance over wafer-scale dimensions in a cost-effective way has been shown to be difficult. In the future, efforts will continue to find advanced ARC structures with improved AR performance along with higher uniformity, lower cost, and superior properties.
The above discussion has shown that significant optical improvement can be made in nanowires/nanorods by engineering their morphology. However, most studies of nanostructure-based solar cells have shown unsatisfactory performance improvement, in spite of the strong AR characteristics.35–37 This is because the superior AR qualities of the nanostructures are usually accompanied by the poor electrical properties of the devices. The expected boosted short-circuit current density (Jsc) is partially counterbalanced by poor open-circuit voltages (Voc) and fill factors (FF). To exploit the optical advantages and to be able to use nanostructures in practice, there are still key design challenges yet to be addressed and aspects to be considered. In particular, the photoexcited carriers are easily trapped by high-density surface defects (caused by the ultra-high surface area from increasing the length of the nanowires/nanorods) before being collected by the external circuits. The high recombination velocity caused by the high-density surface defects would eliminate the optical advantages of the nanostructures, and thus lead to deterioration in the performance, including low Voc, Jsc, and FF values.35–37 Accordingly, obtaining a concurrent improvement in the electrical and optical characteristics of nanostructure based solar cells is the most important issue for realizing high efficiency nanostructured solar cells. For further details please direct your attention to the challenges and outlook section.
2.2. Light scattering
Above, we have shown that light management can reduce reflection, allowing more light to enter the solar cells. However, as light enters, a more important concern is that it must be effectively absorbed by the materials. Therefore, one of the goals of photon management inside solar cells is to increase the length of the optical path, namely, to extend the light path beyond just the simple depth of the material. In addition, light absorption must occur in the active region for efficient conversion of light power; otherwise the result is energy loss. Clearly, an effective photon-management scheme capable of concentrating light at the active layer is highly desirable.
Light scattering can increase internal absorption for a wide range of wavelengths through enhancement of the light–medium interaction. The scattering effect enhances the effective optical thickness, and thus increases the near and below band gap absorption.8,9 Moreover, if the scattering angles are larger than the critical angle of total internal reflection, light can be effectively confined in the active layer, which is strongly desirable for the solar cell as well.10
In the early 1980s, Yablonovitch and Cody first derived the Lambertian limit of a light scattering scheme for the perfect scattering (Lambertian scattering) interface using statistical mechanics and geometrical optics approaches.38,39 For a perfect scattering absorbing medium, the optical path length can be increased by a factor of 4n2, which means that the optical absorption can be enhanced by a factor of 4n2 compared to a flat surface (e.g., Si with n = 3.5, the corresponding factor is L = 4n2 = 49). For the light acceptance angle 2θ, the theoretical limit increases to 4n2/sin2θ.40,41 However, the approximations are valid only for weak absorption limits, and the calculated absorptance is a numerical solution. Green et al. derived the analytical solutions of the absorptance applied to both a weakly and strongly absorbing medium.42,43 A ≈ (1 − Rext)P(αbb + αfc)/[1 + P(αbb + αfc)],(3)where Rext is the reflection from the top surface; P is the effective path length, which is equal to 2W for a planar device and 4n2W for a device with an ideal Lambertian scatterer (W is the device thickness); αbb is the absorption coefficient due to band-to-band transitions; and αfc is an effective distributed value due to a combination of free carrier absorption in bulk regions, heavily doped regions and metal contacts. This result improves the accuracy of the calculated transmittance and absorptance compared to the numerical solutions.
Although the Lambertian case has been precisely analyzed, conventional theory is not applicable in the nanoscale regime, because the theory is based on the assumption that the scale of the structure is much larger than the wavelength. Hence, the Lambertian limit needs to be modified when the structural dimension becomes comparable to or smaller than the incident wavelength, where the wave effect of the light becomes prominent.6,7 To gain insight into light scattering in the wave-optics regime, many researchers have found that the scattering effect in subwavelength dimensions exceeds the Lambertian limit. Tobías and Saeta calculated the upper limit of the enhancement factor in the wave regime through the approximate approaches, including a summation of various incoherent scattering. Their results showed that the enhancement factor is higher than 4n2.9,44 Sheng et al. interpreted this phenomenon by the photonic density of state (ρ(ω)) and proposed that the ρ(ω) within the structure could be altered using grating substrates.45 By properly choosing the parameters of said grating, the ρ(ω) from a non-absorbing region can be transferred to an absorbing region, resulting in the absorption exceeding the Lambertian limit. Yu et al. developed a systematic wave analysis of nanoscale structures based on a rigorous electromagnetic perspective, allowing the calculation of the maximum light absorption enhancement ratio in the wave-optics regime via statistical temporal coupled mode theory. The upper limit for absorption of the medium was attained by summing up the maximal spectral cross-section of all resonances as follows:6,46 (4)where σmax is the maximum value of the contribution of a single resonance to the total absorption by a spectral cross-section; γi is the intrinsic loss rate of the resonance due to material absorption; M is the number of resonances; and N is the number of channels within the frequency range Δω. Comparing the average absorption with the single-pass absorption, the upper limit of the enhancement factor is (5)where α = γi/c is the absorption coefficient (c is the speed of light in a vacuum), and d is the thickness of the active layer. Assuming a long absorption length and n2 = 12.5 for Si, Fig. 5a shows the limit of absorption enhancement in 2D grating structures. When s (= L/λ) < 1, where L is the periodicity of the grating structure and λ is the light wavelength, the enhancement factor increases quadratically with s and reaches its maximum value at s = 1. For L » λ, the calculated upper limit is reduced to the 3D bulk limit of 4n2. To study the absorption in the subwavelength regime (s < 1), the absorption spectra and average enhancement factor  are calculated over wavelength ranges from 600 to 1200 nm, which covers the frequency range of 0.5 < s < 1 for L = 600 nm, as shown in Fig. 5b. The  in this wavelength range is 74.2, which significantly exceeds 4n2 = 50. The results reveal that gratings with wavelength scale periodicity can achieve an absorption enhancement factor that is higher than the conventional limit over a broadband region, opening a new avenue for the design of highly efficient nanostructured solar cells. Previous studies only considered limited specific cases (shallow gratings at the low-absorbing region). Recently, Callahan et al. identified that the electromagnetic local density of optical states (LDOS) is the common feature for light trapping structures in wave optics. The 4n2 limit (Lambertian limit or so-called Ergodic limit) can be surpassed when the textured absorber exhibits an LDOS exceeding that of the bulk.8 They demonstrated that photonic crystals or subwavelength-scaled structures are good candidates for providing a large LDOS beyond the conventional limit. Fig. 5c shows an example that surpasses the Lambertian limit. In this structure, the elevated LDOS enhances the absorption which exceeds the geometrical optic light trapping limit.
 Fig. 5  (a) Limit of absorption enhancement in 2D grating structures. (b) Absorptance spectrum for normal incident light (averaged among two polarizations). The absorptive film is 3000 nm-thick. The whole structure is placed on a perfect mirror. (c) Structures that surpass the ergodic limit. Full-wave simulations of a P3HT:PCBM structure clad with roughened GaP with absorption enhancement exceeding the ergodic limit. The absorptance greatly exceeds the LDOS limit for the slab of P3HT:PCBM in air (dashed orange line) and approaches the LDOS limit for the P3HT:PCBM slot (dashed blue line) with refined incoupling. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A366. Copyright 2010 The Optical Society.6 (c) Reprinted with permission from D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 214. Copyright 2012 the American Chemical Society.8 
The scattering effect at the nanoscale has also been verified experimentally.47–50 Nanowires show significant light trapping effects which benefit from diffraction effects, collective resonances, and changes in the optical density of states.51 Muskens et al. demonstrated that the optical properties of nanowire structures (e.g., InP, Si, and GaP nanowires) are dominated by diffuse multiple scattering, which can excite localized resonances (Fig. 6a–c).52–54 By designing the scattering mean free path to be larger than the absorption length, the thickness of nanostructured solar cells can be reduced. Garnett et al. estimated the light-trapping path length enhancement, defined as the optical thickness divided by its actual thickness of the structure, as up to a factor of 73 obtained with Si nanowires under the best conditions, going well beyond the Lambertian limit, as shown in Fig. 6d and e.55
 Fig. 6  Experimental reflectance spectra for (a) InP, (b) GaP, and (c) Si. Lines denote the diffuse reflectance of the nanowires (thin line), the corresponding substrates (dashed line), and the coherent-beam specular reflectance (thick line). Vertical lines denote the electronic bandgaps of InP (1.33 eV) and Si (1.12 eV). (d) Light-trapping path length enhancement factor (EF) versus that derived by comparing the Jsc from ordered Si nanowire arrays with the same roughness factor (RF) but different absorber thicknesses (red and black) and from the optical transmission measurements in panel c, assuming that 95% (blue) or 85% (purple) of the reduced transmission ultimately leads to absorption. The normalized Jsc (gold) is also shown on a linear scale for comparison. The strong correlation further supports the light-trapping effect because the absorption (and ultimately photocurrent) is scaled with the logarithm of the path length. (e) SEM images of Si nanowire arrays with different lengths. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from O. L. Muskens, J. G. Rivas, R. E. Algra, E. Bakkers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2638. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.54 (d and e) Reprinted with permission from E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.55 
The geometry of nanostructures dominates the distribution and the intensity of the light scattering. The light scattering effect can be optimized by deliberate design of the geometry of the nanostructures including the diameter,22 length,23 periodicity,47 surface profile,20 and interface roughness control.25 Hu et al. used the transfer matrix method to analyze the effects of the diameter, length, and filling ratio of nanowires with a periodicity of 100 nm on the optical absorption (Fig. 7a).56 The nanowire arrays show significant improvement in the optical absorption in the high frequency region, whereas the low-frequency absorptivity of the nanowire arrays was less than that of a film structure, regardless of the length or filling ratio, as shown in Fig. 7b. Many researchers have proposed that an ultra-small feature size (e.g., periodicity < 100 nm) is not beneficial for light trapping over broadband wavelength regions.57–59 The periodicity is too small, so that long light wavelengths cannot be resolved with the structure of the geometry, and hence the optical diffraction is weak, resulting in little improvement of light absorption at long wavelengths.47,59Fig. 7c shows the diffraction angle as a function of λ/Λ, where Λ is the periodicity of the nanowire array. It can be seen that no high order diffractions exist for λ/Λ > 4, leading to straight propagation of the incident light through the medium; i.e., the optical thickness is almost equal to the actual thickness.60 With increased Λ, the forward (transmission) diffraction efficiencies for high diffraction orders (DETHO) increase to approximately 100% for the broadband wavelength regions. As shown in Fig. 7d, the DETHO with a large angle of diffraction results in elongation of the optical path length and enhances internal reflectance within the nanowires, benefiting the long wavelength absorption. Moreover, the large Λ increases the number of waveguide modes inside the nanostructures.57 Leung et al. demonstrated that the light absorption could be maximized when the size of nanowells matched the wavelength of the light, as shown in Fig. 8a.61 97.2% of the incident light is absorbed when the dimension is similar to the wavelength (700 nm). The simulation shows the 700 nm nanowell arrays at higher diffraction angles (73°) than the 1 μm nanowell arrays (47°), increasing the optical path length. Fig. 8b and c show the diffraction patterns for 1 μm and 700 nm nanowell arrays, respectively, generated with a 650 nm laser. The diffraction intensity of the 700 nm nanowell arrays is much weaker than that of the 1 μm nanowell arrays, indicating strong light absorption by these structures. Li simulated the optical properties using various Si nanowires and nanopores with different structural parameters, as shown in Fig. 8d and e.50,51,62 The results indicate that increasing the array periodicity leads to a shift in the “deviation” point of the absorption spectra towards a lower energy, increasing the long wavelength absorption. According to the simulation results, the upper limit of the efficiency with intensified scattering can be increased by up to 27% when the periodicity is 500 nm, as shown in Fig. 8f. We compared different scales of nanostructures through experiments (Fig. 8b and c), different simulation methods (Fig. 7a and b, Fig. 8a and d–f) or different point of views (Fig. 7c and d). All of the results echo Yu's simulation results, based on a rigorous electromagnetic perspective (as mentioned above in Fig. 5a). The most significant enhancement in light absorption occurs when the periodicity of the nanostructures is slightly smaller or comparable to the incident wavelength.46,51,54,58–62
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic drawing of the periodic Si nanowire structure. The parameters are the length L, the periodicity a, and the diameter d. (b) Absorptance of the nanowire structures with various thicknesses, L = 1.16, 2.33, and 4.66 μm (d = 50 nm and a = 100 nm) (left). Absorptance of the nanowire structures with various filling ratios, f = 0.20, 0.33, 0.50, obtained by TMM and Maxwell–Garnet approximation (L = 2.33 μm and a = 100 nm) (right). (c) Diffraction angles θmn as functions of normalized wavelength, λ/Λ at several diffraction orders (m, n) for 2D symmetrical Si grating. Higher order DET (DETHO) of 2D Si pyramid gratings with d/Λ = 1.0 as a function of wavelength for several different values of Λ. The circular symbols show the absorption length of c-Si. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.56 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from H. Sai, Y. Kanamori, K. Arafune, Y. Ohshita and M. Yamaguchi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 415. Copyright 2007 WILEY-VCH.60 
 Fig. 8  (a) Simulated absorption 2D contour with monochromatic input light λ = 700 nm showing one absorption band centering around pitch d = λ. The inset shows a schematic drawing of ordered nanowells with 2 μm-depth. (b) and (c) are the diffraction patterns of 1 μm and 700 nm nanowell array samples generated with a 650 nm diode laser. (d) Absorption measurements of the Si nanowire arrays as a function of periodicity (P). The ratio of D/P is set as 0.5, where D is the diameter. (e) Absorption measurements of the Si nanowire arrays as a function of D. P is set as 300 nm. (f) Ultimate efficiency of the structure as a function of the Si nanopillar array periodicity. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from S.-F. Leung, M. Yu, Q. Lin, K. Kwon, K.-L. Ching, L. Gu, K. Yu and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3682. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.61 (d–f) Reprinted with permission from J. Li, H. Yu, S. M. Wong, X. Li, G. Zhang, P. G.-Q. Lo and D.-L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 243113. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics.62 
Recently, it has been fiercely debated whether random or periodic nanostructures will lead to better light trapping in solar cells and this should be further verified.53,63–67 Ferry et al. systematically studied and designed pseudorandom arrays based on their power spectral density and final photocurrent.65Fig. 9a shows the different behaviors of the pseudorandom and periodic arrays. It can be seen that the pseudorandom patterns exhibit broadband scattering power, while the periodic array has a very high and sharp power peak centered at 2.5 μm−1. However, as shown in Fig. 9b, the current density–voltage characteristics of the two structures are similar. Solar cells with periodic and pseudorandom arrays achieved efficiencies of 9.6% and 9.4%, respectively, with a 90 nm-thick active layer. The authors pointed out that the key to high-efficiency pseudorandom arrays are plasmonic back-reflectors coupled to waveguide modes with Mie scatterer surfaces. Lin et al. demonstrated that the aperiodic Si nanowire array (random position) exhibits a 2.35-factor enhancement in ultimate efficiency compared to periodic arrays with a lattice constant of 100 nm, diameter of 65 nm, and height of 2.33 μm.53 From the absorptance spectrum in Fig. 9c, it is obvious that the difference between the aperiodic and periodic arrays lies in the low energy region, because the spectral behavior of aperiodic arrays mimics that of the periodic ones with larger periodicity. Normal incident light with a wavelength of 992.3 nm excites localized resonances, resulting in “multiple reflection” or “multiple scattering” between the aperiodic nanowire arrays, as shown in Fig. 9d and e. This mechanism leads to an absorption enhancement similar to that of a resonant cavity. Moreover, Bao et al. investigated the optical properties of Si nanowire arrays with three types of structural randomness, i.e., random position, diameter, and length.68 The Si nanowires with random diameters further enhance the optical broadband absorption compared to ordered nanowire arrays (Fig. 9f), which can be attributed to the enhanced internal multiple scattering and/or inner-wire resonance in the random array structure. Most of the results show that the random structures outperform the periodic structures. Battaglia et al. developed tailored periodic arrays of nanocavity-based amorphous Si solar cells and compare this with the random pyramid-textured amorphous Si solar cell.69 A high Jsc of 17.1 mA cm−2 and efficiency of 10.9% was achieved by optimizing periodic arrays of nanocavity-based amorphous Si solar cells, as shown in Fig. 9g, demonstrating that the device performance of the optimized periodic structures can be as high as that of random structures. Compared to periodic structures, random structures are easy to fabricate, but it might be difficult to unify the performance of random structured solar cells. On the other hand, although the performance of periodic structure solar cells is more uniform, it can take more time and cost to fabricate periodic structures. Therefore, the issue of which type is better (random or periodic) requires further discussion.
 Fig. 9  (a) One-dimensional power spectral density calculations. The 400 nm pitch and pseudorandom patterns with large particles have the highest power through the range of spatial frequencies required for coupling to waveguide modes in the a-Si/H in the 600–700 nm spectral bands. (b) J–V measurements for the best-efficiency cells on the substrate with 90 nm intrinsic layers. The optimized periodic pattern and the pseudorandom pattern have efficiencies of 9.6% and 9.4%, respectively. (c) The absorptance spectrum for periodic and optimal aperiodic Si nanowire structures. (d and e) Absorption profiles of periodic and optimal aperiodic Si nanowire structures at a horizontal cross section 0.233 μm below the top surface of the nanowrie array. White dashed lines indicate boundaries between super cells. (f) Reflectance and absorptance of ordered and random Si nanowire arrays from FDTD calculations. (g) J–V characteristics and SEM images for the a-Si:H cells on the optimized periodic nanocavity array, the random pyramidal texture, and the flat reference substrate. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, M. C. van Lare, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4239. Copyright 2011 The American Chemical Society.65 (c–e) Reprinted with permission from C. Lin and M. L. Povinelli, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A1148. Copyright 2011 The Optical Society.53 (f) Reprinted with permission from H. Bao and X. Ruan, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3378. Copyright 2010 The Optical Society.68 (g) Reprinted with permission from C. Battaglia, C.-M. Hsu, K. Söderström, J. Escarré, F.-J. Haug, M. Charrière, M. Boccard, M. Despeisse, D. T. L. Alexander, M. Cantoni, Y. Cui and C. Ballif, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2790. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.69 
Finally, light scattering to enhance the absorption is necessary for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). DSSCs are based on the photo-excitation of dye molecules on the surface of metal oxide electrodes.70 A schematic representation and illustration of the operation of a DSSC are shown as Fig. 10. The 10 μm-thick porous oxide surface with 5 μm-thick scattering layer provides a large absorption area for the dye molecules, which are employed as the sensitizers of the solar cell. The prepared TiO2 electrodes usually have porous surfaces, which can increase the interfacial surface area up to 1000-fold for a 10 μm-thick flat film.70 Despite the significant increase in the surface area, most of the dyes (such as N3 or N719) used in DSSCs show weak absorption in the wavelength region of 600–800 nm. The porous TiO2 surface is not effective at scattering visible wavelengths due to the small size of the geometrical features.71 The employment of a scattering layer to induce light scattering on the device surface is expected to enhance the optical absorption of the sensitized photo-electrodes. In order to simultaneously attain a large surface area and improve the scattering effect, nanocrystallite aggregates, such as photo-electrodes, have been employed.72,73 Nanocrystallite aggregates are generally of geometrical sizes comparable to visible wavelengths, and therefore able to induce sufficient light scattering on the device surface, as shown in Fig. 11. In addition, the aggregate geometry provides higher carrier collection efficiencies than those in a nanocrystalline film.72,73 Currently, DSSCs containing single-layer TiO2 nanocrystallite aggregates can achieve efficiencies of up to ∼10–11%, comparable to the record values for devices with a double-layer TiO2 structure.74 ZnO-based DSSCs utilizing nanocrystallite aggregates can also reach efficiencies of up to 6.1%.75Table 1 lists the performances of various DSSCs with electrodes made of nanocrystallite aggregates. Currently, the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs has been pushed to 12.3%, with a 10 μm-thick double-layer TiO2 electrode, and co-sensitization of YD2-o-C8/Y123 dyes and Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl) redox electrolytes.76 In short, nanocrystallite aggregates have three advantages: (i) the features of the aggregates can generate stronger light scattering in visible regions than the 400 nm solid-core particles;77 (ii) the large voids among the nanocrystallite aggregates can serve as a “highway” that allows the fast diffusion of I3− ions within the photo-electrodes;78 (iii) the tightly interconnected nanocrystallite aggregates can facilitate the transportation of photoexcited electrons in DSSCs.74
 Fig. 10  Dye-sensitized solar cell device schematic and operation. (a) Liquid-based DSSCs are comprised of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, TiO2 covered in a monolayer of sensitizing dye, an electrolyte and a platinum-coated, FTO glass. (b) Energy levels and device operation of DSSCs; the sensitizing dye absorbs a photon (energy hν), the electron is injected into the conduction band of the TiO2 and travels to the front electrode. The oxidized dye is reduced by the electrolyte, which is regenerated at the counter-electrode to complete the circuit. Voc is determined by the Fermi level (EF) of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte. 
 Fig. 11  Schematic drawing of the ZnO or TiO2 NP aggregates. 
Table 1 Performance of the DSSCs utilizing different aggregates




Aggregate
Dye

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Eff. (%)
Ref.




ZnO
N3
670
10.9
0.48
3.51

169



ZnO
N3
635
18.7
0.45
5.40

170



ZnO
N719
680
11.4
0.62
4.81

171



ZnO:I
N3
660
14.0
0.49
4.50

172



Li–ZnO
N3
660
21.0
0.44
6.10

75



ZnO nanorods
N3
628
12.6
0.51
4.00

173



TiO2 coated ZnO
N3
709
15.8
0.56
6.30

174



TiO2
N3
830
11.67
0.61
5.90

175



Yolk shell TiO2
N719
803
18.01
0.63
9.05

176



TiO2 beads
N719
720
10.57
0.64
4.92

177



TiO2 beads
N719
746
16.6
0.72
9.00

178



TiO2 beads
N719
791
15.47
0.72
8.84

179



TiO2 beads
N719
777
12.79
0.72
7.20

180





2.3. Resonance

- Metallic resonance. 
Metallic resonance can be used to achieve light trapping in the active layers, particularly for thin-film solar cells. This has been observed for metals such as Au, Ag, Al, and Cu.79 Various structures, including nanoparticles, gratings, and slits, have been designed to demonstrate this phenomenon, to increase our physical understanding and facilitate device applications.80–82 By tuning the size and the pattern of the structures, one can adjust the peak and the bandwidth of the absorption spectrum. The photon management technique of the plasmonic structures can allow shrinkage of the photovoltaic device thickness, without sacrificing device performance.
The underlying concepts of metallic plasmonic resonance include light scattering, light concentration, and excitation of the surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs).79,83 Light scattering by nanoparticles well below the wavelength of light can be expressed as (6)where Cscat and Cabs are the scattering and the absorption cross-section of the particles, and α is the polarizability. The polarizability α can be expressed as (7)where V is the particle volume; εp and εm are the dielectric constant of the particle and medium, respectively.79,84 It is clearly shown that as εp approaches −2εm, α approaches infinity, achieving surface plasmon resonance. In this manner, plasmonic structures such as nanoparticles become scattering centers which can increase the effective path length of light in the semiconductor film, as shown in Fig. 12a. In addition, as shown in Fig. 12b, the strong enhancement of the localized field around the plasmonic structures can be used to increase the absorption of the surrounding semiconductor materials. In this scenario, plasmonic structures should be placed near the junction area of the device. The enhanced resonance around the structures can increase the amount of electron–hole pairs generated in the active layer. Depending on the size, shape, and periodical forms of the structure, light in different wavelength regions can be coupled into the junction area.85–87 Therefore, to boost the device performance, the structure for plasmonic resonance should be taken into consideration in the absorption peak of the active layer. Many examples of enhanced photovoltaic efficiencies, including for Si, organic, and dye-sensitized cells have been reported based on this light concentration concept of localized surface plasmon.88–92 As shown in Fig. 12c, light can also be trapped in the photovoltaic cell by converting it into surface polarization polaritons (SPPs) via electromagnetic waves travelling along the interface between a metal back contact and a semiconductor layer. The propagation distance can be orders of magnitude larger than the optical absorption length. If the absorption of the SPP in the semiconductor is higher than that of the metal, then efficient light trapping can be achieved. More detailed discussion of SPP waveguiding behaviors and propagation characteristics are provided by ref. 84 and 93–95.
 Fig. 12  Concepts of metallic resonance: (a) light scattering; (b) light concentration; (c) surface plasmon polaritons. 
By operating with plasmonic structures, the absorption layer thickness of the photovoltaic device can be effectively decreased. For instance, thin-film Si devices with a thickness of only 1–2 μm can be designed to create sufficient absorption in the 600–1100 nm spectral range that exhibits a solar efficiency approaching that of 100 μm-thick Si. Moreover, reducing the active layer thickness can play a crucial role for CdTe and CuInSe2 devices, since their main limitation is the abundance of material resources. In addition to lowering the cost of the photovoltaic device, reducing the device thickness can also improve the electrical characteristics by reducing the dark current and carrier recombination, leading to a high device efficiency.96
Traditional plasmonic structure designs usually exhibit enhancement at a certain peak or region in the wavelength, making this an ideal design for optical antennas, sensors, or light-emitting diodes.97,98 However, in order to design ideal plasmonic structures specifically for photovoltaics, broadband enhancement from ultraviolet to infrared region of the solar spectrum is desired. Various approaches have been demonstrated to achieve broadband absorption enhancement by using shape-dependent nanoparticles, nanopatterning techniques to design structures with less uniformity, and combining nanostructures in order to couple different spectral bands of light in series.99–103 As shown in Fig. 13a, Li et al. mixed spherical Ag nanoparticles and triangular Ag nanoprisms in the active layer of organic solar cells to extend the wavelength region of light absorption.99 Aydin et al. demonstrated broadband ultrathin plasmonic absorbers by engineering cross-trapezoid patterns with e-beam lithography, as shown in Fig. 13b.100 As illustrated in Fig. 13c, Fahr et al. used metallic nanoparticles as intermediate reflectors in a tandem solar cell geometry to efficiently couple different spectral bands of the solar spectrum.83,101
 Fig. 13  (a) Broadband light absorptance of the active organic layer with mixed spherical Ag nanoparticles and triangular Ag nanoprisms. (b) Broadband ultrathin plasmonic absorbers by engineering cross-trapezoid patterns with e-beam lithography. (c) Metallic nanoparticles as intermediate reflectors in tandem solar cells. (a) Reprinted with permission from X. Li, W. C. H. Choy, H. Lu, W. E. I. Sha and A. H. P. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2728. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH.99 (b) Reprinted with permission from K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.100 
For practical applications, controllable large scale production of the plasmonic structures is necessary. The traditional method for depositing nanoparticles on the substrate is by depositing and annealing a thin-film of metal of about 10 nm.104 To control patterns more precisely, direct writing methods, such as e-beam lithography and focused ion beam milling, have been used for systematic studies of different structures.100,105 However, the afore-mentioned writing methods could be too expensive and time-consuming for commercial devices. Recently, approaches such as nanosphere lithography, alumina templates or nanoimprint lithography processes have been developed to break the device size limitations of the direct writing methods.106–109
The ongoing development of metallic resonance in thin-film photovoltaics has provided the possibility of the fabrication of more cost-effective devices. Both of the band-selective or broadband structures have demonstrated routes towards the effective control of next-generation cells. Large scale fabrication methods have the potential to realize metallic resonance in commercial devices. With further optimization, cells engineered with plasmonic structures are expected to be of assistance in solving the considerable energy problems we can expect to face in the future.


- Dielectric resonance. 
In this section, we discuss the use of waveguide and resonance modes to achieve photon management in dielectric materials in solar cells. First, we show examples of light redirection/confinement at active regions via a combination of light trapping and a waveguide technique. We then look at the other resonance modes and their applications in photovoltaic devices, which demonstrate light-concentration characteristics for enhanced absorption. Finally, the application of photonic crystals as absorbers and reflectors for the enhancement of solar cell performance will also be discussed.
Waveguide modes induced in the grating structures can be coupled with the incident wave to create a guided resonance. The waveguide is used to confine the energy so that it travels in limited dimensions, usually in cooperation with the light trapping schemes. Leung et al. described ordered three-dimensional nanowall arrays with tunable feature sizes, including pitch, diameter, and depth developed based on a self-assembly approach (Fig. 14a and b).61 The structures possessed strong optical absorption due to the enhanced coupling of incident light into the arrays and the existence of a large density of waveguide modes. Peng showed an example using Si nanoholes to incorporate radial p–n junctions, rivaling that with planar and pyramid cells (Fig. 14c).110 A waveguide mode can also be applied to guide and confine the field within the active layers. For example, Yu et al. showed that using a 5 nm-thick absorber layer surrounded by a cladding layer and a scattering layer, the absorption can be greatly enhanced compared to the bulk counterpart (Fig. 14d).46
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of flexible nanowalls embedded in polydimethylsiloxane. (b) Simulated absorption 2D contour with a monochromatic input light λ = 700 nm showing one absorption band centering around the pitch d = λ. (c) I–V curves for solar cells with different geometries fabricated under identical conditions. The inset shows the top-view SEM image of ordered, shallow, flat-bottomed pits in Si formed during the initial etching stage. (d) The upper figure illustrates a nanophotonic light-trapping structure. The scattering layer consists of a square lattice of air groove patterns with periodicity L = 1200 nm. The bottom figure shows the profile of electric-field intensity for the fundamental waveguide mode, where fields are strongly confined in the active layer. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from S.-F. Leung, M. Yu, Q. Lin, K. Kwon, K.-L. Ching, L. Gu, K. Yu and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3682. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.61 (c) Reprinted with permission from K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6872. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.110 (d) Reprinted with permission from Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2010, 107, 17491. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences.46 
An approach capable of light concentration/confinement at the active layer is required, because light absorption must occur in the active layer for efficient light-energy conversion. Resonant absorption modes, caused by multiple scattering of light inside the structured materials, are helpful to confine light in certain areas of the cells. Cao and colleagues showed significant enhancement of the absorption of sunlight in Si nanowires over the bulk material (Fig. 15a).111 Strong light trapping is attributed to the induced resonant modes in dielectric materials and the coupling of light into leaky resonant modes, which allows nanowires to act as antenna solar absorbers. Wang theoretically demonstrated that due to their structural symmetry, the incident light on vertical nanowires can only be coupled to leaky modes.112 Accordingly, the wavelength associated with leaky modes and the corresponding absorption can be tuned by varying the diameter of the nanowires, through which wavelength-selective absorption can be achieved. Kim and colleagues demonstrated that the corresponding EQE spectra are in good quantitative agreement with the simulations and allow the assignment of the observed peaks to the Fabry–Perot, whispering gallery, and complex high-order resonant absorption modes (Fig. 15b).113 Yu et al. further employed dielectric core–shell optical antenna arrays to enable strongly enhanced solar absorption.114 This approach allowed an a-Si thin film to absorb 90% of the incident solar radiation above the bandgap, which typically requires thicker antireflective coated thin films.
 Fig. 15  (a) Calculated photocurrent density of an array of 130 nm wide square nanowires as a function of the nanowire separation. The left-side vertical axis indicates the photocurrent is normalized to that of a continuous film (zero separation). The inset schematic illustrates the field inside the nanowires. (b) Experimental (solid black) and simulated (dashed red) EQE spectra for nanowires with diameters of 170 nm. The inset shows the electric field intensity illustration of coupling between a vertically incident plane wave and highly confined resonant modes within a Si nanowire. (c) Current density calculated in the amorphous silicon layer with and without the presence of nanospheres. The a-Si thickness is 100 nm and the sphere diameter is 600 nm. (d) Integrating sphere measurement of the absorption spectra under normal incidence for the flat sample and nanoshell sample. The inset shows the side view of the electric-field distribution with whispering gallery mode. (a) Reprinted with permission from L. Cao, P. Fan, A. P. Vasudev, J. S. White, Z. Yu, W. Cai, J. A. Schuller, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 439. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.111 (b) Reprinted with permission from S. K. Kim, R. W. Day, J. F. Cahoon, T. J. Kempa, K. D. Song, H. G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4971. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.113 (c) Reprinted with permission from J. Grandidier, D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1272. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH.117 (d) Y. Yao, J. Yao, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Ruan, C. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 664. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.118 
Intriguing resonant modes have also been found in spherical micro- and nano-structures. Atwater's group have explored the use of dielectric nanospheres in solar cells and carried out a series of works (Fig. 15c).115–117 They discovered that the dielectric nanospheres can induce whispering gallery modes, by which the light absorption was significantly enhanced. Such spherical structures can be applied onto a-Si and GaAs solar cells. In parallel to these works, Yao et al. fabricated closely packed hollow nanocrystalline-Si nanospheres to induce resonance modes (Fig. 15d). The unique structures exhibit a low quality-factor, facilitating the coupling of light into the resonant modes, thus significantly enhancing absorption over planar samples.118 Spinelli and colleagues used a two-dimensional periodic array of silicon nanocylinders to enhance absorption, based on the dielectric Mie resonators with larger scattering cross-sections than the geometrical ones.119 The results showed that such substrate-coupled Mie resonances allow almost zero reflectance over a broad spectral range.
Implanting photonic crystals is another potential approach to realize the control of light propagation and localization inside the solar cells.11 Photonic crystals can be used as either distributed Bragg reflectors placed on the front or shadow sides of solar cells, or as a photonic absorber to confine light inside itself. Such couplings between the photonic crystals and the solar cells have been demonstrated in a large number of studies and have shown potential improvements in solar cell efficiency. As a reflector, a TiO2 inverse opal structure was adopted to improve the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs.120 The inverse opal structure was built with multi-layered TiO2 NPs which form three-dimensional photonic crystals on the electrode surface and thus enhance the optical absorption of the devices. The structural color of the inverse opal layer is decided by the selective reflection of the ambient light at (111) planes of the face-centered cubic colloidal crystals. Assuming normal reflection (θ = 0), the center wavelength of the reflected light can be estimated using the modified Bragg equation: (8)where d is the diameter of the air cavities of the inverse opal layer; m is the order of the Bragg diffraction; n1, n2, f1, and f2 are the refractive indices and the filling factors of the air cavities and interstices, respectively; θ is the angle measured from the normal to the plane of the colloidal crystal film. The reflected color is often referred to as the structural color, since it is the ordered structure that is responsible for the selective light reflection, as shown in Fig. 16.121 Seo et al. obtained various structural colors for inverse opal TiO2 films by controlling the diameters of polystyrene nanospheres ranging from 210 to 510 nm.121
 Fig. 16  Photographs of the composite PS/TiO2 films which are fabricated by differently sized PS microspheres and the corresponding TiO2 IO films after calcination. The numbers following PS are the diameters of the PS balls. Reprinted with permission from Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH.121 
It is worth noting that when the incident angle is enlarged the spectral range corresponding to the photocurrent enhancement is found to shift towards shorter wavelengths, exhibiting a photonic pseudogap phenomenon.122 Nishimura et al. proposed the pseudogap concept in 2003, showing that the Jsc of DSSCs can be boosted by 26% using the photonic crystal-like structure.123 Thereafter, this novel approach has gained extensive interest in the development of DSSCs. In particular, Mihi et al. performed theoretical calculations using a scalar wave approximation. The group achieved significant enhancement in the photocurrent over a wide range of the solar spectrum by the fabrication of a photonic crystal structure on the electrode.124 The enhancement was contributed to by the very high optical absorption due to the photon localization in the resonant cavities, determined by the penetration depth of the incident light and the thickness of the TiO2 film. The authors also showed that the cell exhibited decreased efficiencies at the wavelengths corresponding to the forbidden bands in the photonic gap, but the efficiencies increased when the wavelengths matched the photonic gap frequencies.122 To date, various DSSCs utilizing TiO2 inverse opals in the scattering layers have been investigated.120,125–127 For example, Han et al. fabricated quasi-inverse opal layers containing highly crystalline anatase TiO2 nanocrystals that are not perfectly ordered. The porous quasi-inverse opal layers composed of highly crystalline anatase TiO2 nanocrystals exhibited excellent dye adsorption, benefiting the generation of photo-excited carriers. Moreover, reflectance measurement revealed an effective scattering property of the quasi-inverse opal layer over the wavelength range of 600–750 nm. The photocurrent of the DSSC based on the 420 nm quasi-inverse opal layer is therefore remarkably higher than that of the conventional DSSC with a layered scattering structure, and thus results in a conversion efficiency as high as 5.7%.126 This novel inverse opal structure opens up new opportunities for solar harvesting through photonic bandgap engineering, which is done by the variation of void diameters for the inverse opal and by shifting the absorption wavelengths of the photosensitizer in DSSCs.
Compared to traditional reflectors or absorbers, a photonic reflector is beneficial for its spectral selectivity, which enables almost perfect reflectivity and light confinement for wavelengths within the photonic bandgap. Some examples employing the resonance-enhanced techniques using photonic crystals are presented here. As mentioned above, inverse opals as reflectors have been widely employed in order to enhance absorption in dye sensitized solar cells (Fig. 17a).125,128,129 The mechanism is due to the localization of heavy photons near the red edge of the bandgap,123 while the confinement of light at the interface of the stacks is due to a combined effect of several resonant modes.124 As absorbers, Han et al. showed that photonic crystal layers consisting of nanohole arrays can increase the efficiency of solar cells, an effect which is attributed to the increasing number of waveguide modes (Fig. 17b).130 Mallick and colleagues patterned the active layer into a two-dimensional photonic crystal, which supports leaky or waveguided modes so as to enhance coupling of the incident light to the materials (Fig. 17c).131 Other photonic nanostructures, such as nanofunnels (Fig. 17d),132 nanostripes,133 and nanorods,61 have been found to have improved absorption and efficiency because of the strong coupling of quasi-guided modes.
 Fig. 17  (a) Relative spectral EQE of the different cell types normalized at a wavelength of 520 nm. The gray dashed line indicates the calculated Bragg position in the liquid electrolyte DSSC. (b) Calculated absorptance spectra for the nanohole and the nanorod array structures when the thickness d is 2.33 μm and 1.193 mm. The c-Si filling fraction and the lattice constant are 0.5 and 500 nm, respectively. (c) Normalized EQE data for a photonic crystal and reference unpatterned device that shows enhanced photocurrent in the near IR. (d) Comparison of the calculated absorption spectra of SiNF and optimized SiNH arrays. The filling fraction and the lattice constant are 0.5 and 500 nm, respectively. (a) Reprinted with permission from S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner, and N. Tetreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.125 (b) Reprinted with permission from S. E. Han and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1012. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.130 (c) Reprinted with permission from S. B. Mallick, M. Agrawal, A. Wangperawong, E. S. Barnard, K. K. Singh, R. J. Visser, M. L. Brongersma and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 053113. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.131 (d) Reprinted with permission from L. Li, K. Q. Peng, B. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223902. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.132 
In conclusion, we have reviewed the usage of waveguides, resonant modes and photonic crystals for the enhancement of absorption in photovoltaic devices. We have shown that a successful implementation of resonant strategies should consider the type and structure of solar cells, where the resonances can be induced through the proper design of device geometry. Although the selection of materials and the optimization of device geometries are still needed, the resonance-assisted strategies have already shown strong absorption and enhanced the efficiency of solar cells. We also note that some of the resonant applications have only been theoretically predicted, so continued efforts to realize them in practice are required.

3. Challenges and outlook
Despite the incredible improvements in absorption, most nanostructured solar cells still cannot exceed the traditional microstructured cells in terms of efficiency.134–136 The main reason for this is that most nanoscale photon management schemes are accompanied by poor electrical properties; because of the high aspect ratio of the nanostructure, and the inevitable increase in surface defects which will lead to a deterioration of the cell performance.137 Li, Huang, and Kulakci reported on the influence of nanowire length on solar performance, as shown in Fig. 18.134,138,139 The results showed that, although the absorption increases with nanowire length, the enhanced AR property does not improve the efficiency, but instead results in a lower Voc, Jsc, and FF (Fig. 18a, b and Table 2).138 This is because long nanowires will lead to a low minority carrier lifetime and high saturation current density due to the increased surface defects of high-aspect-ratio nanostructures, ultimately decreasing the Voc. The internal quantum efficiency measurement (IQE) further confirms that the poor photo-electron conversion efficiency of nanostructures is caused by the increase in bulk recombination, surface recombination, and series resistance (Fig. 18c). The IQE loss is especially severe in short wavelength regions, indicating the formation of high density surface defects causing low Jsc.36 Moreover, high density defects induce many parallel paths across each layer, resulting in low shunt resistance and thus decreasing the FF and the efficiency of a solar cell.36 Finally, last but not least, high-aspect-ratio structures easily lead to nonconformal deposition of the following layers (e.g., emitter layers, passivation layers, ARCs, and electrodes), bringing about high series resistance and poor carrier transport (Fig. 18d).135 Jeong and Hsu focused on optimizing the morphologies of nanostructures to obtain the conformal thin emitter layer coverage.140,141 The electrode/active layer interface also plays an important role for carrier collection.142 Alonzo et al. created P3HT brushes as an anode buffer layer to replace the traditional PEDOT:PSS buffer layer to enhance hole transportation. The Jsc of the P3HT brush device can be nearly twice as high as that of the traditional PEDOT:PSS cell.142 All results indicate that no matter how many photocarriers are generated, if the carriers cannot be successfully extracted, the generated photocarriers are wasted and insufficient current is generated.142 Consequently, the electrical properties of nanostructured solar cells need to be improved in order to carry out an efficient nanoscale photon management scheme.
 Fig. 18  (a) Reflectance of Si nanowires with different lengths. (b) Density and power conversion efficiency for Si nanowire array solar cells with different aspect ratios. The inset shows the density and power conversion efficiency for Si nanowire array solar cells with an aspect ratio between 1 and 6.5. (c) IQE of Si nanowire solar cells with different lengths. (d) Power conversion efficiency and series resistance for SiNW array solar cells with different lengths. Reprinted with permission from B.-R. Huang, Y.-K. Yang, T.-C. Lin and W.-L. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 357. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.138 
Table 2 Illuminated J–V measurements of Si nanowire array solar cells138




Length of SiNW array solar cell (nm)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




0
507.5 ± 2.50
26.15 ± 3.25
57.4 ± 6.10
7.51 ± 0.10


∼60
505.0 ± 5.00
25 ± 0.50
65.5 ± 0.2
8.28 ± 0.06


∼91
522.5 ± 2.50
27.95 ± 0.65
64.45 ± 0.45
9.43 ± 0.20


∼279
520 ± 10.00
30.65 ± 1.15
4.85 ± 0.35
10.15 ± 0.05


∼312
522.5 ± 2.50
28.65 ± 0.85
57.25 ± 2.45
8.56 ± 0.09


∼544
520 ± 0.05
24.8 ± 0.50
59.8 ± 1.10
7.72 ± 0.32


∼1100
525 ± 5.00
21.3 ± 0.20
56.89 ± 3.02
6.37 ± 0.34


∼2934
492.5 ± 7.50
13.9 ± 3.10
53.45 ± 6.75
3.55 ± 0.31




To overcome these electrical problems, bulk and surface defect densities should be reduced. Two straightforward solutions are (i) to shrink the thickness and (ii) to lower the aspect ratio of active structures. First, reducing the thickness to create thin solar cells may have several advantages, such as reducing the need for material, allowing for lower material-quality, and improving the charge collection efficiency. For example, Zhu et al. designed the ultrathin nanodome solar cell with an a-Si:H layer, whose thickness (280 nm) is lower than the carrier diffusion length of a-Si (<300 nm) (Fig. 19a).143 Another advantage is that thinner a-Si:H can reduce the light-induced degradation of a-Si. Despite the thin absorber layer, 94% of the incident light with wavelengths of 400–800 nm can be absorbed; the light-matter interaction can be observed in Fig. 19b. Similar concepts have been proposed by Ferry and Kuang, who employed an ultrathin a-Si:H p–i–n junction (90 and 25 nm) deposited on nanopatterned substrates to improve the efficiency.65,144–147 Hsu et al. investigated 290 nm-thick a-Si:H solar cells with optimized nanocone shapes, to achieve an initial efficiency of 9.7% (Fig. 19c and d).141
 Fig. 19  (a) a-Si:H nanodome solar cells after the deposition of multilayers of materials on nanocones. (b) Snapshots of simulated electric fields in the structure at 700 nm wavelength. (c) The SEM of the cell deposited over the patterned substrate. (d) J–V curves for solar cells with differently patterned substrates. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.143 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from C.-M. Hsu, C. Battaglia, C. Pahud, Z. Ruan, F.-J. Haug, S. Fan, C. Ballif and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 628. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH.141 
Lowering the aspect ratio to reduce surface defects and achieve conformal layer deposition is another valid approach towards improving the electrical properties. One practical example is that microwire arrays turn out to be more efficient than nanostructures for the collection of photocarriers due to an effective reduction of surface defect density.148 Additionally, lowering the aspect ratio can lead to improved coverage of the passivation layer, which can further reduce the surface recombination.149,150 SiOx, SiNx, and Al2O3 are widely used materials for surface passivation in traditional Si solar cells.151,152 Alternatively, passivation layers, such as hydrogenated amorphous Si (a-Si:H) for single crystalline Si (c-Si) wafers, can be used to provide band offset at the a-Si:H/c-Si interface. This occurs due to the different band gaps of the two materials, leading to the formation of the field effect passivation to further minimize the minority carrier recombination.36 Recent studies have shown that by optimizing the surface area, radial microwire a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunctions with high quality passivation can be obtained.153 The microwire array device has been shown to generate a Jsc of 31.1 mA cm−2 and Voc of 591 mV, leading to an efficiency of 12%. Through a-Si:H passivation, Panasonic has achieved a world-record high efficiency among all kinds of Si-based solar cells of practical sizes (100 cm2 and above) of 24.7%.154
Unfortunately, reducing the thickness and aspect ratio both lead to a degradation in the light trapping capability of the structures, resulting in unsatisfactory Jsc enhancement. Therefore, designing thin and low aspect ratio structured solar cells while still retaining strong light absorption is a key issue. Recently, many groups have integrated different types of photon management schemes in order to achieve the goal of producing thin and low-aspect-ratio solar cells that have superior light trapping effects. Wang et al. designed double-sided grating Si solar cells to separate the AR and light trapping purposes, as shown in Fig. 20.155 The final structure exhibited a Jsc of 34.6 mA cm−2 on a 2 μm-thick Si substrate. Fang et al. proposed a strategy for enhancing the efficiency of solar cells by arranging different sizes of nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 21.156 By combining the functions of different sized nanoparticles excellent broadband, omnidirectional light-harvesting can be achieved by the solar cells. Kelzenberg et al. embedded Al2O3 light scattering particles (900 nm in diameter) between microwire arrays to scatter the incoming light between the microwires, thereby enhancing the absorption probability (Fig. 22a).3,26,136,157 The group studied the overall fraction of the above-bandgap photons that each wire array would absorb throughout a day of operation as a non-tracking solar cell, Aavg, for each light-trapping technique. Fig. 22b shows there to be a 36.7% enhancement for Aavg after ARC and scattering particles were embedded. Broadband absorption has been reported for dual-diameter nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 23.158 It is found that nanopillar arrays 60 nm in diameter exhibit the lowest reflectance and the highest transmittance, while the nanopillar arrays 130 nm in diameter show the highest absorption (Fig. 23c–e). Accordingly, a small diameter rod was fabricated at the top to minimize the reflectance and increase the amount of light entering the structures, with a large diameter at the base for maximal optical absorption once the photons enter the nanopillar array. The resultant optimized Ge dual-diameter nanopillar array exhibits 95–100% absorption for wavelengths ranging from 300 to 900 nm, which is a drastic improvement over the single-diameter nanopillar arrays. Lin et al. similarly integrated nanopillar and nanowell arrays together to confine light in solar cells (Fig. 24). The group showed that nanopillar arrays can suppress broadband and omnidirectional reflection; while nanowell arrays can further confine the incoming light more efficiently within their cylindrical cavities. Overall, the mixed structure obtained a day-integrated absorption of 89.27%, as opposed to only 33.45% for the planar control sample.159 These studies reveal that a proper arrangement of different structures can effectively improve light trapping with the retention of electrical properties.
 Fig. 20  (a) The optimized double-sided nanostructure. (b) The absorption spectrum of the double-sided structure. Reprinted with permission from K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1616. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.155 
 Fig. 21  Schematic drawing of scattering particles on graded refractive index nanoparticle stacks. 
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic drawing of a microwire array with an ARC and embedded within a transparent polymer, employing light-scattering particles and a transparent top contact. (b) A plot of Aavg calculations corresponding to each absorption measurement, showing the incident sunlight and spectrally weighted absorption of each throughout the day, compared with the measured absorption of a commercial, ARC, polycrystalline Si solar cell. Reprinted with permission from M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.136 
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic drawing of Ge nanorods with dual diameters. (b) SEM images of Ge nanorods with controlled diameters. (c) Reflectance, (d) transmittance, and (e) absorptance measurement of different diameter of Ge nanorods. (f) Absorptance measurement of dual diameters nanorods. Reprinted with permission from Z. Fan, R. Kapadia, P. W. Leu, X. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh, K. Takei, K. Yu, A. Jamshidi, A. A. Rathore, D. J. Ruebusch, M. Wu and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3823. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.158 
 Fig. 24  (a) SEM image of a nanowire and nanowell mixed structure. (b) Simulated cross-sectional |E|2 distribution of the EM wave on the nanowire and nanowell mixed structure. (c) The normal incident absorption spectra of the five samples. (d) Above-band gap broadband photon flux absorption with the incident angle dependence of the nanowires, nanowells, and nanowire and nanowell mixed structures. Reprinted with permission from Q. Lin, B. Hua, S.-f. Leung, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2725. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.159 
The creation of hierarchical architectures that combine materials of different classes,34,160,161 electrical/optical properties,162,163 and scales31,164 to provide synergistic and tailorable performance has attracted a great deal of attention. To further enhance light-matter coupling, hierarchical structures consisting of microstructures and nanostructures have attracted intensive interest in recent years.33,36,165,166 Photon management using hierarchical structures shows excellent light-harvesting characteristics. Hierarchical structures with only 1.16 μm-long nanowires can suppress the total reflection to 2.96% (with wavelengths of 300–1100 nm), which is even superior to the surfaces purely consisting of long nanowires up to 40 μm in length.23,36 A key optical benefit of the hierarchical architecture design stems from the gradient refractive index effect of the nanostructures, allowing more photons to enter the entire device, and then the multiple scattering effect of the microstructures. Fig. 25 shows various kinds of hierarchical structures combining different microstructures and nanostructures.33,167,168 Recently, Si solar cells with hierarchical structures have shown very high efficiency; see the results summarized in Table 3. Our group achieved a power conversion efficiency of up to 11.48%, which is the highest power conversion efficiency out of all the reported Si/organic hybrid cells to date, for hierarchical structures consisting of micropyramids and nanowires to be used in Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells (Fig. 26).165 The hierarchical Si surface leads to increased internal multiple reflection and provides an intermediate refractive index between air, PEDOT:PSS, and Si, leading to broadband and omnidirectional suppression of the undesired surface reflection. Moreover, the hierarchical structures also provide efficient charge separation/transport as a consequence of increasing the junction areas. It is worth noting that a more pronounced enhancement of generated power density by the hybrid cells with hierarchical Si surfaces was observed at high angles of incidence (AOIs) (from 51.9% at the normal AOI to 253.8% at the AOI of 75°), showing the excellent omnidirectional solar cell characteristics of the hierarchical Si surfaces. The enhancement of power generation increased to 253.8% at high AOIs, showing the outstanding omnidirectional operation ability of hybrid cells with hierarchical Si surfaces (Fig. 26i and j). Wang et al. further improved the carrier collection of hierarchical structures through chemical polishing etching (CPE) treatment. Applying the CPE treatment to the hierarchical structures leads to the creation of atomically smooth and contamination-free surfaces, avoiding the nonconformal ultrathin a-Si:H deposition.36 In addition, this can reduce excessive carrier trapping centers caused by the high density of surface defects and metal contamination in the high-aspect-ratio nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 27a–c. The conformal a-Si:H provides superior passivation qualities, reflected in the increase of carrier lifetimes shown in Fig. 27d. The increase of IQE with CPE time indicates that the surface defects can be effectively reduced even with just a short period of CPE treatment, echoing the results of the effective lifetime measurements (Fig. 27d). After carefully removing the surface defects, the radial junction design will be able to effectively work for the purpose of carrier collection. These concurrent improvements in optical and electrical design in the hierarchical structures are reflected in the success of practical Si heterojunction solar cells, which achieve a Jsc of 36.58 mA cm−2, a Voc of 595.65 mV, a FF of 69.5%, and thus an efficiency of 15.14%. Properly designed hierarchical-structured devices show promise for developing low-cost, high-efficiency, omnidirectional solar applications.
 Fig. 25  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) the Si solar cell with 70 nm Si3N4-coated microgrooves and (b) the Si solar cell with the ZnO nanorod arrays/Si3N4-coated Si microgrooves. SEM image of (c) the p-GaN microdome structure and the hierarchical SiO2 nanorod arrays/p-GaN microdomes. Surface morphology of the silicon nanowires on the pyramid-textured silicon surface depending on a 7 min electroless etching time. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from C. A. Lin, K. Y. Lai, W. C. Lien, and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6520. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.32 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from C. H. Ho, D. H. Lien, Y. H. Hsiao, M. S. Tsai, D. Chang, K. Y. Lai, C. C. Sun and J. H. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 161104. Copyright 2013 The American Institute of Physics.162 (e and f) Reprinted with permission from I.-J. Lee, U. Paik and J.-G. Park, Sol. Energy, 2013, 91, 256. Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.163 
Table 3 Si solar cells with hierarchical structures




Junction type
Wafer type
Morphology

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Eff. (%)
Ref.




Homojunction
Poly-Si
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
619
33.5
77.7
16.1

181



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
614
33.8
78.6
16.32

182



Homojunction
N/A
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)
615
35.6
78.2
17.1

183



Homojunction
N/A
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
∼585
∼33.25
∼74
14.29

184



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Microgroove (isotropic wet etching)+ nanopores (metal-assisted chemical etching)
604
33.89
77.3
15.8

152



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Microgroove (isotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
632
34.04
77.9
17.6

185



Homojunction
CZ
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanohole (metal-assisted chemical etching)
618.7
35.13
72.77
15.82

186



Homojunction
CZ
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanohole (metal-assisted chemical etching)
623
35.5
79.3
17.5

187



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
613
36.14
75.98
16.82

188



Homojunction
N/A
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)
598
34.36
74.99
15.39

168



Homojunction
N/A
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)
620
35.76
77.2
17.11

189



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Microgroove (isotropic wet etching) + nanopores (metal-assisted chemical etching)
624
35.16
77.2
16.94

190



Homojunction
Poly-Si
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
613
36.14
75.98
16.82

191



Homojunction
N/A
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)
620
36
78.4
17.5

192



a-Si/c-Si Heterojunction
CZ
Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)
596
36.58
69.5
15.14

36





 Fig. 26  SEM images of micropyramid-textured Si substrates (a) without nanowires. SEM images of micropyramid-textured Si substrates with (b) 30 nm, (c) 185 nm, (d) 234 nm, (e) 357 nm, and (f) 602 nm nanowires, respectively. (g) J–V characteristics and (h) EQE spectra of the hybrid cells with planar, micropyramid-textured, and hierarchical-structured Si. (i) Incident angle dependence of the generated maximum power and (j) enhancement of the generated maximum power. Reprinted with permission from W. R. Wei, M. L. Tsai, S. T. Ho, S. H. Tai, C. R. Ho, S. H. Tsai, C. W. Liu, R. J. Chung and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3658. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.165 
 Fig. 27  HRTEM images taken near the edge of individual nanowires on hierarchical structures (a) before and (b) after the CPE treatment. The scale bars in (a) and (b) represent 3 nm. (c) Ag concentration as a function of time for CPE treatment with the hierarchical structure surfaces obtained from Ag 3d XPS spectra. (d) Lifetimes at a carrier density of 1015 cm−3 for all structures. (e) IQE spectra and (f) J–V characteristics of Si heterojunction solar cells with different structures under air mass 1.5 G illumination. Reprinted with permission from H. P. Wang, T. Y. Lin, C. W. Hsu, M. L. Tsai, C. H. Huang, W. R. Wei, M. Y. Huang, Y. J. Chien, P. C. Yang, C. W. Liu, L. J. Chou and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9325. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.36 
In short, to realize high efficiency solar cells, both the photon absorption and photocarrier collection abilities have to be considered and optimized. The employment of nanostructures has led to an excellent absorption capability; however, this usually comes at the expense of the electrical properties. To retain the absorption properties with minimized electrical loss, thin thickness and low aspect ratios are necessary. Several photon management strategies have been proposed in the past few years to achieve these goals. However, each photon management scheme has its own limitations. For example, antireflective structures increase the amount of broadband light entering the structures, but cannot efficiently confine light within the active layer due to less interaction between tiny antireflective structures and incident light. Light scattering structures with large periodicity enhance absorption at long wavelengths by increasing the optical path length, but structures with large periodicity are not beneficial for incident light transmission into the device. Appropriate resonance structure design strongly enhances light absorption under resonance conditions, but it is difficult to obtain a broadband high absorption resonance. A proper combination of photon management schemes could be a future trend for achieving higher efficiency solar cells. Going forward, taking advantage of photon management schemes to come up with creative designs appears to have the greatest potential for achieving high performance and cost-effective solar cells.
References
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, A. K. Jain, E. F. Haites, L. D. D. Harvey, S. D. Potter, M. E. Schlesinger, S. H. Schneider, R. G. Watts, T. M. L. Wigley and D. J. Wuebbles, Nature, 1998, 395, 881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          International Energy Agency (IEA), Redrawing the Energy Climate Map: World Energy Outlook Special Report, International Energy Agency (IEA),  2013, p. 1 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency (IEA), Redrawing the Energy Climate Map: World Energy Outlook Special Report, International Energy Agency (IEA),  2012, p. 1 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Department of Energy, $1/W Photovoltaic Systems, Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, U.S.Department of Energy (DOE),  2010, p. 1 Search PubMed .
C. G. Bernhard, Endeavour, 1967, 26, 79 Search PubMed .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Heine and R. H. Morf, Appl. Opt., 1995, 34, 2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Saeta, V. E. Ferry, D. Pacifici, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 20975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Springer, B. Rech, W. Reetz, J. Müller and M. Vanecek, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 1 CAS .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rayleigh, Proc. London Math. Soc., 1879, s1, 51 CrossRef .

          J. Fraunhofer, Joseph von Fraunhofer Gesannekte Schriften, Munich, Germany,  1888 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Someda, Electromagnetic Waves, Chapman & Hall, London,  1998 Search PubMed .
W. H. Southwell, Opt. Lett., 1983, 8, 584 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Dobrowolski, D. Poitras, P. Ma, H. Vakil and M. Acree, Appl. Opt., 2002, 41, 3075 CrossRef CAS .
D. Poitras and J. A. Dobrowolski, Appl. Opt., 2004, 43, 1286 CrossRef .
K. Hadobas, S. Kirsch, A. Carl, M. Acet and E. F. Wassermann, Nanotechnology, 2000, 11, 161 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Clapham and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281 CrossRef .
Y. R. Lin, K. Y. Lai, H. P. Wang and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2765 RSC .
Y. R. Lin, H. P. Wang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 114310 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Wang, K. Y. Lai, Y. R. Lin, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Dai, H. C. Chang, K. Y. Lai, C. A. Lin, R. J. Chung, G. R. Lin and J. H. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10924 RSC .
Y. C. Chao, C. Y. Chen, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3436 CAS .
H. C. Chang, K. Y. Lai, Y. A. Dai, H. H. Wang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2863 CAS .
J. C. M. Garnett, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1904, 203, 385 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. M. Garnett, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1906, 205, 237 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. G. Bruggeman, Ann. Phys., 1935, 416, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 279 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T.-A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan, H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Yeh, K. Y. Lai, G. J. Lin, P. H. Fu, H. C. Chang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 505 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Lin, K. Y. Lai, W. C. Lien and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6520 RSC .
K. Y. Lai, H. C. Chang, Y. A. Dai and J. H. He, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ho, M. L. Tsai, H. J. Jhuo, D. H. Lien, C. A. Lin, S. H. Tsai, T. C. Wei, K. P. Huang, S. A. Chen and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6350 RSC .
M. M. Adachi, M. P. Anantram and K. S. Karim, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1546 CAS .
H. P. Wang, T. Y. Lin, C. W. Hsu, M. L. Tsai, C. H. Huang, W. R. Wei, M. Y. Huang, Y. J. Chien, P. C. Yang, C. W. Liu, L. J. Chou and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1982, 72, 899 CrossRef .
E. Yablonovitch and G. D. Cody, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1982, 29, 300 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Campbell and M. A. Green, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1986, 33, 234 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Goetzberger, Proceedings of the 15th IEEE Photovoltaics Specialists Conference, Kissemme,  1981, vol. 867 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2002, 10, 235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, J. Zhao, A. Wang, P. J. Reece and M. Gal, Nature, 2001, 412, 805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tobías, A. Luque and A. Martí, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 034502 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sheng, A. N. Bloch and R. S. Stepleman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1983, 43, 579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Wang, K. T. Tsai, K. Y. Lai, T. C. Wei, Y. L. Wang and J. H. He, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fahr, T. Kirchartz, C. Rockstuhl and F. Lederer, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, M.-Y. Shih, S. F. LeBoeuf, M. Pietrzykowski, P. J. Codella, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima, J. Rand, A. Davuluru and U. Rapol, J. Nanophotonics, 2007, 1, 013552 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233117 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Street, W. S. Wong and C. Paulson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin and M. L. Povinelli, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Muskens, J. G. Rivas, R. E. Algra, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin and M. L. Povinelli, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 19371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sai, H. Fujiwara and M. Kondo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Han and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sai, Y. Kanamori, K. Arafune, Y. Ohshita and M. Yamaguchi, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 415 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-F. Leung, M. Yu, Q. Lin, K. Kwon, K.-L. Ching, L. Gu, K. Yu and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Yu, S. M. Wong, X. Li, G. Zhang, P. G.-Q. Lo and D.-L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 243113 CrossRef PubMed .
O. L. Muskens, S. L. Diedenhofen, B. C. Kaas, R. E. Algra, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, J. Gómez Rivas and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Lal, H. Zhou, M. Hawkeye, J. K. Sinha, P. N. Bartlett, G. A. J. Amaratunga and J. J. Baumberg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245318 CrossRef .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, M. C. v. Lare, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bozzola, M. Liscidini and L. C. Andreani, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013 DOI:10.1002/pip.2385 .
F. Pratesi, M. Burresi, F. Riboli, K. Vynck and D. S. Wiersma, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, A460 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bao and X. Ruan, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, C.-M. Hsu, K. Söderström, J. Escarré, F.-J. Haug, M. Charrière, M. Boccard, M. Despeisse, D. T. L. Alexander, M. Cantoni, Y. Cui and C. Ballif, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .

          H. C. van de Hulst, Light Scattering by Small Particles, Wiley, New York,  1957 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, K. Park, J. Xi, D. Myers and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, K. Park, D. Liu, X. Zhou, Y.-H. Jeong and G. Cao, J. Nanophotonics, 2010, 4, 041540 CrossRef PubMed .
F. d. r. Sauvage, D. Chen, P. Comte, F. Huang, L.-P. Heiniger, Y.-B. Cheng, R. A. Caruso and M. Graetzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, S. Candelaria, D. Liu, B. B. Garcia, X. Zhou, Y.-H. Jeong and G. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2427 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N.-G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jensen, M. D. Malinsky, C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10549 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Ritchie, E. T. Arakawa, J. J. Cowan and R. N. Hamm, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1968, 21, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, Wiley, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .
J. J. Mock, M. Barbic, D. R. Smith, D. A. Schultz and S. Schultz, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 6755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Lee and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 107, 668 CrossRef .
W. C. Tu, Y. T. Chang, H. P. Wang, C. H. Yang, C. T. Huang, J. H. He and S. C. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Rand, P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 7519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Morfa, K. L. Rowlen, T. H. Reilly III, M. J. Romero and J. van de Lagemaat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013504 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hagglund, M. Zach and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. Konda, R. Mundle, H. Mustafa, O. Bamiduro, A. K. Pradhan, U. N. Roy, Y. Cui and A. Burger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 191111 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Berini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 61, 10484 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Dionne, L. A. Sweatlock, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 075405 CrossRef .
T. D. Heidel, J. K. Mapel, M. Singh, K. Celebi and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093506 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, J. Zhao, A. Wang and S. R. Wenham, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1999, 46, 1940 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mühlschlegel, H.-J. Eisler, O. J. F. Martin, B. Hecht and D. W. Pohl, Science, 2005, 308, 1607 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Okamoto, I. Niki, A. Shvartser, Y. Narukawa, T. Mukai and A. Scherer, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. C. H. Choy, H. Lu, W. E. I. Sha and A. H. P. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fahr, C. Rockstuhl and F. Lederer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 121105 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aubry, D. Y. Lei, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, Y. Sonnefraud, S. A. Maier and J. B. Pendry, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Stuart and D. G. Hall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. R. Vesseur, R. de Waele, H. J. Lezec, H. A. Atwater, F. J. G. de Abajo and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083110 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5599 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakayama, K. Tanabe and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 121904 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Boltasseva, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2009, 11, 114001 CrossRef .
M. Ramanathan, S. M. Kilbey II, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10389 RSC .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, P. Fan, A. P. Vasudev, J. S. White, Z. Yu, W. Cai, J. A. Schuller, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Wang and P. W. Leu, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 3756 CrossRef .
S. K. Kim, R. W. Day, J. F. Cahoon, T. J. Kempa, K. D. Song, H. G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Grandidier, R. A. Weitekamp, M. G. Deceglie, D. M. Callahan, C. Battaglia, C. R. Bukowsky, C. Ballif, R. H. Grubbs and H. A. Atwater, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Grandidier, D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 123 CrossRef .
J. Grandidier, D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, J. Yao, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Ruan, C. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 664 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Spinelli, M. A. Verschuuren and A. Polman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13 CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Han, S. Lee, H. Shin and H. Suk Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Shin and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Li, Q. Tang, F. Y. Cai, X. B. Hu, H. H. Lu, Y. Yan, W. Hong and B. Y. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Warren, S. K. Brayshaw, A. L. Johnson, S. Schiffers, P. R. Raithby, T. L. Easun, M. W. George, J. E. Warren and S. J. Teat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Han and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Mallick, M. Agrawal, A. Wangperawong, E. S. Barnard, K. K. Singh, R. J. Visser, M. L. Brongersma and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 053113 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, K. Q. Peng, B. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223902 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Q. Meng, V. Depauw, G. Gomard, O. El Daif, C. Trompoukis, E. Drouard, C. Jamois, A. Fave, F. Dross, I. Gordon and C. Seassal, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Li, R. Jia, C. Chen, Z. Xing, W. C. Ding, Y. L. Meng, D. Q. Wu, X. Y. Liu and T. C. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 151116 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, X. D. Li, S. Song, Y. Xu and J. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 255703 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 060801 Search PubMed .
B.-R. Huang, Y.-K. Yang, T.-C. Lin and W.-L. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kulakci, F. Es, B. Ozdemir, H. E. Unalan and R. Turan, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 548 CrossRef .
S. Jeong, E. C. Garnett, S. Wang, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Hsu, C. Battaglia, C. Pahud, Z. Ruan, F.-J. Haug, S. Fan, C. Ballif and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Alonzo, W. M. Kochemba, D. L. Pickel, M. Ramanathan, Z. Sun, D. Li, J. Chen, B. G. Sumpter, W. T. Heller and S. M. Kilbey II, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9357 RSC .
J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. T. Li, E. Verhagen, R. J. Walters, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Deceglie, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuang, K. H. M. van der Werf, Z. S. Houweling and R. E. I. Schropp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Agostinelli, A. Delabie, P. Vitanov, Z. Alexieva, H. F. W. Dekkers, S. De Wolf and G. Beaucarne, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dan, K. Seo, K. Takei, J. H. Meza, A. Javey and K. B. Crozier, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hoex, S. B. S. Heil, E. Langereis, M. C. M. van de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 042112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, T. Lai, H. Li, Y. Wang, Z. Mei, H. Liang, Z. Li, F. Zhang, W. Wang, A. Y. Kuznetsov and X. Du, Small, 2012, 8, 1392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gharghi, E. Fathi, B. Kante, S. Sivoththaman and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Panasonic Corp. http://panasonic.co.jp/corp/news/official.data/data.dir/2013/02/en130212-7/en130212-7.pdf,  2013.
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Fang, Y.-L. Liu, Y.-C. Lee, H.-L. Chen, D.-H. Wan and C.-C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, R. M. Briggs, J. Y. Baek, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 866 CAS .
Z. Fan, R. Kapadia, P. W. Leu, X. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh, K. Takei, K. Yu, A. Jamshidi, A. A. Rathore, D. J. Ruebusch, M. Wu and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, B. Hua, S.-f. Leung, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Tsai, C. A. Lin, W. C. Lien, H. C. Chang, Y. L. Wan and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Tsai, S. T. Ho, H. J. Jhuo, C. R. Ho, S. A. Chen and J. H. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 253111 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Hsu, D. H. Lien, S. Y. Lu, C. Y. Chen, C. F. Kang, Y. L. Chueh, W. K. Hsu and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Lin, K. P. Huang, S. T. Ho, M. W. Huang and J. H. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 123901 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Hsiao, C. Y. Chen, L. C. Huang, G. J. Lin, D. H. Lien, J. J. Huang and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2624 RSC .
W. R. Wei, M. L. Tsai, S. T. Ho, S. H. Tai, C. R. Ho, S. H. Tsai, C. W. Liu, R. J. Chung and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Ho, D. H. Lien, H. C. Chang, C. A. Lin, C. F. Kang, M. K. Hsing, K. Y. Lai and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7346 RSC .
C. H. Ho, D. H. Lien, Y. H. Hsiao, M. S. Tsai, D. Chang, K. Y. Lai, C. C. Sun and J. H. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 161104 CrossRef PubMed .
I.-J. Lee, U. Paik and J.-G. Park, Sol. Energy, 2013, 91, 256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Chou, Q. Zhang, G. E. Fryxell and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, C. Hu, X. Wu, Q. Wu and C. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zheng, X. Tao, Q. Hou, D.-T. Wang, W.-L. Zhou and J.-F. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 3 CrossRef .
Y.-Z. Zheng, J. Zhao, H. Zhang, J.-F. Chen, W. Zhou and X. Tao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11519 RSC .
K. Park, Q. Zhang, B. B. Garcia, X. Zhou, Y.-H. Jeong and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xi, Q. Zhang, S. Xie, S. Yodyingyong, K. Park, Y. Sun, J. Li and G. Cao, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2011, 3, 690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Liao, H.-P. Lin, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1627 RSC .
C.-R. Ke and J.-M. Ting, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, F. Huang, D. Chen, L. Cao, X. L. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, D. Chen, X. L. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yoo, G. Yu and J. Yi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Lee, M.-H. Ha, J. H. Kim and J.-W. Jeong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Toor, H. M. Branz, M. R. Page, K. M. Jones and H.-C. Yuan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 103501 CrossRef PubMed .
K. DaeYoung, O. JungHwa, K. Bonghwan, C. Chanseob and L. Jonghyun, 2012 IEEE Sensors, 2012, 1 Search PubMed .
H.-W. L. Ji-Myung Shim, K.-Y. Cho, J.-K. Seo, J.-S. Kim, E.-J. Lee, J.-Y. Choi, D.-J. Oh, J.-E. Shin, J.-S. Kim, J.-H. Kong, S.-H. Lee and H.-S. Lee, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, L. Wang, D. Li, N. Zhou, Z. Feng, X. Zhong and D. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 264, 621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Z. Dimitrov and C.-H. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Park, M. B. Lee, K. S. Jeon and S. Y. Choi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 03BD01 CrossRef .
X. X. Lin, X. Hua, Z. G. Huang and W. Z. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 235402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. P. Liu, T. Lai, H. L. Liang, Z. L. Li, Z. X. Mei, F. M. Zhang, A. Kuznetsov and X. L. Du, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15483 RSC .
K. M. Park, M. B. Lee, J. W. Shin and S. Y. Choi, Sol. Energy, 2013, 91, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, B. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Shen, C. Li and Y. Xia, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 229, 165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Hsin-Ping Wang	Hsin-Ping Wang received her M.S. degree (2011) at the Graduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. She is now a Ph.D. student in Dr Jr-Hau He's group. Her research interests include theoretical and experimental research on the optical properties analysis of nanostructures and solar cells (including conventional Si solar cells, thin-film solar cells, a-Si solar cells, and Si heterojunction solar cells), and solar water splitting cells.
Der-Hsien Lien	Der-Hsien Lien received his B.S. degree (2003) and M.S. degree (2005) at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He is a Ph.D. student at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University. His research interests include the dynamics and applications of nanophotonics, green memory devices, 2D materials physics and flexible optoelectronics.
Meng-Lin Tsai	Meng-Lin Tsai received his B.S. degree from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He is currently with the Department of Electrical Engineering, and Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Chin-An Lin	Chin-An Lin received his B.S degree in Physics from the National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 2006. In 2007, he joined Dr Jr-Hau He's group at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, and received his M.S. degree in 2008. He is now Dr Jr-Hau He's Ph. D. student and his current research interests include antireflective coatings in solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells.
Kun-Yu Lai	Kun-Yu Lai is currently an assistant professor at the Department of Optics and Photonics at the National Central University (NCU) in Taiwan. Dr Lai received his Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State University in 2009. After working as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the National Taiwan University in 2009–2011, he joined the faculty in the Department of Optics and Photonics at NCU, where he specializes in the growth/fabrication of novel III-nitrides optoelectronic devices and the optical properties of low-dimensional structures, such as quantum wells, quantum dots, and nanowires.
Jr-Hau He	Jr-Hau He received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1999 and 2005, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics and the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. He is involved in the design of new nanostructured architectures for nanophotonics and the next generation of nanodevices, including photovoltaics, and resistive memory. Prof. He is a recipient of the Outstanding Young Electrical Engineer Award from the Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering (2013), the Outstanding Youth Award of the Taiwan Association for Coating and Thin Film Technology (2012), the Youth Optical Engineering Medal of the Taiwan Photonics Society (2011), and has won numerous other awards and honors with his students in professional societies and conferences internationally.

 	Fig. 1  Cross-sectional SEM images of Si nanowire array layers fabricated with (a) 20 mM, (b) 30 mM, and (c) 50 mM AgNO3. The inset shows the calculated refractive index profiles of the corresponding Si nanowire arrays. (d) Total reflectance of the nanowire arrays obtained with different AgNO3 concentrations. (e) Total reflectance of the nanowire arrays with abrupt interfaces (AgNO3 20 mM 90 min; height: 5.21 ± 0.09 μm), nanowire arrays with rough interfaces (AgNO3 50 mM 30 min; height: 4.52 ± 0.95 μm), and inverted micropyramid texturing in combination with 100 nm-thick Si3N4 for a commercial Si solar cell (Commercial solar cell; height: 3.68 ± 0.10 μm). (f) A photo of a 5-inch wafer with nanowire arrays with rough interface structures, and a schematic representation of nanowire arrays with rough interface structures. Reprinted with permission from H. C. Chang, K. Y. Lai, Y. A. Dai, H. H. Wang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2863. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.25	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Total reflectance of Si nanotips with length (L) = 1.6 μm, 5.5 μm, and 16 μm UV, VIS and NIR wavelengths. (c and d) Specular reflectance of the longest Si nanotips (L = 16 μm) compared with polished Si. Reprinted with permission from Y. F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y. J. Jen, C. Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y. K. Hsu, C. L. Pan, H. C. Lo, C. H. Hsu, Y. H. Chang, C. S. Lee, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.30	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of syringe-like ZnO nanorods. (b) Reflectance of GaAs solar cells with Si3N4 and syringe-like ARC. (c) EQE and (d) J–V measurement of GaAs solar cells. Reprinted with permission from L. K. Yeh, K. Y. Lai, G. J. Lin, P. H. Fu, H. C. Chang, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 505. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH.31	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of the nanowire arrays annealed for 3 hours at 900 °C in ambient air. (b) TEM image of the 3 hour-annealed nanowire arrays showing a core–shell structure. (c) HRTEM image recorded at the interface area, indicated by the red rectangle in (b). (d) Total reflectance calculated by rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) with a polished surface, as-synthesized and 3 hour-annealed nanowire arrays. The measurement results are also presented for comparison. Time-averaged and normalized TE electric field distribution, |Ez|, simulated by FDTD analysis for (e) polished Si substrates, (f) as-synthesized nanowire arrays, (g) nanowire arrays annealed for 1 hour, (h) nanowire arrays annealed for 3 hours. Wavelength: 650 nm. Reprinted with permission from K. Y. Lai, H. C. Chang, Y. A. Dai and J. H. He, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A255. Copyright 2012 The Optical Society.33	 
A ≈ (1 − Rext)P(αbb + αfc)/[1 + P(αbb + αfc)],	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Limit of absorption enhancement in 2D grating structures. (b) Absorptance spectrum for normal incident light (averaged among two polarizations). The absorptive film is 3000 nm-thick. The whole structure is placed on a perfect mirror. (c) Structures that surpass the ergodic limit. Full-wave simulations of a P3HT:PCBM structure clad with roughened GaP with absorption enhancement exceeding the ergodic limit. The absorptance greatly exceeds the LDOS limit for the slab of P3HT:PCBM in air (dashed orange line) and approaches the LDOS limit for the P3HT:PCBM slot (dashed blue line) with refined incoupling. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A366. Copyright 2010 The Optical Society.6 (c) Reprinted with permission from D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 214. Copyright 2012 the American Chemical Society.8	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental reflectance spectra for (a) InP, (b) GaP, and (c) Si. Lines denote the diffuse reflectance of the nanowires (thin line), the corresponding substrates (dashed line), and the coherent-beam specular reflectance (thick line). Vertical lines denote the electronic bandgaps of InP (1.33 eV) and Si (1.12 eV). (d) Light-trapping path length enhancement factor (EF) versus that derived by comparing the Jsc from ordered Si nanowire arrays with the same roughness factor (RF) but different absorber thicknesses (red and black) and from the optical transmission measurements in panel c, assuming that 95% (blue) or 85% (purple) of the reduced transmission ultimately leads to absorption. The normalized Jsc (gold) is also shown on a linear scale for comparison. The strong correlation further supports the light-trapping effect because the absorption (and ultimately photocurrent) is scaled with the logarithm of the path length. (e) SEM images of Si nanowire arrays with different lengths. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from O. L. Muskens, J. G. Rivas, R. E. Algra, E. Bakkers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2638. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.54 (d and e) Reprinted with permission from E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.55	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic drawing of the periodic Si nanowire structure. The parameters are the length L, the periodicity a, and the diameter d. (b) Absorptance of the nanowire structures with various thicknesses, L = 1.16, 2.33, and 4.66 μm (d = 50 nm and a = 100 nm) (left). Absorptance of the nanowire structures with various filling ratios, f = 0.20, 0.33, 0.50, obtained by TMM and Maxwell–Garnet approximation (L = 2.33 μm and a = 100 nm) (right). (c) Diffraction angles θmn as functions of normalized wavelength, λ/Λ at several diffraction orders (m, n) for 2D symmetrical Si grating. Higher order DET (DETHO) of 2D Si pyramid gratings with d/Λ = 1.0 as a function of wavelength for several different values of Λ. The circular symbols show the absorption length of c-Si. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.56 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from H. Sai, Y. Kanamori, K. Arafune, Y. Ohshita and M. Yamaguchi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 415. Copyright 2007 WILEY-VCH.60	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Simulated absorption 2D contour with monochromatic input light λ = 700 nm showing one absorption band centering around pitch d = λ. The inset shows a schematic drawing of ordered nanowells with 2 μm-depth. (b) and (c) are the diffraction patterns of 1 μm and 700 nm nanowell array samples generated with a 650 nm diode laser. (d) Absorption measurements of the Si nanowire arrays as a function of periodicity (P). The ratio of D/P is set as 0.5, where D is the diameter. (e) Absorption measurements of the Si nanowire arrays as a function of D. P is set as 300 nm. (f) Ultimate efficiency of the structure as a function of the Si nanopillar array periodicity. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from S.-F. Leung, M. Yu, Q. Lin, K. Kwon, K.-L. Ching, L. Gu, K. Yu and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3682. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.61 (d–f) Reprinted with permission from J. Li, H. Yu, S. M. Wong, X. Li, G. Zhang, P. G.-Q. Lo and D.-L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 243113. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics.62	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) One-dimensional power spectral density calculations. The 400 nm pitch and pseudorandom patterns with large particles have the highest power through the range of spatial frequencies required for coupling to waveguide modes in the a-Si/H in the 600–700 nm spectral bands. (b) J–V measurements for the best-efficiency cells on the substrate with 90 nm intrinsic layers. The optimized periodic pattern and the pseudorandom pattern have efficiencies of 9.6% and 9.4%, respectively. (c) The absorptance spectrum for periodic and optimal aperiodic Si nanowire structures. (d and e) Absorption profiles of periodic and optimal aperiodic Si nanowire structures at a horizontal cross section 0.233 μm below the top surface of the nanowrie array. White dashed lines indicate boundaries between super cells. (f) Reflectance and absorptance of ordered and random Si nanowire arrays from FDTD calculations. (g) J–V characteristics and SEM images for the a-Si:H cells on the optimized periodic nanocavity array, the random pyramidal texture, and the flat reference substrate. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, M. C. van Lare, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4239. Copyright 2011 The American Chemical Society.65 (c–e) Reprinted with permission from C. Lin and M. L. Povinelli, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A1148. Copyright 2011 The Optical Society.53 (f) Reprinted with permission from H. Bao and X. Ruan, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3378. Copyright 2010 The Optical Society.68 (g) Reprinted with permission from C. Battaglia, C.-M. Hsu, K. Söderström, J. Escarré, F.-J. Haug, M. Charrière, M. Boccard, M. Despeisse, D. T. L. Alexander, M. Cantoni, Y. Cui and C. Ballif, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2790. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.69	 

 	Fig. 10  Dye-sensitized solar cell device schematic and operation. (a) Liquid-based DSSCs are comprised of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, TiO2 covered in a monolayer of sensitizing dye, an electrolyte and a platinum-coated, FTO glass. (b) Energy levels and device operation of DSSCs; the sensitizing dye absorbs a photon (energy hν), the electron is injected into the conduction band of the TiO2 and travels to the front electrode. The oxidized dye is reduced by the electrolyte, which is regenerated at the counter-electrode to complete the circuit. Voc is determined by the Fermi level (EF) of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic drawing of the ZnO or TiO2 NP aggregates.	 

ZnO	N3	670	10.9	0.48	3.51	
169

ZnO	N3	635	18.7	0.45	5.40	
170

ZnO	N719	680	11.4	0.62	4.81	
171

ZnO:I	N3	660	14.0	0.49	4.50	
172

Li–ZnO	N3	660	21.0	0.44	6.10	
75

ZnO nanorods	N3	628	12.6	0.51	4.00	
173

TiO2 coated ZnO	N3	709	15.8	0.56	6.30	
174

TiO2	N3	830	11.67	0.61	5.90	
175

Yolk shell TiO2	N719	803	18.01	0.63	9.05	
176

TiO2 beads	N719	720	10.57	0.64	4.92	
177

TiO2 beads	N719	746	16.6	0.72	9.00	
178

TiO2 beads	N719	791	15.47	0.72	8.84	
179

TiO2 beads	N719	777	12.79	0.72	7.20	
180

	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 12  Concepts of metallic resonance: (a) light scattering; (b) light concentration; (c) surface plasmon polaritons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Broadband light absorptance of the active organic layer with mixed spherical Ag nanoparticles and triangular Ag nanoprisms. (b) Broadband ultrathin plasmonic absorbers by engineering cross-trapezoid patterns with e-beam lithography. (c) Metallic nanoparticles as intermediate reflectors in tandem solar cells. (a) Reprinted with permission from X. Li, W. C. H. Choy, H. Lu, W. E. I. Sha and A. H. P. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2728. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH.99 (b) Reprinted with permission from K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.100	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of flexible nanowalls embedded in polydimethylsiloxane. (b) Simulated absorption 2D contour with a monochromatic input light λ = 700 nm showing one absorption band centering around the pitch d = λ. (c) I–V curves for solar cells with different geometries fabricated under identical conditions. The inset shows the top-view SEM image of ordered, shallow, flat-bottomed pits in Si formed during the initial etching stage. (d) The upper figure illustrates a nanophotonic light-trapping structure. The scattering layer consists of a square lattice of air groove patterns with periodicity L = 1200 nm. The bottom figure shows the profile of electric-field intensity for the fundamental waveguide mode, where fields are strongly confined in the active layer. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from S.-F. Leung, M. Yu, Q. Lin, K. Kwon, K.-L. Ching, L. Gu, K. Yu and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3682. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.61 (c) Reprinted with permission from K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6872. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.110 (d) Reprinted with permission from Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2010, 107, 17491. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences.46	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Calculated photocurrent density of an array of 130 nm wide square nanowires as a function of the nanowire separation. The left-side vertical axis indicates the photocurrent is normalized to that of a continuous film (zero separation). The inset schematic illustrates the field inside the nanowires. (b) Experimental (solid black) and simulated (dashed red) EQE spectra for nanowires with diameters of 170 nm. The inset shows the electric field intensity illustration of coupling between a vertically incident plane wave and highly confined resonant modes within a Si nanowire. (c) Current density calculated in the amorphous silicon layer with and without the presence of nanospheres. The a-Si thickness is 100 nm and the sphere diameter is 600 nm. (d) Integrating sphere measurement of the absorption spectra under normal incidence for the flat sample and nanoshell sample. The inset shows the side view of the electric-field distribution with whispering gallery mode. (a) Reprinted with permission from L. Cao, P. Fan, A. P. Vasudev, J. S. White, Z. Yu, W. Cai, J. A. Schuller, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 439. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.111 (b) Reprinted with permission from S. K. Kim, R. W. Day, J. F. Cahoon, T. J. Kempa, K. D. Song, H. G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4971. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.113 (c) Reprinted with permission from J. Grandidier, D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1272. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH.117 (d) Y. Yao, J. Yao, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Ruan, C. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 664. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.118	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 16  Photographs of the composite PS/TiO2 films which are fabricated by differently sized PS microspheres and the corresponding TiO2 IO films after calcination. The numbers following PS are the diameters of the PS balls. Reprinted with permission from Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH.121	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Relative spectral EQE of the different cell types normalized at a wavelength of 520 nm. The gray dashed line indicates the calculated Bragg position in the liquid electrolyte DSSC. (b) Calculated absorptance spectra for the nanohole and the nanorod array structures when the thickness d is 2.33 μm and 1.193 mm. The c-Si filling fraction and the lattice constant are 0.5 and 500 nm, respectively. (c) Normalized EQE data for a photonic crystal and reference unpatterned device that shows enhanced photocurrent in the near IR. (d) Comparison of the calculated absorption spectra of SiNF and optimized SiNH arrays. The filling fraction and the lattice constant are 0.5 and 500 nm, respectively. (a) Reprinted with permission from S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner, and N. Tetreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.125 (b) Reprinted with permission from S. E. Han and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1012. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.130 (c) Reprinted with permission from S. B. Mallick, M. Agrawal, A. Wangperawong, E. S. Barnard, K. K. Singh, R. J. Visser, M. L. Brongersma and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 053113. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.131 (d) Reprinted with permission from L. Li, K. Q. Peng, B. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223902. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.132	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Reflectance of Si nanowires with different lengths. (b) Density and power conversion efficiency for Si nanowire array solar cells with different aspect ratios. The inset shows the density and power conversion efficiency for Si nanowire array solar cells with an aspect ratio between 1 and 6.5. (c) IQE of Si nanowire solar cells with different lengths. (d) Power conversion efficiency and series resistance for SiNW array solar cells with different lengths. Reprinted with permission from B.-R. Huang, Y.-K. Yang, T.-C. Lin and W.-L. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 357. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.138	 

0	507.5 ± 2.50	26.15 ± 3.25	57.4 ± 6.10	7.51 ± 0.10
∼60	505.0 ± 5.00	25 ± 0.50	65.5 ± 0.2	8.28 ± 0.06
∼91	522.5 ± 2.50	27.95 ± 0.65	64.45 ± 0.45	9.43 ± 0.20
∼279	520 ± 10.00	30.65 ± 1.15	4.85 ± 0.35	10.15 ± 0.05
∼312	522.5 ± 2.50	28.65 ± 0.85	57.25 ± 2.45	8.56 ± 0.09
∼544	520 ± 0.05	24.8 ± 0.50	59.8 ± 1.10	7.72 ± 0.32
∼1100	525 ± 5.00	21.3 ± 0.20	56.89 ± 3.02	6.37 ± 0.34
∼2934	492.5 ± 7.50	13.9 ± 3.10	53.45 ± 6.75	3.55 ± 0.31

 	Fig. 19  (a) a-Si:H nanodome solar cells after the deposition of multilayers of materials on nanocones. (b) Snapshots of simulated electric fields in the structure at 700 nm wavelength. (c) The SEM of the cell deposited over the patterned substrate. (d) J–V curves for solar cells with differently patterned substrates. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.143 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from C.-M. Hsu, C. Battaglia, C. Pahud, Z. Ruan, F.-J. Haug, S. Fan, C. Ballif and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 628. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH.141	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The optimized double-sided nanostructure. (b) The absorption spectrum of the double-sided structure. Reprinted with permission from K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1616. Copyright 2012 The American Chemical Society.155	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic drawing of scattering particles on graded refractive index nanoparticle stacks.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic drawing of a microwire array with an ARC and embedded within a transparent polymer, employing light-scattering particles and a transparent top contact. (b) A plot of Aavg calculations corresponding to each absorption measurement, showing the incident sunlight and spectrally weighted absorption of each throughout the day, compared with the measured absorption of a commercial, ARC, polycrystalline Si solar cell. Reprinted with permission from M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.136	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic drawing of Ge nanorods with dual diameters. (b) SEM images of Ge nanorods with controlled diameters. (c) Reflectance, (d) transmittance, and (e) absorptance measurement of different diameter of Ge nanorods. (f) Absorptance measurement of dual diameters nanorods. Reprinted with permission from Z. Fan, R. Kapadia, P. W. Leu, X. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh, K. Takei, K. Yu, A. Jamshidi, A. A. Rathore, D. J. Ruebusch, M. Wu and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3823. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.158	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) SEM image of a nanowire and nanowell mixed structure. (b) Simulated cross-sectional |E|2 distribution of the EM wave on the nanowire and nanowell mixed structure. (c) The normal incident absorption spectra of the five samples. (d) Above-band gap broadband photon flux absorption with the incident angle dependence of the nanowires, nanowells, and nanowire and nanowell mixed structures. Reprinted with permission from Q. Lin, B. Hua, S.-f. Leung, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2725. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.159	 

 	Fig. 25  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) the Si solar cell with 70 nm Si3N4-coated microgrooves and (b) the Si solar cell with the ZnO nanorod arrays/Si3N4-coated Si microgrooves. SEM image of (c) the p-GaN microdome structure and the hierarchical SiO2 nanorod arrays/p-GaN microdomes. Surface morphology of the silicon nanowires on the pyramid-textured silicon surface depending on a 7 min electroless etching time. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from C. A. Lin, K. Y. Lai, W. C. Lien, and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6520. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.32 (c and d) Reprinted with permission from C. H. Ho, D. H. Lien, Y. H. Hsiao, M. S. Tsai, D. Chang, K. Y. Lai, C. C. Sun and J. H. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 161104. Copyright 2013 The American Institute of Physics.162 (e and f) Reprinted with permission from I.-J. Lee, U. Paik and J.-G. Park, Sol. Energy, 2013, 91, 256. Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.163	 

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	619	33.5	77.7	16.1	
181

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	614	33.8	78.6	16.32	
182

Homojunction	N/A	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)	615	35.6	78.2	17.1	
183

Homojunction	N/A	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	∼585	∼33.25	∼74	14.29	
184

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Microgroove (isotropic wet etching)+ nanopores (metal-assisted chemical etching)	604	33.89	77.3	15.8	
152

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Microgroove (isotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	632	34.04	77.9	17.6	
185

Homojunction	CZ	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanohole (metal-assisted chemical etching)	618.7	35.13	72.77	15.82	
186

Homojunction	CZ	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanohole (metal-assisted chemical etching)	623	35.5	79.3	17.5	
187

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	613	36.14	75.98	16.82	
188

Homojunction	N/A	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)	598	34.36	74.99	15.39	
168

Homojunction	N/A	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)	620	35.76	77.2	17.11	
189

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Microgroove (isotropic wet etching) + nanopores (metal-assisted chemical etching)	624	35.16	77.2	16.94	
190

Homojunction	Poly-Si	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	613	36.14	75.98	16.82	
191

Homojunction	N/A	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanorod (reactive ion etching)	620	36	78.4	17.5	
192

a-Si/c-Si Heterojunction	CZ	Micropyramid (anisotropic wet etching) + nanowire (metal-assisted chemical etching)	596	36.58	69.5	15.14	
36


 	Fig. 26  SEM images of micropyramid-textured Si substrates (a) without nanowires. SEM images of micropyramid-textured Si substrates with (b) 30 nm, (c) 185 nm, (d) 234 nm, (e) 357 nm, and (f) 602 nm nanowires, respectively. (g) J–V characteristics and (h) EQE spectra of the hybrid cells with planar, micropyramid-textured, and hierarchical-structured Si. (i) Incident angle dependence of the generated maximum power and (j) enhancement of the generated maximum power. Reprinted with permission from W. R. Wei, M. L. Tsai, S. T. Ho, S. H. Tai, C. R. Ho, S. H. Tsai, C. W. Liu, R. J. Chung and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3658. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.165	 

 	Fig. 27  HRTEM images taken near the edge of individual nanowires on hierarchical structures (a) before and (b) after the CPE treatment. The scale bars in (a) and (b) represent 3 nm. (c) Ag concentration as a function of time for CPE treatment with the hierarchical structure surfaces obtained from Ag 3d XPS spectra. (d) Lifetimes at a carrier density of 1015 cm−3 for all structures. (e) IQE spectra and (f) J–V characteristics of Si heterojunction solar cells with different structures under air mass 1.5 G illumination. Reprinted with permission from H. P. Wang, T. Y. Lin, C. W. Hsu, M. L. Tsai, C. H. Huang, W. R. Wei, M. Y. Huang, Y. J. Chien, P. C. Yang, C. W. Liu, L. J. Chou and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9325. Copyright 2013 The American Chemical Society.36	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
