Origin of photogenerated carrier recombination at the metal–active layer interface in polymer solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP04831A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP04831A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 27690-27697Origin of photogenerated carrier recombination at the metal–active layer interface in polymer solar cells

        
          
            Mukesh 
            Kumar
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ashish 
            Dubey
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Khan Mamun 
            Reza
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nirmal 
            Adhikari
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Venkat 
            Bommisetty
          
        
      *b
aFunctional and Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Punjab 140 001, India. E-mail: mkumar@iitrpr@ac.in
bElectrical Engineering Department, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA. E-mail: qiquan.qiao@sdstate.edu; venkat.bommisetty@sdstate.edu
Received 
      14th August 2015
    , Accepted 23rd September 2015First published on 25th September 2015AbstractThe role of the metal–active layer interface in photogenerated recombination has been investigated using nanoscale current sensing atomic force microscopy (CS-AFM) and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) in as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. Aluminum (Al) confined post-annealed BHJ solar cells exhibited a significantly improved device efficiency compared to pre-annealed BHJ solar cells having similar photocarrier harvesting ability in the active layer. The nanoscale topography and CS-AFM results indicate a uniform PCBM rich phase at the metal–active layer interface in the post-annealed cells, but PCBM segregation in the pre-annealed cells. These two different annealing processes showed different carrier dynamics revealed using IMPS under various light intensities. The IMPS results suggest reduced photo generated carrier recombination in uniform PCBM rich post-annealed BHJ solar cells. This study reveals the importance of the metal–bend interface in BHJ solar cells in order to obtain efficient charge carrier extraction for high efficiency.
1. Introduction
Organic photovoltaic devices are emerging as potential renewable sources of electrical energy and have attracted considerable attention due to their advantages such as lightweight and mechanical flexibility compared to conventional photovoltaic devices.1–4 Solution processable bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells containing a poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) blend as an absorbing layer are considered prototypical due to highly reproducible processing methods, which resulted in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) up to 4–6%.5,6 Recently, Yang's group reported ∼8.7% efficiency in multi-donors to absorb a broad spectrum of light in BHJ solar cells.7 These efficiencies are still low compared to their inorganic counterparts, partly due to complex photo-physical processes underlying photon harvesting.
Losses in BHJ solar cells occur during various processes including exciton generation, exciton diffusion, exciton dissociation into free charge carriers, charge recombination during carrier transport to electrodes, and charge recombination at electrodes.8,9 Each of these processes requires specific electronic and structural characteristics and an associated energetic disorder landscape to minimize carrier losses and high PCE. Even in inorganic solar cells, carrier recombination was found to be a key factor in improving the solar cell efficiency to 18.2%.10 In BHJ solar cells, the optimum distribution of donor (P3HT) and acceptor (PCBM) materials in the blend plays an important role in aforementioned processes and is controlled by fabrication conditions.11–16 Ultrafast electron transfer (<100 ps) at the P3HT/PCBM interface results in efficient dissociation of excitons with an internal quantum efficiency approaching unity.1,2,17 Prior studies reveal that ∼89% of excitons create free charge carriers on an ultrafast time scale and subsequently contribute to the extracted photocurrent.18–22 Despite the high yield of free charge carriers, the power conversion efficiency of BHJ solar cells remains moderate and suggests recombination as one of the losses of carriers after exciton dissociation, within the bulk of the active layer and/or at charge collecting electrodes.21–24
Annealing of solar cells after depositing metal electrodes (referred to as post-annealing) was reported as a possible way to enhance device efficiency through improved carrier transport in contrast to conventional annealing, annealing before metal electrode deposition.17,25 However, the effects of post-annealing on photogenerated carrier loss dynamics have not been studied. Probing carrier transport processes at the metal–active layer interface and their relationship with annealing conditions will provide important information to maximize the PCE. Scanning probe microscopy and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) were used to develop this correlation. In IMPS, the photocurrent response of a solar cell is measured under open circuit conditions at various modulation frequencies and illumination intensities (a small AC light intensity superimposed over DC light intensity). The IMPS technique has been successfully employed to study carrier dynamics in amorphous silicon solar cells,26 dye sensitized solar cells27,28 and bilayer polymer solar cells29 but fewer studies have been reported for BHJ solar cells.24,30
In this work, current sensing atomic force microscopy (CS-AFM) was used to probe the topography, hole current pathways and local distribution of P3HT and PCBM at the metal–active layer interface under pre- and post-annealing conditions. The carrier transport dynamics in aluminum (Al) confined post-annealed P3HT:PCBM solar cells and conventional annealed solar cells were investigated using IMPS at different light intensities. The CS-AFM results showed that aluminum confined annealing results in a uniformly distributed PCBM rich active layer, with no segregation, at the metal–active layer interface, which reduced the carrier loss at the metal–active layer interface. This study reveals the underlying processes responsible for improvement in the efficiency of post-annealed BHJ cells and helps in further optimizing device processing conditions to minimize carrier losses during transportation to the end electrode.
2. Experiments
All BHJ solar cells were fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (Delta Technologies, 15 Ω sq−1). The ITO substrates were cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min and then dried under a nitrogen jet. The cleaned ITO substrates were treated with UV ozone plasma for 30 s and 40 nm of the PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P) layer was spun cast on the substrates followed by air annealing at 140 °C for 10 min. The substrates were then transferred into a nitrogen filled glove box. The blend solution was prepared by mixing regioregular electronic grade P3HT (Rieke Metals Inc.) and PCBM (Nano-c) having 20 mg ml−1 (wt ratio 1:1) in 1,2 dichlorobenzene and stirred overnight at 55 °C in a glove box. The P3HT:PCBM blend was filtered and spin coated to get a uniform film of thickness ∼140 nm, as measured using a Dektak 150 profilometer. The Al metal electrode was thermally evaporated through a shadow mask with a device area of about 0.1 cm2. It is important to note that no interfacial layer such as LiF or Ca was used to minimize the complexity of the interface structure. The final device structure was ITO/PEDOT:PSS (45 nm)/P3HT:PCBM (140 nm)/Al (120 nm). Three sets of devices were fabricated according to their thermal treatment conditions (each set had four identical devices): as-deposited (no thermal treatment followed by Al deposition), pre-annealed (annealing at 140 °C for 10 min followed by Al deposition) and Al confined post-annealed (Al deposition followed by annealing at 140 °C for 10 min and referred to as the post-annealed device). The pre-annealed and post-annealed devices were annealed inside a glove box to avoid oxidation.

J–V characteristics of solar cells were measured using an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter analyzer, keeping the solar cells under AM 1.5 illumination (Xenon lamp, Newport part # 66984-300XF-R1 and AM 1.5 filter part number # 81094) with a light intensity of ∼100 mW cm−2. The nanoscale distribution of P3HT/PCBM on the active area of the solar cells was studied using an Agilent 5500 scanning probe microscope installed inside a glove box and equipped with a MAC-III controller. CS-AFM was measured in contact mode using a Pt/Ir coated Si tip (Budget Sensors ContE-G; radius ∼ 20 nm; force constant of 0.2 N m−1; resonance frequency ≈ 14 kHz). The CS-AFM cantilever with a small force constant allowed repeated imaging of the soft polymer surface without deformation. The conducting probe makes contact with the P3HT/PCBM BHJ thin film and measures the current variation across the surface with fixed bias. The holes were injected from a conducting Pt/Ir coated AFM tip into P3HT and collected at the grounded ITO electrode. The hole current was measured using an in-built preamplifier with 1 nA V−1 sensitivity. The images were taken at 0.5 V bias to avoid tip induced local oxidation/reduction. The Al electrodes were removed carefully using a sticky tape procedure reported in the literature.13 The optical images of the top surface after removing the Al electrodes were taken using a confocal optical microscope attached with a Horiba LabRAM HR Raman microscope.
The IMPS measurements were performed by a green laser (wavelength 532 nm) in the frequency range between 0.1 Hz and 20 kHz using a Solartron 1255 frequency response analyzer (FRA). The green laser used in the IMPS measurement was bought from Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co. Ltd. We used an MSL-III-532-AOM/1 ∼100 mW capable of modulation up to 1 MHz. The IMPS measurements were performed under open circuit conditions with different DC laser intensities of 7.8 × 1015 cm−2 s−1, 12.5 × 1015 cm−2 s−1, 20.8 × 1015 cm−2 s−1 and 37.5 × 1015 cm−2 s−1 controlled by different combinations of neutral density filters. In the IMPS technique, a small alternating (ac) laser light signal, in the frequency range between 0.1 Hz and 20 kHz, controlled by FRA was superimposed over a constant (dc) light intensity and used to illuminate solar cells. The amplitude and phase shift of the resulting ac photovoltage from solar cells were measured with respect to ac modulation frequency. The ac component of the light was maintained at 10% of the dc intensity during all measurements. The solar cells were not exposed to the ambient air during these measurements.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed solar cells. The parameters including short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), power conversion efficiency (η), series (Rs) and shunt (Rsh) resistance are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 1  
J–V characteristics of as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed P3HT:PCBM solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 illumination. The overall enhancement in the device performance was observed in post-annealing treatment. 
Table 1 Device performance of P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells under different Al–blend interface treatment




 

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)




As deposited
4.43
600
27.3
0.7
109
154


Pre-annealed
7.53
570
42.9
1.84
24
239


Post-annealed
8.5
581
53.7
2.65
15
733




The as-deposited devices show an efficiency of 0.7% which increases to 1.84% after pre-annealing. Although the device efficiency of the pre-annealed cells is as high as the typical device efficiency reported for P3HT:PCBM solar cells, our study utilizes no interfacial layers to minimize device complexity. Besides, the device efficiency of our pre-annealed solar cell is better than the reported efficiency of solar cells processed under similar conditions.25 The post-annealed cells show an overall efficiency of 2.65%. The parasitic resistance, series (Rs) and shunt (Rsh) resistance, of different solar cells were calculated by the inverse slope of the J–V curve at J ∼ 0 mA cm−2 and V ∼ 0 V, respectively, under illumination.31 The Rsh for the as-deposited device was 154 Ω cm2 which increased to 239 Ω cm2 after pre-annealing and a nearly fivefold increase to 733 Ω cm2 after post-annealing. The Rs also shows appreciable changes and decreases from 109 Ω cm2 to 15 Ω cm2 for as-deposited and post-annealed solar cells. To further investigate the microscopic mechanisms responsible for the enhancement in the device efficiency for post-annealed solar cells, IMPS response was measured at different light intensities along with nanoscale topography, CS-AFM imaging and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. Fig. 2(a) shows the experimental IMPS complex Nyquist plots for all three devices and Fig. 2(b) and (c) correspond to Bode plots. The shapes of the complex-plane plots are similar for all three cells with arcs extended into two quadrants, one in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz–20 Hz (quadrant I) and the other in the range of 20 Hz–20 kHz (quadrant IV). The IMPS responses in quadrant I of the complex-plane plot indicates a positive phase, both real and imaginary components of photocurrent are positive, thus producing a positive phase shift, of ac photocurrent with respect to modulation frequency as seen in Fig. 2(b). The dynamics of photogenerated carriers determine the amplitude and the phase of ac photocurrent with modulation frequency, as observed in Fig. 2(b) and (c) and relates to the kinetics of recombination. At the lowest modulation frequency of 0.1 Hz, the ac photocurrent amplitude represents the steady state value of the current. Furthermore, the lowest modulation frequency corresponds to the longest time, during which photogenerated carriers go through interfacial state charging and the most substantial recombination occurs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Experimental IMPS spectra and Nyquist plots for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells under short circuit conditions. The dc light (532 nm laser) intensity was 7.8 × 1015 cm−2 s−1 and ac modulation was 10% of dc intensity. (b) The amplitude and (c) phase of ac photocurrent, Bode plots, with respect to the modulation frequency. 
As the frequency increases, interfacial state recombination is reduced and this leads to an increase in the amplitude of ac photocurrent. With further increase in the frequency, the ac photocurrent reaches the Gartner limit which corresponds to the maximum photocurrent from solar cells without any interfacial state recombination.24,27,31 At this frequency, the imaginary part of the photocurrent, Jph(Im), becomes zero and ac photocurrent is in phase with modulation frequency. In the first quadrant of the Nyquist plot, Fig. 2(a), the real and imaginary parts of the photocurrent are positive and indicate that the photocurrent has a positive phase i.e. photogenerated carriers are first generated and charge the interfacial states with respect to the modulation frequency. Byers et al. have reported IMPS studies of freshly prepared and aged P3HT:PCBM solar cells and observed a similar photocurrent with a positive phase with respect to the modulation frequency.
The recombination processes for BHJ solar cells may be geminate or non-geminate, bulk or interfacial state recombination. In the present study, we tried to throw some light using the IMPS technique. Fig. 2(a) and (c) reveals the real and imaginary parts of the photocurrent and the phase of the photocurrent with respect to the modulation frequency, respectively. In the first quadrant of the Nyquist plot, Fig. 2(a), the real and imaginary parts of the photogenerated current are positive which indicates that photogenerated carriers are ahead in that frequency region (0.1 Hz to 20 Hz). This reveals that the photogenerated carriers are getting separated out and get collected at the end electrodes within the modulation frequency range (0.1 Hz to 20 Hz). Therefore, the recombination process may be interfacial recombination.32–34 In the IMPS data, there are two frequency domains, fmax and fmin, as mentioned in Fig. 2(a). These two frequency domains can be used to estimate the characteristic relaxation times for the dynamic processes that correspond to two portions of the plot. In DSSCs and inorganic solar cells the IVth quadrant and fmin were correlated with the processes of carrier transport in the bulk of the active layer. On the other hand, the positive phase and an increase in the amplitude of the ac photocurrent with modulation frequency observed in BHJ solar cells are hardly observed with DSSCs and inorganic solar cells and this is a signature of interfacial recombination.24,27 For DSSCs and amorphous silicon solar cells, the IMPS response in a similar modulation frequency range was reported, which is different from what was observed in BHJ solar cells. Typically, IMPS complex-plane plots were reported to have only one arc in quadrant IV with the negative phase and a decrease in ac amplitude for all modulation frequencies.26,27 Therefore, the modulation frequency at the maxima of the complex-plane plot in quadrant I for BHJ solar cells, fmax, can be directly related to the carrier recombination rate.24,27 The fmax values for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells (listed in Table 2) indicate a smaller fmax for post-annealed cells than as-deposited and pre-annealed cells, which indicate less carrier recombination in post-annealed solar cells.
Table 2 Characteristic frequency of intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed devices in low frequency (fmax) and high frequency (fmin) ranges




 

f
max (Hz)

f
min (Hz)




As deposited
1.98
544


Pre-annealed
1.54
371


Post-annealed
1.20
176




As the frequency increased further from 0.1 Hz to 20 KHz, the IMPS responses crossed the positive real x-axis from quadrant I into quadrant IV of the complex-plane, resulting in a negative phase, the real component is positive while the imaginary component is negative of the photocurrent, thus producing a negative phase shift. The amplitude of the ac photocurrent, Fig. 2(c), decreases with increasing frequency and finally tends to zero at a frequency of about 20 kHz. The shape of the IMPS complex-plane plots in quadrant IV for BHJ solar cells is similar to those reported for amorphous silicon solar cells,26 bilayer polymer solar cells,29 and DSSCs, where the phase of the ac photocurrent is negative and the amplitude of the ac photocurrent decreases with modulation frequency and has often been related to the carrier transport in the bulk of the active layer.26–30 In DSSCs, the high frequency minima (fmin) was related to the average carrier transport time τD through the bulk of the active layer, according to the relation τD = 1/(2πfmin).24,27 Similarly, the fmin obtained from different devices can be correlated with the average transport time of photocarriers through the active layer.24 The values of fmin for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells were 544 Hz, 371 Hz and 176 Hz respectively (summarized in Table 2). The decrease in the fmin (and hence increase in τD) with annealing indicates an increase in the average transport time taken by the photogenerated carriers through the bulk of the P3HT:PCBM layer.
The characteristic frequencies fmax were measured at different DC light intensities for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed solar cells. The increase in fmax with dc light intensities, as shown in Fig. 3, was observed and this was directly correlated with the first-order recombination rate constant (k).24 In particular, a more pronounced increase in fmax with dc light intensities was observed for as-deposited and pre-annealed cells in comparison to post-annealed cells. Therefore, the post-annealed cells exhibited a reduced recombination of photogenerated carriers in comparison to as-deposited and pre-annealed cells at different dc light intensities. As shown in Table 1, the threefold increase in shunt resistance (Rsh) for post-annealed cells correlating the amount and nature of impurities and defects responsible for charge recombination and leakage current in pre-annealed devices also supports the IMPS data.
 Fig. 3  Characteristic frequency, fmax, for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells with dc light intensities. The increase in fmax may directly correlate with an increase in the interfacial recombination rate constant. 
To understand the reduced interfacial state recombination in post-annealed cells and the possible role of the Al–active layer interface under different annealing treatments, the nanoscale topography and CS-AFM for the blend surface were investigated on the active area of solar cells after removing the Al pad. For comparison, the Al pad was removed from the as-deposited blend and similar nanoscale measurements were performed. Fig. 4(a)–(c) show the confocal optical micrographs for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed blends. No distinct feature was observed in the as-deposited sample while micrometer-sized needle like and domain like patches were observed on pre-annealed and post-annealed blends, respectively. The surface topography and CS-AFM images of all three blends are shown in Fig. 4(d)–(i). The surface topography on a large scale also confirms featureless, micron-sized needle like and patch like structures in as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed bend surfaces, respectively. The root mean square roughness (Rrms) of the blend in as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed samples (on 1 × 1 μm2) is found to be 12.0 ± 2.0 nm, 9.0 ± 1.5 nm and 13.0 ± 3.0 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Confocal optical micrographs of the active area in (a) as-deposited, (b) pre-annealed and (c) post-annealed blends after the Al electrode was peeled off. Needle like and patch like microstructures were observed in pre-annealed and post-annealed blends, respectively. The large area AFM topography (d–f) and conductive images (g–i) confirm that the needle like structures in the pre-annealed blend are pure PCBM over-growth while micron size patches on the post-annealed blend surface are PCBM rich regions. 
The CS-AFM results reveal that the needle and patch like structures on the pre-annealed and post-annealed blends have lower conductivity. The Pt/Ir coated AFM tip used for CS-AFM imaging is suitable for either injection or collection of the holes from the blend. The brighter regions in the CS-AFM images are high hole current regions corresponding to P3HT and the darker regions are low hole current regions corresponding to PCBM. Therefore, the needle like micron size regions on the confocal optical images are PCBM overgrowth during the annealing process. Similar PCBM overgrowth during pre-annealing of the blend was reported before.15,16 On the other hand, the CS-AFM images of the post-annealed blend, Fig. 4(i), show that the patch like regions in the post-annealed blend surface are PCBM rich regions instead of only PCBM overgrowth as observed in the pre-annealed cells. Therefore, post-annealing results in re-distribution of the P3HT/PCBM components at the Al–active layer interface.
The high resolution CS-AFM images of all three blends are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c). The distribution of PCBM at the blend surface in all three cells was observed to be different. For the as-deposited blend, the average PCBM size distribution varies in the range of 30 nm–250 nm while for the pre-annealed blend it varies from 30 nm to 150 nm. The pre-annealing process may help the diffusion of PCBM into the blend and result in a change in the phase distribution, including PCBM overgrowth at the blend interface.15 The post-annealing process results in coarser PCBM distribution in the P3HT matrix at the Al–blend interface and the average PCBM size distribution varies in the range of 50 nm–700 nm. The average PCBM size distribution on the non-patchy region of the post-annealed blend surface varies from 40 nm to 500 nm. As a result, the interface in the post-annealed cell is relatively PCBM rich without any PCBM overgrowth, which is different from the pre-annealed sample. Therefore, the large area and high resolution CS-AFM images suggested a uniform PCBM rich blend interface without any PCBM overgrowth in the case of the post-annealing process.
 Fig. 5  High resolution CS-AFM images of (a) as-deposited, (b) pre-annealed and (c) post-annealed blends. The CS-AFM results reveal that post-annealing leads to a uniform PCBM rich Al–active layer interface with a bigger PCBM domain with PCBM overgrowth. The marked regions in CS-AFM images showed PCBM regions under different annealing conditions. 
Steady state PL spectroscopy was performed on the active area of the solar cells. The PL signal intensity can be directly related to the radiative recombination of photogenerated excitons in the blends.35Fig. 6 shows the PL data of as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed blends with respect to pure P3HT. The PL intensity of pure P3HT film is 89% quenched by mixing PCBM with P3HT (1:1 wt%) in the as-deposited blend. This indicates that the photogenerated excitons are getting disassociated at the P3HT:PCBM interface and are responsible for reduced radiative recombination for the as-deposited blend. The PL intensity increased slightly after pre-annealing and post-annealing treatment with marginal difference.
 Fig. 6  Photoluminescence of the P3HT:PCBM (1:1 wt%) blend on the active area from as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed samples compared to pure P3HT film (PL intensity of pure P3HT is reduced by fivefold for a better view). The PL quenching decreases and PL signal intensity increases under pre-annealing and post-annealing thermal treatment with a marginal difference. 
The higher PL intensity indicates that fewer photogenerated excitons in P3HT can diffuse to the P3HT/PCBM interface to be quenched. This implies that the average distance between P3HT and PCBM in the blend has increased.35–37 Also, the similar PL intensity from pre-annealed and post-annealed blends indicates the same exciton harvesting in the pre-annealed and post-annealed cells. Therefore, only interfacial re-distribution of P3HT:PCBM may be responsible for the observed difference in the device performance. As already discussed from the CS-AFM results, the blend interface in the post-annealed solar cells is uniformly PCBM rich without PCBM growth as observed under pre-annealed conditions. Unlike the Al–P3HT complex, aluminium was reported to form a bond with the carbonyl group in PCBM, Al–O–C, at the annealing temperature and to improve the contact quality between the blend and Al without introducing any defect state.13 The ohmic nature of the Al–PCBM contact reduced the possibility of trap or recombination states where the Al–P3HT complex may increase the trap density at the Al–active layer interface.13 Therefore, any Al–P3HT contact in close proximity of the PCBM cluster at the blend interface may become a possible location for interfacial state recombination. The P3HT rich nature of the as-deposited and pre-annealed blends may increase the possibility of Al–P3HT complex formation for higher trap density near the Al–active layer interface and may increase interfacial recombination losses of photogenerated carriers, as observed in the IMPS study (Fig. 2). However, the complex nature of BHJ solar cells may lead to many interfaces for possible contribution in trap assisted carrier recombination.24,32 The P3HT/PCBM interface was reported to be the most likely location for interfacial state recombination in aged cells compared to freshly prepared cells.24 Pre-annealed and post-annealed cells were fabricated under identical conditions including annealing temperature and annealing time. The PL results in Fig. 6 revealed the same signal quenching in pre-annealed and post-annealed blends with respect to pure P3HT indicating similar radiative recombination of excitons and hence trap density for interfacial recombination at the P3HT:PCBM interface in the blend. Therefore, the enhanced performance of the post-annealed cell is caused by the PCBM rich Al–active layer interface which improves the electron extraction at or near the interface.

f
max can be considered equal to the interfacial state recombination rate constant in solar cells.24,27Fig. 7 shows the relationship between cell efficiency and interfacial recombination, related to the fmax in quadrant I of the complex-plane plot, for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells. The fmax decreases from 2.26 Hz for as-deposited cells to 1.20 Hz for post-annealed cells, as the efficiency increases from 0.7% to 2.65%, respectively. The solar cell efficiency critically depends on JSC, VOC and FF. Although the increment in all aforementioned device parameters was observed for post-annealed cells, a substantial increment was observed in JSC and the fill factor. This may be due to the improved metal–P3HT:PCBM interface and reduced recombination in post-annealed cells.23 The improved interface quality at the Al–P3HT:PCBM interface resulted in reduced series resistance and high shunt resistance. Therefore, the reduced interfacial state recombination and efficient charge carrier collection improves the overall efficiency in post-annealed solar cells.
 Fig. 7  The power conversion efficiency (η) and low frequency maxima (fmax) of IMPS plots in the as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells. fmax can be considered equal to the interfacial state recombination rate constant in solar cells. A higher value of fmax indicates more interfacial recombination in solar cells. 
4. Conclusions
Aluminum confined post-annealing resulted in an increased efficiency in P3HT:PCBM solar cells. The nanoscale phase distribution of the active area beneath the aluminum electrode revealed that the type of annealing process played an important role in determining the distribution of P3HT and PCBM at the Al–active layer interface. Post-annealed devices showed a larger domain of PCBM at the Al–active layer interface without PCBM segregation whereas pre-annealed devices showed segregation and overgrowth of PCBM clusters. Such a uniform PCBM rich Al–active layer interface in post-annealed cells may reduce carrier losses at the interface leading to efficient charge carrier collection. The IMPS results gave insights into the dynamics of photogenerated carriers and suggested reduced surface recombination in post-annealed cells. This study reveals the importance of aluminum confined post-annealing to reduce surface recombination and enhance the carrier extraction efficiency in BHJ devices.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by grants including NASA EPSCoR (NNX13AD31A) and NSF MRI (grant no. 1229577 and 1428992) and the SDSU Electrical Engineering PhD program.
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Chen, L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 190–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef .
J. Oh, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, H. Lin, S. J. Lou, X. Yu, P. Guo, E. F. Manley, S. Loser, P. Hartnett, H. Huang, M. R. Wasielewski, L. X. Chen, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Seifter, S. D. Collins, C. Luo, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1646–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, J. Liu, M. A. G. Namboothiry and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163511 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jo, S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, T.-W. Lee, Y. Chung, S.-J. Kang, D. Vak and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2398–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6154–6164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14866–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2255–2263 CrossRef CAS .
F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister, T.-D. Kim, K.-S. Lee, N. S. Baek and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9469–9479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mauer, I. A. Howard and F. Laquai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1736–1741 CrossRef CAS .
D. Credgington, R. Hamilton, P. Atienzar, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2744–2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Byers, S. Ballantyne, K. Rodionov, A. Mann and O. A. Semenikhin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 392–401 CAS .
A. Orimo, K. Masuda, S. Honda, H. Benten, S. Ito, H. Ohkita and H. Tsuji, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043305 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. van de Lagemaat and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 41–42, 537–542 CrossRef .
L. M. Peter, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 753–769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, M. Grätzel, P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7536–7539 CrossRef .
C. Chen, M. Wang and K. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1624–1631 CAS .
M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 075308 CrossRef .
W. W. Gärtner, Phys. Rev., 1959, 116, 84–87 CrossRef .
R. A. Street, M. Schoendorf, A. Roy and J. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205307 CrossRef .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155209 CrossRef .
C. Deibel and A. Wagenpfahl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 207301 CrossRef .
C. R. McNeill, S. Westenhoff, C. Groves, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19153–19160 CAS .
A. L. Ayzner, D. D. Wanger, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18711–18716 CAS .
R. A. Marsh, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
J–V characteristics of as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed P3HT:PCBM solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 illumination. The overall enhancement in the device performance was observed in post-annealing treatment.	 

As deposited	4.43	600	27.3	0.7	109	154
Pre-annealed	7.53	570	42.9	1.84	24	239
Post-annealed	8.5	581	53.7	2.65	15	733

 	Fig. 2  (a) Experimental IMPS spectra and Nyquist plots for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells under short circuit conditions. The dc light (532 nm laser) intensity was 7.8 × 1015 cm−2 s−1 and ac modulation was 10% of dc intensity. (b) The amplitude and (c) phase of ac photocurrent, Bode plots, with respect to the modulation frequency.	 

As deposited	1.98	544
Pre-annealed	1.54	371
Post-annealed	1.20	176

 	Fig. 3  Characteristic frequency, fmax, for as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells with dc light intensities. The increase in fmax may directly correlate with an increase in the interfacial recombination rate constant.	 

 	Fig. 4  Confocal optical micrographs of the active area in (a) as-deposited, (b) pre-annealed and (c) post-annealed blends after the Al electrode was peeled off. Needle like and patch like microstructures were observed in pre-annealed and post-annealed blends, respectively. The large area AFM topography (d–f) and conductive images (g–i) confirm that the needle like structures in the pre-annealed blend are pure PCBM over-growth while micron size patches on the post-annealed blend surface are PCBM rich regions.	 

 	Fig. 5  High resolution CS-AFM images of (a) as-deposited, (b) pre-annealed and (c) post-annealed blends. The CS-AFM results reveal that post-annealing leads to a uniform PCBM rich Al–active layer interface with a bigger PCBM domain with PCBM overgrowth. The marked regions in CS-AFM images showed PCBM regions under different annealing conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoluminescence of the P3HT:PCBM (1:1 wt%) blend on the active area from as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed samples compared to pure P3HT film (PL intensity of pure P3HT is reduced by fivefold for a better view). The PL quenching decreases and PL signal intensity increases under pre-annealing and post-annealing thermal treatment with a marginal difference.	 

 	Fig. 7  The power conversion efficiency (η) and low frequency maxima (fmax) of IMPS plots in the as-deposited, pre-annealed and post-annealed cells. fmax can be considered equal to the interfacial state recombination rate constant in solar cells. A higher value of fmax indicates more interfacial recombination in solar cells.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
