Amorphous inorganic semiconductors for the development of solar cell, photoelectrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01134G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01134G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6914-6949Amorphous inorganic semiconductors for the development of solar cell, photoelectrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications

        
          
            Bing 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Gill M. 
            Biesold†
a, 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhiqun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. E-mail: zhiqun.lin@mse.gatech.edu
bEco-materials and Renewable Energy Research Center, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, School of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People's Republic of China
Received 
      30th August 2020
    First published on 27th April 2021AbstractAmorphous inorganic semiconductors have attracted growing interest due to their unique electrical and optical properties that arise from their intrinsic disordered structure and thermodynamic metastability. Recently, amorphous inorganic semiconductors have been applied in a variety of new technologies, including solar cells, photoelectrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. It has been reported that amorphous phases can improve both efficiency and stability in these applications. While these phenomena are well established, their mechanisms have long remained unclear. This review first introduces the general background of amorphous inorganic semiconductor properties and synthesis. Then, the recent successes and current challenges of amorphous inorganic semiconductor-based materials for applications in solar cells, photoelectrocatalysis, and photocatalysis are addressed. In particular, we discuss the mechanisms behind the remarkable performances of amorphous inorganic semiconductors in these fields. Finally, we provide insightful perspectives into further developments for applications of amorphous inorganic semiconductors.
Bing Wang
Dr Bing Wang received her PhD from Nanjing University in 2014. She subsequently worked as a research assistant at Nanjing University and postdoctoral research associate at Georgia Institute of technology. Her work involved photoelectrochemical devices for solar energy conversion. Now she is working at Eco-materials and Renewable Energy Research Center of Nanjing University, and her current work has been focusing on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for high efficient photoelectrochemical devices.
Gill M. Biesold
Gill M. Biesold is a PhD student in the Materials Science and Engineering department at Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Clemson University in 2017. His current research is focused on the synthesis of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals and their optoelectronic properties.
Meng Zhang
Dr Meng Zhang is a research scientist in Dr Zhiqun Lin's group in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology. She received her PhD degree in Engineering Thermophysics from Zhejiang University, China in 2016. Her research interests are centered on solar energy conversion and storage, including perovskite solar cells, CO2 conversion and utilization, and advanced energy materials.
Zhiqun Lin
Dr Zhiqun Lin is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his PhD degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2002. His research interests include solar cells, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, batteries, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, surface and interfacial properties, multifunctional nanocrystals, and Janus nanostructures.
1. Introduction
The design of advanced semiconductors is critical to meet the increasing demands for enhanced performance needed in a variety of future technologies. Although most studies have scrutinized the properties of crystalline semiconductors, there is growing interest in exploring amorphous semiconductors.1–5 The intrinsic disordered structure and thermodynamic metastability of amorphous semiconductors enable unique physical attributes which make them an intriguing material with diverse applications in solar energy conversion,1,6 photocatalysis,7–9 and photoelectrocatalysis.3,10–12 The coordination of constituent atoms in amorphous semiconductors deviates from that of crystalline phases (8 valence electrons rule), which can induce higher surface energy and provide more active sites.13 The compositions in amorphous phase can be tuned over a wider range, which holds promise for adjusting electronic structures and further designing appropriate active centers. The relatively smoother surfaces and reduced grain boundaries of amorphous semiconductors have been found to better facilitate electron transfer.7,14 Due to their chemical homogeneity, amorphous materials lack grain boundaries, dislocations and other defects that easily trigger chemical corrosion, enabling the growth of a protective layer to retard ionic transport.15 The improved corrosion resistance of amorphous phases make them excellent candidates for use in photoconversion devices or photochemical reactions. In addition, amorphous semiconductors are usually prepared under mild conditions without annealing or sintering, which can reduce their production cost. The unique electrical and optical properties of amorphous inorganic semiconductors, which have a great impact on their performance in solar cell, photoelectrocatalysis and photocatalysis, are briefly introduced below.
1.1 Electrical properties
Band tail states are localized electronic states near the valence and conduction band edges that are induced by the disorder structure (or defects like impurities or vacancies) of semiconductors and play an important role in the electrical properties of amorphous semiconductors (Fig. 1).16 The boundary that separates delocalized states from an exponential distribution of localized band tail states is called the mobility edge. According to the band theory of solids, all states of a periodic crystal are delocalized because the electrons in these states have an equal probability of being found near each equivalent atom.17 In amorphous semiconductors, however, band tails have an enhanced impact because of the increase in localized states from the lack of periodicity of the disordered structures. The state density determines the electrical properties of an amorphous semiconductor. While electrons in the band tail states do not have significant mobilities, they are primarily responsible for electrical conductivity because these electrons can easily be excited into a high-mobility (conduction band) state by very small amounts of additional energy, easily supplied by the thermal lattice vibrations.17 Generally there are two type of conduction in amorphous semiconductors, band conduction in delocalized states and hopping conduction tunneling between localized states or between localized and delocalized state.
 Fig. 1  Schematic density of states diagrams for (a) crystalline semiconductors and (b) amorphous semiconductors. 
Recent reports have revealed that amorphous TiO2 might actually be more advantageous due to its electric “leakiness”.3,18 The formation of oxygen vacancies and the reduction of Ti4+ cations to Ti3+ in amorphous TiO2 were found to enhance conductivity via n-type doping. This doping has been observed to increase photocurrent by suppressing tunneling barriers and decrease the required overpotential for oxidation–reduction reactions.19,20 These distinct electrical properties have allowed amorphous TiO2 to be successfully used in various solar-energy-conversion devices3,21,22 and as an interlayer or active component in photocatalytic reactions.5,23–26
1.2 Optical band gap
Optical absorption and luminescence in amorphous semiconductors occur by the transition of electrons and holes between electronic states, including valence and conduction bands, tail states, and gap states. There are three distinct regions of optical absorption of amorphous semiconductors. The first is the high absorption region (absorption coefficiency: α ≥ 104 cm−1) which is governed by the optical band gap between the valence band and conduction band. The second is the Urbach's exponential tail region (with α = 102–104 cm−1), which is governed by the optical transitions from localized tail states above the valence band to delocalized states in the conduction band and/or from the delocalized states in the valence band to localized states below the conduction band. The third is the low energy absorption region (α ≤ 102 cm−1) that follows Tauc's relation and is governed by the optical transitions from one delocalized state to another delocalized state. Optical absorptions in the latter two regions appear at energies lower than the optical gap, and thus the electronic states of the band tail in amorphous semiconductors may contribute to the optical absorption in the visible range.27
In addition, electron–phonon coupling, which is a mediator of light-induced structural changes in semiconductors, has a great impact on the optical responses of materials to light and charge-carrier dynamics28 and is significantly larger for localized states than for delocalized states. Thus, amorphous semiconductors have a stronger photo-response due to their larger electron–phonon coupling that more strongly modulates light energy.29,30
Based on the unique electrical and optical properties of amorphous semiconductors, this review summarizes the recent advances and current challenges in amorphous inorganic semiconductor materials, with a particular emphasis the fundamental properties and mechanisms of amorphous TiO2-based materials and their applications in solar cells, photoelectrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. We hope to provide insightful perspectives on further developments for future applications of amorphous inorganic semiconductors. Notably, the electron energy in vacuum is usually used as a reference in solar cells, whereas the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale is traditionally adopted in photoelectrocatalysis. As shown in Fig. 2, NHE lies at −4.5 eV with respect to the absolute vacuum scale, and we can convert these two energy scales via the equation: EVac = −4.5 − ENHE.
 Fig. 2  TiO2 energy level alignment on the vacuum energy scale and NHE scale. 
2. Synthesis of amorphous inorganic semiconductors and black TiO2
2.1 Synthesis of amorphous inorganic semiconductors

2.1.1 Atomic layer deposition. 
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a vapor phase technique used in industrial semiconductor device fabrication to produce a variety of large-scale thin films.31 Generally, the ALD process consists of sequentially alternating pulses of gaseous chemical precursors that react with a substrate until an appropriate film thickness is achieved. ALD processes are typically conducted at modest temperatures below 350 °C,32 but amorphous TiO2 layers with uniform coverage have been obtained at much lower temperatures (∼60 °C).33 A wide range of amorphous semiconductor materials have been grown via ALD in previous studies.3,12,18,23,34–36 Compared with chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and various physical vapor deposition (PVD) techniques, ALD offers superior control over the morphology, thickness, and composition of amorphous semiconductor materials. Depositing an amorphous thin film by ALD on a substrate with nano-sized roughness has been reported to increase surface smoothness.37 Increased surface smoothness has been found to result in an increased Schottky barrier height due to decreased surface state density,38 which reduces leakage current across the interface.37 This stands in sharp contrast to thicker films which typically have a rougher surface and thus a reduced Schottky barrier height. For example, when ALD fabricated amorphous SnO2 was used as the electron transport layer in perovskite solar cells, almost no hysteresis was observed. This lack of hysteresis may be attributed to the smooth SnO2 layer, which reduced charge trapping centers and increased the Schottky barriers at the atomic-layer-deposited SnO2/perovskite interface.1,39 In addition to their smoothness, amorphous ALD semiconductor films possess a low leakage current because they lack grain boundaries that act as sinks, sources for impurities, and sites for non-uniform charge conduction.40 Many ALD-prepared amorphous inorganic semiconductors like ZnO41 and TiO242 have shown good density, smoothness, and low leakage current, making them good candidates for high performance solar-energy-conversion devices. However, ALD is a high-cost technique due to its low material utilization efficiency. It is reported that approximately 60% of precursor dosage is wasted in the ALD process.43 Moreover, the requirement of vacuum conditions further increases the cost. Another drawback of ALD is its time-consuming operation due to the low deposition rate. However, this challenge can be partially overcome by using spatial atmospheric ALD.44


2.1.2 Reactive magnetron sputtering. 
Reactive magnetron sputtering (RMS) is another technique that can easily form thin compound semiconductor films via the sputtering of metallic targets in the presence of a reactive gas.10,45,46 It is widely applicable for the fabrication of many kinds of semiconductors, including nitrides, oxides, and carbides. For example, amorphous carbon nitride, a well-known hard coating material, has been successfully prepared on both ultrathin Si and SiO2 substrates by RMS using a graphite target and pure nitrogen gas.47–49 However, the deposition rate of compound semiconductor films drops abruptly when the reactive gas flowrate is increased. To synthesize high-quality amorphous semiconductor films using RMS, it is imperative to maintain precise control over the preparation parameters.
To date, RMS has been employed to deposit amorphous layers for solar cells and other optical components.50 For example, amorphous chromium oxide (Cr2O3), a hole transporting layer (HTL) for organic solar cells, was synthesized by RMS on FTO-coated glass substrates.46 The optical properties (e.g. transmittance, band gap energy, etc.) and electrical resistivity of the Cr2O3 film were found to be critically dependent on the RMS preparation conditions. A 10 nm thick Cr2O3 film (deposited at a temperature of 473 K with an oxygen flow ratio of 40%) showed the best performance as a solar cell HTL due to the increased p-type conductivity and optimized band-energy structure of Cr2O3 for hole-transport and electron blocking.46 A thicker Cr2O3 layer was found to increase the series resistance and hinder carrier transport, while thinner ones induced larger leakage current. Another study looked at photoanodes made from Cr and N co-doped amorphous Ti(Cr)O2–x:N thin films created in a mixed gas atmosphere containing nitrogen, argon, and oxygen at constant total pressure of 0.69 Pa.51 The amorphous Ti(Cr)O2–x:N exhibited a sufficient flat band potential, high width of the depletion layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and good performance for hydrogen production due to its appropriate electronic structure and morphology.51 Additionally, an amorphous carbon nitride film with a graded band gap structure was created by controlling the substrate temperature from 450 °C to 600 °C.49 Such a graded band energy structure was found to absorb a wider range of solar energy than a single band gap.49 Notably, low temperature RMS-deposited films generally contain defects and pinholes. To create high quality amorphous films without these defects, the films should either be made sufficiently thick or treated at proper processing temperatures.10


2.1.3 Electrochemical deposition. 
Electrochemical deposition is a widely used technique to fabricate coatings. Electrochemical deposition can achieve extremely thin films (as small as a few nanometers thick). It has been widely adopted in nanotechnology due to its relatively low energy needs and ability to shape materials into three-dimensional geometries.52,53 Electrochemical deposition also creates strong bonds between materials, bestowing the final product with impressive durability.52 Amorphous TiO2 was electrodeposited on W:BiVO4/F:SnO2 to block undesired back reduction of photo-oxidized intermediates on the conductive substrate and improve the photoelectrocatalytic performance of the photoanode toward the oxidation of water.52 The optimal thickness of amorphous TiO2 overlayers was determined to be 80–120 nm, formed from 15–30 s of electrodeposition. Despite not being photoactive, the amorphous TiO2 layer was observed to simultaneously provide sufficient surface coverage and minimize resistance to charge transfer to the solution.52 Amorphous iron sulfide thin films were deposited with ZnO using the electrochemical deposition method.54 0.5 μm-thick iron sulfide films were formed with a deposition time of 3 min and a deposition potential of −1.0 V vs. SCE. The heterojunction of ZnO and iron sulfide showed clear rectification properties and light responsivity.54 Thin amorphous WO3 films were also successfully prepared by sol–gel electrogalvanostatic deposition, which may be very promising for applications in optical devices.55 It is notable that electrodeposition of the W- or Mo-containing solutions generally requires a solute prepared by oxidative ‘dissolution’ of powdered metal in H2O2.56 One drawback of the electrodeposition method is its tendency towards the non-uniform thickness of coatings.57 Electrodeposited coatings tend to be thickest near the anode, with a gradual decrease as distance from the anode increases.


2.1.4 Chemical bath deposition. 
Chemical bath deposition (CBD) has been widely used as a simple and convenient process for the large-area deposition of many semiconductors.1,58,59 Amorphous films can be fabricated by CBD without the need for annealing or sintering. The morphology of the final products can be controlled via tuning the concentration of precursors, solution temperature and pH, and deposition time. For example, amorphous TiO2 films with thickness ranging from 40–190 nm were crafted from titanium and stoichiometric oxygen by varying the deposition time from 1 h to 12 h at pH = 2.2.60 As the deposition time increased from 0.5 h to 8 h, the film surface was observed to roughen.60 Notably, homogeneous films were observed with a deposition time of 2 h. Recently, an amorphous SnO2 electron transport layer (ETLs) for perovskite solar cells was prepared by CBD at a very low temperature (55 °C) using a simple nontoxic aqueous bath of tin chloride. The energy-level alignment between the SnO2 and the perovskite light absorber facilitated easy electron extraction and effectively blocked hole transport.1 Amorphous MoS2 thin films made using ammonium tetrathiomolybdate as a single source precursor for Mo and S and hydrazine hydrate as the reducing agent were deposited on glass and quartz substrates by CBD at 60 °C and pH = 10. The deposited film showed good adherence to the substrate and excellent transmission in the visible range.61 It is worth noting that the thickness of films grown from CBD is limited due to the solution supersaturation phenomenon.62 This problem can, however, be addressed by performing the synthesis process in several runs.63


2.1.5 Chemical vapor deposition. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a technique in which a thin film is produced by chemical reactions on the surface of a substrate using one or more gaseous compounds or elements containing thin film elements. It involves the dissociation and/or chemical reactions of gaseous reactants in an activated (heat, light, plasma) environment, followed by the formation of a stable solid product.64 A unique feature of CVD over other deposition techniques is its ability to coat components with complex geometries. Both ALD and CVD can provide precise control over doping and laminate formation as interlayers in devices. The versatility of CVD has led to its rapid growth for a wide range of applications, such as semiconductor-based devices for optoelectronics and energy conversion. CVD can create uniform and conformal amorphous semiconductor films with high chemical purity on substrates by optimizing deposition rates and temperatures.65,66 However, when the surface reactions become faster, non-uniform films with pinholes and resistive grain boundaries can also easily form. The optical and electrical properties of CVD semiconductor films depend strongly on the deposition rate and time (or film thickness).67 It is important to control the deposition parameters for optimal properties.68 An inherent drawback of the CVD process is its need to use high temperatures, which limits possible substrates to only those which can survive such high temperature environments. This problem can be addressed by coupling plasma, which can trigger chemical reactions at relatively low-temperatures, allowing for synthesis of thin films.69 Amorphous semiconductor structures allow the formation of films at low substrate temperatures where the low mobility of the reactive species is achieved to prevent species migration into more energetic sites for crystal nucleation. Amorphous Bi2S3 films were synthesized by room temperature CVD and used as an electron transport layer in hybrid perovskite solar cells.65 The process was free of solvents, which minimized the potential for contamination. The obtained film was smooth and compact without pinholes or cracks, which enabled a conformal encapsulation of the hybrid perovskite. Thin (12–36 nm) and conformal TiO2 amorphous interlayers with few pinholes were fabricated by CVD and used as electron collection contacts in inverted bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaics.68 Notably, it is difficult to deposit multicomponent materials by CVD method due to the different vaporization rates of multiple precursors.

2.2 Synthesis of black TiO2
The wide band gap of crystalline TiO2 (3.0 eV for rutile and 3.2 eV for anatase) allows it to absorb light only in the ultraviolet region. Very recently, introducing midgap states via disorder engineering has been proposed as a method to enhance the absorption efficiency of TiO2 in the visible and near-infrared range.70 A hydrogen-doped TiO2 (TiO2:H) crystalline core/amorphous shell structure with black color (black TiO2) has triggered a surge of interest due to its high absorption in the visible and near-infrared wavelengths and its excellent conductivity.12,45,71 In contract to the synthesis methods of amorphous semiconductors summarized in Section 2.1, the reported methods for preparing hydrogenated amorphous-based TiO2:H focuses mainly on hydrogen thermal treatment,72,73 hydrogen plasma,74 chemical reduction,73 and electrochemical reduction.73 Hydrogenation treatment induces oxygen vacancies on the surface that create localized states in the bandgap. These localized states have observed to shift the bandgap of TiO2:H to around 1.5 eV, with an optical onset around 1.0 eV.75 Hydrogen thermal treatment is a simple and straightforward process in which TiO2 is annealed in a H2 atmosphere to reduce Ti4+ to Ti3+. Hydrogenated black TiO2:H can also be made in a thermal plasma furnace by inductively coupled hydrogen plasma at specific temperatures.76 Strong reductants such as NaHB4,77 CaH2,78 zinc powder,79 and aluminum25 can also be used to craft TiO2:H by creating disorder surfaces. Hydrogenated black TiO2:H nanotubes with tens of well-defined layers with long-range structural periodicity and visible light responsive bandgaps have been made using electrochemical deposition.80 Depending on the synthetic methods, Ti3+ ions, oxygen vacancies, Ti–OH or Ti–H bonds can be observed experimentally, all of which could act as active sites in the applications of black TiO2.81,82 The performance of black TiO2:H in solar cell, photoelectrocatalytic and photocatalytic reactions will be discussed in the following sections.
3. Amorphous inorganic semiconductors for solar cells
The new generation of solar cells includes perovskite solar cells (PSCs), dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic solar cells (OSCs), and quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QSSCs).83 Compared to conventional silicon solar cells these new cells are attractive due to their lower cost, thinner nature, and ability to be used in various lighting conditions. Nevertheless, several challenges remain to be addressed regarding the efficiency and stability of these new solar cells. To address these issues, numerous attempts have been made to incorporate amorphous semiconductors such as TiO221 and SnO21 into these devices due to the distinct electrical and optical properties of amorphous materials.
3.1 Perovskite solar cells
A typical PSC is an all-solid-state device that utilizes a bulk heterojunction architecture comprised of a perovskite absorber layer sandwiched between an electron transporting layer (ETL) and hole transporting layer (HTL) to create an n–i–p junction. The ETL, which is usually made of materials ranging from metal-oxide semiconductors to fullerene-based polymers, plays a vital role in PSC device performance. It not only extracts and transports photogenerated electrons from the perovskite to the electrodes, but it also blocks holes to suppress charge recombination. Crystalline compact TiO2 is the most common choice for ETL in PSCs, but its necessary high-temperature processing (generally above 500 °C) significantly decreases its compatibility with substrates and the perovskite absorber, both of which have lower thermal budgets than crystalline TiO2.36,84,85 Furthermore, typical fabrication approaches of the crystalline TiO2 compact layer (e.g. spin-coating or spray pyrolysis) result in numerous pinholes and grain boundaries, which can lead to deleterious direct contact between the perovskite absorber and electrodes. Using a low-temperature-processed amorphous compact layer instead of a crystalline one provides an intriguing route to prevent devices from forming grain-induced inhomogeneities and diffusion pathways.36,65,84–88Table 1 summarizes the performance of PSCs using low-temperature-processed amorphous semiconductor as the ETLs, which will be discussed in detail in this section. Martinson et al. utilized thermal ALD to synthesize pinhole-free amorphous TiO2 compact layers at or below 120 °C using tetrakis-(dimethylamino)titanium and H2O as precursors.36 The 12 nm thick films were then employed as ETLs in planar PSCs (Fig. 3a). In order to eliminate the negative effects of carbon impurities (i.e. organic remnants from the low temperature thermal ALD process may serve as charge recombination centers at the interface between ETLs and perovskite absorber) on the performance of PSCs, as-deposited TiO2 ETLs were post-treated with ultraviolet-ozone (UV-O3). For comparison, anatase compact TiO2 layers (annealed at 500 °C) were also synthesized. The amorphous TiO2 with post-treatment of UV-O3 and the annealed anatase resulted in similarly improved performance of the devices (Fig. 3c and d, respectively).36 The crystallization-free improvement to short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) from room temperature UV-O3 treatment was attributed to the removal of some defects that can cause deep level states (Fig. 3b) and then result in carrier recombination. Our group further proved that samples treated with O3 plasma treatment can retain bulk vacancies while effectively eliminating surface vacancies, which act as surface trap sites that facilitate charge carrier recombination.6
Table 1 The best photovoltaic parameters of PSCs with amorphous inorganic semiconductors as ETLs




ETLs

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Note: NPs, nanoparticles; NWs, nanowires; Voc, open-circuit voltage; Jsc, short circuit current; FF, fill factor; PCE, photoelectric conversion efficiency.




TiO2 NPs
0.82
10.0
21.8
1.8

36



TiO2 NPs
0.91
22.6
66.0
13.7

88



TiO2 NPs
1.02
24.6
71.0
17.8

6



TiO2 NPs with UV-O3 treatment
0.86
25.6
45.2
10.0

36



TiO2 NWs
0.96
20.7
74.0
14.7

84



Nd-Doped TiO2
1.08
23.9
74.0
19.0

87



WOx
0.71
21.8
58.0
9.0

85



WOx
1.06
24.8
79.1
20.8

89



WOx/TiOx
0.89
23.1
71.0
14.5

90



WOx/C60
0.93
22.2
78.0
16.1

91



SnO2
1.05
21.3
66.3
14.8

1



SnO2
1.17
23.9
76.5
21.4

92



SnOx
1.05
22.8
66.2
15.8

93



Nb2O5
1.04
22.9
72.0
17.1

94



NbOx
1.12
22.42
76.0
19.1

95



InGaZnO4
1.14
22.7
66.8
17.4

96



ZnSnO4
1.04
24.7
78.0
20.0

97



NbOH
1.16
23.0
79.0
21.1

98



Bi2S3
0.95
18.6
74.2
13.1

65





 Fig. 3  (a) Device structure of a planar PSC and (b) the corresponding energy level diagram. (c) J–V characteristics of the PSC with TiO2 ETLs post-treated under various conditions. Dotted lines represent curves obtained in the dark. (d) Characteristic properties of PSCs as a function of post-treatment on TiO2 ETLs. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Higher average oxidation states on the surface of amorphous TiO2 have been shown to significant enhance the performance of PSC.36 This conclusion was verified by Caruso et al. who used amorphous TiO2 nanowires as the ETL in PSCs.84 PSCs made with these hydrothermal amorphous TiO2 yielded a stabilized PCE of approximately 14%, which is comparable to that of high-temperature annealed analogues.84 The porous hydrothermal TiO2 nanowire network was found to both form a larger interfacial contact area for effective electron extraction and provide a direct pathway for better electron transport and charge collection.99
In addition to TiO2, tungsten oxides (WOx) have also been recognized as another attractive candidate for efficient ETLs in PSCs due to their chemical stability, good light transmittance, wide band gaps (2 to 3 eV) and high electron mobility (10–20 cm2 V−1 s−1).100,101 Low temperature-processed amorphous WOx ETLs in PSCs have also been reported.85,90,91 To improve the intrinsically high charge recombination and relatively lower (to TiO2) Fermi level of pure WOx (which can result in low Voc and FF,90,91,102), WOx-based amorphous composites such as WOx–TiOx (Fig. 4a)90 and WOx/C60 thin films91 were fabricated. The addition of TiOx into WOx has been shown to raise the Fermi level and suppress charge recombination due to optimal band energy alignment.90 The WOx–TiOx composite ETLs showed favorable optical characteristics as more than 90% of the photons from 400 nm to 1000 nm were permitted to pass through.90 Compared with amorphous and crystalline TiO2 ETLs, these composite ETLs can more easily extract photo-generated electrons due to their enhanced electrical conductivity of the WOx–TiOx. A notable increase in photovoltaic performance was observed in PSCs made with the amorphous WOx–TiOx composite ETL, as evidenced by their constant photocurrent of 20.00 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 11.9% for 2000 seconds in an ambient atmosphere and under a bias voltage of 0.6 V, as shown in Fig. 4b.90 A fullerene (e.g. C60) layer is commonly used as an ETL because of its excellent electron mobility (1.6 cm2 V s−1) and conductivity (2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1). Additionally, fullerene has been shown to passivate grain boundaries, suppress the ion migration in perovskite,91,103–105 and reduce trap state density and hysteresis of PSCs.106,107 Adding C60 to the WOx resulted in ETLs with better electron extraction and transfer between the perovskite and WOx layer, both of which were attributed to optimized energy-level alignment (Fig. 4c) and superior electrical contact. As a result, amorphous WOx/C60 ETL-based devices showed superior performance to that of WOx ETL-based devices (Fig. 4d).91
 Fig. 4  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements on samples with the device architecture of FTO/different ETL/CH3NH3PbI3. The legend TiO2, TiOx, WO0/10, WT2/10 represent crystalline TiO2, amorphous TiO2, pure amorphous WOx, and amorphous WOx–TiOx with the molar ratios of titanium to tungsten 2/10, respectively; (b) steady power conversion efficiency (PCE) and current output for the PSCs based on WT2/10 as the ETL. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (c) Energy band diagram of planar WOx/C60 ETL-based PSC; (d) J–V curves of WOx and WOx/C60 ETL-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
Tin oxide (SnO2) has also attracted significant interest as an alternative ETL in PSCs recently due to its higher band gap (∼3.7 eV), high electron mobility (100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1), deeper valence-band maximum, and stability.73,108,109 Efficiencies greater than 22% have been reported for PSCs with SnO2 ETLs.110,111 However, most of the reported works have utilized crystalline SnO2 films with tetragonal rutile structures that need to be annealing at 180–200 °C,112 and studies using amorphous SnO2 ETLs prepared at low-temperatures are still limited. Tietze and Gobbo et al. synthesized amorphous SnO2 (Fig. 5a) by a one-step CBD method at low temperature without an annealing process.1 The amorphous SnO2 ETLs were resistant to UV radiation and moisture, and thus were less susceptible to surface chemical and energetic alterations.1 The amorphous SnO2-based films were able to be stored for several days in air without any moisture or UV degradation. Efficient electron transfer from perovskite to the amorphous SnO2 ETLs was achieved by optimizing the energy-level alignment via the following device structure: ITO/amorphous SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD (Full name of spiro-OMeTAD is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene, Fig. 5b). Although the CBD-processed SnO2 showed lower electron mobility (1.5 × 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1) than its crystalline counterparts, the favorable band alignment between the amorphous SnO2 ETLs and the perovskite absorber overcame the potential resistive losses.1 Compared to the crystalline TiO2- or SnO2-based references, amorphous SnO2-based devices displayed improved performance (Fig. 5c) due to their higher transmittance in the UV and visible ranges.93 A planar (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15-based (MA = CH3NH3+; FA = CH(NH2)2+) perovskite solar cell employing low-temperature processed amorphous SnOx as the ETL showed a PCE up to 15.8% with a Voc of 1.05 V.93 However, the device was reported to have strong hysteresis effects due to charge accumulation in trap states at the SnO2 ETL/perovskite interface113 and the low conductivity of SnO2.93,114–116 Fullerenes have been used to passivate defects that originate from grain boundaries in the perovskite film.104,117 [6,6]-phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM) was introduced as an interlayer at the amorphous SnO2 ETL/perovskite interface to passivate both the surface trap states and perovskite grain boundaries. In addition, such an interlayer can prevent the migration of I− in the perovskite film which was found to reduce hysteresis in SnO2 ETL-based PSC devices.1 Recently, Yang et al. found that an ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)-complexed amorphous SnO2 (E-SnO2) electron-transport layer in PSCs can also effectively suppress hysteresis and achieve a record efficiency of 21.60% (Fig. 5d).118 Adding EDTA was found to enhance the hydrophilicity of the E-SnO2 surface which decreased the Gibbs free energy favoring heterogeneous nucleation of the perovskite film, leading to better crystallinity, full surface coverage, and increased grain size.118
 Fig. 5  (a) 10 × 10 μm2 AFM image of amorphous SnO2 on ITO; (b) the corresponding energy-level diagram of the ITO/amorphous SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD device architecture. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) J–V curves of the best-performing PSCs with amorphous SnO2 or compact TiO2 as ETLs and mixed (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite as the photoactive layer, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from The Chemical Society of Japan, copyright 2017. (d) Current density and PCE measured as a function of time for the EDTA, SnO2, and E-SnO2-incorporated devices biased at 0.85 V, 0.89 V, and 0.92 V, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (e) Schematic demonstration of the inverted ITO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/amorphous Bi2S3/Au device, and (f) band diagram of CH3NH3PbI3/amorphous Bi2S3 devices. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Tang et al. introduced an amorphous bismuth trisulfide (Bi2S3) ETL into inverted hybrid PSCs (Fig. 5e).65 Bi2S3 was chosen because of its intrinsically higher electron concentration and carrier mobility (257 cm2 V−1 s−1) and its better hydrophobic nature relative to the traditional PC61BM ETL.119–121 In contrast to other amorphous inorganic semiconductor films with numerous defects (such as vacancies and dangling bonds), because amorphous Bi2S3 is composed of one-dimensional (Bi4S6)n ribbons stacked together through van der Waals forces, amorphous Bi2S3 possesses few dangling bonds and low defect density.122 As shown in Fig. 5f, there is a 0.07 eV conduction band offset between the perovskite absorber and the amorphous Bi2S3 ETLs, enabling efficient separation of photogenerated carriers.65,123 Simultaneously, such a small interfacial energy barrier between perovskite and amorphous Bi2S3 was found to suppress charge trapping and interface accumulation, which resulted in reduced scanning hysteresis of the devices.65 Additionally, the good conductivity of Bi2S3 and the efficient charge separation at the amorphous Bi2S3/perovskite interface enabled comparable performance between amorphous Bi2S3 ETL-based devices and PC61BM ETL-based devices. Improved humidity and photo stabilities of the devices with the amorphous Bi2S3 as ETLs were also observed and attributed to its hydrophobic nature and high light stability.65
3.2 Organic solar cells
Organic solar cells (OSCs) are generally constructed similarly to PSCs, with the following layers: a conductive transparent glass or plastic substrate, a hole-collection interlayer (cathode buffer layer), an active absorber layer (conjugated polymers), a thin electron conducting layer (anode buffer layer), and a reactive metal top contact.68,124 In a typical structure, indium tin oxide (ITO) is widely used as the transparent conducting anode, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the electron blocking layer, lithium fluoride (LiF) is the hole blocking layer, and aluminum (Al) is used as the anode (Fig. 6a).125–127 Notably, inverted OSCs usually place a hole blocking layer (e.g. ZnO) between the ITO and the active layer, and an electron blocking layer (e.g. PEDOT:PSS) is deposited on top of the active layer, as shown in Fig. 6b.128 Both the conventional and inverted structures require proper energy level alignment and a low work function metal electrode for electron extraction.124 Although currently the PCE of OSCs lags behind that of inorganic solar cells,129 OSCs hold promise due to their lightweight and flexible nature and their possibility for low-cost high-throughput roll-to-roll processing.130 Stability of OSCs has been reported as a key challenge towards their widespread application.31,131,132 PEDOT:PSS has been found to undergo fast degradation because of its acidic nature.133 Photodegradation of polymers at the indium tin oxide (ITO) and the metal electrodes has also been reported, and was attributed to reactions with oxygen and water.128 Thus, it is currently a challenge to achieve OSCs with high performance and superior stability. To address these issues, amorphous inorganic semiconductors have been applied in OSCs, example of which will be discussed individually.
 Fig. 6  Schematic and energy band structures of (a) a regular and (b) an inverted organic solar cell (OSC). 

3.2.1 Amorphous electrodes. 
ITO, a transparent conducting oxide, is one of the most commonly used transparent electrodes due to its excellent electrical and optical properties and environmental stability. However, its mechanical flexibility is limited because of cracks formed at grain boundaries which increase sheet resistance and deteriorates electrical performance of the film. Hence, more suitable flexible transparent electrodes are urgently needed to realize flexible OSCs. Amorphous transparent electrodes, which can be synthesized at low temperatures, possess superior flexibility and promise to be a viable alternative to conventional ITO.134,135 Although partially replacing In and Sn in ITO with Zn, Cd, and Si has been reported to produce promising cost-efficient amorphous electrodes for use in OSCs,136–140 it is desirable to explore In-free multilayer electrodes with low sheet resistance and high transparency comparable to those of crystalline ITO electrodes due to the scarcity and high cost of indium. A structure of amorphous ZnSnO3/Ag/amorphous ZnSnO3 (ZTO/Ag/ZTO) with a nano-scale Ag layer sandwiched between two amorphous ZTO layers was used as an alternative electrode in inverted OSCs.141 Due to its low sheet resistance and high optical transmittance, the OSC devices made using ZTO/Ag/ZTO electrodes displayed comparable PCE to that of an ITO cell.141 Additionally, OSCs made with amorphous ZnO/Ag/ZnO electrodes were found to possess power conversion efficiencies 20% higher than that of indium tin oxide electrodes.142 The enhanced performance was attributed to the low sheet resistance and high optical transmittance of ZnO/Ag/ZnO electrodes in the visible region. No significant degradation in the performance of the OPVs was measured after 400 cycles of continuous bending, which demonstrated the superior mechanical stability of OPVs made with the amorphous ZnO/Ag/ZnO.142 Nevertheless, the studies on the OSCs with amorphous In-free electrodes are still rare and need to be further explored for cost-efficient devices.


3.2.2 Amorphous electron collection interlayer. 
Insertion of interfacial layers between electron transport layers and organic semiconductors can significantly improve the performance of OSCs. In order to integrate new generations of photoactive materials into OSCs, the energy level difference between the electrodes and organic components must be incrementally tuned.143 TiO2 is usually used as an electron-selective interlayer in OSCs because its conduction band energy level is suitable to harvest electrons and its valence band energy is large enough to block holes and suppress surface recombination.144,145 Optimal energy level alignment can be achieved by implementing an amorphous electron-selective TiO2 interlayer film in the inverted bulk poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC61BM) configuration OSCs, as shown in Fig. 7a. An amorphous TiO2 interlayer prepared by CVD was found to possess a low concentration of the defects and suppress carrier recombination, especially near the maximum power point.68 Regardless of the thickness of the TiO2 layer, devices made with the amorphous film exhibited higher FF, Voc, Jsc, and overall performance compared to OSCs made with bare ITO (Fig. 7b).68 Amorphous TiO2 was also prepared using CBD, and the resulting film was used as an electron collection layer/hole blocking layer between ITO and PCBM:P3HT in inverted OSCs.146 The amorphous titanium interlayers were synthesized with various stabilizers (e.g. ethanolamine, diethanolamine, or acetyl acetone). The stabilizers used in TiOx formation played a key role in reducing resistance in the bulk and at the TiOx/conjugated polymer interface.146 The PCE of OSC with ethanolamine-stabilized TiOx was observed to be 2.5 times higher than that without the TiOx layer (Fig. 7c).146 The relatively efficient charge transport of electrons was ascribed to the superior conduction properties of TiOx.147,148 Inverted OSCs with amorphous TiOx showed high durability due to the protection of the PCBM:P3HT blend from photo-degradation, which occurs via permeation of oxygen and moisture. The amorphous TiOx inhibited the permeation of air into PCBM:P3HT blend layer, which prevented direct contact between the blend layer and oxygen/moisture. Cell performance decreased to 63.8% of the maximum PCE when the amorphous TiOx electron collection interlayer was replaced with anatase TiO2.146 A similar study demonstrated that electron selective interfacial layers made from crystalline TiO2 (instead of amorphous) caused PCE to drop in inverted OSCs.149 Oxygen defects have been observed to increase resistance in amorphous ALD-crafted TiO2 films, but they can be removed by light soaking.149 Devices with 15 nm-thick amorphous-TiO2 layers showed a better performance (PCE = 3.31%) than those with polycrystalline TiO2 of the same thickness (PCE = 2.59%). This decrease in performance was attributed to the grain boundaries in crystalline TiO2 which facilitate easier hole collection by the cathode, leading to a higher carrier recombination.149 It's worth noting, however, that some report that OSCs using crystalline TiO2 yield higher mobility.150 Thus, detailed theoretical and mechanistic studies are needed to fully understand how the electronic interactions between conjugated polymer and amorphous TiO2 enhance electron collection and charge separation.
 Fig. 7  (a) A proposed energy level diagram of an inverted OSC incorporating CVD-prepared amorphous TiO2. (b) J–V curves for ITO/CVD-TiO2/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Ag bulk heterojunction OSCs. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) Irradiation time-dependent PCE for the ITO/TiOx/PCBM:P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au inverted OSC with an amorphous TiOx interlayer and for conventional ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al OSC. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2008. (d) A schematic and cross-sectional TEM image of an ITO/amorphous IGO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag solar cell.143 Insets show higher-resolution TEM image and nanobeam electron diffraction pattern of amorphous IGO. (e) Representative AFM images of amorphous IGO and GZTO films. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. 
ZnO–SiO2 (ZSO) is a recently reported amorphous ternary oxide semiconductor with a work function of ∼3.4 eV.151,152 It exhibits good electron injection/transport properties, and has been used an alternative to TiO2 as a cathodic buffer layer in inverted OSC devices. Ar plasma-treated ZSO (Ar-ZSO) and oxygen plasma-treated ZSO (O-ZSO) films have also been investigated.151 It was found that O-ZSO is more suitable for use in OSCs owing to its higher exciton dissociation efficiency at the polymer (P3HT)/ZSO interface and the smaller work function difference for O-ZSO-based solar cells. OSCs using amorphous O-ZSO as the n-type interlayer showed a better PCE (from 0.03% to 0.12% after O2-plasma treatment).151 Despite the low PCE, the improved performance signified that amorphous ZSO may function as a viable alternate ETL in OSCs. Recently, Facchettic and Marks et al. reported using other uniform amorphous semiconducting oxide alloys, In–Ga–O (IGO) and Ga–Zn–Sn–O (GZSO) as the ETLs for inverted OSCs (Fig. 7d and e, respectively).143 Amorphous phase IGO and GZSO semiconductor alloys have excellent mechanical flexibility, optical transparency, uniform surface morphology, and good electron mobility.153,154 Continuous tunability of conduction band minima over a broad range of 3.5–4.6 eV can be achieved by alloying two or more electronically dissimilar oxides such as IGO and Ga–Zn–Sn–O oxide (GZTO).143 The low tail and midgap state densities in the amorphous phase were found to suppress charge recombination,153,154 and the localized O 2p-based valence bands blocked hole injection from the HOMO of the organic donor.155 Thus, enhanced PCE, excellent chemical/environmental stability, and good electron mobility of amorphous alloy-based OSCs can be achieved.


3.2.3 Amorphous hole collection interlayer. 
Metal oxides have been considered to be attractive hole collection interlayers due to their excellent chemical stability. WO3 has been identified as a promising hole-injection layer due to its good photostability, a long hole-diffusion length (∼150 nm).156–158 As shown in Fig. 8a, a thermally-evaporated uniform amorphous WO3 film was used as a cathode buffer layer in a conventional P3HT:PC60BM OSC.66 The efficient hole collection of these samples was attributed to the well-matched HOMO levels of WO3 and P3HT. Notably, the LUMO level of WO3 also provided a sufficient energy barrier to prevent back-collection of photogenerated electrons. Compared to ITO-based cells, amorphous WO3-based OSC devices exhibited superior FF, Voc, and PCE, (Fig. 8b) possessed significantly better batch-to-batch consistency due to their uniform surface morphology, and displayed improved hole mobility.66
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic device architecture of OSC, and an AFM image of the surface and the cross-sectional profile of WO3 on ITO. Inset: AFM image of the amorphous WO3 film. (b) Statistical box graphs for Jsc, Voc, FF, and efficiency of devices with various hole collection buffer layers. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2009. (c) The energy level diagrams of device components referenced to the vacuum level. (d) AFM image of NACO film on FTO. (e) J–V curves of the OSCs with the ACO or NACO films exposed to air for different hours. Inset: Influence of the air exposure time of the ACO or NACO films. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
Amorphous Cr2O3 is another excellent candidate as a cathode buffer layer because of its optimal 3.7 eV band gap.159 P-type amorphous Cr2O3 films were synthesized using the sputtering method and used in FTO/Cr2O3/P3HT:PCBM/Al solar cells.46 PCEs of 3.28% and 2.91% were achieved under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination for devices with and without the Cr2O3 layer, respectively. The PCE enhancement for devices with the Cr2O3 layer was attributed to the improved of p-type conductivity, enhanced hole collection, and electron blocking from the wide band-gap Cr2O3.46 Notably, the Cr2O3 tends to hydroxylated due to water dissociation after its exposure to air. The hydroxyl groups at the surface of amorphous Cr2O3 films affected the humidity stability, which can degrade performance of the OSC devices. In this regard, making nitrogen-doped amorphous Cr2O3 film may resolve this problem since N in amorphous Cr2O3 film could prevent water dissociation and hydroxylation of the Cr2O3 film surface. Nitrogen-doped amorphous Cr2O3 films were synthesized by radio frequency sputtering.160 Compared with pure Cr2O3, the nitrogen doped amorphous Cr2O3 (NACO) had a smoother surface (Fig. 8d). The smoother surface resulted in a smaller contact area at the NACO/air interface, which simultaneously prevented water dissociation and hydroxylation. Devices that used NACO as an HTL were observed to possess improved stability, as shown in Fig. 8e.46,160

3.3 Dye-sensitized solar cells
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) typically consist of a semiconductor photoanode, a counter electrode, a light-sensitizer (a dye molecular), and an electrolyte containing a redox couple such as I3−/I−.161 Under illumination, the dye molecules are elevated from the ground state to the excited state. The excited-state dye molecules inject electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Then, the electrons are diffused to a conductive substrate and flow into an external circuit. The dye in the oxidation state is reduced and regenerated by the electrolyte, which is subsequently reduced after receiving electrons from the counter electrode, thus completing a cycle. Semiconductor films (e.g., TiO2, ZnO and WO3) are the key component of DSSC photoanodes, which are coated onto a conductive substrate.162 The typical device architecture and working mechanisms of TiO2-based DSSCs are shown in Fig. 9.163 The TiO2 photoanode functions as both support for the sensitizers, and a transporter for photo-excited electrons from the dye sensitizer. The absorbed dye molecules generate excited electrons under illumination, which are subsequently injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor photoanodes and travel to the external circuit through the conductive substrate, thus completing a photochemical cycle.164 Due to the inherent issues of DSSCs, such as low electron mobility, slow transport, and recombination of photo-excited electrons, several studies have focused on creating more effective nanostructured electrode materials and morphologies.165–167 A number of these published studies are concerned with the preparation of amorphous semiconducting films to improve DSSC performance. The following sections will examine the recent advances in incorporating amorphous semiconductors into DSSCs.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of a TiO2-based DSSC: (a) device architecture and (b) working mechanism. 

3.3.1 Amorphous semiconductor-based photoanodes for DSSCs. 
TiO2 is the most commonly used photoanode material in DSSCs, but it typically requires a high annealing temperature and can contain a high defect density. Eithiraj and Geethalakshmi168 compared the electronic structure of an amorphous TiO2 cluster to that of crystalline anatase TiO2 by density functional theory and time dependent density functional theory calculations. Both the anatase and amorphous TiO2 showed similar HOMO–LUMO gaps and singlet–singlet lowest excited state energies (Fig. 10a and b). There was also a similar energy-level alignment between the dye molecules and both the amorphous and anatase TiO2, with the energy difference being less than 0.1 eV.168 This suggested that amorphous TiO2 may be a good alternative for use as a photoelectrode in DSSCs. However, some experimental data has indicated that the use of amorphous TiO2 can lead to a relatively lower dye packing density (compared to crystalline phases) because the adsorption of dye molecules is strongly correlated to surface facets of semiconductor photoanodes.169–171 Thus, the incorporation of both amorphous and crystalline TiO2 into DSSCs was studied. Mixed phases of crystalline and amorphous TiO2 were found to improve the conversion efficiency of DSSCs.172 Zhang et al. synthesized a nanocrystalline/amorphous, core/shell nanostructured TiO2 electrode at low temperature, and, due to large surface area of the nanostructured film, it showed improved adsorption of N3 dye (i.e. cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)) compared to pure amorphous TiO2.173 Notably, the electron collection of amorphous TiO2-based photoanode was still unsatisfactory. Kang and Jeon et al. fabricated a shell of amorphous ALD-TiO2 layer on the inner walls of anatase TiO2 nanotube (NT) electrodes.174 The thin amorphous TiO2 layer was dissolved after soaking in water for 48 h and converted into nanoparticles by a classic dissolution–precipitation path. The amorphous TiO2 layer dissolves to form hydroxytitanium complexes (Ti(OH)n−) and then precipitates on the TiO2 layer to form TiO2 nanoparticles.175,176 These amorphous TiO2 nanoparticles offer more charge injection sites at the interfaces, and thereby enhance the charge injection efficiency. The nanostructured TiO2 electrode with a nanocrystalline core/amorphous shell exhibited less transport resistance (∼0.5 Ω), which implied that the electrode was capable of conducting electrons from the injection site to the substrate. In addition, this core–shell architecture facilitated dye adsorption on the surface, ensuring adequate carrier generation. Interestingly, debate exists over whether or not the use of the amorphous TiO2-based photoanodes in DSSCs improves device performance. P25, a commercially available TiO2 consisting of mixed anatase and rutile phases with average particle sizes of 25 nm, is a cheap source of TiO2 nanoparticles that has been widely used in DSSC applications and has a substantial amount of amorphous content.177 Kim et al. investigated the effect of removing the amorphous phase in P25 on DSSC performance171 and found that the efficiency of devices based on samples without amorphous particles was enhanced by 44% (compared to those based on untreated P25). The increased efficiency was attributed to enhanced light harvesting because higher dye loading is achieved on crystalline phase than amorphous phase. This result shows that more studies are needed to understand amorphous phase TiO2 and the mechanisms behind how the amorphous structure impact DSSC performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) The HOMO and LUMOs energy level alignment of the anatase and amorphous TiO2 clusters and dyes (N3 and N719). (b) Schematic representation of the ground and excited sate energy levels for the anatase and amorphous TiO2 clusters as well as dye (N3 and N719). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013. 
Doping metals into semiconductors has been proven to be an effective approach to optimize their electronic structure for efficient devices, and several studies have looked at the influence of the metallic dopants on the photovoltaic behavior of TiO2 photoanodes in DSSCs.178–180 TiO2 electrodes fabricated with a bilayer of nano-crystalline TiO2 and a Er3+ and Yb3+-doped amorphous TiO2 showed an increased DSSC efficiency of 15.6%. This improvement in power conversion efficiency was ascribed to the absence of grain boundaries, better light scattering, and higher dye packing density of the bilayer electrode.181 Amorphous Ti3+-TiO2 nanoparticles grafted on anatase TiO2 nanotube arrays were also investigated for use as photoanodes in DSSCs.70 The TiO2 nanotube arrays were immersed in TiO2 nanoparticles-contained water. The amorphous TiO2:Ti3+ nanoparticles were synthesized by ultraviolet pulsed laser ablation of the water. The amorphous Ti3+–TiO2 photoanodes facilitated better light absorption in the visible region, and its higher quasi-Fermi level (as compared with anatase TiO2 nanotubes) resulted in increased Voc.70
Though rarely reported, some multi-cation oxides have been investigated for application in DSSCs. The electric resistivity of these materials may be easily tuned via altering their composition, which makes them a favorable candidate for photoanodes in DSSCs. For example, zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4 or ZnSnO3) is a promising transparent oxide semiconductor because of its suitable band gap and high electron mobility.182 Amorphous porous sub-micrometer Zn2SnO4 fiber photoanodes were constructed between the mixed inorganic precursors of Zn(OAc)2–Sn(OAc)4 and a polymer matrix.183 The resulting DSSCs with a 3 μm-thick Zn2SnO4 photoanode showed a promising photovoltaic conversion up to 3.7% under standard AM 1.5G sunlight (100 mW cm−2).183 When employing amorphous ZnSnO3 (another known zinc stannate) as a photoanode, inferior electron transport properties were observed to that of crystalline ZnSnO3 samples.184 Nevertheless, amorphous ZnSnO3 is still worth scrutinizing as a potential photoanode because of its good transparency, conduction, stability against acidic dye molecules, and identical constituent elements to Zn2SnO4. In particular, understanding the differences in the optical and electronic properties of the amorphous and crystalline phases of this material is critical for future applications in DSSCs.


3.3.2 Amorphous counter electrodes. 
The counter electrode is also an important component and plays a vital role in the performance of DSSCs. Platinum is one of the traditional counter electrodes that serves as both an electron collector and an electrocatalyst for the regeneration of triiodide (I3−) in the electrolyte.176 However, because platinum is expensive and easily corroded by the I-based electrolyte in liquid-state DSSCs,185 development of low cost alternative counter electrodes is of great interest. CoS has been proposed as a promising substitute due to its superior electrocatalytic activity, low cost, and abundant feedstock.186,187 Amorphous CoS fabricated via an electrochemical milling process was used as the counter electrode in DSSCs, and the resulting cells possessed higher electrocatalytic performance than platinized electrode towards the reduction of I3−.188 High exchange current densities were achieved for the counter electrode of CoS with crude morphology. This morphology opened the surface of CoS to the surroundings, increasing the contact between the CoS and I3−, and thus enhancing the properties in DSSCs. By preparing the CoS using porous CoO as the precursor, much higher conversion efficiency was achieved due to higher active surface area as well as the lower charge transfer resistance of CoS than Pt electrode, as shown in Fig. 11a and b.188 Amorphous indium zinc oxide (IZO) was found to be a relatively conductive film because it lacks grains or grain boundaries that can result in stress and film cracking.189 Despite these advantages, its intrinsically low electronic conductivity remains an issue, but the incorporation of noble metals into IZO can address this problem. Sun et al. prepared an Au/amorphous IZO bilayer at room temperature and used it as the counter electrode in DSSCs.161 High conductivity of 1.2 × 105 S cm−1 (Fig. 11c) and mobility of 65.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 11d) were achieved due to the formation of Au transport paths.161 The figure of merit (FOM, ΦTC = T10/sheet resistance) for Au–IZO (ΦTC = 4.0 × 10−2) is 57 times higher than that of the IZO sample and 3 times higher than that of ITO (ΦTC = 1.5 × 10−2). The Au–IZO-based DSSC showed a photovoltaic efficiency of 3.73% under AM1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2).161 Similarly, a Pt/amorphous porous NiO bilayer was fabricated and used as the counter electrode of a DSSC, and the resulting cell showed enhanced short-circuit current density and efficiency, both of which were ascribed to the increased active surface area.190
 Fig. 11  (a) Nyquist plots of Pt & CoS electrodes. CoS counter electrodes were prepared by chemical bath deposition method (CBD), and electrochemical method with porous Co3O4 or Co3O4 nanowire (NW) precursors, respectively. (b) J–V curves of the DSSCs with various electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. Variation of (c) conductivity, σ and (d) mobility, μ for the Au–IZO samples as a function of Au nominal thickness. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 

3.4 Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs)
Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have drawn considerable interest because of the ability to easily tune their bandgap by varying both size and composition, as well as the ability to form intermediate bands.191–193 As the size of a QD approaches the exciton Bohr radius, quantum confinement effects dominate and electron energy levels are treated as discrete instead of a continuous band. This ability to tune energy levels has led to the incorporation of self-assembled QDs or colloidal QDs as sensitizers in solar cells to boost performance. Unfortunately, charge recombination at the semiconductor/sensitizer/electrolyte interfaces in QDSCs has been found to be more prevalent as compared to conventional DSSCs due to the existence of the surface trap states in the QDs which act as recombination centers.194,195 Electrons transported in the semiconductor layer injected from the excited QDs may recombine with either the holes at the valence band of QDs or with the oxidized species in the redox electrolyte through direct contact.194,196 Interfacial engineering of the QDs by coating them with a buffer layer is a widely accepted method to inhibit such recombination in QDSCs.197–199 Furthermore, the introduction of a buffer layer facilitates the utilization of the I−/I3− redox couple for a higher open circuit voltage and fill factor compared to cells with the commonly used polysulfide electrolyte.200,201 Some of the works selected for this review focused on employing amorphous semiconductor phase such as TiO2, ZnS as the buffer layers in QDSCs.198,202 We will introduce these buffer layers below individually.

3.4.1 Amorphous TiO2 as buffer layer. 
An amorphous TiO2 layer was inserted in QDSCs to suppress interfacial charge recombination and decreasing trap state defects induced by the large lattice mismatch between interfaces.21 Schematic architectures of the different QDSCs are shown in Fig. 12a. The position of the amorphous TiO2 buffer layer (i.e. between crystalline TiO2 and ZnS/SiO2 coating layer, or outside the crystalline TiO2 layer) was found to have a great impact on QDSC performance, particularly their photovoltage (Fig. 12b).203 The amorphous TiO2 layer located at the interface between the QD-sensitized photoanode and ZnS/SiO2 layer was found to inhibit charge recombination at the interface203 and passivate QD surface states that act as charge traps.198 The density of trap states induced by the lattice mismatch at the device interfaces also decreased after incorporation of an amorphous TiO2. The QDSCs with an amorphous TiO2 buffer layer displayed were found to show superior photovoltaic performance to that of cells made with a crystalline buffer layer.203 For example, an amorphous TiOx buffer layer was made via dip-coating and used between a graphene photoanode and QD sensitizers.204Fig. 12c demonstrates the photogenerated electron transfer processes in this QDSC architecture. The amorphous TiO2 buffer layer inhibited recombination of the electrons and holes at the graphene-QD and oxidized species–electrolyte interfaces.204 The transport of electrons from TiO2 to graphene via a rapid transfer process. Due to the high conductivity of graphene and the energy difference from TiO2, electrons injected from QD sensitizer transferred directly to graphene through TiO2 conducting band, rather than trapped by the trap states in the amorphous TiO2 layer.204 The addition of the TiOx interlayer was observed to both eliminated the decay of photocurrent and lead to a longer electron lifetime (Fig. 12d). It was found to provide a barrier that suppressed charge recombination by separating graphene from the oxidized QDs and redox couples in the electrolyte. As a result, the photocurrent and photovoltage of the QDSCs were both greatly enhanced with the use of an amorphous TiOx buffer layer.204 In addition, an amorphous TiO2 coating can protect the QDs from the very corrosive redox couple.198 By blocking trap states where holes can accumulate with an amorphous TiO2 coating, degradation of QDs can be avoided, thus further enhancing the photo-stability of QDSCs.198
 Fig. 12  (a) The schematic architectures and (b) performance of the amorphous TiO2-based QDSC devices. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic structure of photogenerated electron transfer processes in a layered graphene (Gr)/QDs and the energy band diagram. (d) Electron lifetime as a function of Voc and (e) IPCE (incident photon to current efficiency) of the photochemical cell with and without an amorphous TiOx layer. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 


3.4.2 Other amorphous inorganic semiconductors used in QDSCs. 
Various other inorganic amorphous semiconductors have been incorporated into QDSCs. For example, inorganic amorphous ZnS was used to confine PbS QDs in QDSCs.205 It was determined that a type I heterojunction was formed at the PbS/ZnS interface, which facilitated photogenerated carrier separation and transfer. Carriers in the PbS QDs accumulated due to the potential barrier from the ZnS shell, which reduced the cooling rate of hot carriers. Typically, conventional colloidal QDs (like PbS) have a high density of states because they use organic molecules as capping agents.206 Using amorphous ZnS instead of organic molecules as the capping ligand can effectively reduce the states of PbS QDs by creating a bridging sulfur layer at the interface of PbS and ZnS.207,208 Two distinct configurations including embedding and blending structures were studied, as shown in Fig. 13. In embedded configuration, larger PbS QDs were isolated and dispersed in a ZnS matrix, which provided for substantial distance between the QDs. In blended configuration, smaller size PbS QDs were mixed with a ZnS matrix so that there was indiscernible distance between particles. The smaller QD size and closer distance between QDs in the second configuration displayed more efficient charge injection and transport, and thus resulted in QDSCs with superior photovoltaic performance.205 In another study, the insertion of an amorphous ZnO interlayer between the cathode and active layer was demonstrated to improve the efficiency of QDSCs.209 The ZnO buffer layer was found to both reduce recombination by preventing direct contact of the active layer and metal electrode and facilitate electron extraction toward the cathode because of more suitable energy alignment.209 Compared to crystalline ZnO, amorphous ZnO is superior in acting as a cathode interfacial layer and moisture scavenger because of its tight coverage and high surface area.209
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of device structure with PbS quantum dots embedded in and blending with amorphous ZnS. (b) TEM images of PbS quantum dots embedded in and blending with ZnS dielectric matrix prepared in methanol and aqueous solution, respectively. Insets are the corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns. (c) Absorbance spectra of completely filled bulk heterojunctions with embedding and blending structures. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 

4. Amorphous inorganic semiconductors for photoelectrocatalytic water splitting
4.1 Amorphous semiconductor-based photoanodes
Photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) splitting of water to O2 and H2 is an attractive approach for capturing and storing solar energy for fuel production.3,210 High-efficiency PEC solar-driven water splitting requires semiconductor materials with a suitable bandgap to absorb a large portion of the solar spectrum. These materials must also have the capacity to deliver a substantial amount of current, good stability in an aqueous environment, and photovoltage required to drive the fuel-forming anodic and cathodic half reactions. Among the state-of-the-art PEC systems, the most prevalent shortcoming is the stability of the electrodes.211 Many II–VI semiconductors, such as CdS, ZnSe, GaAs, and GaP, have been employed as photoanodes for efficient photocatalytic water splitting because of their negative potentials of valence-band edges.212 Notably, the electrolysis of water is generally performed in strongly alkaline or strongly acidic media due to their high conductivity, minimal pH gradients during operation, and rapid water oxidation ability. II–VI semiconductor materials are often unstable in aqueous electrolytes in these pH ranges, which can cause either anodic photocorrosion or photo-passivation of the materials.3,34,35,213,214 Various coating strategies have been explored to improve the stability of the semiconductors for applications in photocatalytic water splitting, including deposition of metal (Pd, Pt, Ni, Ir, etc.) or metal oxide (NiOx, MnOx, RuOx, IrOx, etc.) thin films onto the semiconductor photoanodes.19,210,215,216 Despite these advancements, imperfections in the protective coatings of materials can lead to the sudden system failure. Unfortunately, the improved stability of semiconductor photoanodes generally comes at the price of decreased efficiency of water oxidation. To this end, amorphous semiconductors have been explored as a component in PEC to improve the stability of photoanodes against both photocorrosion and photopassivation.3

4.1.1 Amorphous TiO2 photoanodes. 
Recently, amorphous TiO2 films have been used as coatings to protect a variety of photoanode materials under oxygen evolution reaction (OER) conditions in alkaline electrolytes.3,18,23,34,35 Amorphous TiO2 is more widely available in nature and can be prepared into different forms at room temperature, which make it a good alternative to its crystalline counterpart. Notably, carrier conduction in the amorphous TiO2 has been attributed to hopping channels provided by impurities such as oxygen vacancies and their defect states.3,8,217–220
Both the preparation technique and thickness of the TiO2 protection layers greatly impact water oxidation. Si photoanodes were protected by coating them with CVD-crystalline TiO2.221 The cracks and pinhole-free TiO2 coating was found to prevent dissolution of the substrates, but the thick protection layer inhibited electron transfer from the electrolyte to the Si substrate, resulting in poor device performance.221 An ALD-crafted conformal pinhole-free layer of 2 nm thin crystalline TiO2 was also used to stabilize Si photoanodes for water oxidation.19 Deposition of this electrically insulating film was found to both prevent oxidation of the Si photoanode and accelerating tunneling of photogenerated holes between the catalyst layers and the underlying substrate (Fig. 14a–c).19 However, as this barrier became thicker, the hole conduction via a tunneling mechanism was suppressed, which induced a large series resistance to the PEC device and increased OER and additional voltage losses.222 To mitigate the negative effects of the crystalline TiO2 layer thickness on water oxidation performance, an intentionally electronic-defect rich unannealed amorphous TiO2 film was used as a protective layer that allowed for the passage of current as a “leaky” dielectric.3,223 While charge transport in crystalline TiO2 is dominated by barrier tunneling that necessitates thin films,19,222,224,225 transport in amorphous TiO2 protection layers are dominated by other mechanisms and thus (Fig. 14d) can maintain good performance in hundred-nanometer-thick films,3,18,34,35,226 as shown in Fig. 14e–h. Amorphous ALD-TiO2 protection layers in PECs with thicknesses ranging from 4 to 143 nanometers were shown to provide electronic defects to promote hole conduction and were sufficiently transparent to allow light penetration to the protected semiconductors. Dual-protected Si photoanodes were created by sputtering 100 nm Ni films onto the TiO2, and these Si photoanodes yielded continuously O2 production for more than 100 hours, and the photocurrent only decreased by ∼10% while the fill factor decreased less than 5%. Improved stability was also observed in analogous n–p+-GaAs/amorphous TiO2/Ni-film and n-GaP/TiO2/Ni-film photoanodes.3,34 An ab initio molecular dynamics model was built for amorphous TiO2, and it was used to study the mechanism of hole diffusion across amorphous TiO2 layers.227 It was found that in amorphous TiO2, O–O peroxy linkages facilitate hole diffusion. The hole diffusion was triggered through an exchange mechanism involving O–O pairs with energy barriers lower than 0.5 eV.227
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic and (b) TEM of the Si photoanode coated with ALD-crystalline TiO2. (c) Energy band diagram of the anode at 1 V versus NHE in pH 0 solution. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (d) Cross-sectional schematic of a photoanode stabilized with amorphous ALD-TiO2. Photoelectrocatalytic behavior of amorphous TiO2-coated (e) Si, (g) GaP and GaAs photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH. (f) Normal-incidence optical absorptance and external quantum yields for n-Si photoelectrodes. (h) O2 detected for different photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014. 
In addition to ALD-amorphous TiO2 films, electrochemical deposited (ECD) amorphous TiO2 has also been utilized as a protective layer to improve the stability of photoanodes in PEC devices. Amorphous TiO2 layers with thicknesses ranging from 80–120 nm were coated via electrodeposition on the photoanode of W-doped BiVO4/FTO, and they improved photoelectrocatalytic performance and enhanced stability.52 The beneficial effect from the ECD-amorphous TiO2 protection overlayer was attributed to its reaction with surface defects and their deactivation with regards to surface recombination.228 An electrodeposited amorphous TiO2 layer was found to passivate the surface of gold electrode, and minimize background current.53 A Pt/amorphous TiO2/n-Si photoanode was tested for photoelectrocatalytic OER, and no current decay was observed for more than 12 h and it produced 19 mA cm−2 of photocurrent density under 100 mW cm−2 xenon lamp irradiation.229 A SrTaO2N/TiOx/Ni(OH)x/CoPi photoanode is fabricated with an amorphous ECD-TiOx blocking layer. Such an amorphous layer between SrTaO2N and Ni(OH)x can not only suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, but protect the oxynitride from corrosion in the PEC application.220


4.1.2 Black TiO2 photoanodes. 
As mentioned above, amorphous phase semiconductors have been employed in many fields because they possess unique electronic structures which, in some cases, can create effective catalytic centers.7,230,231 Recently, combining crystalline and amorphous materials has been shown to improve catalytic performance due to a synergistic effect between the two phases. Crystalline TiO2 quantum dots (nanocrystals) coated with an amorphous black hydrogenated TiO2:H surface layer were fabricated by hydrogenating crystalline TiO2 at 20 bar and 200 °C for 5 days.75,232,233 These samples were then used as electrodes, and enhanced PEC performance was achieved. Photos of the samples and their properties are shown in Fig. 15a and b.75 The inherent disorder in the amorphous phase was found to broaden the tails of states, extending into the otherwise forbidden band gap.75 The hydrogen concentration was found to be the highest in the disordered layer, which also had more dangling bonds than the crystalline core. Dangling bonds and defects in amorphous nanoparticles have been reported to serve as effective electron traps, preventing recombination of electrons and holes.234 Defect-rich black TiO2:H nanoparticles are known to shift optical absorption from ultraviolet to near infrared and display both excellent photoactivity and stability in photocatalytic hydrogen generation.75,235 The enhanced light absorption of hydrogenated black TiO2:H can be attributed to its surface disorder and the formation of oxygen vacancies.75,235,236 Due to lattice disorder, the Ti 3d orbitals and hybridized O 2p orbitals and Ti 3d orbitals up-shift the valence band edge of TiO2, deriving the mid-gap states (Fig. 15c).75 The visible and near infrared-light absorption of black TiO2:H has been observed to result from the transitions from the TiO2 valence band to the oxygen vacancy levels or from the oxygen vacancies to the TiO2 conduction band.77,237,238 The doped H, as a shallow donor, has been found to accelerate charge transport at the semiconductor and electrolyte interface.45 Amorphous black TiO2:H displayed a comparable photocurrent density to that of crystalline TiO2 materials (674 μA cm−2) at an applied voltage of 1.23 V vs. RHE.45
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states of a disorder-engineered semiconductor nanocrystal with dopant incorporation (left), a photo comparing un-modified white and disorder-engineered black TiO2:H nanocrystals (center), and HRTEM images of TiO2:H with the crystalline core and the disordered outer layer (right). (b) Spectral absorbance and valence band XPS spectra of the white TiO2 and black TiO2:H (left and center, respectively); schematic illustration of the density of states of TiO2:H and white TiO2 nanocrystals (right). (c) Schematic illustration of a supercell for TiO2:H and anatase TiO2; calculated DOS of TiO2:H (left panel), TiO2 nanocrystal, and a bulk crystal (second panel); decomposition of the total DOS of TiO2:H into partial DOS of the Ti, O, and H orbitals (third panel); three-dimensional plot of calculated charge density distribution of a mid-gap electronic state of disorder-engineered (at about 1.8 eV) TiO2 nanocrystals (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011. 
To improve the stability of photoelectrocatalytic electrodes, hydrogen treated amorphous TiO2:H was studied in comparison with thermally treated amorphous TiO2 under vacuum. In both treatments, 28.7 nm thick amorphous TiO2 films were formed on a single crystal Si substrate.239 The vacuum thermally-treated TiO2 possessed localized Ti3+, Ti2+, and O− species due to electrons being transferred from an anionic to cationic network with a constant atom ratio of O to Ti. In contrast, the atomic hydrogen treatment removed O atoms and decreased the atom ratio of O to Ti in amorphous TiO2 and created O vacancies surrounded by Ti cations with either a Ti3+ or Ti2+ valence. As a result, the vacuum heat treated amorphous TiO2 was found to significantly prevent the electrode from photocorrosion and improve the stability of devices. The hydrogen treatment was not found to increase the stability of TiO2.239 These results indicate that different synthesis strategies generate different defects which may play distinct role on the device performance. Thus, it is important to design and control the defect types during the preparation of the amorphous semiconductors.


4.1.3 Other amorphous semiconductor photoanodes. 
For photoanodes in state-of-the art PEC systems, most decreases in water splitting efficiency can be traced to carrier recombination, charge transport losses, and chemical/photo-corrosion. Currently, few photoanode materials can simultaneously alleviate or diminish all the loss processes, so new semiconductor materials-based photoanodes need to be developed.240 The combination of different phases and/or semiconductors opens up new avenues to overcome these losses.241,242 High-performance photoanodes with a maximum photocurrent of 2.52 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under AM1.5G illumination were achieved by combining nanometer-thick amorphous layers with small crystalline nanoparticles (similar to the structure of TiO2:H mentioned above).243 Amorphous layers of NiOx and Co(OH)2 were shown to reduce photocorrosion and increase the water oxidation kinetics.243 A photoanode made of an amorphous NiO/single crystalline ZnO core–shell nanorod array exhibited a remarkable cathodic shift in the onset potential for water oxidation compared to that of a bare ZnO photoanode.244 The crystalline ZnO nanorod core acted as a photon absorber and charge transporter, while the amorphous NiO shell served as an electrocatalyst that promoted surface oxygen evolution reaction.244 Similarly, when an amorphous CuSnO3 film with an n-type band gap of 2.3 eV was utilized as a top layer on a WO3-based heterojunction photoanode, the onset potential and photocurrent density of the PEC device was improved due to the formation of a type II heterojunction between of the CuSnO3 and WO3.245 Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is an attractive semiconductor for water oxidation due to its high absorption of visible light and chemical stability in alkaline media. Photoanodes made from α-Fe2O3 combined with a thin amorphous nickel hydroxide layer (such as NiOOH246 or Ni(OH)2247) displayed enhanced photocurrent and a cathodic shift of onset potential. Such enhanced performance can be attributed to the high specific surface area of amorphous nickel hydroxides, the reduced resistance and its ion-permeability which stores holes produced in α-Fe2O3.246 The resistance reduction was assigned to a higher superficial contact area at the electrode/electrolyte interface as well as passivation of the superficial trap sites.247
Elemental combination at the atomic level may also be a valid method to address water splitting efficiency losses by modifying the intrinsic bonding structure and imparting novel physical and chemical properties.248,249 Partial substitution of Si atoms for the Zn or Ge atoms in Zn2GeO4 has been shown to distort bonding structure and form amorphous Zn1.7Si0.3GeO4 (ZSGO) or crystalline Zn2(GeO4)0.88(SiO4)0.12 (ZGSO) nanowires with tunable band structures, respectively.234 Photoanodes made from amorphous ZSGO nanowire arrays exhibited a better efficiency and stability in photoelectrocatalytic water splitting than crystalline ZGSO nanowires because of its higher light-harvesting capability, lower charge recombination, faster charge separation, and higher specific catalytic activity.250

4.2 Amorphous semiconductor-based photocathodes
Like photoanodes, preventing photocathodes from photocorrosion in aqueous electrolytes is also a critical issue that needs to be addressed for PEC water splitting applications. Incorporation of wide-band gap semiconductor coatings and proper electrocatalysts onto the solar energy absorbing material is an innovative approach to stabilize the photoelectrode and reduce the interfacial kinetic barrier. Recently, passivation of the photocathode was attempted by introducing an amorphous semiconductor overlayer on top of the absorber semiconductor (for example, Cu2O).211,251,252 The protective amorphous overlayer must have chemical stability and favorable band alignment to create a p–n junction, which facilitates charge extraction and protects the absorber material from the aqueous electrolyte.

4.2.1 Amorphous TiO2 and black TiO2 photocathodes. 
ALD amorphous TiO2 is a promising candidate to protect photocathodes in PEC devices because it is chemically stable under basic conditions, creates a conformal layer, with controllable thickness, and can modify the electrode surface.3,19,253,254 Turner et al. used a 35 nm ALD-TiO2 layer to protect a p-GaInP2 photocathode functionalized by a cobaloxime molecular catalyst (GaInP2–TiO2–cobaloxime).12 The surface modification strategy for the p-GaInP2 photoelectrodes is shown in Fig. 16. The amorphous TiO2 layer, which is inactive towards HER, was demonstrated to act as an antireflective coating255 and allow transport of photoexcited electrons.256 The inactive amorphous TiO2 can facilitate the cobaloxime catalyst, which can lower the kinetic barrier and provide high activity for water reduction.12 The modified GaInP2–TiO2–cobaloxime electrode possessed remarkable photocurrent stability (5% loss over 20 min) compared to that made with bare GaInP2 (almost no photocurrent after 20 min).12 GaInP2 electrodes coated with only Pt were also studied as a reference, and they exhibited an unstable current and diminished catalytic activity.257,258 The decrease in performance was attributed to inadequate and nonuniform surface coverage of the catalyst and the formation of a passivated Pt hydrated species. When 35 nm of amorphous ALD-TiO2 was deposited as an intermediate layer between the GaInP2 and Pt, stable photocurrent density and robust catalytic activity was realized.12 In another study, improved catalytic activity and stability were achieved when an amorphous TiO2 buffer layer was inserted between ferroelectric BiFeO3 (BFO) and a Pt catalyst (Fig. 17a and b).259 An upward barrier (i.e. upward band edge bending) formed between the BFO and Pt (Fig. 17c and d), which impeded electron transfer from the electrode to the electrolyte. The insertion of amorphous TiO2, with its good conductivity and its suitable work function,260 has been reported to improve stability of photocathodes during photoelectrocatalytic water splitting by removing the upward barrier and facilitating photogenerated carrier separation. Moreover, tunneling has been reported at the amorphous TiO2/electrode (i.e., Pt) contact due to the ultra-low thickness of amorphous TiO2.260 Similarly, an identical amorphous TiO2 buffer layer between PbTiO3 and Pt was also shown to facilitate removal of the upward barrier between PbTiO3 and Pt.261
 Fig. 16  (a) Modification strategies for p-GaInP2 photoelectrodes. (b) IPCE of electrodes at −1 V versus Ag/AgCl in pH = 13 aqueous solution. (c) Current density–time profile of electrodes at −1 V versus Ag/AgCl under 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 17  (a) J–V curves, (b) EIS curves for ITO/BFO/Pt and ITO/BFO and ITO/BFO/TiO2/Pt photoelectrodes. Schematic band diagrams for (c) ITO/BFO/Pt and (d) ITO/BFO/TiO2/Pt photocathodes. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2017. 
The combination of amorphous TiO2 with other materials was also investigated to further improve the stability of electrodes in PEC applications. For example, graphene has been widely used to inhibit corrosion of metals.262,263 A CVD graphene was employed as a protective layer against photocorrosion for a Cu2O photocathode.252 The deposition of graphene layers onto the rough surface of Cu2O was observed to induce the formation of microcracks, which facilitated deleterious direct contact between the electrolyte and Cu2O.252 To block the microcracks and form a protective bilayer, an additional amorphous TiO2 layer was deposited on the top of the graphene. The TiO2/graphene protected Cu2O photocathode generated twice the photocurrent as compared to the bare Cu2O electrode, which was attributed to the type II band structure and electron selective nature of the protective amorphous TiO2/graphene bilayer.252
Recently, a black TiO2 composed of crystalline TiO2 with graded oxygen defects was employed as a protected layer in silicon-based photocathodes.264 The graded oxygen defects can activate and enhance the PEC behaviors of Si-based photocathodes by forming electrically conducting channels that allow photogenerated electrons to reach the surface of a photocathode with low resistance. The protection layer, with its high-density structure, was found to enhance the lifetime of the photocathodes in both strong acid and alkaline electrolyte solutions. The silicon-based photocathode with the black amorphous-crystalline TiO2 protective layer showed a current density of ∼35.3 mA cm−2 and stability of over 100 h at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M NaOH electrolyte. In contrast, no photoelectrocatalytic behavior was observed for the photocathode using a pure crystalline TiO2 protection layer.264 This was ascribed to an up-shift in the valence band edge of TiO2 which resulted from the oxygen defects in the disordered structure (amorphous phase) of black TiO2.75,265 The tail effect narrowed the bandgap of the black TiO2. The difference of CB minimum and VB maximum between Si and black TiO2 (Fig. 18) allows for electrons to move easily through the conduction band, whereas the transport of holes from Si to TiO2 is blocked due to a large barrier in the valence band.264
 Fig. 18  Schematic and the proposed energy band diagram of Pd nanoparticle/black TiO2 (b-TiO2)/black Si (b-Si) photocathode for water reduction. TiO1+y and TiO2−x are the b-TiO2 layer composed of two kinds of stoichiometric Ti:O as well as graded oxygen defects. Reproduced from ref. 264 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2018. 


4.2.2 Amorphous MoSx photocathodes. 
Amorphous molybdenum sulfide (MoSx) has been proven to be a highly active catalyst for HER in acidic solutions.266–268 This class of catalyst is especially competitive for the development of cost-effective PEC hydrogen generation devices because MoSx can be prepared in simple and mild conditions using readily available and inexpensive precursors with excellent chemical stability. The free energy of the hydrogen adsorption on the edge sites of MoSx is theoretically close to that of Pt, which suggests MoSx is a promising HER catalyst.269 Hu et al. showed that an amorphous MoSx catalyst could deliver a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 170 mV and a loading of 0.2 mg cm−2.267 A Cu2O electrode combined with amorphous MoSx catalyst (the devices structure is shown in Fig. 19a–d) was found to produce a maximum photocurrent of 14.7 mA cm−2 and exhibit a maximum solar to hydrogen efficiency of 18% under 1 sun irradiation.4 Such performance is comparable to that of Pt nanoparticles211,270 and RuOx271 deposited on a Cu2O photocathode. In addition, the MoSx catalyst showed improved stability in PEC hydrogen production under acidic conditions in comparison with Pt, as shown in Fig. 19e.4 Gu and Turner et al. deposited a bilayer of amorphous TiOx and MoSx onto GaInP2 as a photocathode, and it showed high catalytic activity and stability (remaining 80% of initial photocurrent density during a 20 h durability test) similar to that of crystalline MoS2 (for the hydrogen evolution reaction).257 Despite the excellent catalytic activity and stability, it is still difficult to recognize the atomic structure and clarify the detailed catalytic mechanisms due to the disordered structure of amorphous MoSx. For example, H2 evolution by amorphous MoSx may proceed via a different mechanism than that of MoS2 crystals.272–274
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic structure and (b) an image of the MoSx–CA–Cu2O photocathode; scale bar, 5 mm. The area covered with the MoSx catalyst (66 mg cm2) is in the middle of the photoelectrode and is approximately 0.48 cm2. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the protective layers, scale bars, 200 nm. (d) Band energy for the Cu2O photocathode with Al-doped ZnO (AZO) and TiO2 and the MoSx catalyst film biased at 0 V versus RHE, assuming the pinning of the band edges of the semiconductor at the interfaces; (e) photocathode stability at 0 V versus RHE for Cu2O photocathodes modified by different HER catalysts under constant AM 1.5 illumination. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from AIP, copyright 2014. 
The edges of MoS2 single crystals have undercoordinated Mo and/or S atoms that have been recognized as active sites.275 Similarly, unsaturated S atoms in amorphous MoSx were identified as the catalytically active sites for the hydrogen evolution reaction.266 Lin et al. synthesized nanocomposites of amorphous MoS2 and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) for the hydrogen evolution reaction.276 Based on the capacitance and impedance measurements, MoSx with an amorphous structure exhibited higher activity than crystalline MoSx due to the fact that the former had a higher number of exposed edges with unsaturated sulfur atoms.276 Tran et al. prepared active amorphous MoSx consisting of discrete thiomolybdate [Mo3S13]2− building blocks (characterized by transmission electron microscopy) which share terminal disulfide ligands, as shown in Fig. 20.274 The thiomolybdate can be viewed as a fragment of the MoS2 structure with a significant number of active sites because most sulfur atoms in the structure exhibit a structural motif similar to that observed at MoS2 edges.277 Elimination of terminal disulfide ligands generated the actual catalytic centers for proton reduction, which were found to hydrate and generate molybdenum oxysulfide sites.278
 Fig. 20  Structures of MoSx materials. Top left: [Mo3S13]2− cluster. Top right: Crystal MoS2, wherein the Mo edge contains Mo(S2) catalytic active sites. Center: Amorphous MoSx coordination polymer with [Mo3S13]2− building block units sharing two of their three terminal disulfide bonds to form a polymeric chain. Some defect sites are present within the polymer. Bottom: MoSx under catalytic H2 evolution turnover conditions. Within a-MoSx, four different ligands are thus identified: apical sulfide μ-S2−, bridging disulfides (S–S)2−br, shared (S–S)2−sh and terminal disulfides (S–S)2−t. Reproduced from ref. 274 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
The morphology of amorphous MoS2 in photocathodes has a significant impact on the performance of PECs.279 A conformal film-like morphology was prepared by electrodeposition starting from cathodic potential. The film was more suitable for efficient catalytic activation than a nonuniform particulate structure prepared by the same method but starting from anodic potential.279 The morphology difference was caused by the different initial reactions. Under cathodic potential, MoS2 yields through the reduction of MoS42−, while the initial reaction under anodic potential generates MoS3 through the oxidation of MoS42−. As a result, the TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathode with film-like morphology MoSx demonstrated 4 times higher photocurrent density (4.8 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE) than its nonuniform counterpart (1.1 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE). Clearly, more study into the effects of morphology of amorphous semiconductors on their performance in photoelectrodes is needed.


4.2.3 Other amorphous inorganic semiconductor photocathodes. 
To improve PEC device efficiency, organic PEC and hybrid organic/inorganic PEC systems based on organic semiconducting polymers as absorbers for H2 production have emerged.10,280–282 Fonzo et al. demonstrated a hybrid organic/inorganic photocathode (Fig. 21a and b) in which a P3HT:PCBM blend photoactive material was sandwiched between an amorphous TiO2 electron selective layer (ESL) and a compact amorphous WO3 hole selective layer (HSL).10 One of the drawbacks of WO3 as a HSL is its wide band-gap, which induces a low charge carrier concentration and inefficient electron injection. Using an electrochemical intercalation process can improve charge carrier concentration by several orders of magnitude by inducing protonated and partially reduced states in WO3.283 Amorphous WO3 was protonated by the intercalation of H+ cations into the oxide lattice to form metal-like hydride phases (HyWOx) during forward scans (toward the cathodic potential). The intercalation of protons increased the majority carrier concentration and improved electron charge transport, leading to higher conductivity.284 As shown in Fig. 21c, the work function was reduced because the intercalation of protons strengthened the n-type nature of amorphous WO3 and created sub-bandgap defect states. The intercalated HyWOx phases, where hydrogen atoms form interstitial or bound states, can form gap states via oxygen vacancies285,286 or polarons (Fig. 21e).287 The amorphous structure of WO3 allows the intercalated protons to be completely extracted from the lattice without damaging the film.288 The increased electron injection barrier induced by the deep intercalation and reduction in the organic/inorganic PEC of P3HT:PCBM caused a slow-paced degradation of the photocurrent in aqueous acidic electrolyte.10 Moreover, the thickness of the amorphous WO3 had great impact on the performance of HER and determined the transparency of films, as is shown in Fig. 21f. The device with 100 nm of amorphous WO3 was determined to possess the optimal thickness.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the energetic structure of the hybrid photocathode. (b) Scanning electron micrograph cross-sectional image of the photocathode composed of ITO, WO3, P3HT:PCBM, TiO2, Pt layer from bottom to top. (c) Work function of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films before and after electrochemical intercalation. (d) Photocurrent density during potentiostatic operation for the full hybrid photoelectrode architecture ITO/WO3/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Pt. (e) Energy level alignment of the WO3/P3HT interfaces before and after the electrochemical intercalation process. (f) Photoelectrocatalytic device characterization versus the thickness of the amorphous WO3 hole selective layer. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
ZrO2 has also been used as a photocathode in water splitting applications due to its good photo-reduction ability, compatible band-edge positions, low cost, and satisfactory stability in both acidic and alkaline media.289,290 However, its large bandgap limits photoconversion efficiency in the visible region of the solar spectrum. Using ZrO2 with a crystalline-core/amorphous-shell structure was found to boost efficiency because the abundant surface defects and lattice dislocations of amorphous shell were observed to create new states in the bandgap291 and form a large number of reaction sites.5 An amorphous shell can absorb light in the visible range more strongly than a crystalline counterpart, resulting in the generation of a large number of charge carriers inside the shell.292 Then the carriers transport into the crystalline core for improved electrical conductivity. Leung et al. developed a HF post-treatment to synthesize a thin amorphous ZrO2 shell with a high amount of oxygen deficiencies on the surface of crystalline ZrO2 nanowires.290 The amorphous ZrO2 significantly improved carrier transport and provided an abundance of active sites. The as-grown amorphous-crystalline ZrO2 hierarchical nanowire photocathode showed a photocurrent density of −12.9 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. Intriguingly, channel cracks and buckling occurred in the films as shown in Fig. 22, where the underside surface was also coated with an amorphous layer.290 Such a layer allowed direct contact between the film and the Si substrate, which in turn reduced the diffusion length of photogenerated carriers and improved the charge carrier collection. On the other hand, an increase in contact with the electrolytes can increase the back electron transfer from solution to collector.293
 Fig. 22  Schematic and SEM of hierarchical nanowire film (a and c) before and (b and d) after the HF treatment. (e) IPCE profiles of HF-treated ZrO2 hierarchical nanowire (HNW), regular nanowire (RNW), and nanobrick (NB) films as functions of wavelength. (f) Schematic for the charge separation and transfer process in the nanoplates of the HF-treated ZrO2 hierarchical nanowires in a photoelectrocatalytic water splitting reaction driven by visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 

5. Photocatalytic decomposition of organic contaminants
5.1 Amorphous-crystalline TiO2 as photocatalyst for organic contaminant degradation
Amorphous TiO2 has been reported to be an inefficient photocatalyst for degradation of organic contaminants. Garshev et al. found that amorphous TiO2 readily adsorbed organic contaminant molecules but exhibited negligible photocatalytic activity.294 The partial removal of the amorphous phase led to a significant increase in activity.294 Tanaka et al. also observed negligible activity for organic compound degradation when using amorphous TiO2 in comparison with crystalline TiO2 samples.24 In photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants, the adsorption of molecules on a TiO2 surface is important.295–298 Despite inactive photocatalytic properties, amorphous TiO2 possesses better adsorption of organic molecules compared to their crystalline counterpart.299 A density functional tight-binding study of organic molecule attachment to TiO2via carboxylic groups (acetic acid) was reported for crystalline and amorphous surfaces of titania. Amorphous TiO2 achieved strong anchoring of organic molecules.299 In addition, when compared to crystalline TiO2, crystalline/amorphous TiO2 has a lower energy bandgap, which can generate active species (i.e., hydroxyl radicals, superoxide anions) during photocatalytic degradation of organic contaminants under visible and infrared illumination.300 Thus, the coexistence and arrangement of crystalline and amorphous phases may play an important role in the photocatalytic performance of TiO2.301
Acid treatment has been shown to create amorphous surfaces on crystalline TiO2 and further increase its adsorption and photocatalytic ability.302,303 Acid treatment of TiO2 nanoparticles has been found to increase the concentration of hydroxyl group on their surfaces.299 These hydroxyl groups serve as Brønsted acid sites (proton donor) whose dissociation can result in a drop in the pH level of solutions and thus protonate the target molecules. Apart from using acid treatment to fabricate amorphous-crystalline structures, Kim et al. synthesized a reduced TiO2 composed of amorphous, rutile, and anatase phases at room temperature using lithium (Li) and ethylenediamine (EDA) as etching agents to treat P25.300 The reduced TiO2 with amorphous structure was found to generate reactive oxygen radicals (such as hydroxyl radicals) in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants under solar irradiation. The oxygen defects on the amorphous surface of reduced TiO2 were observed to function as hole traps, which inhibited carrier recombination and reduced its bandgap.300
5.2 Amorphous TiO2-based composite photocatalysts for organic contaminant degradation
As noted above, the introduction of an amorphous phase can facilitate the partial oxidation reaction of organic molecules.22 Selective aerobic oxidation of benzylic alcohols with moderate to high yields (32–100%) was realized via incorporation of amorphous TiO2 within a mesoporous metal–organic framework (MOF).304 The mild reaction condition (under sunlight irradiation in an oxygen atmosphere) led to the reaction of other electron-rich and electron-poor benzylic alcohols. Similarly, when coating amorphous TiO2 into a mesoporous organosilicate framework (channel), the photocatalytic performance was improved during aerobic regeneration of carbonyl compounds from oximes under sunlight irradiation compared to the catalyst without amorphous TiO2.305
The photocatalytic activity of amorphous and crystalline TiO2 have been enhanced via noble metal deposition and by incorporation of a sensitizer. Homogeneous loading of noble metals (e.g. Ad, Pt, Au, Pd, etc.) onto TiO2 matrices can tune the photophysical properties of the final material.306–308 Compared to TiO2, the higher work functions of the noble metals induced Schottky barriers at the TiO2–metal interface.309 This barrier suppressed electron migration from TiO2 to the metal via a tunneling effect and prevented electron transfer from the Fermi level of metal to the conduction band of TiO2. As a result, the photocatalytic activity of the noble metal-loaded TiO2 can be optimized. Based on a colloidal synthesis route, an amorphous TiO2 matrix may be loaded with Pt nanoclusters307 or Ag nanoparticles.308 The photocatalytic activity of the Pt/Ag-amorphous TiO2 towards the degradation of organic dyes was improved compared to other reported Pt/Ag-crystalline TiO2. Amorphous TiO2 matrix leads to dispersed impregnation of Ag nanoparticles, and thus forms multiple metal–metal oxide interfaces, which results in the decreased recombination of the photo-generated electrons and holes at the interface. Anchoring sensitizers onto the semiconductor surface has also been proven to be an efficient approach to develop a cost-effective visible light active semiconductor photocatalysts. Electrons are first generated by light absorption in the photosensitizer and then injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor where they react with target molecules. A useful molecular sensitizer should anchor firmly on the semiconductor, be highly stable, efficiently absorb light in the visible region, and possess a sufficiently negative excited-state redox potential for electron injection into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Silver halides (AgX, X: Br, I) are well-known as visible-light photosensitive materials. Loading AgX onto the surface of TiO2 has been shown to inhibit the decomposition of the photosensitizer via electrons transformation to O2 instead of Ag+.310 Compared with anatase and P25, amorphous TiO2 was found to be optimal for preserving the stability and high activity of AgI under visible light irradiation for the photodecomposition of organic dyes and photoreduction of Cr(VI),311 which was attributed to the large surface area, negative shift of flat band potential, and lower charge transfer resistance of amorphous TiO2.311 Excellent photocatalytic activity for degradation of organic pollutants was also achieved by anchoring other sensitizers such as curcumin312 and CdS quantum dots313 onto amorphous TiO2.
6. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction based on amorphous phase photocatalysts
Semiconducting photocatalysis converting CO2 into high value-added carbon-based fuels, such as methane or methanol, is a potential method to harvest and utilize solar energy.314 The major challenge of CO2 photoreduction, however, is its low yield, poor selectivity, and difficultly of activating its highly-stable CO bonds.315,316 Theoretical and experimental results have suggested that oxygen vacancies (VO) in semiconductors are highly reactive and are capable of activating and even splitting CO2.26,317–321 Black hydrogenated TiO2:H is known to possess abundant surface defects (such as oxygen vacancies or disordered shells) which efficiently enhance its catalytic performance and result in the intermediate state (Ti–H).322,323In situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) showed that hydrogenated TiO2:H with an amorphous shell can efficiently accelerate the adsorption and chemical activation of CO2 molecules. This in turn facilitated electron injection from TiO2:H to the adsorbed CO2 molecule which formed excited CO2− (Fig. 23). Crystalline-core/amorphous-shell TiO2:H catalysts produced 9 times more CH4 than crystalline TiO2.26,320 Another Al-reduced black titania with crystalline-core/amorphous-shell structure (TiO2@TiO2−x) was found to be efficient in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4.320 The numerous surface VO in the unique TiO2 material facilitated the adsorption and chemical activation of CO2 molecules. Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 was also studied using black brookite nanosheets formed by introducing a large amount of Ti3+ defects in a brookite phase.324 The black brookite TiO2−x displayed drastically enhanced visible-light absorption and exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity toward CO2 reduction due to its enhanced light absorption, efficient charge separation, and well aligned band edges. Selectivity of CO2 reduction products can be improved by utilizing amorphous TiO2 phases as the photocatalysts.325,326 Black TiO2 exhibited a threefold increase in CH4 production rate over pure TiO2.327 Better selectivity has also been realized by fluorinating black TiO2−x.315 Fluorination enabled the replacement of oxygen vacancies with F atoms in the lattice interval of TiO2−x. The electronegativity of the doped fluorine atoms was observed to attract electrons from neighboring Ti3+, which generated a built-in electric field between substitutional F and Ti3+.315 Thus, the Ti3+ impurity level is upward in the electric field, leading to the enhanced reduction potential of photoexcited electrons. The fluorinated black TiO2−x increased CH4 production yield 13-fold, from 0.125 to 1.63 μmol g−1 h−1, under solar light illumination. Additionally, CH4 selectivity was increased 3-fold, from 25.7% to 85.8%.315
 Fig. 23  (a) Possible reaction pathways for the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O using TiO2:H. HRTEM images of (b) pristine TiO2 and (c) TiO2:H samples. The amorphous shells are marked with arrows. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Oxygen vacancies have been explored for their catalytic enhancement in other amorphous semiconductors. For example, VO were generated in an amorphous Zn–Ge–O semiconductor via a photocorrosion reaction to activate oxygen atoms in CO2 molecules.321 As shown in Fig. 24, charge carriers can be photogenerated in the amorphous α-Zn–Ge–O semiconductor photocatalyst. The photogenerated holes in the valence band can then oxidize the lattice oxygen in Zn–Ge–O catalysts. The newly formed Vo is then able to react with the O of CO2, filling the vacancy sites of α-Zn–Ge–O. The photogenerated electrons in the conduction band also reduce the C atoms of CO2 to solid C.321 The defect reaction is sustained by continuous photogenerated hole oxidation of surface oxygen atoms on amorphous Zn–Ge–O.321
 Fig. 24  (a) Energy levels for redox electron transfer reaction for CO2 splitting on α-Zn–Ge–O photocatalyst. (b) Proposed mechanism for CO2 splitting into solid carbon and O2 over α-Zn–Ge–O under irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
7. Conclusion and outlook
In this review, recent advances in amorphous inorganic semiconductor-based materials for applications in solar cells, photoelectrocatalysis and photocatalysis have been summarized. Amorphous phase materials have been found to improve efficiency and stability in three primary ways. First, a layer of amorphous phase provides sufficient surface coverage and simultaneously minimizes the resistance of charge transfer between the material and liquid solutions.52 Amorphous materials have a high specific surface area that physically bridges the gaps between the bulk heterojunctions to maintain electrical contact and lower interfacial resistance. The introduction of amorphous phases to photoconversion devices increases their efficiency by maximizing light collection and photoconversion by rapidly extracting photogenerated charges from photo-absorbing materials and by inhibiting change carrier recombination. Second, amorphous semiconductors are more conductive because electrons in the band tail states can easily be excited into a high-mobility state. While crystalline semiconductors must rely on band gap conductivity, amorphous phases can also use hopping conductivity. In hopping conductivity, electrons in localized states can transport through the band gap into delocalized states. Improved conductivity of amorphous semiconductors suppresses tunneling barriers, increases photocurrent, and decreases the required overpotential.19,20 The low tail and midgap states in amorphous phases can suppress charge recombination and yield electron-selective interfacial layers.153,154 Furthermore, hole diffusion can be triggered across amorphous semiconductor layers through O–O peroxy linkages.227 Lastly, an amorphous phase coating can protect devices from corrosive redox coupling. The ability to tune the energy levels and distribute defect states in coatings offers the opportunity to better stabilize photoconversion devices. Despite these advances, studies of amorphous inorganic semiconductor materials for photoconversion applications are still in their infancy, and many issues and challenges need to be overcome.
First, the structural framework of functional amorphous semiconductors, such as defect types, compositions, active sites should be scrutinized. The photo-absorption and conversion performances of solar cells, PECs, and photocatalysts rely heavily on the surface microstructure of materials. The same amorphous semiconductors with different microstructures (such as defect types) may result in vastly different performances in solar cells,149,150,171,174 photoelectrocatalysis239 and photocatalysis.24,294,300,301 More in-depth investigation into midgap states, which are created by defects in amorphous semiconductors, should be conducted. There are two kinds of midgap states in amorphous phase, shallow level states and deep level states, depending on their relative energetic positions from the band edge (Fig. 25). The ionization energy of shallow states is about kBT (kB is the Boltzmann's constant and T is the temperature), but it is several kBT for deep states. Shallow states generally act as dopants and are classified as donors or acceptors based on whether their energy level sits just below the conduction band or just above the valence band, respectively. Donors can donate electrons to the conduction band, whereas acceptors accept an electron from the valence band, achieving the separation of electrons and holes. In contrast, deep states generally serve as recombination centers because their ability to capture electrons and holes is equal. Therefore, to optimize the performance of prepare amorphous semiconductors, it is critical to maximize shallow states and minimize deep ones. Another aspect of the framework of amorphous semiconductors that needs further investigation is compositional tuning.8 From a technological viewpoint, it should be easier to tune the optical band gaps, trap states and work functions for amorphous semiconductors with multiple cation compositions (such as ternary and quaternary components). Thus, the structural framework of amorphous semiconductors can be rationally designed by tuning their compositions to create more active sites and optimize the physical properties for a variety of applications.
 Fig. 25  Schematic spatial and energy diagram of an amorphous inorganic semiconductor with localized trap states in the bandgap. 
Second, more attention and exploration of the electronic and optical properties of amorphous semiconductors are needed to fully understand their role in photoabsorption and photoconversion. Such study will further reveal new potential applications for amorphous materials. Detailed experimental techniques and theoretical studies will be beneficial for investigating how the electronic interactions between amorphous materials or amorphous/crystalline interfaces affect charge extraction and transport. Several experimental techniques have already been developed to scrutinize the electronic and optical properties of amorphous semiconductors, including space-charge limited current measurements, impedance spectroscopy, photoemission spectroscopy, deep level transient spectroscopy, photothermal deflection spectroscopy, electric force microscopy and Kelvin probe force microscopy. These techniques have enabled the extraction of trap parameters like trap states and their energetic/spatial distribution. In depth understanding of all trap parameters is critical because traps significantly contribute to carrier pathways in amorphous semiconductors. A challenge for this study, however, is that the lack of periodicity and complex atomic structure of amorphous semiconductors are difficult to model and explore through DFT. However, electronic states in amorphous semiconductors can be treated by tight-binding approximations and Hartree–Fock calculations.328,329 These approaches have given insights into how spatial fluctuations of structural parameters (such as bond length, bond angle, and dihedral angle) result in band tails by broadening the bottom of the conduction band and the top of valence band. While some progress has been made towards exploration of the electronic and optical properties of amorphous semiconductors, new techniques and models are needed to fully characterize and understand local spatial distribution and atomic structure.
Third, unlike crystalline materials, amorphous inorganic semiconductors lack standardization during preparations, resulting in different results batch-to-batch. The type and density of defects are difficult to control precisely because they are determined by many factors such as chemicals, instruments, reaction temperature, humidity, etc. Small fluctuations in these reaction conditions could lead to significant microstructure change in inorganic semiconductors, which further affect their performance. Compared with other techniques for the preparation of amorphous semiconductors (see Section 2 of the manuscript), ALD is the best choice for precise control of the microstructures of amorphous inorganic semiconductors.
Fourth, the boundary between crystalline and amorphous phases is ambiguous. While it is well known that the major difference between amorphous and crystalline materials is long-ranged structural order, the phase-transition region between amorphous and crystalline phases is wide, which obscures clear delineation. Crystallinity can range from 0% (ideal amorphous phase) to 100% (ideal crystalline phase), but most materials fall somewhere between these extremes with both crystalline and amorphous structures (see Fig. 26). Currently, no valid technique can quantify the extent of structural similarity/difference between amorphous and crystalline phases. This is partly due to the limited experimental characterization of amorphous structures and the inability of structural models to simulate the correct amount of randomness in amorphous systems. Elliott et al. developed a smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) method to quantify the structural similarity between amorphous and crystalline TiO2,330 which may provide a method for quantifying and defining the boundary between amorphous and crystalline phases in the future.
 Fig. 26  A view of the structure of solids along an undefined variable. The solid blue and brown circles indicate the positions of the ideal amorphous and crystalline phases, respectively; the lines indicate the coexist of both amorphous and crystalline structures in real solids. Reproduced from ref. 331 with permission from Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, copyright 2011. 
Though rapid progress has been made towards the implementation of crystalline semiconductor-based materials for photoconversion applications, much less effort has been focused on amorphous semiconductors. Research and development of amorphous semiconductor-based materials is expected to evolve rapidly and these materials are expected to be beneficial and highly competitive for use in solar cells, photoelectrocatalysis, and photocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the AFOSR (FA9550-19-1-0317), the NSF (DMR 1903990, CMMI 1914713, CBET 1803495, and ECCS 1914562) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province in China (BK20201202).
References
J. Barbe, M. L. Tietze, M. Neophytou, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, A. El Labban, M. Abulikemu, W. Yue, O. F. Mohammed, I. McCulloch, A. Amassian and S. Del Gobbo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11828–11836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Vargas and J. E. Rodriguez-Paez, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2017, 459, 192–205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Gratzel and X. L. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prevot, R. D. Fagan, Z. P. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Cui, Z. W. Wang, M. Rager, Y. K. Yang, Z. G. Zou, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Guo, S. Han, B. Chi, J. Pu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4743–4751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaur and C. V. Singh, Energy Procedia, 2012, 29, 291–299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ponce-Mosso, M. Perez-Gonzalez, P. E. Garcia-Tinoco, H. Crotte-Ledesma, M. Morales-Luna and S. A. Tomas, Catal. Today, 2020, 349, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mezzetti, F. Fumagalli, A. Alfano, D. Iadicicco, M. R. Antognazza and F. di Fonzo, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 433–448 RSC .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. X. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 456–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Duan, Z. Y. Yu, S. J. Hu, X. S. Zheng, C. T. Zhang, H. H. Ding, B. C. Hu, Q. Q. Fu, Z. L. Yu, X. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15772–15777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11686–11707 RSC .

          S. Wang, Corrosion Resistance and Electrocatalytic Properties of Metallic Glasses, IntechOpen,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. F. Wager, AIP Adv., 2017, 7, 125321 CrossRef .
D. Adler, J. Chem. Educ., 1980, 57, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, M. H. Richter, M. F. Lichterman, J. Beardslee, T. Mayer, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3117–3129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duhnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20543–20552 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Ren, J. Wang, Z. X. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. X. Zhao, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and X. H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8398–8405 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Torralvo, J. Sanz, I. Sobrados, J. Soria, C. Garlisi, G. Palmisano, S. Cetinkaya, S. Yurdakal and V. Augugliaro, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 140–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, S. Hu, K. Sun and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 203–207 RSC .
K. Tanaka, M. F. V. Capule and T. Hisanaga, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 187, 73–76 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Y. Yang, T. Q. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Y. Wan, F. F. Xu, F. Q. Huang, J. H. Lin, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3007–3014 RSC .
G. H. Yin, X. Y. Huang, T. Y. Chen, W. Zhao, Q. Y. Bi, J. Xu, Y. F. Han and F. Q. Huang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1009–1017 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sallis, K. T. Butler, N. F. Quackenbush, D. S. Williams, M. Junda, D. A. Fischer, J. C. Woicik, N. J. Podraza, B. E. White, A. Walsh and L. F. J. Piper, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 232108 CrossRef .
R. Atta-Fynn, P. Biswas and D. A. Drabold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 245204 CrossRef .
K. Prasai, P. Biswas and D. A. Drabold, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 073002 CrossRef .
J. Li and D. A. Drabold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 033103 CrossRef .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, C. Guerra-Nunez, I. Utke, J. Michler, P. Agrawal, M. D. Rossell and R. Erni, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2232–2238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. X. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, M. T. McDowell, S. Hu, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3334–3337 RSC .
I. S. Kim, R. T. Haasch, D. H. Cao, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24310–24314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Lau, J. Zhang, X. Wan, J. K. Luo, Y. Xu and H. Wong, AIP Adv., 2014, 4, 027120 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Al-Ahmadi, Heliyon, 2020, 6, e04852 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. C. Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. S. Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 RSC .
D. M. Hausmann and R. G. Gordon, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 249, 251–261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Frankenstein, C. Z. Leng, M. D. Losego and G. L. Frey, Org. Electron., 2019, 64, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
T. Moehl, J. Suh, L. Severy, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43614–43622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Oviroh, R. Akbarzadeh, D. Q. Pan, R. A. M. Coetzee and T. C. Jen, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 465–496 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Munoz-Rojas and J. MacManus-Driscoll, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 314–320 RSC .
J. H. Liang, N. Wang, Q. X. Zhang, B. F. Liu, X. B. Kong, C. C. Wei, D. K. Zhang, B. J. Yan, Y. Zhao and X. D. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Qin, G. J. Fang, N. H. Sun, X. Fan, Q. Zheng, F. Chen, J. W. Wan and X. Z. Zhao, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 4334–4341 CrossRef CAS .
T. Harata, M. Aono, N. Kitazawa and Y. Watanabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 051905 CrossRef .
T. Harata, M. Aono, H. Kishimura, N. Kitazawa and Y. Watanabe, e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 13, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
C. Iwasaki, M. Aono, N. Tamura, N. Kitazawa and Y. Watanabe, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 10NE26 CrossRef .
C. Hom-On, M. Horprathum, P. Eiamchai, S. Limwichean, V. Patthanasettakul, N. Nuntawong, C. Chananonnawathorn, T. Lertvanithphol, N. Triroj and P. Jaroenapibal, Mater. Today: Proc., 2018, 5, 15228–15232 CAS .
K. Zakrzewska, K. Kollbek, M. Sikora, C. Kapusta, J. Szlachetko, M. Sitarz, M. Ziabka and M. Radecka, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 815–824 CrossRef CAS .
D. Eisenberg, H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14011–14014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, B. K. Kim, S. K. Cho and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8173–8176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawai, R. Yamazaki, S. Sobue, E. Okuno and M. Ichimura, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 032110 CrossRef .
J. R. de Andrade, I. Cesarino, R. Zhang, J. Kanicki and A. Pawlicka, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2014, 604, 71–83 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. S. Monk, Crit. Rev. Solid State, 1999, 24, 193–226 CrossRef CAS .

          D. DeMeo, S. MacNaughton, S. Sonkusale and T. E. Vandervelde, Nanowires-Implementations and Applications,  2011, pp. 141–156 DOI:10.5772/1025 .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Shin, S. T. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. J. Kang, B. T. Ahn and H. Kwon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12921–12927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. N. Mu and S. Z. Shi, Polym. Polym. Compos., 2014, 22, 699–704 CAS .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Jaber, S. N. Alamri and M. S. Aida, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3485–3489 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ouafi, B. Jaber, L. Atourki, N. Zayyoun, A. Ihlal, A. Mzerd and L. Laanab, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2018, 4549154 Search PubMed .
K. L. Choy, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2003, 48, 57–170 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Li, L. Hu, Y. Xie, G. D. Niu, T. F. Liu, Y. H. Zhou, L. Gao, B. Yang and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2122–2128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, W. S. Shin, M. Seo, D. Gupta, S. J. Moon and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 791–797 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Jung, B. H. Kim, S. J. Kim, N. Imaishi and Y. I. Cho, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2005, 11, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Ou, D. Tadytin, K. X. Steirer, D. Placencia, M. Nguyen, P. Lee and N. R. Armstrong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6794–6803 RSC .
H. K. Ha, M. Yoshimoto, H. Koinuma, B. K. Moon and H. Ishiwara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2965–2967 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Pan, X. L. Liu, M. Guo, S. F. Yu, H. T. Huang, H. T. Fan and G. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11437–11443 RSC .
W. Zhou, W. Li, J. Q. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, K. F. Zhang, L. Wang, H. G. Fu and D. Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9280–9283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, F. Liu, M. Lv, S. H. Chen, L. H. Hu, J. W. Tang, J. X. Yao and S. Y. Dai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 28424–28429 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Y. Yang, T. Q. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Y. Wan, F. F. Xu, F. Q. Huang, J. H. Lin, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5444–5450 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Hao, D. Wang, G. Chen, E. Markweg, A. Albrecht and P. Schaaf, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14507–14513 RSC .
Q. Kang, J. Y. Cao, Y. J. Zhang, L. Q. Liu, H. Xu and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5766–5774 RSC .
S. Tominaka, Y. Tsujimoto, Y. Matsushita and K. Yamaura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7418–7421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, H. Q. Tan, H. F. Zhao, Y. Lv, L. J. Zhou, Y. J. Song and Z. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2755–2757 RSC .
L. X. Zheng, H. Cheng, F. X. Liang, S. W. Shu, C. K. Tsang, H. Li, S. T. Lee and Y. Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5509–5515 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Grabstanowicz, S. M. Gao, T. Li, R. M. Rickard, T. Rajh, D. J. Liu and T. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bharti, S. Kumar, H. N. Lee and R. Kumar, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e79 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, D. H. Chen, F. Z. Huang, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. T. Shi, Q. S. Dong, Y. Li, S. F. Wang, X. F. Yu, M. Y. Wu and T. L. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kogo, Y. Sanehira, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2224–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Numata, R. Ishikawa, Y. Sanehira, A. Kogo, H. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9583–9591 RSC .
N. Vaenas, D. Konios, T. Stergiopoulos and E. Kymakis, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107771 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Jiang, Y. H. Wu, J. L. Guo, X. Y. Kong, X. Y. Wu, Y. Z. Li, D. F. Zheng, S. J. Wu, X. S. Gao, Z. P. Hou, G. F. Zhou, Y. W. Chen, J. M. Liu, K. Kempa and J. W. Gao, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900499 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. T. Shi, B. Li, L. Zhao, W. Wang, X. Y. Wang, X. G. Bai, S. F. Wang, C. Hao and T. L. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1891–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. O. Eze, Y. Seike and T. Mori, Org. Electron., 2017, 46, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800794 CrossRef .
P. Pinpithak, H. W. Chen, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 382–384 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Ling, J. Y. Yuan, D. A. Liu, Y. J. Wang, Y. N. Zhang, S. Chen, H. H. Wu, F. Jin, F. P. Wu, G. Z. Shi, X. Tang, J. W. Zheng, S. Z. Liu, Z. K. Liu and W. L. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23181–23188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Zhang, Y. T. Shi, S. Wang, Q. S. Dong, Y. L. Feng, L. D. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Y. Shao, Y. Liu and S. F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17882–17888 RSC .
Z. G. Rao, B. K. Du, C. Huang, L. L. Shu, P. Lin, N. Q. Fu and S. M. Ke, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 789, 276–281 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jung, J. Lee, C. Im, J. Do, J. Kim, W. S. Chae and M. J. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2410–2417 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, J. F. Liao, J. X. Zhong, Y. F. Xu, L. Z. Wang and J. S. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20980–20987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Jiang, X. Sheng, Y. X. Li, X. J. Feng and T. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14720–14723 RSC .
M. Gillet, K. Aguir, C. Lemire, E. Gillet and K. Schierbaum, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 467, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain, A. R. Kirmani and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9051–9057 RSC .
C. M. Chen, Z. K. Lin, W. J. Huang and S. H. Yang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 464–475 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Ke, D. W. Zhao, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Ge, H. Tao, H. W. Lei, G. J. Fang and Y. F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17971–17976 RSC .
Y. H. Shao, Z. G. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. J. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. J. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J. P. Sun, X. Z. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C. Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Zhou, J. M. Zhen, Q. Liu, Z. M. Fang, D. Li, P. C. Zhou, T. Chen and S. F. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1724–1733 RSC .
W. J. Ke, G. J. Fang, Q. Liu, L. B. Xiong, P. L. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. W. Lei, B. R. Li, J. W. Wan, G. Yang and Y. F. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Song, E. Q. Zheng, J. Bian, X. F. Wang, W. J. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837–10844 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Q. Zhang, H. L. Wang, X. L. Yang, J. H. Meng, H. Liu, Z. G. Yin, J. L. Wu, X. W. Zhang and J. B. You, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Hui, Y. G. Yang, Q. Xu, H. Gu, S. L. Feng, Z. H. Su, M. R. Zhang, J. O. Wang, X. D. Li, J. F. Fang, F. Xia, Y. D. Xia, Y. H. Chen, X. Y. Gao and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906374 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Xiong, Y. X. Guo, J. Wen, H. R. Liu, G. Yang, P. L. Qin and G. J. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802757 CrossRef .
Q. S. Dong, Y. T. Shi, K. Wang, Y. Li, S. F. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. J. Xing, Y. Du, X. G. Bai and T. L. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10212–10217 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ke, D. W. Zhao, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, P. L. Qin, Q. Liu, L. B. Xiong, Y. F. Yan and G. J. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24163–24168 RSC .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, P. V. V. Jayaweera, S. Kaneko, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1750–1752 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, J. Y. Kim, H. J. Son, C. H. Lee, S. S. Jang and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Bastiani, G. Dell'Erba, M. Gandini, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Neutzner, A. R. S. Kandada, G. Grancini, M. Binda, M. Prato, J. M. Ball, M. Caironi and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501453 CrossRef .
D. Yang, R. X. Yang, K. Wang, C. C. Wu, X. J. Zhu, J. S. Feng, X. D. Ren, G. J. Fang, S. Priya and S. Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef .
H. B. Song, X. J. Zhan, D. B. Li, Y. Zhou, B. Yang, K. Zeng, J. Zhong, X. S. Miao and J. Tang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Chen, C. Uher, L. Iordanidis and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1655–1658 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Roest, J. J. Kelly, D. Vanmaekelbergh and E. A. Meulenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 036801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Y. Chen, S. K. Qin, X. S. Liu, J. Chen, D. J. Xue, M. Luo, Y. Z. Cao, Y. B. Cheng, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 409–415 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minemoto, T. Matsui, H. Takakura, Y. Hamakawa, T. Negami, Y. Hashimoto, T. Uenoyama and M. Kitagawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lattante, Electronics, 2014, 3, 132–164 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl, M. Y. Wu, F. C. Prehn and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 455–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Notarianni, K. Vernon, A. Chou, M. Aljada, J. Z. Liu and N. Motta, Sol. Energy, 2014, 106, 23–37 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, S. Yodyingyong, J. T. Xi, D. Myers and G. Z. Cao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1436–1445 RSC .
S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 474–510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Abdulrazzaq, V. Saini, S. Bourdo, E. Dervishi and A. S. Biris, Part. Sci. Technol., 2013, 31, 427–442 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Morse, A. Tournebize, A. Rivaton, T. Chasse, C. Taviot-Gueho, N. Blouin, O. R. Lozman and S. Tierney, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11884–11897 RSC .
J. Kesters, P. Verstappen, J. Raymakers, W. Vanormelingen, J. Drijkoningen, J. D'Haen, J. Manca, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and W. Maes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1332–1341 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J. A. de Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255–2257 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Kim, K. S. Lee and J. H. Kwon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 012103 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Choi, K. H. Choi, H. Lee, H. Lee, J. W. Kang and H. K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1615 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Choi, J. A. Jeong and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1822–1830 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Lee, S. B. Kang, K. B. Chung and H. K. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 021914 CrossRef .
N. J. Zhou, D. B. Buchholz, G. Zhu, X. G. Yu, H. Lin, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and R. P. H. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, D. B. Buchholz, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2333–2337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Cho, K. H. Kim, T. W. Kim, Y. J. Noh, S. I. Na, K. B. Chung and H. K. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 24, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Choi, K. H. Choi, H. Lee, H. Lee, J. W. Kang and H. K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1615–1623 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Lee, J. S. Goo, Y. W. Kim, Y. J. You, H. Kim, S. K. Lee, J. W. Shim and T. G. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 417, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Zhou, M. G. Kim, S. Loser, J. Smith, H. Yoshida, X. G. Guo, C. Song, H. Jin, Z. H. Chen, S. M. Yoon, A. J. Freeman, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7897–7902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Ratcliff, B. Zacher and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1337–1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2512 RSC .
T. Kuwabara, T. Nakayama, K. Uozumi, T. Yamaguchi and K. Takahashi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1476–1482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, K. Tsukigi, T. Uchino and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 388, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pomoni, A. Vomvas and C. Trapalis, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 479, 160–165 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Lin, C. Y. Jiang, C. X. Zhu and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 713–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Yeo, S. Nakao, Y. Hirose, T. Hasegawa and Y. Matsuo, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1715–1719 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Yang, J. Kim, K. Yamamoto, X. Xing and H. Hosono, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 995–1000 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hosono, J. Kim, Y. Toda, T. Kamiya and S. Watanabe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 233–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 15–22 CrossRef .
J. D. Perkins, T. Gennett, J. E. Leisch, R. Sundaramoorthy, I. L. Repins, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 2010, 989–991 Search PubMed .
A. Walsh, J. L. F. Da Silva, Y. F. Yan, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 073105 CrossRef .
M. Y. Chan, C. S. Lee, S. L. Lai, M. K. Fung, F. L. Wong, H. Y. Sun, K. M. Lau and S. T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094506 CrossRef .
A. G. F. Janssen, T. Riedl, S. Hamwi, H. H. Johannes and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 073519 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. P. Ruan, G. H. Xie, X. Z. Kong, L. Shen, F. X. Meng, C. X. Liu, X. D. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043311 CrossRef .
P. Hones, C. Zakri, P. E. Schmid, F. Levy and O. R. Shojaei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3194–3196 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Qin, G. J. Fang, Q. He, N. H. Sun, X. Fan, Q. Zheng, F. Chen, J. W. Wan and X. Z. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1005–1010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, C. H. Tang, J. M. Xu, X. S. Yin, S. Nie, H. Q. Wang, K. Sun, S. J. Cho and H. Gong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 10194–10199 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khongchareon, S. Choopun, N. Hongsith, A. Gardchareon, S. Phadungdhitidhada and D. Wongratanaphisan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 106, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Meen, J. K. Tsai, Y. S. Tu, T. C. Wu, W. D. Hsu and S. J. Chang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 523 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Ye, X. R. Wen, M. Y. Wang, J. Iocozzia, N. Zhang, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, K. Zhu, A. J. Frank, C. A. Grimes and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2727–2730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and Z. Q. Lin, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 2754–2762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colodrero, A. Forneli, C. Lopez-Lopez, L. Pelleja, H. Miguez and E. Palomares, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1303–1310 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Eithiraj and K. R. Geethalakshmi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 585, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Walker, H. Snaith, F. De Angelis and C. E. Da Como, Unconventional Thin Film Photovoltaics: RSC Energy and Environment Series, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2016 Search PubMed .
V. Johansson, L. Ellis-Gibbings, T. Clarke, M. Gorlov, G. G. Andersson and L. Kloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 711–718 RSC .
K. Al-Attafi, A. Nattestad, Q. J. Wu, Y. Ide, Y. Yamauchi, S. X. Dou and J. H. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 381–384 RSC .
N. Kakuta, T. Oku, A. Suzuki, K. Kikuchi and S. Kikuchi, J. Ceram. Process. Res., 2012, 13, 30 Search PubMed .
D. S. Zhang, H. Y. Hu, L. F. Li and D. L. Shi, J. Nanomater., 2008, 271631 Search PubMed .
S. Kurian, P. Sudhagar, J. Lee, D. Song, W. Cho, S. Lee, Y. S. Kang and H. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4370–4375 RSC .
N. A. Ovramenko, L. I. Shvets, F. D. Ovcharenko and B. Y. Kornilovich, Inorg. Mater., 1979, 15, 1560–1562 Search PubMed .
P. Pinceloup, C. Courtois, J. Vicens, A. Leriche and B. Thierry, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 19, 973–977 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, K. Sarukawa, K. Tokieda and M. Matsumura, J. Catal., 2001, 203, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yacoubi, L. Samet, J. Bennaceur, A. Lamouchi and R. Chtourou, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 30, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Wang and D. S. Bai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H265–H268 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oku, N. Kakuta, K. Kobayashi, A. Suzuki and K. Kikuchi, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2011, 21, 122–126 CrossRef .
C. H. Han, H. S. Lee, K. W. Lee, S. D. Han and I. Singh, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alpuche-Aviles and Y. Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3216–3224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, D. Hwang, D. Y. Kim, Y. Kervella, P. Maldivi, S. Y. Jang, R. Demadrille and I. D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3146–3155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hisatome and M. Takemoto, Electrochemistry, 2016, 84, 130–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Yun, P. D. Lund and A. Hinsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3495–3514 RSC .
F. De Rossi, L. Di Gaspare, A. Reale, A. Di Carlo and T. M. Brown, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12941–12947 RSC .
M. K. Wang, A. M. Anghel, B. Marsan, N. L. C. Ha, N. Pootrakulchote, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15976–15977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hasin, Sol. Energy, 2016, 135, 398–407 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bae, J. M. Moon, J. W. Kang, H. D. Park, J. J. Kim, W. J. Cho and H. K. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, J81–J85 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim, K. W. Park, J. H. Yum and Y. E. Sung, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. J. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sogabe, Q. Shen and K. Yamaguchi, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 6, 040910 Search PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778–17787 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Pan, I. Mora-Sero, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. H. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mora-Sero, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, R. Gomez, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef .
M. Shalom, S. Dor, S. Ruhle, L. Grinis and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3895–3898 CrossRef CAS .
E. Barea, X. Q. Xu, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. Ripolles-Sanchis, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3414–3419 RSC .
O. Niitsoo, S. K. Sarkar, C. Pejoux, S. Ruhle, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Lee, B. M. Huang and H. T. Chien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6903–6905 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shalom, J. Albero, Z. Tachan, E. Martinez-Ferrero, A. Zaban and E. Palomares, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1134–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Ren, J. Wang, Z. X. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. X. Zhao, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and X. H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8398–8405 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, C. X. Guo, G. H. Guai, Q. L. Song, S. P. Jiang and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1940–1945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Sun and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14239–14246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Patel, F. X. Wu, J. Z. Zhang, C. L. Torres-Martinez, R. K. Mehra, Y. Yang and S. H. Risbud, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11598–11605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, D. K. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. J. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Roghabadi, V. Ahmadi, B. A. Nejand and K. O. Aghmiuni, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2352–2359 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 RSC .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 RSC .
Y. B. Wu, M. K. Y. Chan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 235301 CrossRef .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vonkujaw, Z. Phys. Chem., 1967, 235, 140 Search PubMed .
Y. Nakato, T. Ohnishi and H. Tsubomura, Chem. Lett., 1975, 883–886 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. O. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, R. Liu, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15189–15199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Pham and L. W. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 541–550 RSC .
G. J. Liu, S. Ye, P. L. Yan, F. Q. Xiong, P. Fu, Z. L. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Y. Shi and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1327–1334 RSC .
Z. L. Ma, T. Thersleff, A. L. Gorne, N. Cordes, Y. B. Liu, S. Jakobi, A. Rokicinska, Z. G. Schichtl, R. H. Coridan, P. Kustrowski, W. Schnick, R. Dronskowski and A. Slabon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19077–19086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. D. Prange, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2487–2496 RSC .
S. Duenas, H. Castan, H. Garcia, E. San Andres, M. Toledano-Luque, I. Martil, G. Gonzalez-Diaz, K. Kukli, T. Uustare and J. Aarik, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. L. Hou, L. Wang, R. Xu, Y. Lei, S. H. Shen, D. J. Yang and W. Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15650–15657 RSC .
Y. H. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. L. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Q. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. D. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Hu, I. D. Sharp, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19618–19624 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Guo, F. Ambrosio and A. Pasquarello, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11804–11810 RSC .
S. S. Kalanur, I. H. Yoo, J. Park and H. Seo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1455–1461 RSC .
H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13753–13757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Guo, S. Han, H. F. Mao, S. M. Dong, C. C. Wu, L. C. Jia, B. Chi, J. Pu and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 979–985 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhang, J. M. Yan, S. Han, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2778–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Shah, Y. Q. Zhu, X. Y. Fan, J. Zhao, Y. X. Li, S. Asim and C. Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15804 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Wang, C. Y. Chou, S. R. Yi and H. D. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28685–28697 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, L. H. Zu, Y. Zhang, C. L. Mao, X. X. Xu, J. H. Yang and S. H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7882–7891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. C. Tang, X. Y. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12410–12412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Kim, C. D. Kim and Q. W. Choi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1984, 30, 3625–3628 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naldoni, M. Allieta, S. Santangelo, M. Marelli, F. Fabbri, S. Cappelli, C. L. Bianchi, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7600–7603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hannula, H. Ali-Loytty, K. Lahtonen, E. Sarlin, J. Saari and M. Valden, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1199–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. G. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
L. X. Meng, S. Y. Wang, F. R. Cao, W. Tian, R. Long and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6761–6765 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhang, L. Ma, J. T. Ming, B. Q. Liu, Y. B. Zhao, Y. D. Hou, Z. X. Ding, C. Xu, Z. Z. Zhang and J. L. Long, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 481–489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Landsmann, Y. Surace, M. Trottmann, S. Dilger, A. Weidenkaff and S. Pokrant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12149–12157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Mao, Y. G. Cheng, J. Q. Wang, H. Yang, M. Y. Li, J. Chen, M. J. Chao, Y. X. Tong and E. J. Liang, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 107–112 RSC .
B. N. Kim, G. K. Seo, S. W. Hwang, H. Yu, B. Ahn, H. Seo and I. S. Cho, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 1843–1849 CrossRef CAS .
F. Malara, A. Minguzzi, M. Marelli, S. Morandi, R. Psaro, V. Dal Santo and A. Naldoni, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5292–5300 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, F. R. Cao, F. L. Wu, H. Lu and L. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600256 CrossRef .
X. L. Guo, L. L. Wang and Y. W. Tan, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lin, G. P. Dong, D. Z. Tan, X. F. Liu, Q. A. Zhang, D. P. Chen, J. R. Qiu, Q. Z. Zhao and Z. Z. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 504, 177–180 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Haynes, C. M. Perry, M. Rivas, T. D. Golden, A. Bazan, M. Quintana, V. N. Nesterov, S. A. Berhe, J. Rodriguez, W. Estrada and W. J. Youngblood, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 830–837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Das, B. Ananthoju, A. K. Dhara, M. Aslam, S. K. Sarkar and K. R. Balasubramaniam, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700271 CrossRef .
A. Niilisk, M. Moppel, M. Pars, I. Sildos, T. Jantson, T. Avarmaa, R. Jaaniso and J. Aarik, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., 2006, 4, 105–116 CAS .
Y. H. Lai, D. W. Palm and E. Reisner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501668 CrossRef .
S. Y. Lien, D. S. Wuu, W. C. Yeh and J. C. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2710–2719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Science, 1984, 223, 1141–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, J. A. Aguiar, S. Ferrere, K. X. Steirer, Y. Yan, C. X. Xiao, J. L. Young, M. Al-Jassim, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16192 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Burke and M. B. C. Roche, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 164, 315–334 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Shen, X. X. Zhou, W. Dong, X. D. Su, L. Fang, X. Wu and M. R. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 123901 CrossRef .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, C. X. Jiang, W. Dong, F. G. Zheng, L. Fang, X. D. Su and M. R. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 102902 CrossRef .
D. Prasai, J. C. Tuberquia, R. R. Harl, G. K. Jennings and K. I. Bolotin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1102–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Nine, M. A. Cole, D. N. H. Tran and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12580–12602 RSC .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. H. Lyu, R. L. Wang, C. Xie, H. J. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3572 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Y. Yang, T. Q. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Y. Wan, F. F. Xu, F. Q. Huang, J. H. Lin, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5444–5450 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. L. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
H. Vrubel and X. L. Hu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2002–2011 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yu, P. A. Xiao, P. Wang and J. G. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 217–225 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vrubel, D. Merki and X. L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6136–6144 RSC .
Y. F. Huang, R. J. Nielsen, W. A. Goddard and M. P. Soriaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6692–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran, T. V. Tran, M. Orio, S. Torelli, Q. D. Truong, K. Nayuki, Y. Sasaki, S. Y. Chiam, R. Yi, I. Honma, J. Barber and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Lin, C. J. Liu and J. Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134, 75–82 CrossRef .
Q. Ding, B. Song, P. Xu and S. Jin, Chem, 2016, 1, 699–726 CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tan, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10898–10908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fumagalli, S. Bellani, M. Schreier, S. Leonardi, H. C. Rojas, A. Ghadirzadeh, G. Tullii, A. Savoini, G. Marra, L. Meda, M. Gratzel, G. Lanzani, M. T. Mayer, M. R. Antognazza and F. Di Fonzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2178–2187 RSC .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, C. Laberty-Robert, S. Campidelli, R. de Bettignies, V. Artero, S. Palacin and B. Jousselme, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2706–2713 RSC .
M. T. Greiner, M. G. Helander, W. M. Tang, Z. B. Wang, J. Qiu and Z. H. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 76–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vasilopoulou, L. C. Palilis, D. G. Georgiadou, A. M. Douvas, P. Argitis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, G. Papadimitropoulos, I. Kostis, N. A. Stathopoulos and D. Davazoglou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1489–1497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, E. Olide and F. E. Osterloh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H65–H71 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Calero, P. Ortiz, A. F. Onate and M. T. Cortes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4922–4930 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Xie, M. Z. Su, Z. B. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Gong, F. Y. Xie, W. H. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Y. Luo, P. Y. Liu, N. S. Xu, S. Z. Deng, H. J. Chen and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1662–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Saenger, T. Hoing, B. W. Robertson, R. B. Billa, T. Hofmann, E. Schubert and M. Schubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 245205 CrossRef .
R. Giannuzzi, M. Balandeh, A. Mezzetti, L. Meda, P. Pattathil, G. Gigli, F. Di Fonzo and M. Manca, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1614–1622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Highfield, Molecules, 2015, 20, 6739–6793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rahman, J. P. Thomas and K. T. Leung, Adv. Energy
Mater., 2018, 8, 1701234 CrossRef .
H. W. Yeon, S. M. Lim, J. K. Jung, H. Yoo, Y. J. Lee, H. Y. Kang, Y. J. Park, M. Kim and Y. C. Joo, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Dan, K. Seo, K. Takei, J. H. Meza, A. Javey and K. B. Crozier, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2527–2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kang and Y. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15723–15728 RSC .
V. A. Lebedev, D. A. Kozlov, I. V. Kolesnik, A. S. Poluboyarinov, A. E. Becerikli, W. Grunert and A. V. Garshev, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 195, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Yang, B. Wang, H. Cui, H. An, Y. Pan and J. P. Zhai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16905–16912 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Yang, B. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Cui, Y. Pan, H. An and J. P. Zhai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18670–18676 RSC .
B. Wang, Z. W. Yang, H. An, J. P. Zhai, Q. Li and H. Cui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, C. Li, H. Cui, J. Zhang, J. P. Zhai and Q. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1336–1344 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manzhos, G. Giorgi and K. Yamashita, Molecules, 2015, 20, 3371–3388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. M. Hwang, L. Wang, I. Kim, Y. Yoon and H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hao, S. Q. Tang, J. C. Yan, L. J. Cheng, S. J. Guan, Q. Zhao, Z. Zhu and Y. Lu, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 89, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Soria, J. Sanz, M. J. Torralvo, I. Sobrados, C. Garlisi, G. Palmisano, S. Cetinkaya, S. Yurdakal and V. Augugliaro, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 306–319 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiong, Q. Y. Jia, Y. Y. Cao, L. P. Liu and Z. D. Guo, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 24046–24054 RSC .
S. Abedi and A. Morsali, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1398–1403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abedi, B. Karimi, F. Kazemi, M. Bostina and H. Vali, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2013, 11, 416–419 RSC .
E. V. Chulkov, A. G. Borisov, J. P. Gauyacq, D. Sanchez-Portal, V. M. Silkin, V. P. Zhukov and P. M. Echenique, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4160–4206 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, S. Kumar and V. Krishnan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 179, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, G. Harith, S. Kumar, R. Sharma, K. L. Reddy, A. Bahuguna and V. Krishnan, Mater. Technol., 2017, 32, 461–471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yan, S. T. Kochuveedu, L. N. Quan, S. S. Lee and D. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 560, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. M. Chen, N. X. Zhu, X. D. Shi, H. Jin, Y. Zhang and Y. Q. Cong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 407–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Buddee and S. Wongnawa, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 75, 152–163 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Vorokh, N. S. Kozhevnikova, T. I. Gorbunova, O. I. Gyrdasova, I. V. Baklanova, L. Y. Buldakova, M. Y. Yanchenko, A. M. Murzakaev, E. V. Shalaeva and A. N. Enyashin, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 706, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Xing, Y. Zhou, C. Y. Dong, L. J. Cai, L. X. Zeng, B. Shen, L. H. Pan, C. C. Dong, Y. Chai, J. L. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Palmer, M. Neurock and M. M. Olken, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8452–8461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tamaura and M. Tabata, Nature, 1990, 346, 255–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yin, Q. Y. Bi, W. Zhao, J. J. Xu, T. Q. Lin and F. Q. Huang, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 4389–4396 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. H. Wang, L. Lu, C. G. Zhou, Z. Y. Xi, J. J. Wang, X. K. Ke, G. D. Sheng, S. C. Yan and Z. G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 516–525 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Li, J. Q. Yan, T. Wang, Z. J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. L. Gong and N. J. Guan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5881 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Lei, Y. F. Sun, K. T. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Xin, T. Xu, L. Wang and C. Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fresno, P. Renones, E. Alfonso, C. Guillen, J. F. Trigo, J. Herrero, L. Collado and V. A. D. O'Shea, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 912–918 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yin, M. Nishikawa, Y. Nosaka, N. Srinivasan, D. Atarashi, E. Sakai and M. Miyauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2111–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Razzaq, A. Sinhamahapatra, T. H. Kang, C. A. Grimes, J. S. Yu and S. I. In, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 215, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Hennig, P. A. Fedders and A. E. Carlsson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 195213 CrossRef .
F. Spiegelman, N. Tarrat, J. Cuny, L. Dontot, E. Posenitskiy, C. Marti, A. Simon and M. Rapacioli, Adv. Phys.: X, 2020, 5, 1710252 CAS .
J. Mavracic, F. C. Mocanu, V. L. Deringer, G. Csanyi and S. R. Elliott, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2985–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Stachurski, Materials, 2011, 4, 1564–1598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Bing Wang
	Dr Bing Wang received her PhD from Nanjing University in 2014. She subsequently worked as a research assistant at Nanjing University and postdoctoral research associate at Georgia Institute of technology. Her work involved photoelectrochemical devices for solar energy conversion. Now she is working at Eco-materials and Renewable Energy Research Center of Nanjing University, and her current work has been focusing on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for high efficient photoelectrochemical devices.

Gill M. Biesold
	Gill M. Biesold is a PhD student in the Materials Science and Engineering department at Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Clemson University in 2017. His current research is focused on the synthesis of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals and their optoelectronic properties.

Meng Zhang
	Dr Meng Zhang is a research scientist in Dr Zhiqun Lin's group in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology. She received her PhD degree in Engineering Thermophysics from Zhejiang University, China in 2016. Her research interests are centered on solar energy conversion and storage, including perovskite solar cells, CO2 conversion and utilization, and advanced energy materials.

Zhiqun Lin
	Dr Zhiqun Lin is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He received his PhD degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2002. His research interests include solar cells, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, batteries, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, surface and interfacial properties, multifunctional nanocrystals, and Janus nanostructures.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic density of states diagrams for (a) crystalline semiconductors and (b) amorphous semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 2  TiO2 energy level alignment on the vacuum energy scale and NHE scale.	 


TiO2 NPs	0.82	10.0	21.8	1.8	
36

TiO2 NPs	0.91	22.6	66.0	13.7	
88

TiO2 NPs	1.02	24.6	71.0	17.8	
6

TiO2 NPs with UV-O3 treatment	0.86	25.6	45.2	10.0	
36

TiO2 NWs	0.96	20.7	74.0	14.7	
84

Nd-Doped TiO2	1.08	23.9	74.0	19.0	
87

WOx	0.71	21.8	58.0	9.0	
85

WOx	1.06	24.8	79.1	20.8	
89

WOx/TiOx	0.89	23.1	71.0	14.5	
90

WOx/C60	0.93	22.2	78.0	16.1	
91

SnO2	1.05	21.3	66.3	14.8	
1

SnO2	1.17	23.9	76.5	21.4	
92

SnOx	1.05	22.8	66.2	15.8	
93

Nb2O5	1.04	22.9	72.0	17.1	
94

NbOx	1.12	22.42	76.0	19.1	
95

InGaZnO4	1.14	22.7	66.8	17.4	
96

ZnSnO4	1.04	24.7	78.0	20.0	
97

NbOH	1.16	23.0	79.0	21.1	
98

Bi2S3	0.95	18.6	74.2	13.1	
65


 	Fig. 3  (a) Device structure of a planar PSC and (b) the corresponding energy level diagram. (c) J–V characteristics of the PSC with TiO2 ETLs post-treated under various conditions. Dotted lines represent curves obtained in the dark. (d) Characteristic properties of PSCs as a function of post-treatment on TiO2 ETLs. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements on samples with the device architecture of FTO/different ETL/CH3NH3PbI3. The legend TiO2, TiOx, WO0/10, WT2/10 represent crystalline TiO2, amorphous TiO2, pure amorphous WOx, and amorphous WOx–TiOx with the molar ratios of titanium to tungsten 2/10, respectively; (b) steady power conversion efficiency (PCE) and current output for the PSCs based on WT2/10 as the ETL. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (c) Energy band diagram of planar WOx/C60 ETL-based PSC; (d) J–V curves of WOx and WOx/C60 ETL-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) 10 × 10 μm2 AFM image of amorphous SnO2 on ITO; (b) the corresponding energy-level diagram of the ITO/amorphous SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD device architecture. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) J–V curves of the best-performing PSCs with amorphous SnO2 or compact TiO2 as ETLs and mixed (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite as the photoactive layer, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from The Chemical Society of Japan, copyright 2017. (d) Current density and PCE measured as a function of time for the EDTA, SnO2, and E-SnO2-incorporated devices biased at 0.85 V, 0.89 V, and 0.92 V, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (e) Schematic demonstration of the inverted ITO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/amorphous Bi2S3/Au device, and (f) band diagram of CH3NH3PbI3/amorphous Bi2S3 devices. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic and energy band structures of (a) a regular and (b) an inverted organic solar cell (OSC).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A proposed energy level diagram of an inverted OSC incorporating CVD-prepared amorphous TiO2. (b) J–V curves for ITO/CVD-TiO2/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Ag bulk heterojunction OSCs. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (c) Irradiation time-dependent PCE for the ITO/TiOx/PCBM:P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au inverted OSC with an amorphous TiOx interlayer and for conventional ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al OSC. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2008. (d) A schematic and cross-sectional TEM image of an ITO/amorphous IGO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag solar cell.143 Insets show higher-resolution TEM image and nanobeam electron diffraction pattern of amorphous IGO. (e) Representative AFM images of amorphous IGO and GZTO films. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic device architecture of OSC, and an AFM image of the surface and the cross-sectional profile of WO3 on ITO. Inset: AFM image of the amorphous WO3 film. (b) Statistical box graphs for Jsc, Voc, FF, and efficiency of devices with various hole collection buffer layers. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2009. (c) The energy level diagrams of device components referenced to the vacuum level. (d) AFM image of NACO film on FTO. (e) J–V curves of the OSCs with the ACO or NACO films exposed to air for different hours. Inset: Influence of the air exposure time of the ACO or NACO films. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of a TiO2-based DSSC: (a) device architecture and (b) working mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The HOMO and LUMOs energy level alignment of the anatase and amorphous TiO2 clusters and dyes (N3 and N719). (b) Schematic representation of the ground and excited sate energy levels for the anatase and amorphous TiO2 clusters as well as dye (N3 and N719). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Nyquist plots of Pt & CoS electrodes. CoS counter electrodes were prepared by chemical bath deposition method (CBD), and electrochemical method with porous Co3O4 or Co3O4 nanowire (NW) precursors, respectively. (b) J–V curves of the DSSCs with various electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. Variation of (c) conductivity, σ and (d) mobility, μ for the Au–IZO samples as a function of Au nominal thickness. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The schematic architectures and (b) performance of the amorphous TiO2-based QDSC devices. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic structure of photogenerated electron transfer processes in a layered graphene (Gr)/QDs and the energy band diagram. (d) Electron lifetime as a function of Voc and (e) IPCE (incident photon to current efficiency) of the photochemical cell with and without an amorphous TiOx layer. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of device structure with PbS quantum dots embedded in and blending with amorphous ZnS. (b) TEM images of PbS quantum dots embedded in and blending with ZnS dielectric matrix prepared in methanol and aqueous solution, respectively. Insets are the corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns. (c) Absorbance spectra of completely filled bulk heterojunctions with embedding and blending structures. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic and (b) TEM of the Si photoanode coated with ALD-crystalline TiO2. (c) Energy band diagram of the anode at 1 V versus NHE in pH 0 solution. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (d) Cross-sectional schematic of a photoanode stabilized with amorphous ALD-TiO2. Photoelectrocatalytic behavior of amorphous TiO2-coated (e) Si, (g) GaP and GaAs photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH. (f) Normal-incidence optical absorptance and external quantum yields for n-Si photoelectrodes. (h) O2 detected for different photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states of a disorder-engineered semiconductor nanocrystal with dopant incorporation (left), a photo comparing un-modified white and disorder-engineered black TiO2:H nanocrystals (center), and HRTEM images of TiO2:H with the crystalline core and the disordered outer layer (right). (b) Spectral absorbance and valence band XPS spectra of the white TiO2 and black TiO2:H (left and center, respectively); schematic illustration of the density of states of TiO2:H and white TiO2 nanocrystals (right). (c) Schematic illustration of a supercell for TiO2:H and anatase TiO2; calculated DOS of TiO2:H (left panel), TiO2 nanocrystal, and a bulk crystal (second panel); decomposition of the total DOS of TiO2:H into partial DOS of the Ti, O, and H orbitals (third panel); three-dimensional plot of calculated charge density distribution of a mid-gap electronic state of disorder-engineered (at about 1.8 eV) TiO2 nanocrystals (right panel). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Modification strategies for p-GaInP2 photoelectrodes. (b) IPCE of electrodes at −1 V versus Ag/AgCl in pH = 13 aqueous solution. (c) Current density–time profile of electrodes at −1 V versus Ag/AgCl under 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) J–V curves, (b) EIS curves for ITO/BFO/Pt and ITO/BFO and ITO/BFO/TiO2/Pt photoelectrodes. Schematic band diagrams for (c) ITO/BFO/Pt and (d) ITO/BFO/TiO2/Pt photocathodes. Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic and the proposed energy band diagram of Pd nanoparticle/black TiO2 (b-TiO2)/black Si (b-Si) photocathode for water reduction. TiO1+y and TiO2−x are the b-TiO2 layer composed of two kinds of stoichiometric Ti:O as well as graded oxygen defects. Reproduced from ref. 264 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic structure and (b) an image of the MoSx–CA–Cu2O photocathode; scale bar, 5 mm. The area covered with the MoSx catalyst (66 mg cm2) is in the middle of the photoelectrode and is approximately 0.48 cm2. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the protective layers, scale bars, 200 nm. (d) Band energy for the Cu2O photocathode with Al-doped ZnO (AZO) and TiO2 and the MoSx catalyst film biased at 0 V versus RHE, assuming the pinning of the band edges of the semiconductor at the interfaces; (e) photocathode stability at 0 V versus RHE for Cu2O photocathodes modified by different HER catalysts under constant AM 1.5 illumination. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from AIP, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structures of MoSx materials. Top left: [Mo3S13]2− cluster. Top right: Crystal MoS2, wherein the Mo edge contains Mo(S2) catalytic active sites. Center: Amorphous MoSx coordination polymer with [Mo3S13]2− building block units sharing two of their three terminal disulfide bonds to form a polymeric chain. Some defect sites are present within the polymer. Bottom: MoSx under catalytic H2 evolution turnover conditions. Within a-MoSx, four different ligands are thus identified: apical sulfide μ-S2−, bridging disulfides (S–S)2−br, shared (S–S)2−sh and terminal disulfides (S–S)2−t. Reproduced from ref. 274 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the energetic structure of the hybrid photocathode. (b) Scanning electron micrograph cross-sectional image of the photocathode composed of ITO, WO3, P3HT:PCBM, TiO2, Pt layer from bottom to top. (c) Work function of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films before and after electrochemical intercalation. (d) Photocurrent density during potentiostatic operation for the full hybrid photoelectrode architecture ITO/WO3/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Pt. (e) Energy level alignment of the WO3/P3HT interfaces before and after the electrochemical intercalation process. (f) Photoelectrocatalytic device characterization versus the thickness of the amorphous WO3 hole selective layer. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic and SEM of hierarchical nanowire film (a and c) before and (b and d) after the HF treatment. (e) IPCE profiles of HF-treated ZrO2 hierarchical nanowire (HNW), regular nanowire (RNW), and nanobrick (NB) films as functions of wavelength. (f) Schematic for the charge separation and transfer process in the nanoplates of the HF-treated ZrO2 hierarchical nanowires in a photoelectrocatalytic water splitting reaction driven by visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Possible reaction pathways for the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O using TiO2:H. HRTEM images of (b) pristine TiO2 and (c) TiO2:H samples. The amorphous shells are marked with arrows. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Energy levels for redox electron transfer reaction for CO2 splitting on α-Zn–Ge–O photocatalyst. (b) Proposed mechanism for CO2 splitting into solid carbon and O2 over α-Zn–Ge–O under irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic spatial and energy diagram of an amorphous inorganic semiconductor with localized trap states in the bandgap.	 

 	Fig. 26  A view of the structure of solids along an undefined variable. The solid blue and brown circles indicate the positions of the ideal amorphous and crystalline phases, respectively; the lines indicate the coexist of both amorphous and crystalline structures in real solids. Reproduced from ref. 331 with permission from Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, copyright 2011.	 
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
