Carbon black-derived graphene quantum dots composited with carbon aerogel as a highly efficient and stable reduction catalyst for the iodide/tri-iodid ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR06118G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06118G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1209-1215Carbon black-derived graphene quantum dots composited with carbon aerogel as a highly efficient and stable reduction catalyst for the iodide/tri-iodide couple†

        
          
            Chun-Chieh 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shih-Yuan 
            Lu
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsin-Chu 30013, Taiwan. E-mail: SYLU@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Received 
      16th October 2014
    , Accepted 11th November 2014First published on 9th December 2014AbstractA microwave-assisted oxidative cleavage process is developed to prepare graphene quantum dots (GQDs) from carbon black. The size evolution of the resulting carbonaceous products is studied. In one hour, GQDs of a size less than 10 nm and thickness less than 2 nm are obtained. These GQDs are further composited with mesoporous carbon aerogels (CA) by a filtration process to form GQD-decorated CA composites (GQD/CA). The GQD/CA composite is applied as a catalyst electrode for the reduction of I3− to I−, a critical electrolyte regeneration reaction in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Also investigated are Pt electrodes, the expensive traditional counter electrode material for DSSCs, and plain CA electrodes for comparison. Based on data derived from cyclic voltammograms and Tafel plots, the GQD/CA composite exhibits catalytic efficiencies comparable to that of Pt electrodes and better than that of plain CA electrodes. The GQD/CA electrodes, however, surpass the Pt electrodes in terms of long-term stability. The cathodic current drops significantly after 500 cycles for the Pt and plain CA electrodes, whereas the cathodic current is slightly increased for the GQD/CA electrodes. The GQD/CA composite thus proves to be an inexpensive, efficient, and stable alternative to Pt as the counter electrode material for DSSCs.
Introduction
Graphene is a two-dimensional sheet of a single atomic layer of carbon with sp2 hybrid orbitals. It possesses a zero band gap and honeycomb lattice, and has attracted enormous research attention since its first report in 2004.1–3 Graphene has demonstrated extraordinary electronic, mechanical, thermal, and optoelectronic properties such as ultrahigh carrier mobilities, thermal conductivities, and mechanical strength.4–6 Graphene can however also be made semiconducting through the introduction of structural defects.7 For semiconducting graphene, finite size effects have been theoretically predicted and experimentally confirmed, and an increasing amount of research attention has been placed on a new type of graphene nanostructure: graphene quantum dots (GQDs), which are graphene sheets with sheet sizes smaller than 100 nm.8
GQDs exhibit unique optical and electronic properties because of their quantum confinement and edge effects,8,9 and their application has been proposed in photovoltaic devices, cellular imaging, and drug delivery.10–12 The synthetic methods for GQDs can be classified into two main groups: bottom-up and top-down processes. Bottom-up processes offer a pathway to prepare GQDs of well-defined size and shape, but these processes involve complex synthetic procedures. The organic precursors involved are often costly and difficult to prepare, and mass production is thus not promising.13 Top-down routes produce GQDs from the oxidative cleavage of carbonaceous precursors, and the involved operations are often simple and large scale production can be more readily realized. These methods include acidic exfoliation,14 hydrothermal synthesis,15 and electrochemical oxidation.16 GQDs exhibit good crystallinity and possess the same lattice structure as graphene, and are different in their intrinsic properties from amorphous carbonaceous 0D materials such as carbon dots and carbon nanoparticles.17 To ensure generation of GQDs instead of carbon dots or carbon nanoparticles, graphitic carbon sources, e.g., graphite oxide, carbon nanofibers, and graphene sheets, are often used as the raw materials, cleaving of which leads to the generation of GQDs. Pretreatment steps and time consuming operations are often required in these processes.14–16,18
In this work, we develop a simple process that can produce GQDs from commodity carbon sources, such as carbon black, in a short operation time, within an hour. The necessary fast oxidative cleavage of the carbon source is achieved with energy provided through microwave absorption. Microwave irradiation offers rapid and uniform heating for the reaction medium and thus the reaction time can be drastically shortened,19 particularly for the oxidative cleavage reaction involved in the production of GQDs from bulk carbon sources. Here, we report a microwave-assisted, carbon black-derived GQD production method, by which GQDs of sizes less than 10 nm and thicknesses less than 2 nm can be obtained in one hour through microwave treatment of carbon black powders in an acidic medium. The size evolution and accompanying effects of size on the optical properties of the product are studied.
Carbonaceous materials, because of their good catalytic activities toward tri-iodide ion reduction (I3− to I−), excellent resistances to iodine, high electric conductivities, Earth-abundances, and low costs, have been considered as a promising alternative to Pt as the counter electrode material for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). A wide variety of carbonaceous materials have been investigated, including activated carbon,20 carbon black,21 hard carbon spheres,22 carbon nanotubes,23 graphene sheets,24 and graphene aerogels.25 Here, we develop a new form of carbonaceous material, carbon composite, for counter electrode applications. The carbon composite is formed by decorating a mesoporous carbon aerogel (CA) with GQDs. The idea is to combine the advantages of high specific surface area offered by the CA and high catalytic efficiency acquired from the GQDs. The GQD/CA composite thus formed is applied in the catalysis of the reduction of I3− to I−, the critical electrolyte regeneration reaction in DSSCs. CA and Pt are used as controls to assess the catalytic performance of the GQD/CA composite.
The GQD/CA composite exhibits a better catalytic efficiency than that of the plain CA electrode, as revealed from the characteristic cyclic voltammogram and Tafel plot, and competes favorably with the Pt electrode, the traditionally best-performing but expensive counter electrode material.26 More interestingly, the GQD/CA composite surpasses the Pt electrode in terms of long term stability. The cathodic current drops significantly after 500 cycles of operations for the Pt and plain CA electrodes, whereas the cathodic current is slightly increased for the GQD/CA electrodes. The GQD/CA composite thus proves to be an inexpensive, efficient, and a stable alternative to Pt as the counter electrode material for DSSCs.
Experimental section
Synthesis of GQDs
0.15 g of carbon black powder (325 mesh, Showa Chemical Inc.) is added into a mixture of 40 mL concentrated acids (a volumetric ratio of H2SO4 to HNO3 of 3:1) under vigorous stirring until the colour of the suspension turns black. The mixture is then heated and refluxed under microwave irradiation for 1 h in a microwave oven operated at 300 W. After cooling to room temperature, a well-dispersed GQD suspension is obtained. The suspension appears transparent and colourless and is very stable. It remains transparent and colourless for at least up to three weeks of storage. The GQD suspension is first diluted with de-ionized (DI) water (with a volumetric ratio of 1:10) and its pH value was adjusted to 7 by neutralization with Na2CO3 for UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence emission (PL) characterizations. For the TEM observation and CA decoration, the GQD suspension is prepared without the neutralization step.
Synthesis of GQD/CA
Mesoporous carbon aerogels are prepared through sol–gel chemistry involving resorcinol and formaldehyde as the precursors and the necessary condensation and polymerization reactions catalysed by Na2CO3.27,28 Briefly, a mixture of 26.4 g resorcinol and 0.035 g Na2CO3 is dissolved in 34.735 mL DI water. 35 mL of formaldehyde (36.6 wt%) is added to the above solution under vigorous stirring until complete dissolution is reached and a transparent yellow sol is formed. The sol is kept in an oven at 50 °C for one day to form a dark brown gel. The wet gel is further aged for five days in an oven at 80 °C, followed by washing with ethanol and drying at room temperature. The dried gel is carbonized in a N2 atmosphere at 1000 °C for 10 h to afford the CA monolith. To fabricate the GQD/CA composite, the CA monolith is first ground into powder to be dispersed in DI water, and the resulting suspension is filtered through a polyethersulfone (PES) membrane (with a pore size of 0.22 μm, Millipore Corporation) to form a black CA layer on top of the PES membrane. The as-prepared GQD suspension is first diluted with DI water in a volumetric ratio of 1:10, and then filtered through the above CA/PES membrane to form the GQD/CA composite by trapping GQDs in the mesoporous structure of the CA. The GQD/CA composite is collected and dried in an oven at 80 °C overnight.
Electrode fabrication
0.08 g of GQD/CA powder is added into a binder solution, prepared by mixing 0.025 g of ethylcellulose and 1 mL of α-terpineol at 110 °C under stirring for 20 minutes. The mixture is stirred for one day at room temperature to form the GQD/CA paste. The GQD/CA paste is spin-coated onto FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) glass to form a GQD/CA electrode with an active area of 0.25 cm2. For electrodes with a GQD/CA layer thicker than 4 μm, the coating procedure is conducted using the doctor blade method. The as-prepared GQD/CA coated FTO glass is first dried at 60 °C to remove the solvent, followed by calcination at 400 °C for 40 minutes to remove the residual solvent and binder and to strengthen the adhesion between the GQD/CA layer and the FTO substrate to afford the GQD/CA electrodes. For plain CA electrodes, the fabrication procedures are the same as those for the GQD/CA electrode. The Pt electrodes are prepared by the sputtering deposition of Pt onto FTO glass (sputtering time = 1 min, current density = 10 mA).
Characterization
The microwave reactor consists of a microwave oven equipped with an atmospheric reflux unit (Discover Benchmate, CEM Corporation). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images are taken using a JEOL ARM200F electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The thickness of the GQDs is determined using an atomic force microscope (AFM, XE-70, Park Systems). The C element of the GQDs is detected with an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS, PHI Quantera SXM, ULVAC-PHI). UV-visible spectra are recorded on a U-3300 spectrophotometer (Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra are obtained on an F-2500 fluorescence spectrophotometer. The electrochemical measurements are conducted using a three-electrode system. Both cyclic voltammograms (CV) and Tafel plots are recorded using an electrochemical workstation (CHI6275D, CH Instruments Inc.). The GQD/CA, CA or Pt electrode serves as the working electrode, with Pt coil for both the reference and counter electrodes. A mixture of 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4 dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN) is used as the electrolyte for the electrochemical measurements.
Results and discussion
GQDs are derived from carbon black powders through microwave-assisted oxidative cleavage. Fig. 1(a)–(d) show the TEM images of the cleaved products at an increasing reaction time of 0, 5, 20, and 60 min, respectively. As the reaction time increases, the oxidative cleaving proceeds to a more complete extent, resulting in smaller-sized products. With a reaction time of only 5 min, it is evident that the size of the product has been substantially reduced. There appears to be a range of particle clusters of varying sizes. With the reaction time increasing to 20 min, the product size is further reduced and the size distribution becomes narrower. In fact, there are only a small number of particle clusters remaining in the system, and most of the product is in discrete form with a range of sizes less than 10 nm. Finally, with a reaction time of 60 min, the product size falls below 10 nm, and large-sized particle clusters are no longer present. The upper-right corners of Fig. 1(a)–(d) show photos of the product suspensions. Evidently, at 5 min, the suspension is black, the same as the carbon black suspension. The suspension then turns a clear, transparent yellow after a reaction time of 20 min. It further becomes a colorless, transparent suspension after a reaction time of 60 min.
 Fig. 1  TEM images of carbonaceous products at different reaction times: (a) 0 min (pristine carbon black), (b) 5 min, (c) 20 min and (d) 60 min, with corresponding photographs for product suspensions shown in the upper-right insets. The lower-right inset of (d) is an HRTEM image of a GQD. (e) Edge structure of a GQD produced after 60 min accompanied by a schematic graphene structure, with a corresponding FFT pattern shown in the inset. (f) Size distribution of GQDs produced at 60 min. 
The lower-right corner of Fig. 1(d) shows an HRTEM image of a typical GQD. The image reveals a single-crystalline GQD. The interlayer distance is determined to be 0.204 nm, in good agreement with the d-spacing of the (101) direction of graphite (JCPDS file 75-1621). Fig. 1(e) shows an HRTEM image of a GQD, along with the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern of the GQD and a schematic graphene crystal structure. The consistent orientation of the GQD edges with the zigzag orientations of the FFT pattern and the graphene crystal structure indicates that the edge of the GQD is created by cleaving the graphitic material along the zigzag direction, in good agreement with the observations of previous literature.13,29,30 The zigzag direction has been shown, both theoretically and experimentally, to be more vulnerable than the armchair direction as the preferred cleavage direction because of the preferred residence of the oxygen-containing functional groups. Fig. 1(f) shows the size distribution of the GQDs collected after a reaction time of 60 min. The sizes of the GQDs span a narrow range of 2–10 nm and are centered at 4 nm.
The thicknesses of the GQDs are checked with AFM measurements. Fig. 2(a) shows the topographic morphology of the GQDs produced after a reaction time of 60 min. The two AFM line scans reveal the thicknesses of the GQDs to be less than 2 nm, corresponding to 1–2 graphene layers.1,31 This proves that the products are not only small in size, but also thin in layers, confirming that they are GQDs instead of carbon nanocrystals. The result of the XPS measurement of the GQDs is shown in Fig. 2(b). The two characteristic binding energy peaks for the C1s are de-convoluted into four sub-bands located at 284.9, 286.3, 287.8, and 288.8 eV, attributable to the C–C/CC of the aromatic ring, epoxide or hydroxyl groups, carbonyl groups, and carboxyl groups, respectively.32,33 From the de-convolution, one notes that the lower binding energy peak at 284.9 eV is mainly contributed by the C–C/CC of the aromatic ring, whereas the higher binding energy peak at 288.8 eV comes from the carboxyl groups. The contributions coming from the epoxide, hydroxyl, and carbonyl groups are quite limited. The epoxide, hydroxyl, and carbonyl groups reside mainly on the basal plane of the 2D graphitic carbon structure, whereas the carboxyl groups populate at the edges. Because of the nano-size of the GQDs, the edges account for a significant portion of the GQD structure and thus the carboxyl group dominates as the main oxygen-containing functional group in the GQDs. The minor amount of the basal plane-related oxygen-containing functional groups also implies good basal plane crystallinity of the GQDs. The oxygen-containing functional groups possess high polarity and can be readily energized through absorption of microwaves. These energized oxygen-containing functional groups are thus prone to oxidative cleavage in the acidic environment. This direct energy intake mechanism makes microwave irradiation a much more efficient way of cleaving the carbon network for production of GQDs than previously-reported methods that utilize input energy, thermal or electric, indirectly.
 Fig. 2  (a) AFM image and two AFM line scans of GQDs produced after 60 min. (b) XPS measurement of the C1s of GQDs. 

Fig. 3(a) shows the UV-visible absorption spectra of the GQDs synthesized after increasing reaction times; from 5 to 60 min. Evidently, the onset absorption wavelength shifts to shorter wavelengths with increasing reaction time. As shown in Fig. 1(a)–(d), the size of the products reduces with increasing reaction time because of the progressively more complete cleavage of the carbon network. The reduction in product size leads to bandgap widening of the GQDs, and thus the consequent blue-shifts in onset absorption wavelength. After 20 min, pronounced absorption shoulders appear. This feature remains for GQDs produced after longer reaction times, and can be attributed to the multiple excitonic absorptions between discrete energy bands arising from the quantum confinement effect. This phenomenon has been reported for several compound semiconductor QDs of good crystallinity, and has also been observed for GQDs.34,35
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of GQDs and (b) PL spectra of GQDs and suspending solution excited at 340 nm. Inset of (b) are PL spectra of GQDs produced with a 60 min reaction time and suspending solution excited at 300 nm. 

Fig. 3(b) shows the corresponding photoluminescence spectra of the GQDs at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm. As expected, the emission peak exhibits a blue shift trend as the reaction time increases, in accord with the blue shift trend observed in the corresponding absorption spectra. After 20 min, the blue shift trend progresses only slightly, in good agreement with the slight blue shifts in onset absorption wavelength observed for the corresponding absorption spectra for GQDs produced with a reaction time longer than 20 min. As shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d), as the reduction in product size approaches a limiting state at the reaction time of 20 min, so do the size-dependent optical properties. Note also that a bump emerges from the PL curve of the 20 min reaction case, and becomes more pronounced with increasing reaction time. In fact, after 60 min, the PL emission of the GQD almost disappears in contrast to this emission peak. This emission peak is contributed by the suspending solution of the GQD suspension, as shown in the bottom curve of Fig. 3(b). With an excitation wavelength of 340 nm, the absorbance of GQDs, produced with a reaction time equal to or longer than 20 min, is quite limited, leading to much less intensive PL emissions. To confirm this argument, we record the PL spectra, with an excitation of 300 nm, for both the GQDs produced with a 60 min reaction time and the plain suspending solution. The results are shown as the inset of Fig. 3(b). From the comparison of the two spectra, one can first identify that the PL peak located at 333 nm is contributed by the suspending solution, whereas that at 391 nm is from the GQDs. The intensity of the PL emission of the GQDs appears comparable to that of the suspending solution, attributable to the stronger absorption of the GQDs at the shorter excitation wavelength of 300 nm than at 340 nm.
The application of the GQDs in catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I− is explored. Mesoporous carbon aerogels are decorated with GQDs to form GQD/CA composites through a filtration process. The catalytic efficiency of the GQD/CA composite is first studied against those of the CA and Pt with cyclic voltammetry (CV). The CV is recorded in an ACN solution containing 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4 at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 over a potential window of −0.5 to 0.5 V. The recorded CV is shown in Fig. 4(a) for comparison. Each CV loop exhibits one pair of redox peaks, indicating all three materials possess significant catalytic ability toward the involved redox reaction. The anodic peak is generated at the positive scan, whereas the cathodic peak appears during the negative scan. This redox pair comes from the oxidation of I− and reduction of I3− according to the following redox equation:36 3I− ↔ I3− + 2e−(1)
 Fig. 4  (a) CV of Pt, CA, and GQD/CA electrodes recorded at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots of negative scans of the GQD/CA electrodes at four coating thicknesses recorded at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Inset shows positive shifts in the onset reduction potential of CA and GQD/CA electrodes with increasing electrode coating thickness. 
The magnitudes of the anodic and cathodic peak current densities are one indicator for the catalytic efficiency of the electrode. This indicator however depends on the loading amount of the electrode material. Here, we can only compare the catalytic efficiencies of the CA and GQD/CA composite electrodes based on the magnitudes of the anodic and cathodic peak current densities, since the loading of the two materials can be controlled to be about the same in the experiments through adjusting the coating thickness. In this regard, the GQD/CA electrode exhibits a better catalytic efficiency toward the redox of I−/I3− than the CA electrode. One other useful indicator for catalytic efficiency is the peak-to-peak separation (Epp) of the anodic and cathodic peaks. The rate constant of a redox reaction is inversely proportional to Epp.37,38 The smaller the Epp, the faster the electrochemical reaction involved and thus the better the catalytic efficiency. From Fig. 4(a), evidently, the Pt electrode exhibits the smallest Epp, with the GQD/CA electrode coming next, and the CA electrode last. The decoration of the CA with GQDs does enhance the catalytic efficiency of the CA. The catalytic efficiency of the electrode can also be evaluated from the onset potential of the reduction of I3− to I−, revealed in the Tafel plot as the tip potential. The smaller the onset potential, the better the catalytic efficiency of the electrode. Here, we investigate the effect of the coating thickness of the electrode material on the onset reduction potential. Fig. 4(b) shows the positive shift of the onset reduction potential of the GQD/CA electrode with increasing coating thickness. This positive shift in onset reduction potential may be caused by the increased mass transfer resistance involved in the thicker coating layer. Higher potentials are needed to overcome the mass transfer resistance to drive the reduction reaction. The inset of Fig. 4(b) depicts the onset reduction potential versus thickness curves for both electrodes. Evidently, the GQD/CA electrode consistently outperforms the CA electrode with significantly lower onset reduction potentials.
The catalytic efficiencies of the three electrodes are further investigated with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Table S1† summaries the charge transfer resistances (Rct), another indicator for the catalytic efficiency, as determined from the EIS spectra (Fig. S1†) recorded for the three electrodes. The Pt electrode gives the smallest Rct value of 2.1, with 3.4 for the GQD/CA electrode coming next, and finally 11.2 Ω cm2 for the CA electrode. This trend is in good agreement with the previous ones. As a final check, dye-sensitized solar cells are assembled and tested using the three counter electrodes. Fig. S2† shows the J–V curves for the three counter electrode-based DSSCs. The four important performance parameters, namely the open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Vsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η), derived from the J–V curves are summarized in Table S2† for comparison. Once again, the trend in power conversion efficiency agrees with those trends derived from the CV, Tafel and EIS analyses.
The long-term stability of the Pt, CA and GQD/CA electrodes in catalytic efficiency is also investigated. A test of 500 cycles is performed for the three electrodes. The results are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c), for the Pt, CA and GQD/CA electrodes, respectively. Both the anodic and cathodic peak current densities decrease significantly for the Pt electrode with increasing cycle number, implying the deactivation of Pt in the redox reaction of the I−/I3− couple. The anodic and cathodic peak separation also widens with increasing cycle number. The deactivation of Pt in the redox reaction of the I−/I3− couple has been attributed to the corrosion and poisoning of Pt.39,40 As for the CA electrode, it shows good stability up to 10 cycles, with the cathodic peak current density maintained at a constant level. The situation however deteriorates after 10 cycles. Not only does the cathodic peak current density drop, but also the peak-to-peak separation widens. The cathodic peak even disappears after 200 cycles. The GQD/CA electrode outperforms the Pt and CA electrodes in long term stability. Although the peak separation still widens, both the anodic and cathodic peak current densities in fact increase slightly with increasing cycle number, as evident from Fig. 5(c). The introduction of GQDs into the CA evidently enhances both the catalytic efficiency and stability of the CA. A possible explanation is as follows: the GQDs are tiny in size, less than 10 nm, and thus possess a high percentage of edge carbon atoms. These edge carbon atoms are more energetic and active toward catalysis of the reduction of the I−/I3− couple. Furthermore, the higher catalytic efficiency of these GQDs suppresses the occurrence of the relevant de-activation reactions, thus leading to better stability.
 Fig. 5  CV of (a) Pt, (b) CA and (c) GQD/CA electrodes, recorded for 500 cycles. The CV is recorded in electrolyte containing 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4 in ACN at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. 
Conclusions
A simple, highly efficient microwave-assisted oxidative cleavage method is developed for the production of GQDs from carbon black. GQDs of a size less than 10 nm and a thickness less than 2 nm are obtained in one hour. The GQDs are of good crystallinity, and contain a rich amount of carboxyl groups along their edges. Mesoporous carbon aerogels are successfully decorated with the GQDs to form GQD/CA composites, which exhibit superior performances in terms of long-term stability than Pt in catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−, a critical I− regeneration reaction at the counter electrode of DSSCs. The GQD/CA composites are thus proven to be a promising, cost-effective and stable alternative to Pt as the counter electrode material for DSSCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Science Council of the Republic of China (Taiwan) under grant NSC 101-2221-E-007-111-MY3 and by the Low Carbon Energy Research Center of the National Tsing-Hua University.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C.-N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9, 211–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. C. Medeiros, S. Stafstrom and J. Bjork, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89, 041407 CrossRef .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858–6860 RSC .
Y. M. Lin, C. Dimitrakopoulos, K. A. Jenkins, D. B. Farmer, H. Y. Chiu, A. Grill and P. Avouris, Science, 2010, 327, 662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L.-S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. A. Rebeca, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J.-J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng, J. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, L. Guo, J. Zhang, C. Xi, Q. Xue, H. Huang, J. Li, Z. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Chen, Z. Li and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3314–3318 RSC .
E. A. Anumol, P. Kundu, P. A. Deshpande, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8049–8061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imoto, K. Takahashi, T. Yamaguchi, T. Komura, J.-I. Nakamura and K. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 459–469 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Li, F. Wang, J. Song, F. Y. Xiong and X. P. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Cha, B. K. Koo, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 659–662 RSC .
J. Han, H. Kim, D. Y. Kim, S. M. Jo and S. Y. Jang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Cheng, C.-C. Wang and S.-Y. Lu, Carbon, 2013, 54, 291–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Pekala, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 3221–3227 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Wang, C.-C. Wang, W.-Y. Cheng and S.-Y. Lu, Carbon, 2014, 69, 287–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakada and M. Fujita, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17954–17961 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Radovic and B. Bockrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5917–5927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112–1114 RSC .
O. C. Compton, D. A. Dikin, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 892–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. I. Klimov, in Semiconductor and metal nanocrystals: synthesis and electronic and optical properties, Marcel Dekker, Inc., USA, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, B. Li, X. Cui, Q. Wei, K. Tajima and L.-S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1119–1124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, X. Lin, T. Wang, J. Qiu and T. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2308–2315 CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. H. Baker, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Gratzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2255–A2261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Figgemeier and A. Hagfeldt, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2004, 6, 127–140 CrossRef CAS .
E. Olsen, G. Hagen and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures for DSSC fabrication and testing and EIS measurements. EIS spectra and J–V curves of the three electrodes. Data for charge transfer resistances and power conversion efficiencies. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06118gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of carbonaceous products at different reaction times: (a) 0 min (pristine carbon black), (b) 5 min, (c) 20 min and (d) 60 min, with corresponding photographs for product suspensions shown in the upper-right insets. The lower-right inset of (d) is an HRTEM image of a GQD. (e) Edge structure of a GQD produced after 60 min accompanied by a schematic graphene structure, with a corresponding FFT pattern shown in the inset. (f) Size distribution of GQDs produced at 60 min.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) AFM image and two AFM line scans of GQDs produced after 60 min. (b) XPS measurement of the C1s of GQDs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of GQDs and (b) PL spectra of GQDs and suspending solution excited at 340 nm. Inset of (b) are PL spectra of GQDs produced with a 60 min reaction time and suspending solution excited at 300 nm.	 
3I− ↔ I3− + 2e−	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) CV of Pt, CA, and GQD/CA electrodes recorded at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots of negative scans of the GQD/CA electrodes at four coating thicknesses recorded at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Inset shows positive shifts in the onset reduction potential of CA and GQD/CA electrodes with increasing electrode coating thickness.	 

 	Fig. 5  CV of (a) Pt, (b) CA and (c) GQD/CA electrodes, recorded for 500 cycles. The CV is recorded in electrolyte containing 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4 in ACN at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures for DSSC fabrication and testing and EIS measurements. EIS spectra and J–V curves of the three electrodes. Data for charge transfer resistances and power conversion efficiencies. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06118g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
