Interface design to improve stability of polymer solar cells for potential space applications   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01368H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01368H
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4917-4920Show Chemical TermsInterface design to improve stability of polymer solar cells for potential space applications†

        
          
            Ankit 
            Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nadav 
            Rosen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Roderick 
            Devine
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. E-mail: yangy@ucla.edu;   Tel: +1 310 794 6491
bAir Force Research Laboratory, Space Electronic Branch (AFRL/RVSE), Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117, USA. E-mail: devine@chtm.unm.edu;   Tel: +1 505 272 7833
Received 
      29th March 2011
    , Accepted 17th May 2011First published on 23rd June 2011Abstract
Polymer solar cells may potentially fill the gap for a solar technology which satisfies the requirements of high specific power for space photovoltaics. Here, we address the issue of radiation hardness. Mathematical and analytical explanation for the observed degradation in Voc and guidance for designing more stable photocells have been provided.

Broader context

Polymer solar cell technology offers great advantage over traditional thin film and Si photovoltaic technology for space photovoltaics. Their light weight and flexibility are the key to such applications where weight and volume of the cell are important. In addition, the active layer composed of polymers is relatively “transparent” to X-rays which require heavy elements to stop it. However, the degradation due to high energy X-rays results in loss of open circuit voltage of the devices. In this manuscript, we demonstrate that degradation in open circuit voltage of the device is strongly affected by the type of interface. It is shown that smart interface engineering can mitigate the problem of degradation under X-ray radiation and reasonably radiation hard diodes and solar cells can be designed. As well as benefiting photovoltaic research, the findings are also expected to be useful for diodes in memory arrays and X-ray detectors for medical and sensing applications.

Space systems depend on solar arrays to generate electrical power to operate the spacecraft and its payloads. Several new emerging technologies (primarily based on crystalline, polycrystalline or amorphous inorganic) are being researched with the hope of improving power conversion efficiency levels. Although efficiency gains are satisfactory, they are being accomplished at the cost of higher mass and hence higher launch cost. As a result, the specific power gains are marginal.1 Revolutionary, not incremental, improvements in specific power gains are required. Organic photovoltaics, a new breed of emerging solar cell technology, offer solutions to several of the challenges posed today. In this manuscript, we address the critical issue of radiation hardness for any such future applications of this promising technology.
Until recently, the focus of most solar technology development for space was towards more efficient, more radiation-resistant and increasingly powerful arrays. Two dominant performance metrics in the selection of solar array technologies are the power/mass ratio (i.e. the amount of power that can be produced for each kilogram of total mass) and the volume of the stowed array as it is launched. Rigid, higher efficiency solar arrays come at the cost, however, of relatively high launch mass. These are important because of the mass and volume limitations on the launch vehicle that places the array into space, and the high cost of launching this limited mass and volume. In particular, for limited military applications, there is a growing need for small special purpose satellites. These typically weigh several kilograms and have power requirements of only several watts. The power/mass and volume considerations are greatly enhanced for such applications. It is for these specific applications in the immediate future that polymer solar cells (PSCs) may be particularly applicable.
The light weight and flexibility of PSCs are key advantages.2 These materials could hold the key to inexpensive, easily deployed, large area, high mass-specific power solar arrays. This is due in part to the possibility of roll-to-roll processing using low-cost coating or spray deposition or direct-write/printing approaches to producing thin polymer film solar cells on inexpensive lightweight flexible substrates.3 Additionally, PSCs require a minimum of storage space and can be inflated or unrolled for deployment. Bearing in mind these key advantages, the pace of research focusing on organic photovoltaics (OPVs) has increased significantly over the past few years. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has almost been doubled since 2005 and now 8–9%4 (device area = 0.1 cm2) under AM1.5 illumination has been achieved. Although this is far less than what has been observed for inorganic solar cells, it is worthwhile to start looking into the possibility of potential applications in space. From the point view of space applications, a good benchmark for OPV is a PCE of 12–15% to compete with other technologies, which is also aligned with the prediction of OPV efficiency limit.3
We have investigated earlier5,6 the reason for degradation of polymer solar cells when subjected to X-ray radiation. It was found that no significant changes took place in the polymer structure; the morphology and crystallinity of the photoactive layer are retained after radiation. It was further shown that charge accumulation at the interface is the primary concern in such a case since it clearly degrades the open-circuit voltage, Voc. To address this issue for PSCs we concentrate, in this manuscript, on the interface of the charge collection electrode and the photoactive layer. We show that it is possible to engineer interfaces such that charge accumulation is minimized, leading to more stable devices. We systematically study the effect of X-ray irradiation on five different polymer/cathode interfaces. We fix the polymer active layer to the work horse poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) system and vary the cathode to Al, Ca/Al, LiF/Al, TiO2:Cs/Al and ZnO/Al interface to reveal the underlying phenomenon.
PSCs were made at UCLA. The devices with Al only cathode were fabricated following Ma et al.7 For the other interfaces, the P3HT:PCBM active layer was fabricated using a slow growth approach suggested by Liet al.8 The interfacial layers were deposited as reported in the literature.9–11 For the irradiation studies, the solar cells were encapsulated using glass and epoxy and shipped to the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Kirtland AFB. The performance of pristine devices as measured at UCLA before shipping to AFRL is summarized in Table S1, ESI†. These efficiencies are among state of the art reported in the literature for the model system under consideration. For details on device measurements and radiation tests, see ESI†.

Fig. 1 shows the experimental current–voltage (I–V) measurements under light before and after radiation (0.3 Mrad (SiO2)) for the cells having the different cathode interfaces (refer to ESI†). As shown in the previous work,5 the devices based on high PCBM ratios should show little change in fill factor or series resistance. However, significant changes take place in the Voc of the device. It can be seen from Fig. 1 that the drop in Voc is more significant for Ca/Al, Al, and LiF/Al interfaces as compared to the TiO2:Cs/Al and ZnO/Al interfaces. It appears that metal–oxide interfaces are less susceptible to radiation effects. To confirm that this effect is indeed due to the changes in built-in-potential of the device and not from photo-generated carriers, dark current–voltage measurements were performed (Fig. S1†), and a similar trend can be seen for the diode turn on voltages. In fact, the dark I–V curves for the metal–oxide/metal interface seem to overlap pretty well after radiation. This suggests that diodes made using such interfaces are reasonably stable. Fig. 2(a) shows the in situ (during radiation) variation of dark saturation current and ideality factor as a function of radiation dose. It can be seen that changes in the leakage current under dark is much smaller for metal–oxide interface as compared to other interfaces, indicating enhanced stability of such diodes. For such applications, stability of the diode ideality factor (n) is a pre-requisite. Also, n is indicative of the recombination mechanism within the device.12 In general, the changes in ideality factor should be small since the fill factor is not significantly affected by radiation, as can be seen in Fig. 1. Fig. 2(b) confirms this, wherein the percentage change for metal–oxide/metal interfaces is much smaller than that for other interfaces, suggesting more radiation hardness for such devices.
 Fig. 1  Photovoltaic performance of P3HT:PCBM based solar cells with different interfaces (a) Al only, (b) Ca/Al, (c) LiF/Al, (d) TiO2:Cs/Al and (e)ZnO/Al. The Figure shows light I–V curves obtained before (black curve) and after (red curve) 0.3 Mrad (SiO2) X-ray radiation. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Dark saturation current and (b) diode ideality factor n as a function of degradation time under X-ray radiation. The different curves correspond to different interfaces Al (dark blue inverted triangle), Ca/Al (red circle), LiF/Al (black square), TiO2:Cs/Al (cyan rhobohedrals) and ZnO/Al (light green up triangle). 
The main objective of the manuscript is to explore the possibility of stable PSCs for space applications using modified interfaces. We suggested earlier that the main effect of X-ray radiation is the decrease in open-circuit voltages of the devices, which is a direct effect of change in built-in-potential (Vbi) of the devices.5 To directly measure Vbi we refer to the work by Mihailetchi et al. who had earlier demonstrated a way to measure Vbi of PSCs.13 They showed that when the dark current (Idark) is subtracted from the light current (Ilight) and plotted as a function of applied bias voltage (V); the point where the photocurrent Ilight − Idark = 0 can be defined as the Vbi of the device. Following the same procedure, the results for calculated Vbi as a function of radiation dose for Ca/Al interface are shown in Fig. 3(a). Vbi clearly follows the same trend as the Voc of the device, giving additional confirmation for the hypothesis. Also, this gives us a tool to study the Voc change in devices by directly measuring the change in Vbi of the devices.
 Fig. 3  Calculated built-in potential Vbi measured as a function of X-ray radiation dose. Fig. 3(a) was obtained by calculating Vbi from experimental I–V curves following the process of Mihailetchi et al.12 For Fig. 3(b) the experimental I–V curves were corrected for series resistance and shunt resistance before calculating Vbi as in ref. 13. The different curves correspond to different interfaces Al (dark blue inverted triangle), Ca/Al (red circle), LiF/Al (black square), TiO2:Cs/Al (cyan rhobohedrals) and ZnO/Al (light green up triangle). 
We earlier showed that the bulk recombination of the devices is not affected significantly for PSCs (with high PCBM loading) as in the present case.5 The question to answer then is: if the bulk recombination mechanism is the same then why is the change in Voc and Vbi of the devices with different interfaces not similar?
Physically, the answer lies in the amount of charge accumulation at the interface. But to make sense mathematically, we refer to the model by Koster et al.14 wherein it was shown that the device Voc can be given by eqn (1) (1)where P is the dissociation probability of the e–h pairs into free carriers, γ is the recombination constant, Nc is the density of states in the conduction band and G is the generation rate of electron–hole pairs. This suggests that Voc is reduced from its ideal value [EHOMO(donor)–ELUMO(acceptor)] by the recombination in the device. A higher recombination constant γ would reduce the Voc of the devices more significantly. On putting:  where τ is the carrier lifetime, and rearranging eqn (1) we get: (2)where β is an analytical parameter of fitting of τ vs. Voc as shown by Shuttle et al.15 If there is a higher interface recombination for pristine (non-irradiated) devices, then charge accumulation at the interface (when subjected to radiation) will be less significant and consequently the change in Voc should be smaller. A higher interfacial recombination for pristine devices should also manifest itself as a higher value of γ. But as eqn (2) shows, higher γ should result in a lower value of pre-exponential factor τ0. To confirm experimentally, if devices with more stable metal–oxide interfaces indeed show a lower value of τ0, we performed transient-photovoltage measurements for all the devices and fitted τ vs. Voc curves to the exponential equation (eqn (2)), as done by Shuttle et al. The obtained results are shown in Fig. S4† with values of τ0 and β reported in Table 1. It can be seen that τ0 for metal–oxide interfaces is smaller indicating a higher value of the product γNc. Since Nc is governed by the bulk, it is safe to assume that Nc remains constant for the various devices with different interfaces. Hence, we can conclude that metal–oxide interfaces have a higher recombination constant. This manifests itself as smaller number of charges accumulated at the interface.
Table 1 Extracted values of pre-exponent τ0 and the parameter β as in eqn (2) from carrier lifetime (τ) vs. Voc measurements (shown in Fig. 4†)




Interface

τ
0/μs

β/V−1





                  Al
                
3.31 × 1011
52.68


Ca/Al
9.35 × 106
27.6



                  LiF/Al
7.2 × 105
22.51



                  TiO2:Cs/Al
2.47 × 105
26.04



                  ZnO/Al
3.05 × 105
23.54




Our calculations also explain for first time the empirical fit of τ vs. Voc as observed by Shuttle et al. and gives a physical meaning to the value of β. Hence, in an unperturbed system, (3)the deviation of β from the ideal value of 38.6 V−1 (at room temperature) can be attributed to trap assisted recombination as explained by Mandoc et al. in their model.16
Changes in surface recombination and charge accumulation will also be manifested as the ohmicity of the devices as seen earlier in Fig. S2†. However, to confirm our hypothesis, we mathematically remove the effect of series (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) from the experimentally observed I–V curves. We artificially put the ideal values of Rs = 0 and Rsh = 1 × 1010 to simulate the experimental curves without the effect of Rs and Rshi.e., ideal interfaces. To do so, we utilized a software system we developed that is more accurate than the conventional model of fitting the slope at the high voltage end, since it considers the different current flow patterns under dark and under illumination, and the multi-dimensional effect of the Rs.5 The detailed curves are shown in Fig. S3†. Fig. 3(b) shows the calculated Vbi extracted from these simulated curves following the method of Mihailetchi et al.13 and plotted as a function of radiation dose. It can be seen that if we exclude the effect of ohmicity of the interfaces, the ratio of calculated Vbi (after radiation) to Vbi (pristine) is approximately the same; 0.8 V for all devices. No changes can be seen in the rate of decay of calculated Vbi, confirming our hypothesis.
Conclusions
It was shown that degradation of PSCs is primarily a result of charge accumulation at the interfaces, resulting in a change in built-in electric field of the devices.17 However, we show that it is not a severe problem and can be mitigated by proper design of the interfaces. Recombination at the interface is the process governing the stability of these devices. Hence, we demonstrate the criteria necessary for design of more stable interfaces. This suggests that PSCs can have promising applications in space.
Acknowledgements
A. Kumar and Prof. Y. Yang would like to thank Dr Gang Li, Dr Zhengqing Gan, Eric Richard and Bao Lei for fruitful scientific discussions. The authors also thank Dr Rui Dong for ZnO and Dr M.-H. Park for TiO2:Cs material. This work is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (grant # FA9550-09-1-0610, Program manager-Dr Charles Lee).
Notes and references
E. J. Simburger, J. H. Matsumoto, T. W. Giants, A. Garcia, III, S. Liu, S. P. Rawal, A. R. Perry, C. H. Marshall, J. K. Lin, S. E. Scarborough, H. B. Curtis, T. W. Kerslake and T. T. Peterson, Thin film technology development for the PowerSphere, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 265 Search PubMed .

          E. L. Ralph and T. W. Woike, Proceedings of the 37th American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibition,  1999, p. 1 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinsky and C. Waldauf, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 50 ; G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, T. Ameri, P. Denk, K. Forberich, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 579 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS ; J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, R. Devine, C. Mayberry, B. Lei, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2729 Search PubMed .
R. Devine, C. Mayberry, A. Kumar and Y. Yang, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2010, 99, 1 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(7), 1288 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Park, J.-H. Li, A. Kumar, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1241 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. C. Scharber, P. Schilinsky, J. A. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 104503 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93(21), 216601 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. de Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093311 CrossRef .
M. M. Mandoc, F. B. Kooistra, J. C. Hummelen, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 263505 CrossRef .
K. Kawano and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3934 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01368hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context

Polymer solar cell technology offers great advantage over traditional thin film and Si photovoltaic technology for space photovoltaics. Their light weight and flexibility are the key to such applications where weight and volume of the cell are important. In addition, the active layer composed of polymers is relatively “transparent” to X-rays which require heavy elements to stop it. However, the degradation due to high energy X-rays results in loss of open circuit voltage of the devices. In this manuscript, we demonstrate that degradation in open circuit voltage of the device is strongly affected by the type of interface. It is shown that smart interface engineering can mitigate the problem of degradation under X-ray radiation and reasonably radiation hard diodes and solar cells can be designed. As well as benefiting photovoltaic research, the findings are also expected to be useful for diodes in memory arrays and X-ray detectors for medical and sensing applications.


 	Fig. 1  Photovoltaic performance of P3HT:PCBM based solar cells with different interfaces (a) Al only, (b) Ca/Al, (c) LiF/Al, (d) TiO2:Cs/Al and (e)ZnO/Al. The Figure shows light I–V curves obtained before (black curve) and after (red curve) 0.3 Mrad (SiO2) X-ray radiation.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Dark saturation current and (b) diode ideality factor n as a function of degradation time under X-ray radiation. The different curves correspond to different interfaces Al (dark blue inverted triangle), Ca/Al (red circle), LiF/Al (black square), TiO2:Cs/Al (cyan rhobohedrals) and ZnO/Al (light green up triangle).	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated built-in potential Vbi measured as a function of X-ray radiation dose. Fig. 3(a) was obtained by calculating Vbi from experimental I–V curves following the process of Mihailetchi et al.12 For Fig. 3(b) the experimental I–V curves were corrected for series resistance and shunt resistance before calculating Vbi as in ref. 13. The different curves correspond to different interfaces Al (dark blue inverted triangle), Ca/Al (red circle), LiF/Al (black square), TiO2:Cs/Al (cyan rhobohedrals) and ZnO/Al (light green up triangle).	 
	(1)

 		 
	(2)


                  Al
                	3.31 × 1011	52.68
Ca/Al	9.35 × 106	27.6

                  LiF/Al	7.2 × 105	22.51

                  TiO2:Cs/Al	2.47 × 105	26.04

                  ZnO/Al	3.05 × 105	23.54
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01368h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
