An ammonia-free chemical-bath-deposited ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer for flexible Cu(In,Ga)Se 2 solar cell application: an eco-friendly approach to achievin ...  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6GC01293K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6GC01293K
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5212-5218An ammonia-free chemical-bath-deposited ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer for flexible Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cell application: an eco-friendly approach to achieving improved stability†

        
          
            Tzu-Hsuan 
            Yeh
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chia-Hao 
            Hsu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei-Hao 
            Ho
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shih-Yuan 
            Wei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chung-Hao 
            Cai
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Chih-Huang 
            Lai
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: chlai@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Received 
      10th May 2016
    , Accepted 13th June 2016First published on 23rd June 2016AbstractA low-cost, environmentally friendly process of chemical-bath-deposited (CBD) ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers for flexible Cu(In,Ga)Se2(CIGS)-based solar cells is reported. Unlike the conventional CdS buffer layers, in which toxic cadmium and ammonia are used, our CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is fabricated without the addition of ammonia or other complexing agents. The ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is robust under light illumination so the metastabilities in the device characteristics (the so-called light-soaking effect), typically observed in CIGS/CBD-ZnS(O,OH) solar cells, are eliminated. To further adjust the composition of the ammonia-free CBD ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer, we employed an oxygen plasma post-treatment so that the oxygen content of the CBD buffer layer could be controlled in a straightforward way and the conduction band offset at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface could be engineered. Significantly reduced series resistance was observed after optimizing the oxygen content, leading to 10.1% cell efficiency. Our ammonia-free process demonstrates a comparable efficiency to the conventional process but without any light soaking.
1. Introduction
High efficiency Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS)-based thin film solar cells are commonly produced with chemical-bath-deposited CdS buffer layers.1,2 However, the use of chemical bath deposition (CBD) in the fabrication of CdS thin films raises environmental problems and increases production costs because of the considerable amount of hazardous waste containing cadmium and ammonia. Thus, avoiding Cd, ammonia and other hazardous materials in processing buffer layers for CIGS-based solar cells is desirable from both environmental and economic standpoints.
Concern for the environment has motivated the development of Cd-free buffer layers. Among the Cd-free alternatives, CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers have been found to yield the highest efficiency.3 Compared to CBD-CdS, CBD-ZnS(O,OH) is a complicated system due to the co-precipitation of sulfides, oxides and hydroxides. The S/(S + O) ratio of the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is a critical factor that affects the transport barrier and thus cell efficiency.4–6 Although the S/(S + O) ratio of CBD-ZnS(O,OH) can be adjusted by the concentration of the sulfur precursor to some extent,6,7 systematic control of the composition of ZnS(O,OH) is less feasible by using CBD than by atomic layer deposition5 or sputtering.8 Moreover, devices with CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers typically show the effects of metastability. That is, a time-consuming light soaking (LS) process at room temperature4,9 or at an elevated temperature4 is required to attain maximum efficiency, which is unfavorable from an industrial point of view. LS is believed to originate from the change of barrier height in the vicinity of the CIGS/buffer.10 LS time has been found to be reduced by modifying the properties of the layers in the vicinity of CIGS/ZnS(O,OH), such as by surface treatment of CIGS,11 changing the buffer layer thickness9 or replacing ZnO by ZnMgO.12
In addition to the relatively poor composition control and the unfavorable LS effect, another disadvantage of utilizing CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers is that the deposition still involves environmentally hazardous ammonia as a complexing agent to reduce homogeneous precipitation. (CBD processes using ammonia are hereafter termed conventional or ammonia processes.) Alternative complexing agents, such as hexamethylenetetramine, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and sodium citrate have therefore been proposed.13–17 However, these studies focus only on the fundamental properties of ZnS(O,OH) films. To the best of our knowledge, no device performance of CIGS solar cells with such buffer layers has been demonstrated.
In this paper, we report efficient CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) solar cells exhibiting no metastabilities through a simple CBD process without the addition of ammonia or other complexing agents (hereafter termed the ‘ammonia-free process’). ZnS(O,OH) films were deposited by CBD under near-neutral pH conditions with zinc sulfate and thioacetamide (TAA) used as precursors of zinc and sulfur, respectively. Zn–TAA complex ions form in this pH region,18,19 thus preventing the need for external complexing agents. Furthermore, we demonstrate a novel approach by employing an oxygen plasma treatment to adjust the S/(S + O) ratio in the CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers, a key factor for the conduction band offset (CBO) at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface. With the ammonia-free and oxygen-plasma-treated CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer, the efficiency of CIGS solar cells reaches 10.1%, comparable to that of a conventionally-processed CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer. It is worth mentioning that our ammonia-free process does not require light soaking to stabilize the highest efficiency, which is superior to the conventional CBD process.
All of our experiments were performed on flexible stainless steel substrates, which have the advantages of high specific power (kW kg−1) and low production cost through roll-to-roll manufacturing.20 Our process of depositing an ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is compatible with the facilities currently used in the industry. The exclusion of ammonia and other harsh chemicals would enable CIGS solar cells to be manufactured in a cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner in the near future.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Device preparation
The CIGS solar cells had the following structure: stainless steel/Cr/Mo:Na/CIGS/CBD-ZnS(O,OH)/i-ZnO/AZO. 1.6 μm thick CIGS films were formed by selenization of Cu–In–Ga metallic precursors on Mo:Na-coated stainless steel substrates with a Cr diffusion barrier. The selenization process was achieved at 550 °C using elemental Se pellets. The CIGS samples were then coated with ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers by CBD. Some of the samples were deposited without ammonia and the others were conventionally deposited in order to see the difference between the two process routes. After the CBD process, the samples were subsequently annealed at 225 °C under atmospheric conditions. 50 nm intrinsic-ZnO and 200 nm ZnO:Al bi-layers were then deposited by radio-frequency sputtering. The solar cells were completed by evaporating 1 μm thick Al electrodes. Cells of an active area of about 0.33 cm2 were defined by mechanical scribing.
The ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer was deposited in a ZnSO4 (0.15 M)/TAA (0.03 M) aqueous solution. TAA, instead of thiourea (TU), was chosen as the sulfur source for the ammonia-free process because the deposition rate with TAA is much faster than that with TU. The pH value of the solution was about 5 without adjustment. The precursor solutions of zinc sulfate and TAA were separately preheated to 70 °C. The reaction and film deposition were then carried out by mixing the solution for 15–60 minutes at 70 °C under vigorous stirring.
The conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer was deposited in ZnSO4 (0.15 M)/ammonia (4 M)/TU (0.6 M) aqueous solution.21 The zinc sulfate was first premixed with TU for 3 minutes at 80 °C, forming [Zn(SCNH2)]2+ complexes. Ammonia was then added, and after reacting with the excess of free Zn2+ in the solution, Zn(NH3)42+ was formed. The sample was then dipped in the solution to deposit films for 17 minutes at 80 °C under vigorous stirring.
In addition to the divergent methods in the processing of the samples, the film thicknesses also varied. The thickness of the conventionally-processed buffer layers was about 50 nm. On the other hand, we varied the thickness of the ammonia-free processed ZnS(O,OH) approximately from 5 nm to 15 nm by controlling the deposition time. The film thicknesses were estimated by X-ray fluorescence intensity of the Zn Kα line.
To adjust the oxygen content in the ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers, we immersed the samples in oxygen plasma produced by a radio-frequency power source. The working gas was an Ar–O2 mixture, the working pressure was 20 mTorr, and the discharging power was 30 W.
2.2 Characterization
The morphologies of the ZnS(O,OH) films were analyzed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at 10 kV. The film compositions were studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using Zn 2p, S 2p3 and O 1s spectra. Atomic compositions were obtained by using relative sensitivity factors. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of solar cells were determined at 25 °C under illumination of an AAA solar simulator, the intensity of which was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 by using a Si solar cell certified by Fraunhofer ISE. To determine cell efficiency, the accurate cell area was calibrated by using high-resolution scanned images. External quantum efficiency (EQE) of CIGS devices was measured using a lock-in amplifier, chopped-light and monochromator system without background illumination. The light intensity of the EQE system was calibrated by Si and Ge photodiodes.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Growth mechanisms of the ammonia-free process
As mentioned in the experimental details, TAA was used as the sulfur source in the ammonia-free process. Different reaction mechanisms have been proposed depending on the pH of the solution. An overview of the deposition of sulfides using TAA can be found in ref. 18 and is briefly summarized below.
In the alkaline region, the typical region for the conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH) process, the TAA hydrolysis is considerably fast, leading to the formation of hydrosulphide ions:H3C·C(S)NH2 + 2OH− → CH3COO− + NH3 + HS−
Zinc ions then react with HS− to form ZnS. This is a process between free anions and cations.
In the intermediate pH region, particularly in weakly acidic solutions (pH > 2), on the other hand, metal sulfide forms through the complex-decomposition mechanism, as opposed to the free ion reaction in the alkaline region. The complex formation can be described as the chemical equilibrium below:19Zn2+ + nTAA ⇌ [Zn(TAA)n]2+
ZnS forms by breaking the S–C bond of the Zn–TAA complex ([Zn(TAA)n]2+). The complex formation in the intermediate pH values, in our opinion, is favorable for the suppression of the fast homogeneous precipitation that results from the reaction of free zinc and sulfur ions in the solution. Therefore, in our ammonia-free CBD-ZnS process, the pH value was kept at a near-neutral value of around 5 without deliberate adjustment. The slight acidity is due to the presence of TAA.
3.2 Surface morphology
Different process routes affected the growth of ZnS(O,OH) thin films. Thus, the morphologies of ZnS(O,OH) films grown by conventional and ammonia-free processes were examined. The morphologies of CIGS bare films are also included for comparison, as shown in Fig. 1a and b. Fig. 1c and d show SEM images of the CBD-ZnS(O,OH) thin film deposited on the CIGS surface by the conventional CBD process. A ZnS(O,OH) film was conformally grown on the CIGS surface. However, some small particles on the film surface were observed. These particles were also observed in the reported ZnS(O,OH) films deposited by the ammonia CBD-ZnS(O,OH) processes.7,22 The small particles on the film surface may be the homogeneous precipitations that resulted from the reaction of free zinc ions with S− or OH− ions in the solution. On the other hand, some cracks along the grain boundaries of the CIGS absorber were also observed, probably due to the stress relaxation at the grain boundaries. This type of crack was reported not to penetrate into the CIGS surface.9 Therefore, it may not substantially affect the solar cell performance.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of the (a), (b) CIGS surface and the CBD-ZnS(O,OH) thin films deposited on CIGS by (c), (d) conventional and (e), (f) ammonia-free processes. 

Fig. 1e and f show the SEM images of ZnS(O,OH) films grown on the CIGS surface by the ammonia-free process, which indicate that homogeneous precipitation was significantly suppressed even without external complexing agents. A pinhole-free ZnS(O,OH) film was conformally grown, as in the conventional process, but no particles on the film surface were observed. The lower number of particles could be related to the reduced amount of OH− ions as well as the formation of Zn–TAA complex ions (thereby less free Zn2+ and S2− ions) in the near-neutral pH region.
For solar cell applications, non-uniform aggregation of small particles near the p–n junction may be detrimental to device performance. The smooth and pinhole-free ZnS(O,OH) thin films grown by the ammonia-free process may be a more suitable buffer layer for CIGS-based solar cells.
3.3 Device properties

Impact of the thickness of the ammonia-free buffer layers. 
We first investigated the thickness effects of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers on device properties. Fig. 2 shows the dependence of the device parameters on the thickness (5–15 nm) of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers. The devices with the thinnest buffer layer exhibited the smallest open circuit voltage (Voc), probably due to poor coverage. When the film thickness was increased, Voc was improved. The cells with ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers of 10 nm exhibited the highest performance, with an average fill factor (FF) exceeding 0.6. The FF dropped significantly to less than 0.5 when a 15 nm thick buffer layer was employed, causing the cell performance to deteriorate. It is worth mentioning that when an even thicker (20 nm) ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer was used, a significant current blocking behavior with a low FF of 0.25 would appear (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). Compared to the reported thickness (10–100 nm) of the conventionally-processed ZnS(O,OH),6,9 the thickness of the ammonia-free buffer layer seems to critically influence cell efficiency. The thickness effects will be discussed later.
 Fig. 2  The distributions of (a) Voc, (b) FF, (c) Jsc and (d) efficiency as a function of the thickness of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers. Average values are indicated by the cross symbol (×). 


Impact of process routes of ZnS(O,OH). 
After finding out the optimal thickness for the ammonia-free buffer layer, we examined the different device properties of the best cells consisting of ammonia-free and conventionally-deposited ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers. Fig. 3 shows the J–V characteristics of the cells as a function of LS time, and the corresponding device parameters are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 3  Illuminated J–V curves of CIGS solar cells with ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers deposited by (a) conventional and (b) ammonia-free CBD processes as a function of light soaking time. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of solar cells with conventional and ammonia-free Zn(S,O,OH) buffer layers




Light soaking (LS) time (min)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)




A. Device with traditional ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer


As fabricated
0.36
21.1
0.43
3.3
5.58


5 min
0.51
23.0
0.54
6.4
3.73


10 min
0.54
23.0
0.58
7.2
3.30


30 min
0.57
25.2
0.70
10.1
1.83


 


B. Device with ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer


As fabricated
0.59
24.2
0.65
9.2
4.03




CIGS solar cells consisting of conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers usually suffer from poor device characteristics before LS,4,9,11 and our device is no exception. The device parameters of the CIGS solar cell with the conventionally-deposited ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer were improved considerably after LS and stabilized after 30 minutes of illumination (Fig. 3a). The FF increased from 0.43 to 0.70, the Voc increased from 0.36 V to 0.57 V, and the short circuit current (Jsc) increased from 21.1 mA cm−2 to 25.2 mA cm−2. This clearly indicates that the junction quality was improved after LS. Overall, the cell efficiency increased from 3.3% to 10.1% after being soaked in light for 30 minutes.
In contrast, the CIGS solar cell fabricated with the ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer did not exhibit any effects of LS, as shown in Fig. 3b. Conversion efficiency reached 9.2% in the beginning and did not significantly change after being exposed to light. Compared to the device with the conventional buffer layer, the device with the ammonia-free buffer layer exhibits similar Voc and Jsc; the efficiency loss mainly comes from the lower FF due to the high series resistance (Rs).

3.4 Composition of the ZnS(O,OH) films and its effects on device properties
The composition of the buffer layer determines the CBO at the heterojunction and thus affects the device characteristics.4,5 It has been proposed that LS would induce composition changes in ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers due to dehydration of Zn(OH)2 (reduced OH/(O + OH))23 or decomposition of ZnS (reduced S/(S + O)).4 These composition changes affect the CBO and accordingly result in the observed LS effect.
To understand the impact of buffer composition on device properties, the buffer layers produced by the conventional and ammonia-free processes were analyzed by XPS before and after LS. The O 1s orbital spectra of the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers consist of two peaks, one at 530.6 eV associated with ZnO and the other at 532 eV associated with Zn(OH)2. After deconvolution, the OH/(O + OH) ratios were obtained for all samples. An example of the deconvolution is shown in Fig. 4a. The atomic concentration of zinc, sulfur and oxygen as well as the corresponding S/(S + O) and OH/(O + OH) atomic ratios are listed in Table 2.
 Fig. 4  Oxygen 1s core levels of ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers prepared by the (a) conventional and (b) ammonia-free processes before and after light soaking. The asymmetric O 1s spectra consist of two peaks, one at the higher binding energy associated with Zn(OH)2 bonding and the other at the lower binding energy associated with ZnO. 
Table 2 Compositions of ZnS(O,OH) films prepared by (a) conventional and (b) ammonia-free CBD processes




Sample
Zn (at%)
S (at%)
O (at%)
S/(S + O)
OH/(O + OH)




(a) Conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH)
53.5
29.5
17.0
0.63
0.68


Light-soaked
52.8
26.8
20.4
0.56
0.58


(b) Ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH)
55.8
32.2
12.0
0.73
0.50


Light-soaked
54.5
32.7
12.8
0.72
0.48




Before LS, ZnS(O,OH) thin films formed by the ammonia-free process had a lower oxygen concentration and a lower OH/(O + OH) than those formed by the conventional process. This indicates that the formation of ZnO and Zn(OH)2 was indeed suppressed at the near neutral pH region. The decline of the oxygen content in the buffer layer deposited by the ammonia-free process led to a higher S/(S + O) ratio than that of the buffer layer deposited using ammonia.
After LS, the oxygen content of the conventionally-processed ZnS(O,OH) film increased significantly, as indicated by the increased intensity of the O 1s peak (Fig. 4a). As for the ammonia-free process, the oxygen content was nearly unchanged (Fig. 4b). Quantitatively, the S/(S + O) atomic ratio of the conventional buffer layer decreased from 0.63 to 0.56 after LS. However, the ratio of the ammonia-free buffer layer was stable, remaining around 0.72–0.73 before and after LS (Table 2). That is, the difference in the S/(S + O) ratio between the conventional and ammonia-free buffer layers became even larger after LS. Quantitative analysis also indicated that the OH/(O + OH) ratio in the conventionally processed film decreased from 0.68 to 0.58, while the ratio in the film deposited using the ammonia-free process did not vary substantially.
One may raise the possibility that the different effects of LS on composition resulted from the different sulfur precursors (TU or TAA). However, this is unlikely, since it has been shown that the composition of the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer changes during LS, regardless of being deposited in Zn–ammonia–TU4 or Zn–ammonia–TAA solutions.7 On the other hand, it is very likely that the addition of ammonia, or the presence of NH3 or OH− during the reaction, makes the deposited film unstable. Thus, after removing ammonia from the reaction, the deposited ZnS(O,OH) film becomes invulnerable to LS.
The LS-induced composition changes of the conventionally-processed ZnS(O,OH) films were similar to reported observations,4,23 in which the decomposition of ZnS and the dehydration of Zn(OH)2 were suggested to reduce the CBO at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface, thereby improving cell efficiency. However, LS reveals a very limited influence on the composition of the ZnS(O,OH) film grown by the ammonia-free process, which supports our observation that the device parameters are stable during LS. The stable device parameters of the CIGS solar cell fabricated with the ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer are beneficial to solar cell applications.
However, the high S/(S + O) atomic ratio in the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers grown by the ammonia-free process, which was nearly unaffected by LS, led to a large CBO at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface.5 With a large CBO, transport barriers formed easily when the thickness of the buffer layer increased;24 this explains our observation that the FF dramatically decreased at larger buffer-layer thicknesses (Fig. 2 and S1†). The current blocking behavior shown in the devices with ammonia-free, 20 nm thick ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers (Fig. S1†) reconfirms the presence of a large transport barrier. Even with the ZnS(O,OH) of optimal thickness (10 nm) employed in this study, the device still exhibited a large Rs of 4.03 Ω cm2, which was twice that of the conventional ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer. Therefore, though the ammonia-free process yields Voc and Jsc that are similar to those of the conventional process, the high Rs (due to the high CBO) reduces FF and limits the device efficiency. Reduction of the film thickness to less than 10 nm, which further reduced barrier height, did not work in terms of device efficiency, as it led to the loss of Voc (Fig. 2). Thus, to further reduce the transport barrier and improve cell efficiency, the CBO should be engineered by reducing the S/(S + O) ratio in the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer.
3.5 Band engineering by oxygen plasma post-treatment on the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer
In the ammonia CBD-ZnS(O,OH) process, the concentration of OH− in solution is high, leading to a lower S/(S + O) ratio in the deposited film than that in our ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH). By varying the concentration of the sulfur source, the S/(S + O) ratio of ZnS(O,OH) deposited with ammonia can be adjusted.6,7 However, in our ammonia-free process, the concentration of OH− in solution is very low, so the change of the sulfur concentration mainly varies the growth rate of the buffer layer instead of modifying the film composition.
One way to change the composition of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is to introduce an additional step after deposition. Plasma processes, in which the highly reactive ions and radicals are utilized, have been previously used for surface treatments or cleaning of semiconductors and metals.25,26 In order to optimize the CBO at the CIGS/ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) interface and to improve cell efficiency, oxygen plasma post-treatment was employed to increase the oxygen concentration in the buffer layer after the CBD process.
The control of the oxygen content of the ZnS(O,OH) by using oxygen plasma is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 5, where the S/(S + O) ratio in the ammonia-free buffer layer was adjusted from 0.72 to 0.58 by tuning the oxygen partial pressure. The treatment with an O2/Ar ratio of 0.6 reduced the S/(S + O) ratio to 0.62, a value similar to that of the conventionally-deposited ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer, which resulted in a more optimal CBO. Thus, the plasma-treated buffer layer with such a S/(S + O) ratio was used for further investigation.
 Fig. 5  The S/(S + O) ratio of the plasma-treated, ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers as a function of the O2/Ar ratio of the plasma treatment. The total pressure was 20 mTorr. 

Fig. 6a compares the J–V characteristics of devices consisting of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers with and without the oxygen plasma treatment. The treatment seems not to significantly alter Voc and Jsc. The EQE spectra (Fig. 6b) of both devices were also similar. However, an obvious reduction in Rs from 4.03 Ω cm2 to 2.15 Ω cm2 was observed after oxygen plasma treatment. Since the increased oxygen content in the buffer layer reduced the CBO at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface,5 the transport barrier height was reduced after oxygen plasma post-treatment, as can be inferred from the band diagrams shown in Fig. 6c. The decrease of barrier height reduced the Rs, as demonstrated by the simulation of J–V characteristics using SCAPS (Fig. S2 in the ESI†) based on the band diagrams (Fig. 6c). FF was improved from 0.65 to 0.69 due to the reduced Rs, and a cell efficiency of 10.1% was obtained with the oxygen-plasma-treated ZnS(O,OH). This 10.1% efficiency is comparable to that obtained by the conventionally-processed ZnS(O,OH). However, the deposition of ZnS(O,OH) film by the ammonia-free process is attractive not only for its stable cell parameters (no LS effect) but also for the reduction of chemical waste.
 Fig. 6  (a) The J–V characteristics of ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) devices (1) without and (2) with oxygen plasma post-treatment. (b) EQE spectra and (c) band diagrams of CIGS solar cells consisting of ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers without and with oxygen plasma post-treatment. 
The effect of the oxygen plasma treatment could be seen more evidently when the device had a thicker ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer, as shown in Fig. S1.† The FF increased from 0.25 to 0.54 after the oxygen plasma treatment due to the significantly reduced transport barrier. Further optimization of the treatment parameters and the thickness of ZnS(O,OH) would allow higher conversion efficiency in the future.
4. Conclusions
We successfully developed an ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) process in Zn–TAA solution without adding extra complexing agents. Since the reaction occurred in the near-neutral pH region, Zn–TAA complexes form, reducing homogeneous precipitation. For solar cell applications, devices with ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers exhibit Voc and Jsc similar to those of devices with conventional ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers, but the LS effect generally seen in CIGS/CBD-ZnS(O,OH) heterojunction solar cells was eliminated. ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers formed by the ammonia-free CBD process, however, had a high S/(S + O) atomic ratio, which resulted in a high CBO and a high Rs compared to the device with the conventional ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer. We have further demonstrated that oxygen plasma post-treatment is a feasible method to control the oxygen content in the buffer layer and thereby to engineer the CBO at the CIGS/ZnS(O,OH) interface. After reducing the S/(S + O) atomic ratio of the ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH), an efficiency of 10.1%, a value comparable to that obtained by the conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH) process, was achieved.
While previous studies have reported the fundamental properties of ZnS(O,OH) film produced without ammonia, our work shows that these films can be successfully implemented as buffer layers in CIGS solar cells. Our ammonia-free process for the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer is attractive for the reduced usage of hazardous chemicals, reduced amount of toxic waste, and the improved stability of photovoltaic parameters. Our approach to modifying the S/(S + O) ratio in the ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers by oxygen plasma post-treatment would allow optimization of band alignment for CIGS absorbers with various band gaps. This approach may also be applicable to other sulfoxides employed in other research fields.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, R. O. C. under Grant no. 105-3113-E-007-003-CC2, and National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, R. O. C. under Grant no. 105N509CE1. The authors thank Dong-Yi Hong and Rong-Shian Chu at Giga Solar Materials Corp. for the support for CIGS thin film fabrication.
Notes and references
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chirilă, P. Bloesch, S. Seyrling, A. Uhl, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, C. Fella, J. Perrenoud, L. Kranz, R. Verma, D. Guettler, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger, D. Brémaud and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 560–564 Search PubMed .

          M. Nakamura, N. Yoneyama, K. Horiguchi, Y. Iwata, K. Yamaguchi, H. Sugimoto and T. Kato, in Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 2014 IEEE 40th,  2014, pp. 0107–0110 .
T. Kobayashi, H. Yamaguchi and T. Nakada, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 115–121 CAS .
C. Platzer-Björkman, T. Törndahl, D. Abou-Ras, J. Malmström, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044506 CrossRef .
T. Kobayashi and T. Nakada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 526–530 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kobayashi, T. Kumazawa, Z. Jehl Li Kao and T. Nakada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 123, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klenk, A. Steigert, T. Rissom, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann, T. Unold and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 161–165 CAS .
M. Buffière, N. Barreau, L. Arzel, P. Zabierowski and J. Kessler, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 462–469 Search PubMed .
T. Nakada, T. Kobayashi, T. Kumazawa and H. Yamaguchi, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 461–466 CrossRef .
W.-H. Ho, C.-H. Hsu, T.-H. Yeh, Y.-H. Chang, S.-Y. Wei, T.-Y. Lin and C.-H. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6709–6717 Search PubMed .
D. Hariskos, B. Fuchs, R. Menner, N. Naghavi, C. Hubert, D. Lincot and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 479–488 CAS .
A. Goudarzi, G. M. Aval, R. Sahraei and H. Ahmadpoor, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4953–4957 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, S. R. Kang, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Yun, J.-H. Moon, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 2903–2911 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Agawane, S. W. Shin, A. V. Moholkar, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 535, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, G. L. Agawane, M. G. Gang, A. V. Moholkar, J.-H. Moon, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 526, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
B. Opasanont, K. T. Van, A. G. Kuba, K. R. Choudhury and J. B. Baxter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11516–11525 Search PubMed .

          G. Hodes, Chemical Solution Deposition of Semiconductor Films, CRC Press,  2002 Search PubMed .
K. Yamaguchi, T. Yoshida, D. Lincot and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 387–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Otte, L. Makhova, A. Braun and I. Konovalov, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 613–622 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ennaoui, M. Bär, J. Klaer, T. Kropp, R. Sáez-Araoz and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14, 499–511 CAS .
L. Larina, D. H. Shin, N. Tsvetkov and B. T. Ahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, D469–D473 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kushiya and O. Yamase, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 39, 2577–2582 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Pudov, A. Kanevce, H. A. Al-Thani, J. R. Sites and F. S. Hasoon, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 064901 CrossRef .
N. Korner, E. Beck, A. Dommann, N. Onda and J. Ramm, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1995, 76–77, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wu, C. I. Wu, J. C. Sturm and A. Kahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1348–1350 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6gc01293kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
H3C·C(S)NH2 + 2OH− → CH3COO− + NH3 + HS−
Zn2+ + nTAA ⇌ [Zn(TAA)n]2+

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of the (a), (b) CIGS surface and the CBD-ZnS(O,OH) thin films deposited on CIGS by (c), (d) conventional and (e), (f) ammonia-free processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  The distributions of (a) Voc, (b) FF, (c) Jsc and (d) efficiency as a function of the thickness of the ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers. Average values are indicated by the cross symbol (×).	 

 	Fig. 3  Illuminated J–V curves of CIGS solar cells with ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers deposited by (a) conventional and (b) ammonia-free CBD processes as a function of light soaking time.	 

A. Device with traditional ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer
As fabricated	0.36	21.1	0.43	3.3	5.58
5 min	0.51	23.0	0.54	6.4	3.73
10 min	0.54	23.0	0.58	7.2	3.30
30 min	0.57	25.2	0.70	10.1	1.83
 
B. Device with ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layer
As fabricated	0.59	24.2	0.65	9.2	4.03

 	Fig. 4  Oxygen 1s core levels of ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers prepared by the (a) conventional and (b) ammonia-free processes before and after light soaking. The asymmetric O 1s spectra consist of two peaks, one at the higher binding energy associated with Zn(OH)2 bonding and the other at the lower binding energy associated with ZnO.	 

(a) Conventional CBD-ZnS(O,OH)	53.5	29.5	17.0	0.63	0.68
Light-soaked	52.8	26.8	20.4	0.56	0.58
(b) Ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH)	55.8	32.2	12.0	0.73	0.50
Light-soaked	54.5	32.7	12.8	0.72	0.48

 	Fig. 5  The S/(S + O) ratio of the plasma-treated, ammonia-free ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers as a function of the O2/Ar ratio of the plasma treatment. The total pressure was 20 mTorr.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The J–V characteristics of ammonia-free CBD-ZnS(O,OH) devices (1) without and (2) with oxygen plasma post-treatment. (b) EQE spectra and (c) band diagrams of CIGS solar cells consisting of ZnS(O,OH) buffer layers without and with oxygen plasma post-treatment.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6gc01293k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
