Systematic investigation of the structure and photophysical properties of CdSe, CdSe/ZnS QDs and their hybrid with β-carotene   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA41482E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA41482E
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 26116-26126Systematic investigation of the structure and photophysical properties of CdSe, CdSe/ZnS QDs and their hybrid with β-carotene†

        
          
            T. 
            Pazhanivel
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            V. P. 
            Devarajan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Bharathi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Senthil
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Ganapathy
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Yong
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            D. 
            Nataraj
          
        
      *ab
aThinfilms & Nanomaterials Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. E-mail: de.natraj2011@gmail.com;  Fax: +91-422-2422387;   Tel: +91-422-2428444
bDRDO-BU CLS, Bharathiar University Campus, Coimbatore, India
cSchool of Advanced Materials Science & Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon Campus, Cheoncheon-dong 300, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, South Korea
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering and SAINT, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea
eSurface Chemistry Laboratory of Electronic Materials, Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea
Received 
      26th March 2013
    , Accepted 18th September 2013First published on 30th September 2013AbstractA systematic investigation was conducted to determine the excitation energy dependent emission characteristics of CdSe quantum dot–β-carotene and CdSe/ZnS core–shell quantum dot–β-carotene hybrid samples. The emission intensity was recorded at different excitation energies by continuously varying the excitation energy from the band edge value of the QDs to a maximum value. In both the hybrids, the emission intensity increased with an increase of the excitation energy and then a sudden quenching occurred, which is in contrast with the results from bare samples, where the emission intensity showed a decreasing trend at all excitation energies. The quantum yields corresponding to the maximum emission are 47.12% and 69%, for CdSe QD–βC and CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD–βC hybrids, respectively. At higher excitation energy, electrons were transferred to the molecule's LUMO level, leaving behind holes in the valance band of the QD, and thus the produced charge separated state became responsible for the PL quenching in the hybrid sample. We have confirmed this charge separated state by lifetime measurements. It is because of this PL quenching behaviour of the hybrids that the nature of the interface band structure was deduced as type I. Furthermore, because of the involvement of higher energy photons in the quenching process, the transferred electrons in the LUMO level of the molecule were known as hot electrons. The present paper discusses the excited state electron dynamics across the interface between the two hybrid materials in detail.
1. Introduction
Size tuneable optical and electronic properties of semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have made them interesting materials for various applications. Solar cell fabrication is one of the applications,1–5 in which QDs and their hybrids such as polymer–QD hybrids,6,7 CNT–QD hybrids8 and polymer–core–shell QD hybrids9–11 have been used. Tandem photo-electrochemical solar cells12 and depleted-heterojunction solar cells13 are some other new device designs recently tried for solar cell fabrication. Though QDs have several advantages over dyes, the QD sensitized cells are less efficient, because of various possible carrier loss mechanisms. Trap state assisted recombination within the QDs, recombination at the interface between the QD layer and electrolyte, recombination between the QD layer and oxide electrode and recombination between the adjacent QD layers are the major carrier loss mechanisms in the device design. By solving these problems, one can improve the performance of a QD based solar cell. Recently, there have been attempts to extract the hot carriers (electrons and holes) from QDs. If it is possible to utilize these hot carriers (for example, hot electrons) then the solar energy to power conversion efficiency of the solar cell can be increased further, because of the increase in the photocurrent or open circuit voltage of the device. The photocurrent is increased by a process known as carrier multiplication or multiple exciton generation, and the threshold energy required for this process to occur is two to three times greater than the band gap energy of the material.14–18 If the incident photon energy is below the threshold limit of producing multiexcitons, but produces hot electrons by exciting a few kT above the band edge state, then it is possible to increase the open circuit voltage of the device by directly extracting them towards the metal oxide electrode. If the extracted hot carriers, (for example, hot electrons) are injected into the metal oxide electrode, without energy and recombination losses, then the definition for the open-circuit voltage, which is usually defined as “the difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte and the conduction band (CB) edge state of the QD” could be redefined as “the difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte and the higher energy state CB level of the QD”. This fundamental difference in the carrier extraction process, then, improves the open circuit voltage of the device. However, the extraction process (of the hot carrier) has to take place before the ultra fast cooling towards the band edge states. In a bulk material, hot electron extraction is difficult, because cooling down is through continuum states on an ultrafast timescale (Fig. 1). In the absence of a phonon bottleneck effect in QDs,19 ‘Auger like’20 processes and ‘trap states’21 are the pathways of cooling and are, in fact, dominant at higher excitation energies, as reported elsewhere.22 Therefore hot electron extraction from QDs is also a challenging process.23,24
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a hot electron cooling process in the bulk material. Here, the CB states are continuous in nature and therefore the photo-generated hot electrons relax down towards the CB edge state, on an ultrafast timescale, and thereby lose their excess energy as heat. 
Recently, Anshu Pandey and Philippe Guyot-Sionnest25 have extracted hot electrons from CdSe/ZnSe core–shell QDs. They were irradiated with a resonant 4 μm intraband pulse, after an interband excitation pulse, so that the valence band edge electrons were promoted to a higher energy state CB level (1pe) of the CdSe QD, and from there they were tunnelled out through the ZnSe outer layer as hot electrons. A similar hot electron extraction process was also realised in PbSe QDs by Aydil and Zhu.19 They prepared PbSe QDs with a size distribution of 3.3–6.7 nm and deposited a layer of them onto a TiO2 pre coated surface. For a particular size, hot electron extraction was made possible from PbSe QDs, because the interface is such that the higher energy state CB electrons of this particular size QD were able to transfer to the CB level of TiO2. Apart from these attempts, silicon based thin solar cell devices have also been constructed proving the hot electron effect in device performance.26
Here, we report on the successful extraction of hot electrons from CdSe and CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs by using the β-carotene (βC) molecule as an electron acceptor. All trans βC27 is a well known linear conjugated molecule and its structure has a backbone of eleven carbon double bonds. It is well known that this molecule can establish charge transfer type interactions28 with iodine and AsF5 and therefore its natural absorption is reduced or completely disappears. However, the interaction between βC and nanostructures like QDs, nanowires, nanotubes etc., is not well studied. Recently this molecule was successfully introduced into carbon nanotubes and was investigated for its structural stability and conformation.29 Here we have used this molecule to prepare a hybrid with CdSe and CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs and investigated their photophysical properties in detail.
2. Experimental details
2.1. Preparation of CdSe and CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs
CdSe QDs were prepared by a well-known method, as reported elsewhere.30 First we prepared 0.2 mmol of selenium stock solution by dissolving selenium powder in 5 ml octadecene (ODE) and kept the solution at 180 °C for an hour. Then we prepared cadmium solution by taking CdO powder as a precursor in a mixture solution of 1 ml oleic acid (OA) and 9 ml of octadecene, which was then heated to 180 °C for an hour until a clear solution was formed. While increasing the temperature of the CdO containing solution to 220 °C, 5 ml selenium stock solution was added and the reaction was allowed to run for 15 minutes to obtain large CdSe QDs. The as prepared colloidal QD solution, after repeated washing with ethanol, was subjected to structural and optical characterization. The as obtained final product was a semisolid which was suspended in 10 ml ODE for core–shell preparation. The as prepared Zn and S precursors were simultaneously added into the already prepared CdSe QD solution (suspended in ODE), which was also kept at 180 °C. Now aliquots were taken out of this reaction every five minutes to obtain core–shell QDs. The removed aliquots were washed several times with ethanol and re-dispersed in 10 ml of hexane. To prepare the hybrid sample, different volume of βC solution (1 ml–5 ml) prepared at 0.01 mmol, was mixed with the re-dispersed QD and QD and core–shell QD solutions.
2.2. Characterization
The crystal structure and size details of the as prepared samples were obtained using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and high resolution transmission microscopy (HR-TEM). XRD patterns were recorded by using an XPERT PRO model PANalytical X-ray diffractometer. HR-TEM images were recorded with a JEOL model STEM instrument. Optical absorption and steady state photoluminescence (PL) experiments were done using a SHIMADZU 3600 UV-Vis-NIR model spectrophotometer and a Horiba Jobin Yvon spectrofluromax 4, respectively. Life time measurements were conducted using time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) and laser flash photolysis methods (details of the experiments are given in the ESI†).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structure, optical and PL study of CdSe QDs and CdSe QD–βC hybrids
Fig. S1a† shows the XRD patterns of (i) bare CdSe QDs and (ii) the CdSe–βC hybrid sample. The diffraction patterns are identical and correspond to the cubic structure of CdSe. The calculated lattice parameter value is 6.102 Å. Fig. S1b† is a high resolution TEM image of the bare sample and shows the uniform size (about 4 nm) distribution of the CdSe QDs.
Optical absorption spectra were recorded from the bare CdSe QD (curve ‘i’ in Fig. 2a) and bio-molecule samples (Fig. S2(a))† by dissolving them separately in hexane solution. The CdSe QD sample shows band edge absorption at 2.0 eV which corresponds to the 1σv–1σc transition. In addition to this, we also noticed two weak absorption bands at 2.12 eV and 2.28 eV, respectively, due to the 2σv–2σc, and 1πv–1πc transitions.31 These well resolved higher energy state CB levels indicate that the optical quality of our as prepared CdSe QD sample was good. We calculated the intraband energy separation between these two energy levels as ∼0.16 eV. The absorption spectrum of βC shows a characteristic wide band in the range between 3.54 and 2.36 eV, with a maximum at 2.73 eV. According to previous reports this absorption band is assigned to a transition from the S0 to S2 state of βC.32 The absorption spectrum corresponding to the hybrid sample consists of both of its components (curve ‘ii’ in Fig. 2a), and this means that there is no charge transfer type interaction between them. When the molecule is interacting with a quantum nanostructure, like QDs, then the relative energy level position between the molecule and nanostructure is important for the charge transfer type interaction. In our case we believe that the relative energy level position between the CdSe QD and βC molecule does not favour charge transfer and therefore no such interaction is established between them.
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical absorption spectra of (i) CdSe QD and (ii) CdSe QD–βC hybrid. The three absorption band positions of the CdSe QDs at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV, corresponding to (1σv–1σc), (2σv–2σc) and (1πv–1πc) transitions are indicated by arrows. The inset of this figure shows schematic representations of the energy levels, corresponding to the absorption maxima at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV in the band structure. (b) Emission spectra of CdSe QDs and the hybrids with different concentrations of carotene. When the added βC concentration was 5 ml, then a saturation in the emission was reached. 
Steady state PL characteristics of CdSe QDs and the hybrid samples were obtained at an excitation energy of 2.06 eV, which is equivalent to the band edge absorption value of the QDs. The quantum yield corresponding to the bare CdSe QD sample, calculated with reference to rhodamine B, is about 17.62%. In the case of the hybrid samples, the quantum yield increased with an increase in the βC concentration. When the added βC concentration was about 5 ml, then a saturated emission was noticed as shown in Fig. 2b. We also noticed a gradual shift in the emission maximum towards the higher energy side, as the βC concentration was increased from 1 ml to 5 ml (Fig. 2b). The quantum yield corresponding to the emission maximum is about 47.12%, and it is about 2.67 times higher than the yield value calculated for the bare CdSe QD sample. The improvement in the quantum yield and blue shift are due to the surface passivation effect on the QDs by βC. Because of this passivation effect, non-radiative relaxation pathways are arrested and therefore the quantum yield is increased. The reason for the observed blue shift in the emission maximum could be due to the induced Stark effect. The attachment of bio-molecules occurs via electrostatic or covalent forces; therefore, a distribution of these molecules on the QD surface imposes a net electric field across the QD core, as reported elsewhere.33 It could be because of this electric field assisted Stark effect that the energy levels of the core QDs are separated, thus resulting in a blue shift in the emission maximum.
3.2. Excitation energy dependent PL study up to 2.48 eV
Excitation energy dependent PL experiments were conducted on bare and hybrid samples. The quantum yield of the bare CdSe QDs was decreased gradually (curve ‘i’ in Fig. 3), from a value of 17.62 to 5.81%, as the excitation energy was increased from the band edge value of the QD to higher energy values. This gradual decrease in the quantum yield is usual behavior and has been observed by others. Unpassivated surface states, associated with the surface atoms of colloidal QDs, provide a nonradiative relaxation pathway or channel to the highly excited charge carriers, and therefore, the higher energy excited charge carriers are either inhibited or deviated from reaching the band edge states, from where radiative recombination results.34 In the case of the hybrids, the quantum yield increased with the increase of the excitation energy up to 2.28 eV, and this is unusual behavior. Beyond this, the quantum yield decreased suddenly (curve ‘ii’ in Fig. 3), reaching a minimum yield value of 0.25%, at 2.48 eV excitation energy and above. The initial increase in the quantum yield is due to the confinement of the photoexcited electrons in the CB offset between the QD and βC molecule. However, when the electrons were excited beyond the confinement level then there was a sudden drop in the quantum yield and that must be due to the transfer of electrons to the LUMO level of the molecule.
 Fig. 3  A plot of excitation energy dependent quantum yield values for bare (curve ‘i’) and hybrid (curve ‘ii’) samples. 
According to previous reports, either CB edge electron transfer (scheme 1 in Fig. 4) or hole transfer (scheme 2 in Fig. 4) assisted charge carrier separation is responsible for the observed fluorescence quenching in hybrid samples. However, in our case the higher energy state CB electron or hot electron transfer becomes responsible for the fluorescence quenching (scheme 3 in Fig. 4), and excitation energy dependent PL investigations have shown this clearly. Both the CB edge excited electrons and valence band (VB) edge created holes do not transfer to the molecular energy levels and this means that the nature of the interface between the CdSe QDs (of size about 4 nm) and βC molecules is type I in nature as shown in scheme 3 of Fig. 4. This hybrid sample is, therefore, different from other hybrids such as CdSe–rhodamine B,5 CdSe–methylene blue23 and CdSe–methyl viologen,24 where the molecule's LUMO level is just below the CB edge level of the CdSe QD.
 Fig. 4  Three different possible combinations of relative energy levels for CdSe QDs and βC are depicted in three different schemes. Scheme 1: the S2 level of the carotene is lower than the CB edge state of the QD, and this favours electron transfer from the QD to βC. Scheme 2: the S0 level of βC is on the higher energy side of the VB edge state of the QD, and this favours hole transfer into the S0 level. Scheme 3: the S2 and S0 levels confine the QD energy levels at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV. 
The CBoffset between the CdSe QD and βC energy levels is 0.28 eV and we obtained this by subtracting the energy value corresponding to the start of the emission quenching point (at 2.28 eV) from the optical absorption maximum value at 2.0 eV (CB edge state of CdSe QD). Using this experimental CBoffset value in eqn (1), obtained from the interfacial energy diagram (Fig. 4 ‘scheme 3’), CBoffset = EAQD − EAβC(1)where, EAQD and EAβC, respectively, correspond to the electron affinity values of the CdSe QD and βC, we have calculated EAQD. Before that, EAβC was obtained using eqn (2). For this, the experimental energy band gap (Egβ) (which is 2.57 eV) and the reported ionization potential (IP) energy (−5.84 eV)35 values of βC were used. EAβC = Ip − Egβ(2)
The obtained electron affinity value of the CdSe QDs is −3.55 eV, which closely matches with the reported experimental and theoretical EA value of CdSe QDs of similar size.36 Matching the EA value of the CdSe QDs with that of reported values has indirectly confirmed the experimental CBoffset value between these two hybrid systems.
3.3. Lifetime measurement analysis for CdSe QDs and the hybrid
To confirm the surface passivation effect on the QDs and also to calculate the electron transfer rate to the LUMO level of βC, lifetime measurements were conducted by the TCSPC method. For comparison purposes, a similar study was also conducted on a bare QD sample. Fig. 5 compares the time resolved PL decay curves measured at 2.0 eV and 2.48 eV, respectively, corresponding to the band edge state and higher energy state CB level of the CdSe QDs of the bare and hybrid samples. These emission decay profiles were fitted using the triexponential function37 (eqn (3)) and fitting parameters such as a and τ were obtained. (3)By substituting the component values of the fitting parameters a1, a2, a3 and τ1, τ2, τ3 into eqn (4), we calculated the average lifetime value <τ> for the electrons in the respective energy levels. Table 1 summarises the fitting parameters and the calculated <τ> values for both bare and hybrid samples at two different energy levels. The <τ> corresponding to the band edge state of the QD, in its hybridized state with βC is 13.76 ns and which is high in magnitude when compared to the <τ> value of 7.58 ns corresponding to the CB edge state of the bare QD. The reason for longer lifetime is attributed to the surface passivation effect on the QDs by βC. The calculated <τ> value corresponding to the higher energy state CB of the QDs, in the hybridized form with βC, is much shorter than the similar value measured from the bare QD sample (curve ‘pure 2.48 eV’) and this must be because of the transfer of electrons to the LUMO level of the molecule. By substituting the <τ> values corresponding to the higher energy level CB of the bare and hybrid QD samples in eqn (5), we have calculated the electron transfer rate (κet). The calculated electron transfer rate is 5.35 × 107 s−1 and this value is similar to the reported value calculated for the transfer of electrons from CdSe QDs to TiO2.38 However, because of the experimental limitations in measuring the shortest lifetime components at the higher energy level, the calculated rate constant is an approximate value only. (4) (5)
 Fig. 5  PL decay curves for bare and CdSe QD–βC hybrid samples recorded at 2.0 eV and 2.48 eV. 
Table 1 Lifetime values of electrons in bare QDs and hybrid samples measured at 2.48 and 2.0 eV




Sample
Emission (eV)

τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
3 (ns)
Average lifetime (ns)




Pure QDs
2.48
0.2 (8%)
2.5 (45%)
8 (47%)
6.67


2.0
0.26 (8%)
2.5 (37%)
8.6 (55%)
7.58


 
 
 
 
 
 


QDs with βC
2.48
0.47 (20%)
1.5 (33%)
5.8 (47%)
4.92


2.0
0.27 (3%)
2.2 (11%)
14 (86%)
13.76




3.4. Transient absorption analysis
Finally, to confirm the charge separated state, with electrons in the LUMO level of βC and holes in the valence band edge state of CdSe QD, nanosecond transient absorption (TA) measurements were made. The wavelength of the laser source used for this experiment was 355 nm (3.50 eV). Fig. 6 shows the TA spectra of the hybrid sample with two negative bleach minima at 2.75 and 2.0 eV. As these bleach positions match with the absorption maximum value of βC and the absorption edge value of the CdSe QDs at 2.75 and 2.0 eV, their origin is expected to come from these two respective systems. This could not be due to the direct excitation of either βC or CdSe QDs because their respective individual bleach profiles recover at a much faster rate. For example, in the case of pure βC the excited state electrons in the S2 state undergo a fast internal conversion down to the S1 state within 200 fs. Again, from there the electrons undergo a downward transition to the S0 state in a few tens of picoseconds.39–41 In the case of the CdSe QDs, the band edge bleach profile recovers within a few nanoseconds, as reported elsewhere.42 Therefore the slowly recovering negative bleach at 2.75 eV must be due to the transferred electrons from the CdSe QD to the LUMO level of the βC. As the excitation energy used in this TA experiment is well above the second absorption maximum of the QDs, the VB electrons of the photoexcited CdSe QDs are transferred to the LUMO level of the βC molecule. The transferred electrons remain there as hot electrons for a few tens of nanoseconds and therefore any further transition to this molecular level (followed by the excitation of the molecule (HOMO to LUMO)) is blocked, and as a consequence the negative bleach is obtained at 2.75 eV. To make sure that this 2.75 eV negative bleach is from βC, we measured the difference between the two peak positions at A1 and A2 which is 0.27 eV, agreeing with the vibrational level separation of βC.
 Fig. 6  The transient absorption (bleach) spectra recorded from the CdSe QD–βC hybrid sample. The negative bleach positions ‘1’ and ‘2’ correspond to the presence of holes in the VB edge state of the QDs and to the presence of transferred electrons in the LUMO level of βC, respectively. The positive bleach position ‘3’ corresponds to the absorption of βC. 
The other slow recovering negative bleach at 2.0 eV is due to presence of ‘holes’ in the VB edge state of the CdSe QD. This 2.0 eV bleach appears until the holes in the VB edge state of CdSe QD are depleted by the back transferred electrons from the LUMO level of the βC. Hot electrons in the molecular LUMO level back transfer to the CB edge state of the CdSe QDs and from there they recombine with the holes in the VB level of the CdSe QDs, and by this process (cooling process) both the molecule and the QD are brought back to their respective neutral states. Fig. 7a and b show the time dependent absorption profiles measured at the 2.0 and 2.75 eV peak positions of the bleach spectra. To determine the average lifetime values associated with this back transferring process and the cooling of the charge carriers, we fitted the absorption curves measured at 2.75 and 2.0 eV with Gaussians. A value of ∼24.44 ns was obtained from the absorption curves at 2.75 eV and this could correspond to the average lifetime value for the back transferring of hot electrons into the CB edge state of the CdSe QDs. A similar average lifetime value measured from the absorption curves at 2.0 eV is ∼30.05 ns, and this corresponds to the time taken by the back transferred electrons to recombine with the holes in the VB of CdSe QDs (cooling process). Since the average lifetime value for the cooling process is higher in magnitude than that required for the back transferring process, this indicates that the recombination process is possible only after the arrival back of transferred electrons into the CB edge state of the CdSe QDs. These differences in the <τ> lifetime values therefore suggest that the back transferring mechanism or pathway of electrons is via the CB edge state of the CdSe QDs. The slowly recovering negative bleaches at 2.75 and 2.0 eV are, therefore, direct evidence for the existence of hot electrons.
 Fig. 7  The time dependent absorption spectra measured at 2.0 eV and 2.75 eV, corresponding to the CdSe QDs and βC in the hybrid sample. The spectra were fitted with Gaussians to find the average lifetime values of electrons at the respective energy levels. 
Type I core–shell structures, such as CdSe/ZnS, are well known for their enhanced emission yield.43 However, when their outer surfaces are attached with electron accepting molecules like benzoquinone or surrounded by metal oxide nanocrystals (TiO2), then the photoexcited charge carriers are separated out of the CdSe QDs and the quantum yield from the core QD is quenched.44 In this surface functionalized type I CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD, the photoexcited electrons are thermalized to the CB edge state of the CdSe QD, and then they tunnel out to the electron accepting system (molecule or metal oxide). It is because of this thermalization process that excess energy possessed by the electrons is lost in the core QD itself (when it is excited with a higher excitation energy). Interestingly, our hybrid system, which is also type I in nature, has shown different characteristics. It exhibits both fluorescence enhancement and quenching, and one can tune the sample between these two states just by varying the excitation energy. At a lower excitation energy, because of the confinement effect, the quantum yield was increased similar to a CdSe/ZnS core–shell structure. But once the excitation energy was raised above a threshold value of 2.25 eV then the electrons were transferred to the LUMO level of the molecule, leading to the PL quenching. We believe that the electron wave function overlap with the molecular level is high for the higher energy state CB electrons of the CdSe QDs, and therefore they are transferred to the βC.
In this hybrid nanostructure, emission enhancement and quenching are possible only when βC establishes physical contact with the QD surface. This situation is equivalent to introducing a ‘hole’ on the top of a half-filled vessel such that a water outlet is possible only when the water level rises up to the ‘hole’. In a similar manner electron extraction out of the QD is possible (in this hybrid) only when electrons are raised above the CB edge state of the QD. In the oleated CdSe QD, βC intercalates inbetween the oleic acid molecules as shown in Fig. 8a and can develop either a weak physical or strong chemical binding with the QD surface. However, because βC does not have any functional groups to bind, chemical binding with the QD surface is not possible. On the other hand, a weak physical interaction is possible. A similar weak interaction between the interacting molecules and the QDs is well reported.5 To confirm the intercalation, FTIR spectrum was recorded. Fig. 9 (curve b) shows the FTIR spectrum of the CdSe–βC hybrid sample. Interestingly, we noticed a suppressed vibrational mode (of βC) at 974 cm−1, which usually originates from the –CHCH– out of plane vibration of the βC. (For comparison purposes, the FTIR spectrum was also recorded from bare QD and pure βC as shown in Fig. 9(a and c).) It can be said that this out of plane vibrational motion of the –CHCH– is constrained in this hybrid sample, and we believe that this constraint is due to the intercalation of the βC between the oleic acid molecules (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of β-carotene intercalation on the CdSe QD. (b). Schematic representation of the constrained vibrational motion of the –CHCH– out of plane vibrational mode at 974 cm−1. 
 Fig. 9  The FTIR spectra of (a) CdSe QD, (b) hybrid and (c) βC samples. The suppressed vibrational mode of the hybrid sample at 974 cm−1, in comparison to the βC sample, is highlighted by a circle. 
3.5. Excitation energy dependent PL beyond 2.48 eV
In the excitation energy dependent PL study βC was not excited up to 2.48 eV. If βC was also excited then it would influence the emission process of the hybrid sample. To determine the nature of the influence, the excitation energy dependent PL study was extended beyond 2.48 eV. When the excitation energy was around 2.75 eV, then a weak emission band started to appear at 2.0 eV as shown in Fig. 10. As this emission maximum matched the band edge value of the CdSe QDs, it could originate from the CdSe QD, and either charge or energy transfer induced interaction between βC and the QD may be responsible for it.
 Fig. 10  The excitation energy dependent emission behaviour in the range from 2.26 to 2.95 eV. 
As the LUMO level of the molecule is at a higher energy position, the excited molecules can transfer their electrons to the CB edge state of the CdSe QD, leaving behind the holes in its HOMO level. These holes will be then preferentially occupied by the electrons from the VB edge state of the QD, and as a consequence holes are introduced in the VB edge state of the QD. When these introduced holes recombine with the transferred electrons in the CB of the QD, then band edge emission is possible, or otherwise if the holes are introduced from the QD's deep VB states into the HOMO level of the molecule, followed by the excitation of the QD, then they could be depleted immediately followed by the recombination process with the excited electrons in the CB edge state of QD. By this process βC and QD are neutralised. Now once again electron–hole pairs may be introduced into the QDs, followed by the excitation of the molecule, as discussed before, and this could lead to a weak band edge emission. However, the above charge transfer induced emission must occur at all higher excitation energies. However, the experimental results have shown (Fig. 10) that this weak emission appears only when the excitation energy matches the absorption maximum of βC at 2.75 eV. This means that the charge transfer induced process is not responsible for this weak emission. The other possibility is through the energy transfer assisted process. The emission spectrum of βC is in the range from 2.48 to 1.91 eV (Fig. S2(b))† (the emission spectrum of βC given is similar to that reported elsewhere45) and as it is overlapping with the absorption band position of the acceptor CdSe QD at 2.0 eV, energy transfer assisted band edge emission from the CdSe QDs is possible.46 Some of the βC molecules which were not in contact with the QD surface, but still in close proximity can have an energy transfer type interaction with the QDs, and make them emit at the band edge value.
4. CdSe/ZnS core–shell with βC hybrid system
4.1. Structure, optical and PL emission analysis of CdSe/ZnS and its hybrid
Fig. S3† shows the XRD diffraction pattern of (i) the bare core–shell QDs and (ii) the core–shell QD–βC hybrid samples. The XRD pattern consists of diffraction peaks from both the core CdSe QDs and the ZnS shell layer. The diffraction peaks at 2θ = 25.3, 42.2 and 49.7° correspond to the CdSe QDs and the peaks at 2θ = 28.5, 33.0 and 47.5° correspond to the ZnS shell layer.47
The optical absorption spectrum was also recorded from the core–shell QD and its hybrid samples. The spectrum corresponding to the core–shell QD shows a band edge state absorption at 1.97 eV (1σv–1σc) of the core CdSe QD. Higher energy states of the core QD were also resolved at 2.10 and 2.21 eV, which respectively correspond to (2σv–2σc) and (1πv–1πc) transitions in the absorption spectrum. The spectrum corresponding to the core–shell QD–βC hybrid sample shows bands of the core–shell QD and βC as in Fig. 11a (curve ‘ii’). Here, interestingly, βC's absorption band position is red shifted, and this could be possible only if the molecule undergoes a conformation change from the trans to the cis isomer.48 The prepared core–shell QDs are monodispersed in nature and therefore βC seems to undergo a conformation change from the trans to the cis isomer, and thus becomes responsible for the red shift in the absorption maximum. One more interesting observation is that the absorption maximum of the CdSe/ZnS QDs is also red shifted with respect to the absorption maximum of the CdSe QDs (Fig. 11a). Though the size of the core CdSe QD remains the same in both the samples, because the ZnS shell layer was grown over the already prepared core CdSe QDs, there is a red shift in the absorption maximum of the CdSe/ZnS and that is due to the delocalization of excitons into the ZnS shell layer as reported elsewhere.49
 Fig. 11  (a) The optical absorption spectra of the CdSe/ZnS core shell QD and its hybrid with different concentrations of βC. The inset of this figure is an enlarged view of the absorption region and it indicates the red shift (dotted line) in the absorption of the hybrid sample. (b) The emission spectra of the core–shell QD and its hybrid with different concentrations of βC. The inset of this figure is the enlarged view of the highlighted emission region, which shows a gradual blue shift. 
The as prepared core–shell QD’s quantum yield is about 53.7% and this matches the previously reported value.50 The reason for the increased quantum yield, in comparison with the yield value of the bare QD sample, is the surface passivation effect on CdSe QD by the ZnS shell layer. We have also noticed a red shift in the emission maximum, as observed by others, and this is due to the delocalization of excitons into the ZnS shell layer.49 These observed results have, thus, confirmed the surface passivation effect on CdSe QDs by the ZnS shell layer. Emission spectra were recorded from the core–shell QD–βC hybrid sample at 2.06 eV, with different concentrations of βC (1 ml–5 ml). A maximum yield of 69% was obtained with a 5 ml concentration of βC. The observed further increase in the quantum yield could be due to the surface passivation effect of βC on the ZnS shell layer of the core–shell QDs (Fig. 11b). Defect states present in the ZnS layer are passivated by βC and hence the presence of relaxation process through these defect states is deduced and therefore the quantum yield is increased further. Fig. 12a and b show a schematic representation of the surface passivation effect on the ZnS shell layer. A slight blue shift was seen in the emission maximum (Fig. 11b), and the reason for this could be the surface passivation effect on the ZnS shell layer by βC. When the delocalization of excitons into the ZnS shell layer is responsible for the red shift in the emission maximum of the core–shell QDs, the observed blue shift in the emission maximum must be due to the decrease in the “exciton delocalization effect” into the shell layer. The observed results therefore support the surface passivation of the ZnS shell layer and the consequent enhancement in the emission yield.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a ZnS passivated CdSe QD and the relative energy levels. The “dashes” in the ZnS are the surface states. The photo excited electrons are relaxing through the surface states of the ZnS, and this process limits the emission yield. (b) The carotene passivated core–shell QD. Here surface states are removed, therefore the electron relaxation processes through these levels are blocked. 
4.2. Excitation energy dependent PL behaviour of the CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid system
We observed the emission behaviour of the core–shell–βC hybrid sample by exciting it at higher energies, well above the second absorption maximum of the core CdSe/ZnS QD at 2.21 eV. Fig. 13 shows the excitation energy dependent quenching behaviour of the CdSe/ZnS and CdSe/ZnS–βC samples. Here also the emission quenching started suddenly, once the excitation energy was increased beyond the absorption maximum (curve ‘ii’ in Fig. 13) at 2.21 eV. However, up to 2.21 eV, the emission intensity was increased and this means that the excited electrons up to this energy level are confined in the core QD. The sudden quenching was due to the transfer of higher energy (hot) electrons from the CdSe QD to the LUMO level of the βC. Though a similar higher energy CB electron transfer process becomes responsible for the quenching in the CdSe–βC and CdTe–βC51 hybrid systems, here the electron transfer process occurs via tunneling through the ZnS shell layer. It has to be pointed out that the emission quenching is not complete as was noticed in the case of the CdSe–βC and CdTe–βC hybrid systems. We believe that the mismatching of energy levels across the barrier (ZnS layer), limits the tunneling probability, because of the violation of the tunnelling conditions (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 13  A plot of excitation energy dependent quantum yield values for bare CdSe/ZnS (curve ‘i’) and CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrids (curve ‘ii’) samples. 
 Fig. 14  The relative energy level positions of the LUMO level of the molecule and the higher energy state CB level of the QD, separated by a ZnS barrier. Tunnelling occurs when the levels match. 
4.3. Lifetime measurements of the CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs and the hybrid system

Fig. 15 shows the TCSPC spectra recorded from the CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD sample, in comparison with that of the bare CdSe QDs sample. The <τ> value, at the CB edge state of the ZnS passivated CdSe core QD sample, is ∼17.55 ns and which is high in magnitude when compared to the value of ∼7.5 ns measured from the CB edge state of the bare CdSe QD sample. This higher lifetime value is usually attributed to the surface passivation effect as reported elsewhere.52
 Fig. 15  The PL decay curves of CdSe QD, CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD and CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid samples measured at 1.97 and 2.48 eV. 
Furthermore, to determine the electron transfer rate from the core CdSe/ZnS QD to the βC molecule, TCSPC spectra were recorded from the hybrid sample as well. Table ST1† summarizes the <τ> values for the CdSe/ZnS core–shell and its hybrid. The measured lifetime values also support the surface passivation effect on the core–shell QD sample by the molecule. For example an increase in the <τ> value at the CB edge state of the core CdSe/ZnS QD, in the presence βC, is due to the surface passivation effect of βC on the ZnS shell layer. The <τ> of the hybrid sample at 2.48 eV is 11.04 ns and which is much lower than a similar value from the core–shell QD measured from a similar energy position. This difference in lifetime value is due to the transfer of hot electrons from the core–shell QD to the βC.
4.4. Transient absorption analysis of the CdSe/ZnS core–shell and its hybrids
We also recorded bleach spectra from the core–shell–βC hybrid sample and confirmed the presence of transferred hot electrons in the LUMO level of the molecule. Fig. 16a shows the transient absorption spectra or bleach spectra of the core–shell–βC hybrid sample which shows two negative bleach minima at 2.69 and 1.97 eV, respectively, due to the presence of transferred electrons in the LUMO level of βC and due to the presence of holes in the VB edge state of the core CdSe QDs. Both the negative bleaches recovered slowly, because of the back transfer process. Once the negative bleach at 2.69 eV recovered completely then the positive bleach started to appear at 2.69 eV due to the band edge absorption of the molecule. This positive bleach position of the molecule is red shifted because of the conformation change as discussed before. We also noticed one more positive bleach at 2.25 eV, as observed by several others in the core–shell structure, and this is due to the Stark effect.31 The Stark field is developed inside the QD when its surface is passivated by the ZnS shell layer, and consequently the energy levels are split. When the absorption takes place, with the involvement of these split energy levels then the positive bleach starts to appear at 2.25 eV. We have also noticed a similar positive absorption bleach at 2.25 eV from the bare CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD sample as shown in Fig. S4.†
 Fig. 16  (a) Transient absorption spectra recorded from the CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD–βC hybrid sample. The negative bleach positions ‘1’ and ‘2’, respectively, correspond to the presence of holes in the VB edge state of the QD and to the presence of transferred electrons in the LUMO level of the βC. The positive bleach position ‘3’ corresponds to the absorption of βC and the positive bleach position ‘4’ corresponds to the Stark effect assisted positive absorption. (b) The time dependent transient absorption profile measured at 1.97 and 2.69 eV of the CdSe/ZnS QD–βC hybrid sample. 
The <τ> value for the back transfer process was obtained by fitting the bleach spectra at 2.69 eV (Fig. 16b) and this resulted in a value of 39 ns. This value is high in magnitude when compared to a similar value obtained at 2.75 eV from the ZnS passivation free CdSe QD–βC hybrid sample. The obtained higher lifetime value suggests that the transferred electrons spend more time in the βC molecule, in the case of the core–shell QD–βC hybrid sample, than in the case of the CdSe QD–βC hybrid, and that must obviously be due to the presence of the ZnS shell layer, which blocks the easy back transfer of electrons from βC to the core QD in the core–shell structure. This delayed back transfer pathway is again via the CB edge state of the QD. The electrons tunnel through the ZnS layer and step down to the CB edge state of the CdSe QD and from there they recombining with the holes in the VB edge state of the CdSe QD. It is for this reason that the negative bleach at 1.97 eV recovers after the recovery of the negative bleach at 2.69 eV. The <τ> value obtained from the bleach profile at 1.97 eV is ∼41 ns, which is high in magnitude when compared to the lifetime value calculated at 2.69 eV and this difference in lifetime value confirms the back transfer pathway. We also recorded the emission spectrum from the core–shell–βC hybrid system by extending the excitation energy range up to 2.95 eV (Fig. S5†), in a similar way as we did in the case of the CdSe QD–βC hybrid system. Here, we couldn't see the weak emission band at 2.75 eV as we have seen previously in CdSe–βC hybrid system. This could be because the luminescence was not quenched completely in the case of the core–shell–βC hybrid sample and therefore the emission from the core CdSe QD, due to energy transfer type interaction (if any), could not be observed in this sample.
5. Conclusion
In summary, we found that the photoluminescence behaviour of the CdSe QDs, CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs and the hybrid with βC samples are excitation energy dependent and therefore both the emission enhancement and quenching were tuneable in these systems. Importantly, we demonstrated that it is possible to extract hot electrons from the photoexcited CdSe and CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs by using βC as an electron acceptor. The relative energy level positions of the QD and βC favour hot electron transfer from the higher energy state CB level of the QD into the LUMO level of the βC. In the case of the CdSe/ZnS core–shell system, the ZnS shell layer passivates the CdSe QD surface and therefore the quantum yield was increased to 53.7%. At the same time, in the case of the CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid system, the ZnS shell layer is passivated by βC and hence, the quantum yield is improved further to 69%. In the CdSe–βC hybrid system, the charge separated state, with electrons in the LUMO level of βC and holes in the VB of the QD, existed for a much longer time (a few tens of ns) and therefore the slowing down of the cooling process was possible in our hybrid sample. This cooling process was still slowed down in the CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid system, because the ZnS shell layer blocked the easy flow of electrons back to the core QD. If these hot electrons, present in the LUMO level of the βC can be further extracted to the electrodes of a solar cell device, without any energy loss, then the energy conversion efficiency of the cell could be increased further, and our future research will be on this problem.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank ER & IPR of DRDO, New Delhi for providing funds for this project. We thank Dr P. Ramamurthy, Director, National Centre for Ultrafast Processes, Chennai for conducting the Time Resolved Photoluminescence Studies. We also thank Dr P. V. L. Rao, Director and Dr K. Kadirvelu, joint Director of DRDO-BU CLS, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore for extending the centre facility.
References
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisator, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 325 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, Z. Huang, D. Wu and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 962 CAS .
T. Xu and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2700 CAS .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19 CAS .
A. Kongkanand, R. M. Dominguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kuo, D. M. Liu, S. Y. Chen and C. C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6780 RSC .
M. Zhang, Y. N. Wang, E. Moulin, D. Grutzmacher, C. J. Chien, P. C. Chang, X. Gao, R. Cariusb and J. G. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10441 RSC .
F. Li, D. I. Son, T. W. Kim, E. Ryu, S. W. Kim, S. K. Lee and Y. H. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 061911 CrossRef .
M. Shalom, I. Hod, Z. Tachan, S. Buhbut, S. Tirosh and A. Zaban, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1874 CAS .
G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Physica E, 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Franceschetti and Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 136805 CrossRef .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Efros, V. A. Kharchenko and M. Rosen, Solid State Commun., 1995, 93, 281 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Schroeter, D. J. Griffiths and P. C. Sercel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Wang, M. Califano, A. Zunger and A. Franceschetti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 056404 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Z. Huan, Y. Yang, H. Zhu and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Matylitsky, L. Dworak, V. V. Breus, T. Basche and J. Wachtveit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pandey and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 45 CrossRef CAS .
D. Timmerman, I. Izeddin, P. Stallinga, I. N. Yassievich and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 105 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Liebler and T. D. McClure, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 1996, 9, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Harada, Y. Furukawa, M. Tasumi, H. Shirakawa and S. Ikeda, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 73, 4746 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata and H. Kataura, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 437 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, H. Wang, Z. Tang, J. Z. Niu, S. Lou, Z. Du and L. S. Li, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1733 RSC .
Z. J. Jiang and D. F. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4594 CAS .
H. Kandori, H. Sasabe and M. Mimuro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 2671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dybiec, G. Chornokur, S. Ostapenko, A. Wolcott, J. Z. Zhang, A. Zajac, C. Phelan, T. Sellers and D. Gerion, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263112 CrossRef .
R. J. Ellingson, J. L. Blackburn, P. Yu, G. Rumbles, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7758 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beck, H. Stiel, D. Leupold, B. Winter, D. Pop, U. Vogt and C. Spitz, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2001, 1506, 260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, M. Califno and S. E. Watkins, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. James, Y. S. Liu, P. De Mayo and W. R. Ware, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 120, 460 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ritz, A. Damjanovic, K. Schulten, J. P. Zhang and Y. Koyama, Photosynth. Res., 2000, 66, 125 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Billsten, D. Zigmantas, V. Sundstrom and T. Polivka, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 355, 465 CrossRef .
E. Papagiannakis, J. T. M. Kennis, I. H. M. Van Stokkum, R. J. Cogdell and R. Van Grondellel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 6017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Protiere and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Makha, H. Yan, P. Lemmens and S. K. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 627 Search PubMed .
S. L. Bondarev and V. N. Knyukshto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 225, 346 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kloepfer, N. Cohen and J. L. Nadeau, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17042 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cingarapu, Z. Yang, C. M. Sorensen and K. J. Klabunde, J. Nanomater., 2012, 12, 312087 Search PubMed .
H. Hashimoto, Y. Koyama, Y. Hirata and N. Mataga, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 3072 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Rosenthal, J. McBride, S. J. Pennycook and L. C. Feldman, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pazhanivel, D. Nataraj, V. P. Devarajan, K. Senthil, M. Seol and K. Yong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 261110 CrossRef .
H. M. Gong, Z. K. Zhou, H. Song, Z. H. Hao, J. B. Han, Y. Y. Zhai, S. Xiao and Q. Q. Wang, J. Fluoresc., 2007, 17, 715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD, TCSPC, laser flash experimental details, optical absorption and emission spectra for βC, TA spectra for CdSe/ZnS QDs and extended PL spectrum for CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid system are available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41482eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a hot electron cooling process in the bulk material. Here, the CB states are continuous in nature and therefore the photo-generated hot electrons relax down towards the CB edge state, on an ultrafast timescale, and thereby lose their excess energy as heat.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical absorption spectra of (i) CdSe QD and (ii) CdSe QD–βC hybrid. The three absorption band positions of the CdSe QDs at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV, corresponding to (1σv–1σc), (2σv–2σc) and (1πv–1πc) transitions are indicated by arrows. The inset of this figure shows schematic representations of the energy levels, corresponding to the absorption maxima at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV in the band structure. (b) Emission spectra of CdSe QDs and the hybrids with different concentrations of carotene. When the added βC concentration was 5 ml, then a saturation in the emission was reached.	 

 	Fig. 3  A plot of excitation energy dependent quantum yield values for bare (curve ‘i’) and hybrid (curve ‘ii’) samples.	 

 	Fig. 4  Three different possible combinations of relative energy levels for CdSe QDs and βC are depicted in three different schemes. Scheme 1: the S2 level of the carotene is lower than the CB edge state of the QD, and this favours electron transfer from the QD to βC. Scheme 2: the S0 level of βC is on the higher energy side of the VB edge state of the QD, and this favours hole transfer into the S0 level. Scheme 3: the S2 and S0 levels confine the QD energy levels at 2.0, 2.12 and 2.28 eV.	 
CBoffset = EAQD − EAβC	(1)
EAβC = Ip − Egβ	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  PL decay curves for bare and CdSe QD–βC hybrid samples recorded at 2.0 eV and 2.48 eV.	 

Pure QDs	2.48	0.2 (8%)	2.5 (45%)	8 (47%)	6.67
2.0	0.26 (8%)	2.5 (37%)	8.6 (55%)	7.58
 	 	 	 	 	 
QDs with βC	2.48	0.47 (20%)	1.5 (33%)	5.8 (47%)	4.92
2.0	0.27 (3%)	2.2 (11%)	14 (86%)	13.76

 	Fig. 6  The transient absorption (bleach) spectra recorded from the CdSe QD–βC hybrid sample. The negative bleach positions ‘1’ and ‘2’ correspond to the presence of holes in the VB edge state of the QDs and to the presence of transferred electrons in the LUMO level of βC, respectively. The positive bleach position ‘3’ corresponds to the absorption of βC.	 

 	Fig. 7  The time dependent absorption spectra measured at 2.0 eV and 2.75 eV, corresponding to the CdSe QDs and βC in the hybrid sample. The spectra were fitted with Gaussians to find the average lifetime values of electrons at the respective energy levels.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of β-carotene intercalation on the CdSe QD. (b). Schematic representation of the constrained vibrational motion of the –CHCH– out of plane vibrational mode at 974 cm−1.	 

 	Fig. 9  The FTIR spectra of (a) CdSe QD, (b) hybrid and (c) βC samples. The suppressed vibrational mode of the hybrid sample at 974 cm−1, in comparison to the βC sample, is highlighted by a circle.	 

 	Fig. 10  The excitation energy dependent emission behaviour in the range from 2.26 to 2.95 eV.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The optical absorption spectra of the CdSe/ZnS core shell QD and its hybrid with different concentrations of βC. The inset of this figure is an enlarged view of the absorption region and it indicates the red shift (dotted line) in the absorption of the hybrid sample. (b) The emission spectra of the core–shell QD and its hybrid with different concentrations of βC. The inset of this figure is the enlarged view of the highlighted emission region, which shows a gradual blue shift.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a ZnS passivated CdSe QD and the relative energy levels. The “dashes” in the ZnS are the surface states. The photo excited electrons are relaxing through the surface states of the ZnS, and this process limits the emission yield. (b) The carotene passivated core–shell QD. Here surface states are removed, therefore the electron relaxation processes through these levels are blocked.	 

 	Fig. 13  A plot of excitation energy dependent quantum yield values for bare CdSe/ZnS (curve ‘i’) and CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrids (curve ‘ii’) samples.	 

 	Fig. 14  The relative energy level positions of the LUMO level of the molecule and the higher energy state CB level of the QD, separated by a ZnS barrier. Tunnelling occurs when the levels match.	 

 	Fig. 15  The PL decay curves of CdSe QD, CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD and CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid samples measured at 1.97 and 2.48 eV.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Transient absorption spectra recorded from the CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD–βC hybrid sample. The negative bleach positions ‘1’ and ‘2’, respectively, correspond to the presence of holes in the VB edge state of the QD and to the presence of transferred electrons in the LUMO level of the βC. The positive bleach position ‘3’ corresponds to the absorption of βC and the positive bleach position ‘4’ corresponds to the Stark effect assisted positive absorption. (b) The time dependent transient absorption profile measured at 1.97 and 2.69 eV of the CdSe/ZnS QD–βC hybrid sample.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD, TCSPC, laser flash experimental details, optical absorption and emission spectra for βC, TA spectra for CdSe/ZnS QDs and extended PL spectrum for CdSe/ZnS–βC hybrid system are available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41482e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
