Isothermally crystallized perovskites at room-temperature   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01967D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01967D
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3412-3422Isothermally crystallized perovskites at room-temperature†

        
          
            Kai 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Congcong 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yuchen 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Ye
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jungjin 
            Yoon
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mohan 
            Sanghadasa
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Shashank 
            Priya
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: kaiwang@psu.edu; tvy5161@psu.edu; sup103@psu.edu
bMaterials Research Institute, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
cHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, China
dU.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Aviation & Missile Center, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 35898, USA
Received 
      18th June 2020
    , Accepted 18th August 2020First published on 21st August 2020AbstractThe solution processability of photoactive halide perovskites differentiates them from traditional inorganic semiconducting materials that require multiple post-processing steps such as thermal/vacuum/blowing- and solvent-assisted treatment. Here we report a technical breakthrough of isothermally crystallizing high-quality perovskite films at room-temperature (RT) without the necessity of any post-processing. This process takes advantage of our discovery of a metastable intermediate of lower-dimensionality formed by amine-assisted crystallographic lattice expansion from an initial three-dimensional perovskite. Using in situ optoelectrical/chemical and ex situ structural characterizations, a detailed understanding of the low-dimensional metastable intermediate is developed. In conjunction with the metastable intermediate, the rapid evaporation of the solvent and amine facilitates ultra-fast crystallization at RT within seconds. This RT rapidly synthesized perovskite film exhibits a carrier diffusion length of 2.9 μm and {00} preferred orientation with an ultrahigh Lotgering factor of 97%. These films are highly compatible to conventional or inverted devices, demonstrating 22.3% and 23.1% power conversion efficiencies, respectively.

Broader context
Solution-processed halide perovskite materials represent a new cheap but efficient photovoltaic technology. Further optimizing the manufacturing to a lower-cost-floor with higher throughput is key to its technical transition. Most current research and development rely on high boiling-point precursor ink systems to deposit the perovskite polycrystalline film, followed by an unavoidable thermal annealing process. Here we introduce a paradigm methodology to spontaneously crystallize the perovskite at room-temperature (RT) within seconds and exempt any post treatment (such as annealing, antichemical washing or vacuum treatment). This method takes advantage of a metastable intermediate formed by amine-assisted crystallographic lattice expansion and its dispersion in volatile solvents. The fast solvent evaporation and escape of the amine from the lattice induce a quick transition into a final 3D β-phase crystal with the whole process occurring at room temperature spontaneously. The resultant film exhibits high crystalline quality and device efficiency over 22%. This method is expected to be a novel general route for halide perovskite synthesis with less energic effort and this isothermal RT-semiconductor is also expected to make a difference in broader communities beyond solar cells.

Introduction
Organic–inorganic halide perovskites (HPs) exhibit benign electronic band structure,1 heavy-metal spin–orbital coupling,2 polaronic charge transfer and electron–phonon coherence.3,4 These characteristics impart attractive optoelectronic features such as large light-extinction, long carrier lifetimes and high charge carrier mobilities,1,5 making them excellent candidates for photovoltaic (PV) applications. HPs can be easily processed using regular solution-processing techniques, such as spin-coating, which distinguishes them from traditional photovoltaic (PV) semiconductors such as silicon (Si), cadmium telluride (CdTe), copper indium gallium selenide (GIGS), etc.6 There is continuous need to obtain PVs with low levelized-cost-of-electricity (LCOE) and simplified environment-friendly manufacturing techniques.7 Here we demonstrate a fundamental breakthrough in manufacturing of HPs allowing room-temperature (RT) isothermal crystallization within ten seconds.
Perovskite precursor inks typically consist of high-boiling-point solvents such as dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL), which require redundant solvent-removal steps (with elevated temperatures of 70–150 °C) and long processing times (long-time solvent/thermal annealing and/or light sintering for facilitating Ostwald ripening)8 to thermodynamically favor crystal growth. Perovskite crystallization requires a chemical potential difference in order to drive the precipitation of crystals from the precursor solution, which is proportional to the logarithm of the supersaturation ratio.9 The initiation of supersaturation can be achieved through temperature control (cooling),10 concentration modulation,11 or adjustments of the solution activity coefficients such as those in the solvent/antisolvent methodologies.12 Prior attempts at developing low-temperature synthesis processes for HPs suffer from the use of nonvolatile ionic precursor systems for initiating the supersaturation, and general RT processing is accompanied by subsequent laminar gas-blowing,13 anti-solvent washing14 or instant laser annealing.15 In addition, all the prior processes require a mild thermal annealing (TA) procedure in order to induce supersaturation to drive the crystallization (summarized and discussed in Supplementary Note S1, ESI†). After crystallization, the residual high-boiling-point solvent molecules remaining within the polycrystalline film are believed to induce localized lattice distortion by forming perovskite–solvent chelated intermediates.16 These residual chemicals within films introduce non-perovskite phases of poor electronic properties and severe scattering and recombination loss of photoexcited charge carriers. More volatile solvents such as 2-methoxyethanol (with a boiling point of 125 °C)13,17,18 and other nonionic solvent systems19 have been attempted, which exhibit rapid drying behavior at RT and reduced ionic coordination with the perovskite precursors. However, a TA process is inevitable in order to foster crystallization and remove remaining solvents.
Here we demonstrate a fundamentally transformative manufacturing strategy that enables rapid crystallization in ten seconds at RT without the need for any TA or postprocessing. This strategy takes advantage of an alcohol-soluble metastable intermediate formed by insertion of amine (R–NH2) molecules into the perovskite crystallographic lattice. The fast solvent evaporation and spontaneous escape of the amine from the lattice induce a quick transition into the tetragonal β-phase perovskite crystals at RT. This approach leads to a high-quality polycrystalline thin film with ultrahigh [00] preferred orientation, a ∼2.8 μm charge diffusion length and super film uniformity. Solar cells designed using these ultra-fast synthesized perovskite films exhibit high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs > 22%) in both conventional and inverted configurations.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1A provides evidence of the effectiveness of this synthesis process. Text is written on paper by using this rapidly crystallizing perovskite ink at RT and this text is crystallized within seconds. This writing could be accomplished even at a high relative humidity (RH) of ∼90% (Supplementary Video 1 (SV 1 Writing Crystal on Paper), ESI†). We use various amine (R–NH2) molecules coupled with different volatile solvents for preparing the ink and find a wide range of compatibility for the ink system. The options include methylamine, ethylamine and propylamine with solvents of ethanol, isopropanol and tetrahydrofuran (Fig. S1, ESI†). Unless otherwise stated, a prototype RT-ink containing MAPb(I1−xClx)3 in a mixed solvent system consisting of CH3NH2, EtOH, and acetonitrile is used here for the film and device fabrication and characterization in the following text. Both doctor-blade-coating and spin-coating processes (Supplementary Video 2 (SV 2 Spin & Blade Coating), ESI†) have been attempted and the film fabrication is found to be complete within 30 seconds (Fig. 1B). The crystallization mechanism has been studied in detail using in situ optical microscopy study (in Supplementary Note S2, ESI†). The RT isothermal crystallization follows the classic nucleation and crystal growth theory and we used the Avrami equation developed for isothermal conditions to reveal the kinetic nature of the crystallization. The Avrami constant (n)20 has been obtained with a value of n = 3.63 > 3, suggesting that the crystal growth involves three-dimensional growth with rapid nucleation due to the fast supersaturation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis shows that the RT isothermally crystallized perovskites (RT-perovskite) exhibit a film morphology consisting of densely packed hexagonal grains with an average size of ca. 700 nm (Fig. 1C). In the out-of-plane direction, there is only a single large grain (Fig. S2A, ESI†) throughout the film (Fig. 1D), suggesting well-aligned crystal growth during the RT isothermal process. To further prove this, we also compare the SEM images of the perovskite film prepared from the typical ink followed by a thermal-annealing process (TA-perovskite) (Fig. S2B, ESI†). The top-view SEM image of the TA-perovskite displays various grain boundaries and a nonuniform surface; meanwhile, the cross-sectional images exhibits a less aligned grain feature, consistent with its X-ray diffraction (XRD) result (Fig. S2B, ESI†), indicating the co-existence of multiple scattering facets in the vertical direction. In comparison, the RT-perovskite exhibits well aligned grains (Fig. 1D and Fig. S2B(iii), ESI†). We also estimate the trap density of different films in Fig. S2B(iv) (ESI†) by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method and observe a four-fold lower trap density of the RT-perovskite (1.6 × 1015 cm−3) than the TA-perovskite (6.5 × 1015 cm−3). These vertically aligned single grains in the RT-perovskite secure the efficient out-of-plane flow of charge carriers in two-terminal PV cells, as the photogenerated carriers only transport within one single perovskite grain to reach the corresponding electrodes and do not encounter a grain boundary. Such avoidance of a grain boundary in carrier transport minimizes the scattering loss by disordered states21 and reduces the recombination loss by ionic impurities or traps (Shockley–Read–Hall recombination) located at grain boundaries.22 In a larger scope of 10–100 μm, the RT-perovskite film displays an ultrahigh uniformity as viewed from the cross-sectional SEM (Fig. S3, ESI†) and a specular surface in a macroscopic view (Fig. S1B, ESI†). We also tune the composition of the perovskite system of MAPb(I1−xClx)3. By changing x from 0 to 0.1 (Fig. S4, ESI†), we obtained an optimal crystal-grain feature at x = 0.05. Hence, a perovskite of MAPb(I1−xClx)3 with x = 0.05 is used for the following investigation. In order to distinguish the ink that could isothermally crystallize at room-temperature (RT-ink) from those typical inks that need a thermal annealing process (TA-ink), we tested the ionic current through a cyclic voltammetry measurement using both inks as the electrolyte. The TA-ink shows an ionic current over 200 μA under 0.4 V (Fig. 1F), which is over three orders of magnitude larger than that of 100 nA from the RT-ink (Fig. 1E). This indicates a significantly lower concentration of ions in the RT-ink. In addition, we also execute an electrolytic cell test. Both inks are subjected to a 1.5 V DC bias for 5 h. As can be seen in the photograph inserted in Fig. 1F, the color of the TA-ink turns into orange due to the precipitation of I2, and at the cathode there is precipitation of lead. This result verifies the existence of free I− and Pb2+ in the original TA-ink, which can experience a redox reaction under an external bias. In contrast, the RT-ink does not show such an observation (Fig. 1E), suggesting the formation of already assembled intermediate clusters so that there are minimized free ions in the system.
 Fig. 1  Writing with RT rapidly crystallized perovskite ink. Snapshots showing the rapid RT-isothermal crystallization (A) during handwriting on paper and (B) in a blade-coated film. Microscopic features of the RT isothermally crystallized film in a (C) top-view and (D) cross-sectional view acquired from scanning electron microscopy. (E and F) Verification of minimized free ions in the RT-ink: (E) a RT-ink: ionic current vs. bias plot (measured by a cyclic voltammetry measurement using the ink as the electrolyte), the insert picture shows a RT-ink under a bias of 1.5 V after aging for 5 h, exhibiting no precipitation; (F) a typical TA-ink: ionic current vs. bias, the current at 0.4 V exhibits a value over 200 μA, a picture shows a TA-ink under a bias of 1.5 V after aging for 5 h, where the I2 and Pb precipitations suggest the proceeding of the redox reaction. 
To further understand the compositional evolution during the RT isothermal crystallization process, we employed an in situ steady-state photoluminescence (PL) study (Fig. S9, ESI†). During the drying of the wet film, there is a notable redshift of the PL peak (Fig. 2B), indicating a bandgap reduction as schematically depicted in Fig. 2A. As the electronic band structure in momentum space is correlated with the crystallographic structure in real space,23 this PL change is an indication of the crystallographic phase evolution from some metastable intermediate states to the final tetragonal β-phase states during the RT isothermal crystallization. Based upon the PL emission wavelength, we classify this RT isothermal process into three states (Fig. 2B): (i) wet film (from 0 to 40 s, no obvious PL emission), (ii) drying intermediate (from 40 to 207 s, PL gradually red-shifts towards 806 nm) and (iii) dry perovskite (after 207 s, PL peak fixed at 806 nm). Samples of drying intermediate and final dry perovskite films were analyzed to compare their individual PL feature in the excitation–emission map (Fig. 2C). By exciting with an identical light source with a wavelength range from 300 to 350 nm, the dry perovskite displays a narrow emission peak at 806 nm. In contrast, the intermediate phase shows a wide emission range peak at a short wavelength around 750 nm, indicating a gradual metamorphosis with a larger bandgap. To understand this larger bandgap intermediate phase, we characterize both the chemical and structural fingerprint. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) coupled with an in situ mass spectroscopy (MS) technique is employed to trace the whole RT isothermal crystallization process. Fig. 2D shows the TGA and temperature curve, including three thermal steps of RT-isothermal drying (before 1820 s), warming to 100 °C (1820 to 2270 s) and 100 °C isothermal treatment (after 2270 s). During the RT isothermal step, there is a spontaneous weight loss which results from the evaporation of solvents (ACN and EtOH) and the amine (MA, or methylamine), as characterized by the in situ MS in Fig. 2E. After 1200 s in the RT isothermal process, the weight loss reaches saturation as all the volatile molecules have evaporated. The weight remains constant even after warming up to 100 °C and holding there. This indicates that all the volatile molecules have already evaporated during the RT isothermal drying process. Overall, the final weight ratio remains constant at 57.5 wt%, which agrees well with the starting concentration of the ink. Such RT isothermal crystallization is quite different from that of the conventional TA-perovskite.
 Fig. 2  Compositional evolution during RT isothermal crystallization. (A) Illustrative band-gap reduction and (B) corresponding experimental photoluminescence (PL) change upon time-development during the film drying process. (C) Time-integrated PL-map comparison between the dried crystal and drying intermediate. (D) Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the RT isothermal crystallization ink coupled with (E) an in situ mass spectroscopy (MS) investigation. (F) Schematic illustration of the amine escaping from the lattice of the intermediate perovskite during the drying and (G) an XRD comparison between the final crystal and intermediate perovskite. 
We compare the TGA-MS spectra of the whole crystallization process of the RT- and TA-perovskite in Fig. S12 (ESI†) and find that in the TA-perovskite the solvent evaporation of DMF only occurs at elevated temperatures and it needs over 40 minutes for removal due to the much higher boiling point of DMF (153 °C). In comparison, the RT-perovskite ink displays rapid co-evaporation of the solvent molecules and amine, leading to a quick phase transition from the intermediate state to the final perovskite crystal. This intermediate phase exhibits a larger bandgap and shows a quick transition to the tetragonal β-phase perovskite at RT. To further characterize the intermediate state, we modify the synthesis of the RT-ink by dispersing the perovskite single crystal in a highly concentrated amine solution at lower temperature and obtain the intermediate state in a form of a single crystal (Fig. S13, ESI†). The intermediate perovskite displays a colorless feature with a large optical bandgap of 2.26 eV (Fig. S14, ESI†), which corresponds to the increased {00} interplanar distance1 in the crystallographic lattice according to the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis presented in Supplementary Note S3 (ESI†). This increase of the interplanar {00} spacing can be ascribed to the insertion of amine molecules between the neighboring [PbI6]4−-octahedral sheets, bridging by hydrogen-bond interactions24,25 and formation of the lower-dimensional metastable intermediate of MA(A)nPb(I1−xClx)3, where A is the amine and we use I and Cl as mixed halogens as this exhibits higher charge carrier mobility.26 The intermediate state contains the coordination of Pb with both the halogens and amine (Fig. S15, ESI†). During the RT isothermal process, amine molecules escape (driven by the high tendency of evaporation due to the low boiling point, bp, of the amine, e.g., −6 °C of MA) from the lattice leading to the interplanar distance reduction as schematically depicted in Fig. 2F. This spontaneous process at RT leads to the lattice collapse from the intermediate lamellar structure to the final tetragonal β-phase. To quantify, Fig. 2G shows the XRD result. The intermediate perovskite displays a {00} interplanar distance of 12.33 Å corresponding to a (002) XRD peak at 7.16°, while in distinct contrast the final tetragonal β-phase perovskite displays an interplanar distance of 6.32 Å corresponding to a (002) peak at 14.01°. Hence, during the RT isothermal process the trapped amine molecules within the perovskite intermediate could escape the lattice along with the evaporation of volatile solvents, which leads to the lattice size reduction from a lower-dimensional planar structure with a larger c-axis interplanar distance to a three-dimensional structure with a c-axis shrunken lattice. This structural evolution gives rise to the PL peak redshift in Fig. 2B. Interestingly, we find that the intermediate film exhibits a strong orientation along the [00] direction, which has been successfully inherited by the final tetragonal β-phase. Accordingly, the resultant RT-perovskite film exhibits a strong [00] orientation (Fig. S16, ESI†) with an ultrahigh Lotgering factor27 of 97%. This highly ordered lattice packing is expected to generate reduced disordered electronic states and induce a higher charge transport property.
We then utilize an optoelectronic study to characterize the electrical transport property of the RT-perovskite. The Tauc plot (in accordance of the model of direct allowed band-to-band transition) reveals an optical bandgap of 1.55 eV and the time-integrated PL displays a narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 72 meV (Fig. S17, ESI†), close to that of single crystals.28 Prior reports have shown a range of bandgaps from 1.55 eV to 1.6 eV for TA-perovskites of identical composition,29,30 while here we found that the RT-perovskite displays a consistent bandgap of 1.55 eV regardless of either powder or crystal precursors (Fig. S17C, ESI†). This suggests that the RT isothermal crystallization method is more reliable in reproducing high quality crystals, as the crystalline fingerprint, such as the degree of crystallinity, orientation and grain structure, has a strong influence on the optical and electronic properties and the highly controllable crystalline feature in the RT perovskite leads to a consistent bandgap. The electronic properties (such as the charge carrier diffusion length, defined as the average distance that an excited carrier will travel before recombining) are important in determining the overall performance of optoelectronics. Longer diffusion lengths are indicative of efficient transport and better device performance, which could also originate from higher crystal quality. The carrier diffusion length is measured through PL spectroscopy on the perovskite in the presence or absence of a quenching layer. SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD have been used as an electron and hole quencher, respectively, due to their picosecond charge extraction ability when interfacing with perovskites.31,32 By comparing time-resolved and time-integrated PL on the bare perovskite against perovskite/SnO2 and perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, carrier diffusion signatures of the different perovskites can be achieved. For the RT-perovskite, the time-integrated PL shows significant quenching after interfacing with either SnO2 or spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S18 (ESI†) shows a quenching factor of 24 and 40 with SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively). The high degree of quenching comparable to that in donor–acceptor bulk heterojunction (BHJ) systems33 suggests sufficient charge extraction. Time-resolved PL reveals substantially shortened lifetimes of 18.1 and 16.9 ns upon interfacing with SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively, in distinct contrast to that of the bare perovskite of 5.3 μs (Fig. 3A). Similar trends are found in the reference film of the TA-perovskite in Fig. 3B. Notably, the RT-perovskite exhibits a much longer carrier lifetime of 5.3 μs than that of 310.2 ns in the TA-perovskite. This could be ascribed to the higher crystalline quality of the RT-perovskite film and indicates reduced scattering loss. Overall, both perovskites exhibit a sufficiently quenched PL yield and a shortened lifetime with a feature of mono-exponential decay upon interfacing quenching layers. These results are compared with the carrier diffusion length obtained by the following equation derived from continuum theory using a diffusion model (detailed in Supplementary Note S4, ESI†):34 (1)with LD being the diffusion length, L the film thickness, and τD and τ0 the monoexponentially fitted lifetimes in the presence or absence of the quencher, respectively. Fig. 3C displays the plot of LD against τD/τ0 where diffusion lengths of 2.9 and 2.8 μm of holes and electrons, respectively, are found in the RT-MAPb(I1−xClx)3 perovskite film, 3-fold larger than those of 917 and 883 nm in the TA-MAPb(I1−xClx)3 perovskite. The μm-scale diffusion length in this Cl-doped I-based TA-perovskite35 is ascribed to the halogen ionic-radius difference, which stabilizes the phase of the continuous solid solution,29 or slower MA rotational dynamics evidenced in quasielastic neutron scattering (QENS) investigations36 or other mechanisms.37 Higher crystallinity leads to more efficient charge transport and in the limited case of single-crystalline MAPb(I1−xClx)3, the diffusion length exceeds 380 μm.38 The RT-perovskites display long diffusion lengths on the order of 2.8–2.9 μm, which can be related to the highly ordered crystalline packing and [00] orientation inherited from the intermediate state during the RT isothermal crystallization. The balanced electron and hole diffusion also imply balanced charge transfer in devices.
 Fig. 3  Long carrier diffusion length in the RT-perovskite film and the PV device performance. Diffusion model analysis for the charge carrier diffusion length (A–C): time-resolved PL decay transients for the perovskite without the quencher layer (blue), with the electron quencher layer (green), and with the hole quencher layer (red), where the perovskite is the (A) RT-perovskite and (B) TA-perovskite, respectively. (C) Exciton diffusion length versus PL lifetime quenching ratios on the basis of eqn (1) (specified in Supplemental Note S4, ESI†). Conventional device performance (D–F): (D) cross-sectional SEM image of the whole n-i-p device using the RT-perovskite; (E) (i) J–V characteristics and (ii) static current density at the maximal output power point and corresponding PCE measured as a function of time for both the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite based n-i-p device; (F) statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite. Inverted device performance (G–I): (G) cross-sectional SEM image of the whole p-i-n device using the RT-perovskite; (H) (i) J–V characteristics and (ii) static current density at the maximal output power point and corresponding PCE measured as a function of time for both the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite based p-i-n device; (I) statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite. 
To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of solar cells based on these RT-perovskites and qualify their performance in devices, we prepared both conventional (p-i-n) and inverted (n-i-p) structured PVs. The conventional device consists of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact-TiOx (c-TiOx, considering the oxygen vacancy,39,40 a substoichiometric expression of “TiOx” rather than “TiO2” is used here)/mesoporous-TiOx (m-TiOx)/RT-perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/gold (Au), with FTO being the front cathode collecting electrons and Au being the back anode collecting holes, respectively. Fig. 3D shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the conventional device, visualizing the layer-by-layer device structure. The RT-perovskite layer displays a uniform thickness of ca. 420 nm and an ultra-flat surface, even when viewed over a larger surface area (Fig. S19, ESI†). This enables a homogeneous electrical contact with the top buffer and back electrode. Under AM 1.5 illumination, the RT-perovskite based conventional device exhibits a PCE of 22.32% (independently certified at 22.28% in Fig. S20, ESI†) with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 24.33 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.16 V and fill factor (FF) of 79.1% under reverse scan conditions (from positive bias to zero), and 24.35 mA cm−2, 1.154 V, and 78.32% with a PCE of 22.01% under forward scan conditions (from zero to positive bias) (Fig. 3E(i)). In comparison, the TA-perovskite device exhibits a relatively lower PCE of 20.03% under reverse scan conditions and an even lower PCE of 19.01% under forward scan conditions. Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectroscopy coupled with photocurrent integration reveals an integrated current of 24.24 and 23.67 mA cm−2 for the RT- and TA-perovskite based device, respectively (Fig. S21, ESI†), in good agreement with the numbers (24.33 and 23.91 mA cm−2, respectively) extracted from the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. Notably, the RT-perovskite device displays a noticeable increase in FF, with a higher shunt resistance (Rsh) of 4.9 kΩ cm2 and smaller series resistance (Rs) of 3.8 Ω cm2, respectively, compared to those of Rsh = 0.93 kΩ cm2 and Rs = 5.7 Ω cm2 from the TA-perovskite based device. This is consistent with the long carrier diffusion length of the RT-perovskite and is indicative of efficient charge transport behavior throughout the device. Particularly at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, the flat surface of the perovskite secures synchronized charge transfer from the perovskite to the spiro-OMeTAD buffer in terms of the whole interface, and thereby less higher order carrier recombination. Fig. 3E(ii) compares the static photocurrent of devices biased at their corresponding maximum power points (Vmp). Vmp for each device is individually calculated from Fig. S22 (ESI†). The RT-perovskite device displays a stabilized maximal output power of 22.36 mW cm−2 corresponding to a PCE of 22.36% consistent with the value of 22.32% obtained from the J–V characteristics. In comparison, the TA-perovskite exhibits a mild value of 19.88 mW cm−2 (corresponding to a PCE of 19.88%), which is consistent with the typical state-of-the-art values.41 We also investigate the statistics of the conventional device using either the RT- or TA-perovskite in Fig. 3F by measuring photovoltaic parameters from 20 individual devices. The data for the RT-perovskite based devices exhibit a narrower distribution, as indicated by a smaller standard deviation (σ) as shown in Table S4 (ESI†) (σRT,PCE = 0.48% vs. σTA,PCE = 0.82%).
Inverted solar cells consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO)/NiOx/RT-perovskite/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/silver (Ag) have been prepared and characterized to further evaluate the performance of the RT-perovskite. Fig. 3G displays the cross-sectional SEM images of the fabricated devices. Similar to the conventional device, the inverted structure with the RT-perovskite thin film coated on top of NiOx also exhibits excellent uniformity and ultrahigh flatness as seen in Fig. S23 (ESI†). This homogeneity is important for the efficient charge transfer across the backside contact on the microscale and correlates with a higher performance at the device scale, as leakage, shunting and other meso-structural defects are minimized due to the high film uniformity. Accordingly, the crystallinity, homogeneity and charge transport property of the RT-perovskite enable a high PCE of 23.07% in the inverted device, coupled with a simultaneously improved JSC of 23.52 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.158 V and FF of 84.70% under a reverse scan condition (from positive bias to zero), and 24.48 mA cm−2, 1.156 V and 84.58% with a PCE of 22.96% under a forward scan condition (from zero to positive bias) (Fig. 3H(i)). In comparison, the TA-perovskite devices exhibit a substantially lower PCE of 20.85% (under reverse scan) and 19.88% (under forward scan). We notice a significant improvement in FF from 78.9% to 84.7% owing to the superior charge transport property of the RT-MAPb(I1−xClx)3 perovskite and an obvious voltage change from 1.142 to 1.158 V. Such a change is also present in conventional structure devices (Fig. 3E(i)).
In solar cells VOC is determined by the quasi-Fermi level (quasi-FL) separation at the contacts and in the ideal case it corresponds to the quasi-FL separation in the absorber, assuming infinite carrier mobility and well-aligned bands. In practice, the finite electron and hole conductivities limit the carrier transport by a potential loss, which is reflected in the quasi-FL gradients and finally an internal voltage drop. More efficient charge transport corresponds to lower charge losses (multiple recombination mechanisms including Shockley–Read–Hall recombination, higher order nongeminate recombination etc.)42 and lower potential losses within the device and hence simultaneously enlarged FF and VOC. Another result of efficient charge transfer is a higher external quantum efficiency of photon to current conversion. The corresponding IPCE spectra also verify a higher quantum efficiency in the RT-perovskite device, showing an integrated current density of 23.22 mA cm−2, which is larger than that of 22.78 mA cm−2 in the TA-perovskite device (Fig. S24, ESI†). Fig. 3H(ii) compares the static efficiency of the inverted devices biased at their own corresponding Vmp extracted from the power–bias curve in Fig. S25 (ESI†). The RT-perovskite device shows a steady maximal output power of 23.06 mW cm−2, corresponding to a PCE of 23.06%, higher than the TA-counterpart of 20.55 mW cm−2, and a higher consistency with the PCE values obtained from the J–V characteristics. We also compare the statistics of inverted devices using the data obtained from 20 individual devices. As shown in Fig. 3I, the solar cells fabricated using the RT-perovskite exhibit higher average parameters and a narrower distribution compared to their TA-counterparts. Specifically, the RT-perovskite device displays a PCE of 22.10 ± 0.49% (mean ± standard deviation) compared to that of 20.29 ± 0.93% from the TA-perovskite device. The smaller standard deviation (σ) implies a higher reproducibility, ascribed to the excellent film uniformity and high surface flatness.
Conclusion
In addition to the MAPb(I1−xClx)3 RT-perovskite, we also synthesize RT-perovskites with compositions of MAPbI3 and MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 and characterize the corresponding device performance. Both perovskites exhibit fast crystallization isothermally at RT with a specular film surface. The corresponding device also shows an enhanced efficiency: the RT-MAPbI3 based device shows a PCE of 21.93% compared to that of 19.50% from its TA-counterpart (Fig. S26, ESI†); the RT-MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 based device shows a PCE of 22.19% compared to that of 20.06% from its TA-counterpart (Fig. S27, ESI†). These results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness and high performance of the isothermally crystallized RT perovskite ink for fabrication of efficient solar cells. We attribute this exciting achievement to the volatile solvent and metastable intermediate state, which synergistically foster a rapid phase transition at RT. Overall, we have developed a proto RT-ink (with a CH3NH2/EtOH/acetonitrile solvent system) for isothermally crystallizing the perovskite, which sets an over 22% efficiency baseline for RT-perovskite solar cells. Using this RT-ink protocol, by further exploring other amine and volatile solvent candidates (as exemplified in Fig. S1, ESI†), delicately tuning the compositions and their ratios, and expanding their universality to more perovskites, we anticipate that there will be more opportunities in the future that could be derived from this paradigm methodology.
Methods
Materials
Lead(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.99%) and lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.99%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Spiro-OMeTAD, TiO2 paste (18NR-T), and FTO/glass (ITO/glass) were purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp, Dyesol, and Nippon Sheet Glass, respectively. Other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. These chemicals include: methylammonium iodide (MAI), methylammonium bromide (MABr), methylammonium chloride (MACl), amine solutions including ammonia solution (28–30 wt% in water and 2.0 M in ethanol), methylamine solution (33 wt% in absolute ethanol, 40 wt% in water and 2.0 M in tetrahydrofuran), ethylamine solution (2.0 M in tetrahydrofuran) and propylamine (≥99%) and solvents such as dimethylformanmide (DMF, extra dry, 99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, extra dry, 99%), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB, extra dry, >98%), chlorobenzene (CB, extra dry, 99.8%), and isopropanol (extra dry, 99.8%).
Single-crystal synthesis
Single-crystals of MAPbI3, MAPb(I1−xClx)3 and MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 were synthesized according to prior reports.43 Taking MAPbI3 as an example, a precursor solution containing 5.54 g PbI2 and 1.91 g MAI in 10 mL GBL was prepared at 70 °C, followed by filtration with a PVDF filter with a pore size of 0.2 μm. The resultant pale-yellow solution was transferred into an oil bath with a gradual temperature increase from RT to 110 °C within 2 h and maintained at 110 °C for 3 h. After that, single crystals of black MAPbI3 perovskite were obtained, which were further cleaned by diethyl ether washing and then dried in a vacuum oven overnight. For MAPb(I1−xClx)3 and MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites, small amounts (3 mol% to 5 mol%) of PbX2 and MAX (X is either Cl or Br) were added to the above PbI2 and MAI precursors and 2.5 vol% DMSO was added as a secondary solvent.44 The other steps are similar to those for MAPbI3.
Room-temperature isothermally crystallized perovskite ink (RT-ink) preparation
The RT isothermally crystallized perovskite ink was prepared by dispersing the above single crystals into a series of amine-solutions, where the amine could be ammonia (NH2), methylamine (CH3NH2), propylamine (CH3(CH2)2NH2), etc., and the solvent could be water, ethanol, isopropanol, tetrahydrofuran, etc. (as can be seen in Fig. S1, ESI†). Additionally, the solvent of acetonitrile was further added into the above system to dilute the solution towards a final concentration of 1.0 to 1.2 M. For example, in the case of the MAPb(I1−xClx)3 RT-ink (using CH3NH2/EtOH) used in the solar cell preparation, 734 mg MAPb(I1−xClx)3 single crystal was added to 600 μL CH3NH2/EtOH (33 wt%) and further diluted with 400 μL acetonitrile to synthesize a 1.2 M ink. For other RT-inks shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), all are prepared by dispersing perovskite crystals into a mixture solution of (1) an amine (could be NH2, CH3NH2, CH3(CH2)2NH2, etc.), (2) a volatile solvent (could be water, ethanol, isopropanol, tetrahydrofuran, etc.), and (3) acetonitrile. The final concentration of the perovskite and amine is 1.2 M and 4.8 M, respectively. The volume ratio between the volatile solvent and acetonitrile is 6:4. After ultrasonication (110 W, 40 kHz) for 10 minutes, a yellowish solution was obtained, which will be used for RT isothermal crystallization later. It should be noted that all the amines and solvents for this system have low boiling points. The whole ink preparation was executed at room temperature in an ambient atmosphere. The ink was used after preparation and normally storage in a refrigerator for less than 48 h would not significantly affect the result. But direct use after preparation and ultrasonication before use are suggested.
Spin-coating the room-temperature isothermally crystallized perovskite (RT-perovskite) thin film
The RT-perovskite thin film was spin-cast from the above RT-ink with a spin-rate of 4000 to 6000 rpm for 60 s through a dynamic spin-coating process. Here the dynamic spin-coating process refers to a process where the ink is dropped on an already steadily spinning substrate. As shown in a supplementary video (SV 2. Spin & blade Coating) (ESI†), the film exhibited a quick color change into a black film within several seconds. A relatively long spinning period of 60 s was used to adequately remove the solvent. We used this spin-coating method to prepare the RT-perovskite film for solar cells.
Doctor-blading the RT-perovskite thin film
The RT-ink also exhibited good compatibility for RT-processed blade coating. The supplementary video (SV 2. Spin & blade Coating) (ESI†) also shows a primitive blade coating process on a glass substrate using the above RT-ink. In this preliminary blade process, we used a glass rod to spread the ink on a UV-plasma treated FTO/glass substrate. The RT-ink displayed good wettability on the substrate and the wet film also exhibited quick darkening upon solvent evaporation within several seconds.
Solar cell fabrication

Conventional (n-i-p) structure. 
An n-i-p device with an architecture of FTO/c-TiOx/m-TiOx/RT-perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au was used to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the RT-perovskite. The FTO/glass substrates were first ultrasonicated in a bath of detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol successively, followed by drying in an oven overnight. After that, the dried substrate was further cleaned using UV ozone plasma for 45 min. A compact layer of TiOx was then spin-coated on these precleaned FTO/glass substrates from a mildly acidic titanium isopropoxide solution (prepared by slowly adding a mixed solution containing 35 μL 2 M HCl and 2.53 mL ethanol into another mixed solution of 369 μL titanium isopropoxide and 2.53 mL ethanol) with a spin-rate of 2000 rpm, followed by thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. A mesoporous TiOx layer was then spin-coated on top of the compact layer at a spin-rate of 6000 rpm, from an ethanol solution containing TiO2 paste (18NR-T), α-terpineol and ethanol (TiO2:α-terpineol:ethanol = 1:3:1.5 wt%). After that, the substrates coated with both TiOx layers were annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. After cooling down to RT, the substrates were further treated with UV ozone plasma for 15 min. The RT-perovskite layers were then spin-coated on top according to the above methods. Notably, the RT-perovskite experienced a quick phase transition and no additional processing (neither an anti-solvent process nor post-solvent annealing) was needed. A spiro-OMeTAD layer was then spin-cast on top with a spin-rate of 4000 rpm. Finally, a 75 nm gold electrode was thermally deposited to finalize the device.


Inverted (p-i-n) structure. 
A p-i-n device with an architecture of ITO/NiOx/RT-perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag was used to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the RT-perovskite. Pre-cleaned ITO/glass substrates (through ultrasonication in a bath of detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol sequentially) were treated with UV-ozone plasma for 40 minutes before use. ∼40 nm thick NiOx was spin-cast from a NiOx nanocrystal solution at a spin-rate of 3000 rpm for 40 s according to prior reports.45 The RT-perovskite photoactive layer was spin-coated on top of NiOx according to the above method using the RT-ink. After that, a PCBM electron transfer layer was spin-coated on top of the perovskite using a PCBM/chlorobenzene solution (10 wt%) at a spin-rate of 1000 rpm for 50 s. Lastly, a 5 nm thick bathocuproine (BCP) and a 100 nm thick aluminum (Al) film were sequentially deposited on top through a shadow mask in a vacuum of <5 × 10−6 mbar to finalize the device.

Material characterization
All the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained from a LEO 1530 MERLIN (FESEM) in the Nanofabrication lab in the Materials Research Institute (MRI) at Penn State. For the perovskite material, the acceleration voltage was determined to be 5 kV. Both secondary electron (SE) and backscattered electron (BSE) detection through in-lens secondary electron detectors and conventional Everhart–Thornley style detectors, respectively, were used during the characterization. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and conductive-AFM (C-AFM) images were recorded through a Bruker Innova AFM platform from the Energy and Environmental Sustainability Laboratories (EESL). The sample was coated directly on an ITO/glass substrate, which was further contacted with the bottom electrode of the AFM platform. A Pt-coated AFM tip was used as the top moving electrode at a scan rate of 1.0 Hz. The in situ isothermal RT crystallization study through optical microscopy and a corresponding video (Supplementary Video [SV 4. In situ OM Observation], ESI†) was performed on an OlympusMX50 microscope in the Materials Characterization Lab (MCL) at Penn State. The TGA/MS study was performed on a Discovery Series TGA Q5500 coupled with a Discovery MS (TA Instruments). When coupled with the MS, the gaseous species that were released as a result of evaporation were transferred to the MS through a heated capillary transfer line. The quadrupole detector in the MS provides chemical determination (mass/charge from 1 to 300) of evolved gases, giving information about reactions in real time. The in situ PL study on the RT isothermal crystallization process was performed on an FLS1000 photoluminescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments). Specifically, the RT-ink was directly dropped on a glass substrate which was under a repeat scan by the spectrometer. To acquire a high time resolution, the data points for each single PL spectrum were reduced to a number of 31. For the time-integrated PL map, samples were tested at various excitation (300 to 350 nm) and emission wavelengths (420 to 940 nm). The excitation incident takes place at the perovskite thin film surface with the opposite side being the quenching layers in the case of the quenching experiment. For the charge carrier diffusion length study, the time-resolved PL of different samples was excited at 650 nm and detected at 800 nm. For each sample, the same incident intensity and optical path were applied. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy was performed using a UH4150 (HITACHI). XRD patterns were obtained using a Malvern Panalytical Empryean X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, Rietveld refinement of the PXRD data was performed with the General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) software).
Device characterization
All the solar cell devices were tested under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5) provided by a xenon solar simulator (Solar Simulator, Class AAA, IEC/JIS/ASTM, 450 W xenon, 2 × 2 in.) in an ambient atmosphere. The intensity of the simulator was calibrated to 100mWcm−2 by using a standard reference Si solar cell (Calibrated Reference Cell, Meter, KG3 Window, certified by NREL). The spectral mismatch factor was maintained in a narrow range of 0.99 to 1. The device area (0.096 cm2) was defined by a metal aperture placed on top of the cell. J–V curves were obtained in either reverse (high voltage to low voltage) or forward scans (low voltage to high voltage) with a scan step of 20 mV and scan rate of 200 mV s−1, if not stated otherwise, using a Keithley digital source meter (Model 2400). The static output power was measured by recording the continuous photocurrent of the device held at a constant voltage bias close to its maximum power point (Vmp). Vmp was determined by plotting the power against the voltage. Photocurrent tracking was performed by electrochemical workstations programmed for current–time characterization. The IPCE was recorded using a QuantX 300 (ORIEL) in an ambient atmosphere.
Author contributions
K. W. designed the research and S. P. supervised the whole project. K. W., C. W. and Y. H. synthesized the materials, fabricated the devices and characterized the device performance. K. W. and Y. H. performed other characterizations in MCL. D. Y., T. Y. and J. Y. helped in analyzing the data. K. W. wrote the manuscript and all the authors were actively involved in the discussion, analysis and revision.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Material Characterization Lab (MCL) and Nanofabrication Lab in Penn State for assistance with material characterization tests. We also thank South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics for independent efficiency authentication tests. K. W. and Y. H. acknowledge the support from Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-17-1-0341. S. P. acknowledges the financial support from the Office of Naval Research through grant number N000141912461. D. Y. acknowledges the support from NSF-Crest grant number HRD 1547771. TY and JY acknowledge the support from Office of Naval Research through grant number N000141712520.
References
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 106, 100580 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–16 Search PubMed .
F. Thouin, D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. Quarti, D. Cortecchia, I. Bargigia, D. Beljonne, A. Petrozza, C. Silva and A. R. Srimath Kandada, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, K. Yao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800455 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, M. Saliba, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606258 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. Van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Hou, D. Yang and S. Priya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24661–24690 RSC .
V. L. Pool, B. Dou, D. G. Van Campen, T. R. Klein-Stockert, F. S. Barnes, S. E. Shaheen, M. I. Ahmad, M. F. A. M. Van Hest and M. F. Toney, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef .
B. wook Park, N. Kedem, M. Kulbak, D. Y. Lee, W. S. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Seo, G. Kim, K. J. Kim, T. J. Shin, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and S. Il Seok, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Cheng and Z. Ge, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8–12 RSC .
Y. Deng, C. H. van Brackle, X. Dai, J. Zhao, B. Chen and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, C. Wu and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jeon, H. M. Jin, S. H. Lee, J. M. Lee, H. Il Park, M. K. Kim, K. J. Lee, B. Shin and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7907–7914 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu, D. Yang, Z. Yang, D. Wang, X. Zhu, X. Zhang, S. Zuo, J. Feng and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14744–14750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lee, D. N. Jeong, T. K. Ahn and N. G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2393–2401 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Hendriks, J. J. Van Franeker, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. A. Anta, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2346–2354 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Hou, D. Yang, W. Li, G. Deng, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, Joule, 2020, 4, 615–630 CrossRef CAS .
J. Málek and T. Mitsuhashi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 83, 2103–2105 CrossRef .

          S. Baranovskii and O. Rubel, in Springer Handbooks, Springer,  2017, p. 1 Search PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Serway, C. J. Moses and C. A. Moyer, Modern physics, Thomson Brooks/Cole,  2005 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, D. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9705–9709 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, Z. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Fan, H. Meng, R. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Hagfeldt, G. Cui and S. Pang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5587–5591 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, J. H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 RSC .
F. K. Lotgering, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1959, 9, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, T. Masuda, L. Han and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12081–12088 RSC .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Graẗzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, X. Meng and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701883 CrossRef .
J. K. J. vanDuren, X. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425–434 CrossRef .
S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, A. Solanki, H. A. Dewi, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27119–27123 RSC .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schuck, F. Lehmann, J. Ollivier, H. Mutka and S. Schorr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11436–11446 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Unger, A. R. Bowring, C. J. Tassone, V. L. Pool, A. Gold-Parker, R. Cheacharoen, K. H. Stone, E. T. Hoke, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7158–7165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Li, W. Deng and R. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8431–8435 RSC .
A. Klasen, P. Baumli, Q. Sheng, E. Johannes, S. A. Bretschneider, I. M. Hermes, V. W. Bergmann, C. Gort, A. Axt, S. A. L. Weber, H. Kim, H. J. Butt, W. Tremel and R. Berger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 13458–13466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Yim, C. L. Pang and G. Thornton, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 036806 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, F. So and S. W. Tsang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1611–1624 RSC .

          T.-C. Sum and N. Mathews, Halide perovskites: photovoltaics, light emitting devices and beyond, Wiley-VCH,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. MacUlan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
T. Song, L. Gao, L. Y. Qi Wei, S. Wang, M. Zhang, L. Zhao and Y. Cai, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 015522 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Chang, Z. Lin, L. Zhou, Z. Yang, D. Chen, C. Zhang, S. F. Liu and Y. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703432 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01967dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
Solution-processed halide perovskite materials represent a new cheap but efficient photovoltaic technology. Further optimizing the manufacturing to a lower-cost-floor with higher throughput is key to its technical transition. Most current research and development rely on high boiling-point precursor ink systems to deposit the perovskite polycrystalline film, followed by an unavoidable thermal annealing process. Here we introduce a paradigm methodology to spontaneously crystallize the perovskite at room-temperature (RT) within seconds and exempt any post treatment (such as annealing, antichemical washing or vacuum treatment). This method takes advantage of a metastable intermediate formed by amine-assisted crystallographic lattice expansion and its dispersion in volatile solvents. The fast solvent evaporation and escape of the amine from the lattice induce a quick transition into a final 3D β-phase crystal with the whole process occurring at room temperature spontaneously. The resultant film exhibits high crystalline quality and device efficiency over 22%. This method is expected to be a novel general route for halide perovskite synthesis with less energic effort and this isothermal RT-semiconductor is also expected to make a difference in broader communities beyond solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Writing with RT rapidly crystallized perovskite ink. Snapshots showing the rapid RT-isothermal crystallization (A) during handwriting on paper and (B) in a blade-coated film. Microscopic features of the RT isothermally crystallized film in a (C) top-view and (D) cross-sectional view acquired from scanning electron microscopy. (E and F) Verification of minimized free ions in the RT-ink: (E) a RT-ink: ionic current vs. bias plot (measured by a cyclic voltammetry measurement using the ink as the electrolyte), the insert picture shows a RT-ink under a bias of 1.5 V after aging for 5 h, exhibiting no precipitation; (F) a typical TA-ink: ionic current vs. bias, the current at 0.4 V exhibits a value over 200 μA, a picture shows a TA-ink under a bias of 1.5 V after aging for 5 h, where the I2 and Pb precipitations suggest the proceeding of the redox reaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Compositional evolution during RT isothermal crystallization. (A) Illustrative band-gap reduction and (B) corresponding experimental photoluminescence (PL) change upon time-development during the film drying process. (C) Time-integrated PL-map comparison between the dried crystal and drying intermediate. (D) Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the RT isothermal crystallization ink coupled with (E) an in situ mass spectroscopy (MS) investigation. (F) Schematic illustration of the amine escaping from the lattice of the intermediate perovskite during the drying and (G) an XRD comparison between the final crystal and intermediate perovskite.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Long carrier diffusion length in the RT-perovskite film and the PV device performance. Diffusion model analysis for the charge carrier diffusion length (A–C): time-resolved PL decay transients for the perovskite without the quencher layer (blue), with the electron quencher layer (green), and with the hole quencher layer (red), where the perovskite is the (A) RT-perovskite and (B) TA-perovskite, respectively. (C) Exciton diffusion length versus PL lifetime quenching ratios on the basis of eqn (1) (specified in Supplemental Note S4, ESI†). Conventional device performance (D–F): (D) cross-sectional SEM image of the whole n-i-p device using the RT-perovskite; (E) (i) J–V characteristics and (ii) static current density at the maximal output power point and corresponding PCE measured as a function of time for both the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite based n-i-p device; (F) statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite. Inverted device performance (G–I): (G) cross-sectional SEM image of the whole p-i-n device using the RT-perovskite; (H) (i) J–V characteristics and (ii) static current density at the maximal output power point and corresponding PCE measured as a function of time for both the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite based p-i-n device; (I) statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using the RT-perovskite and TA-perovskite.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01967d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
