Atomic/molecular layer deposition for energy storage and conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00156B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00156B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 3889-3956Atomic/molecular layer deposition for energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Yang 
            Zhao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Liu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Keegan 
            Adair
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feipeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yipeng 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tianpin 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xuanxuan 
            Bi
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Khalil 
            Amine
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Xueliang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B9, Canada. E-mail: xsun9@uwo.ca
bSchool of Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC V1V 1V7, Canada
cX-ray Science Division, Advanced Photon Sources, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
dChemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. E-mail: junlu@anl.gov
Received 
      28th July 2020
    First published on 1st February 2021AbstractEnergy storage and conversion systems, including batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, and photoelectrochemical water splitting, have played vital roles in the reduction of fossil fuel usage, addressing environmental issues and the development of electric vehicles. The fabrication and surface/interface engineering of electrode materials with refined structures are indispensable for achieving optimal performances for the different energy-related devices. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular layer deposition (MLD) techniques, the gas-phase thin film deposition processes with self-limiting and saturated surface reactions, have emerged as powerful techniques for surface and interface engineering in energy-related devices due to their exceptional capability of precise thickness control, excellent uniformity and conformity, tunable composition and relatively low deposition temperature. In the past few decades, ALD and MLD have been intensively studied for energy storage and conversion applications with remarkable progress. In this review, we give a comprehensive summary of the development and achievements of ALD and MLD and their applications for energy storage and conversion, including batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, and photoelectrochemical water splitting. Moreover, the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms involved in different devices will be deeply reviewed. Furthermore, the large-scale potential of ALD and MLD techniques is discussed and predicted. Finally, we will provide insightful perspectives on future directions for new material design by ALD and MLD and untapped opportunities in energy storage and conversion.
Yang Zhao
Dr Yang Zhao is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Zhao received his BS and MS degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical University (Xi'an, China) in 2011 and 2014, respectively. He obtained his PhD degree under the supervisor of Prof. Xueliang (Andy) Sun from the University of Western Ontario in 2018. Then, he had his postdoc training at the University of Western Ontario and the Advanced Light Source of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 2019–2020. His research interests focus on atomic/molecular layer depositions, next-generation batteries, and synchrotron-based X-ray techniques.
Lei Zhang
Dr Lei Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2008) and PhD degree in Nanomaterial Chemistry (2014) from Xiamen University with Prof. Zhaoxiong Xie. He was a visiting graduate student at Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Younan Xia's group from 2012 to 2014. From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Postdoc at Tianjin University. He is currently a postdoctoral associate with Professor Xueliang Sun at the University of Western Ontario. His research interests include the design and synthesis of metal nanomaterials and single atom catalysts for fuel cells, carbon dioxide reduction, and water splitting devices.
Jian Liu
Dr Jian Liu is an Assistant Professor in the School of Engineering at the University of British Columbia (UBC) Okanagan campus, Canada. Dr Liu received his PhD in materials science (2013) from the University of Western Ontario (Canada), and worked as an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory prior to joining UBC in January 2017. His current research interests focus on advanced nanofabrication techniques, material design for Li-ion batteries and beyond, and interfacial control and understanding in energy storage systems.
Khalil Amine
Dr Khalil Amine is a Distinguished Fellow and leader of the Advanced Battery Technology programs at Argonne National Laboratory. Currently Dr Amine serves as a member of the U.S. National Research Council on battery-related technologies. Dr Amine is a 2003 recipient of Scientific America's Top Worldwide Research 50 Research Award, a 2009 recipient of the U.S. Federal Laboratory Award for Excellence in Technology Transfer and a six-time recipient of the R&D 100 Award. He has filed over 207 patents and has over 632 publications. From 1998 to 2018, he was the most cited scientist in the field of batteries.
Jun Lu
Dr Jun Lu is a chemist at Argonne National Laboratory. His research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology, with a main focus on technology beyond Li-ion batteries. He received his bachelor's degree in chemistry physics from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2000. He completed his PhD in materials science from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah in 2009. Following a DOE-EERE postdoctoral fellowship under Vehicles Technology Program, he joined the Division of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at Argonne National Laboratory as a chemist in 2015.
Xueliang Sun
Prof. Xueliang (Andy) Sun is a Canada Research Chair in Development of Nanomaterials for Clean Energy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and Canadian Academy of Engineering and Full Professor at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Sun received his PhD in materials chemistry in 1999 from the University of Manchester, UK, which he followed up by working as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of British Columbia, Canada and as a Research Associate at L'Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Canada. His current research interests are focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
1. Introduction
Energy storage and conversion systems have played vital roles in the development of electric vehicles (EVs), reduction of fossil fuel usage, and addressing environmental issues.1 Among the various systems, Li-ion batteries (LIBs) and proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are two of the most prominent technologies for powering electric vehicles due to their high energy and power density, high efficiency, room temperature operation, and zero emissions. However, the state-of-the-art LIBs and PEMFCs still need further improvement for higher energy density, longer durability, better safety, and lower cost to meet the increasing demands from automotive applications. Meanwhile, next-generation batteries, such as Li metal, Li–sulfur, and Li–O2 batteries, solid-state Li batteries, Na batteries and beyond, have been intensively studied as promising alternatives to LIBs for large-scale energy storage applications due to their lower cost compared to conventional LIBs.2–5 Nevertheless, several formidable challenges inhibit the commercialization of these battery systems, including the detrimental structural changes and unfavourable side reactions at the surface and interface of the electrode materials, which need to be addressed in order to prevent rapid capacity degradation and limited battery lifetime.6–8 Therefore, it is necessary to rationally engineer the surface and interface of the electrode materials to prevent parasitic side reactions and thus enhance battery performance.9–12 For PEMFCs, the high cost and insufficient durability of Pt electrocatalysts is still a major barrier for their application in fuel cell vehicles. Degradation of the electrocatalytic properties of Pt could occur through the coalescence of Pt particles due to weak interactions between Pt and the support, Pt particle agglomeration, corrosion of the support material, and Ostwald ripening. Therefore, it is critical to design a strong interface between Pt and the support to preserve such structures in the harsh environment of PEMFCs while providing the three-phase boundary (catalyst, support, and reactants) required for performing multifunctional electrochemistry.13,14 Moreover, renewable solar energy and solar fuels are regarded as the most promising alternative clean energy source for fossil fuels. Surface and interface engineering in a well-designed fashion are indispensable for obtaining desirable material structure and achieving optimal performance for energy storage and conversion applications. In this review, as shown in Fig. 1, we will deeply discuss the unique techniques of atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular layer deposition (MLD) in the applications of energy storage and conversion. In particular, we will summarize the mechanism, properties, wide applications and large scale potential of ALD and MLD.
 Fig. 1  The mechanism, properties, large-scale potential, and applications for energy storage and conversion of ALD/MLD techniques. 
ALD has emerged as a powerful technique for surface and interface engineering in energy-related devices, such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, and electrochemical water splitting, due to its exceptional capability in controlling material deposition with atomic-level precision.15–17 During an ALD process, gas-phase precursors are sequentially exposed to the substrate, leading to self-limiting and saturated surface reactions (Fig. 2a). This reaction mechanism endows ALD-deposited inorganic thin films with several advantages, including precise thickness control, excellent uniformity and conformity, and tunable composition. These thin films have been employed as surface coating layers on the anode and cathode materials of LIBs to address structural and interfacial problems. Moreover, nanoparticles can also be deposited on substrates by ALD by controlling the nucleation sites on the substrate surface through pre-planted functional groups. This is because nucleation sites, such as hydroxyl groups, defect sites, and heteroatom-doping sites, are prerequisites for ALD surface reactions to take place.18,19 While ALD can traditionally deposit inorganic materials, MLD, the organic counterpart of ALD, can fabricate organic and hybrid inorganic–organic thin films (Fig. 2b). The incorporation of organic segments in the MLD process offers almost unlimited combinations for the film structure, which could lead to unique mechanical, optical, and thermal properties. These MLD thin films hold great promise for tackling surface and interfacial problems in energy storage and conversion systems.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of (a) ALD for inorganic films and (b) MLD for hybrid inorganic–organic films. 
Since the development of ALD in the late 1970's (previously referred to as atomic layer epitaxy (ALE)), this advanced thin film deposition technique has received increasing attention for multiple applications, including catalysis, microelectronics, energy storage and conversion, and sensing.20–22 Various materials, including metal oxides, metal sulfides, metal fluorides, and metal phosphates can be deposited by ALD with precisely controlled thicknesses, compositions and structures.23,24 Particularly in the past ten years, the fields of ALD and MLD for energy storage and conversion have grown rapidly. Fig. 3(a) shows the number of publications associated with atomic layer deposition from 2009 to date, with a significant increase in recent years. As an extension of ALD, MLD was later developed as the organic molecule equivalent. Although the publication numbers on MLD are not as large as that of ALD (Fig. 3(b)), the unique properties of MLD films are still attracting attention for different applications. Among the various applications, energy storage and conversion, especially batteries and fuel cells, are one of the most attractive areas for ALD and MLD (Fig. 3(c and d)). There are several excellent review papers that have summarized the fundamental chemistry and principles of ALD/MLD, and their application for LIBs and Li–S batteries.25–44 However, there is no comprehensive review that summarizes both ALD and MLD in the applications of energy storage and conversion.
 Fig. 3  Publication numbers in the past ten years with the keywords of (a) atomic layer deposition (ALD); (b) molecular layer deposition (MLD); (c) ALD & battery, ALD & fuel cell, ALD & supercapacitor, ALD & photovoltaics, ALD & water splitting; (d) MLD & battery, MLD & fuel cell, MLD & supercapacitor, MLD & photovoltaics, MLD & water splitting. (Based on Web of Science.) 
In this review, we focus on the development and achievements of ALD and MLD and their applications for energy storage and conversion. Different energy storage systems, including batteries and supercapacitors, are included in this comprehensive review. Moreover, the application of ALD/MLD for energy conversion systems including fuel cells, solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting, have been discussed in detail. Not only the significant progress has been summarized, but also a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms involved will be deeply reviewed. Finally, we will provide insightful perspectives on future directions for new material design by ALD and MLD and untapped opportunities in energy storage and conversion.
2. ALD/MLD for energy storage
2.1 ALD/MLD for batteries

2.1.1 ALD/MLD for Li-ion batteries. 
2.1.1.1 ALD/MLD for electrode fabrication. 
Metal oxides are the most popular films deposited by ALD and are promising candidates as electrode materials for LIBs. For example, SnO2 has been extensively investigated due to its high specific capacity and energy density, relative to conventional graphite anodes. ALD SnO2 was first demonstrated as an anode material for LIBs when deposited on graphene nanosheets (GNS),45 as shown in Fig. 4(a). Benefitting from the unique properties of ALD, the structural phases of SnO2 were precisely controlled by the ALD deposition temperatures, resulting in amorphous and crystalline SnO2–GNS composites with sandwich nanostructures. The precursors used in this study were SnCl4 and H2O at two different temperatures of 200 °C and 400 °C. It is very interesting to note that the amorphous SnO2–GNS showed higher electrochemical stability and coulombic efficiency compared to the crystalline SnO2–GNS. The amorphous SnO2–GNS obtained a capacity of 793 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles, which is higher than that of the crystalline SnO2–GNS (499 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles). It is believed that the amorphous SnO2–GNS is more effective than the crystalline SnO2–GNS in overcoming the large volume change of SnO2 nanoparticles during electrochemical cycling. Subsequently, ALD SnO2 was deposited on different substrates, including stainless steel,46 reduced graphene oxide,47 and MXene.48 The as-prepared ALD SnO2 is uniform on different substrates with highly controlled structures and thicknesses.49,50
 Fig. 4  ALD and MLD metal oxide anodes: (a) ALD SnO2; (b) ALD TiO2; (c) ALD V2O5; (d) ALD ZnO; (e) lithium terephthalate; (f) lithiated quinone. 
TiO2 is another attractive anode material candidate for LIBs due to its chemical stability, low volume expansion during cycling, high rate capability and intrinsic safety. ALD TiO2 is also a routine recipe for the ALD community, in which TiCl4 and titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP) are widely used as precursors for Ti-based ALD processes.51,52 Ban et al. firstly reported ALD amorphous TiO2 on high surface area graphene (reduced graphene oxide) sheets for LIBs.53 The as-prepared ALD TiO2 can effectively minimize the Li-ion diffusion coefficient of TiO2, resulting in a stable and high capacity anode with high rate performances. Other matrices have also been used as substrates for ALD TiO2, such as graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) templates and Ni nanotubes.54–58 Sun's group also fabricated ALD TiO2 on worm-like GNS with high capacity and stability, as shown in Fig. 4(b).59 Another interesting work has been demonstrated by Hong et al.,60 in which carbon black is used as a sacrificial template to create the mesoporous structure of TiO2. As a result, the mesoporous TiO2 exhibits a large specific surface area, high capacity, and good coulombic efficiency.
Among the aforementioned metal oxides, ZnO shows various advantages, such as low cost, facile synthesis, chemical stability, and a high theoretical capacity of 978 mA h g−1 in LIBs. ZnO has been widely deposited by ALD, in which Zn(CH3CH2)2 is the most widely used precursor.61 Lian et al. firstly reported ALD ZnO on graphene layers as an anode material for LIBs, as shown in Fig. 4(d).62 In their study, the ZnO was deposited as quantum dots (QDs) on graphene with controllable sizes from 2 to 7 nm. Interestingly, the smaller ZnO QDs on graphene displayed better electrochemical performance, in which a high reversible specific capacity of 960 mA h g−1 is achieved. Another work has been reported using graphene frameworks as substrates for ALD ZnO.63 To achieve better electrochemical performance, another ALD Al2O3 layer was deposited on the ZnO–graphene electrode as a physical protection layer and an artificial ionically conductive SEI layer. As a result, the ALD Al2O3-wrapped ALD ZnO–graphene architecture provided the electrode with superior electrochemical performance with high capacity, excellent rate capability, and good cycling stability.
Some other metal oxides have also been deposited by ALD and used as anode materials for LIBs,64–66 such as MoO3, RuO2, and V2O5. For example, as shown in Fig. 4(c), V2O5 was deposited on graphene using vanadyl oxytriisopropoxide and water as precursors with a deposition temperature of 150 °C, achieving a growth per cycle (GPC) of 1 Å.64 The electrochemical results reveal that a stable capacity of 892 mA h g−1 can be achieved for the ALD V2O5–graphene composite with excellent cycling stability. It is believed that the highly conformal coating induced by the ALD process is the key to mitigating mechanical degradation and vanadium dissolution. Besides the popular metal oxides, other metal nitrides, metal phosphates, and metal sulfides deposited by ALD have also been reported,67–74 including MoS2, MoN, W2N, WS2, VPx, AlSx, and ZnS. The detailed ALD deposition parameters and performances of these materials as anodes in LIBs are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 The detailed parameters and performances of the ALD-fabricated anode materials for LIBs




ALD materials
Precursors
Substrate
Deposition temperature
Electrochemical performances
Ref.




SnO2
SnCl4 and H2O
Graphene nanosheets
200 °C
793 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles

45



400 °C
499 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles




Tin(IV)-butoxide and plasma O−
Stainless steel
200 °C
646 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles

46



Tetrakis(dimethylamino) tin and H2O
Reduced graphene oxide
150 °C
800 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles

47



Tetrakis(diethylamido) tin and O3
MXenes
150 °C or 200 °C
843 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles

48



Sn(C2H5)4 and O2 plasma
Silicon and stainless steel
150 °C and 200 °C
650 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles

50



TiO2
TiCl4 and H2O
Reduced graphene oxide
120 °C
120 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles

53



TiCl4 and H2O
Graphite
—
∼230 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

54



Titanium tetraisopropoxide and H2O
Graphene nanosheets
100 °C
140 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

59



TiCl4 and H2O
Carbon nanotubes
120 °C
120 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles

55



TiCl4 and H2O
Carbon black
200 °C
128 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

60



TiCl4 and H2O
CNTs/CFP
120 °C
178 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles

56



ZnO
Diethyl zinc and H2O
Graphene nanosheets
120 °C
540 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

62



Zn(C2H5)2 and H2O
Graphene
150 °C
490 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

63



Diethyl zinc and H2O
Carbon black
150 °C
769 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles

61



MoS2
Mo(CO)6 and H2S
Carbon
170 °C
851 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles

67



MoN
Mo(CO)6 and NH3
Carbon
170 °C
700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

68



MoO3
Mo(CO)6 and O3
Carbon nanotube
165 °C
150 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles

66



V2O5
Vanadyl oxytriisoprop-oxide and H2O
Graphene
150 °C
892 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

64



RuO2
Ru(C9H13)2 and O2
Carbon nanotube
210–240 °C
∼600 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

65



W2N
W(CO)6 and NH3
Stainless steel
180–195 °C
25 μA h cm−2 after 200 cycles

69



WS2
W(CO)6 and H2S
Stainless steel
180–195 °C
13 μA h cm−2 after 100 cycles

70





Organic electrode materials for metal ion batteries have shown great potential due to their high theoretical capacity, flexible structure design, and environmental friendliness.75–77 Generally, the redox reactions of organic electrode materials are based on the charge-state change of the electroactive groups.78 With this in mind, MLD can be used to fabricate organic electrodes for LIBs. Karppinen's group firstly reported the synthesis of lithium terephthalate (LiTP) by ALD/MLD for anode applications in LIBs.79 As shown in Fig. 4(e), the LiTP was deposited using the precursors of Li(thd) (thd = 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate) and terephthalic acid (TPA) at 200 °C with a GPC of 3.0 Å. The ALD-LiTP presented the same layered crystal structure and high electrochemical activity. Moreover, they demonstrated in situ deposition of the quinone cathode in its lithiated state by ALD/MLD, using LiHMDS and hydroquinone as the precursors, as shown in Fig. 4(f).80 Furthermore, organic all-solid-state cells were successfully developed and fully functional without any conductive additives. However, the MLD-fabricated anode material is still in its infancy and the electrochemical performances of the MLD anode need to be further enhanced.
Nanostructured anode materials demonstrate various structure-dependent advantages, such as high surface area to mass/volume ratios and robust hierarchical structures.81,82 In the past years, nanomaterials with different dimensions and structures have been synthesized via different methods.83,84 Among them, ALD is also a powerful tool to design nanostructured materials,85,86 especially with sacrificial templates.87–93 For example, Jeun et al. fabricated SnO2@TiO2 double-shell nanotubes through a combination of electrospinning and ALD methods. As shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 5(a), electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN) is chosen as a sacrificial template and two layers of SnO2 (inner shell) and TiO2 (outer shell) were deposited and precisely controlled by ALD.87 As a result, the TiO2 outer shell can encapsulate the inner SnO2 nanotube, leading to a hollow structure that can effectively relieve the volume expansion of SnO2 during cycling and improve the electrochemical performance. Their group further developed TiO2@SnO2@TiO2 triple-shell nanotubes by a similar procedure.93 The diameter of the triple-shell nanotubes is around 200 nm with a shell thickness of 10 nm. Fan's group also developed a series of anode materials by ALD with rationally designed nanostructures.56,88,90 Generally, the sacrificial template materials are firstly synthesized through hydrothermal methods. Then, popular metal oxides (such as TiO2, ZnO, etc.) are deposited on the template materials by ALD. Finally, the templates can be removed by an ion-exchange method or acid etching method to achieve a hollow nanostructure. For example, Fig. 5(b) shows a schematic diagram of the synthesis process and morphology of the TiO2@Fe2O3 nanostructured anode materials.
 Fig. 5  Nanostructured anodes fabricated by ALD: (a) SnO2@TiO2; (b) TiO2@Fe2O3. 
The cathode material is typically considered as the limiting factor in determining the energy density of LIBs. Popular cathode materials include LiCoO2, LiFePO4, LiMn2O4, LiCoxNiyMnzO2 (NMC), LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) etc. However, the fabrication of complex oxides with more than three elements by ALD is relatively challenging compared to the binary oxides. The early work using ALD to synthesize cathode materials started from binary oxides of V2O5. V2O5 presents a high reversible capacity of 147 mA h g−1 (at 2.6–4.0 V) and 294 mA h g−1 (at 2.0–4.0 V) as well as fast lithiation and enhanced safety.94–96 In the last section, we have introduced examples using ALD V2O5 as anode materials within the potential range of 0–2 V. However, ALD V2O5 is more often used as a cathode material for LIBs.97,98 Rubloff's group firstly reported ALD V2O5 as a cathode material for LIBs,99 as shown in Fig. 6(a). In their study, VO(OC3H7)3 and O3 are used as precursors within a deposition temperature range of 150 to 210 °C. The 30 nm thick ALD V2O5 film was deposited on Au-coated stainless-steel disks and used as the cathode in coin cell configurations. The electrochemical results indicated that the initial specific discharge capacity of ALD V2O5 is 142 mA h g−1 at 2.6–4.0 V with outstanding rate and cycling performances. Furthermore, their group compared the ALD V2O5 recipes using O3 and H2O as oxidant precursors.100 As a result, polycrystalline V2O5 films were obtained by the O3-based process and amorphous V2O5 films were synthesized from the H2O-based process. From the electrochemical performances, the polycrystalline V2O5 films delivered a higher storage capacity than the amorphous films because of their ability to incorporate up to three Li per V2O5 formula unit. In another study, Mattelaer et al. synthesized VO2 using tetrakis[ethylmethylamino] vanadium and H2O or O3 as precursors.101 This work provided a series of stable vanadium oxide phases in the VO2–V2O5 series fabricated under different oxygen partial pressures between ambient air and 3.7 Pa. It is found that the different vanadium oxide phases demonstrate different volumetric capacities in the order of V2O5 < VO2 (B) < V6O13 < V3O7 < V4O9 in the 1.5–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li potential range.
 Fig. 6  ALD-fabricated cathodes: (a) V2O5; (b) LiCoO2; (c) LiMn2O4; (d) LiFePO4. 
LiCoO2 is the most popular commercialized cathode material for LIBs. However, the development of complex oxides by ALD with three elements is complicated. Generally, the procedure is separated into two sub-cycles of Li compounds and Co compounds and the ratio between these two sub-cycles is controlled to achieve the desired composition. Donders et al. firstly reported the ALD LiCoO2 process using CoCp2 as the cobalt precursor, LiOtBu as the lithium precursor and O2 plasma as an oxidant source with a deposition temperature of 325 °C.102 The schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 6(b) and the super-cycles of LiCoO2 consist of two sub-cycles of Co3O4 and Li2CO3. The crystalline LiCoO2 was obtained after annealing at 700 °C for 6 minutes. The ALD-deposited LiCoO2 electrodes were electrochemically active, revealing good electrochemical performance. Similar to LiCoO2, LiMn2O4 is also an important cathode material for LIBs, especially for high-rate performances. The first report of ALD LiMn2O4 was from Miikkulainen et al. with a combination of binary ALD processes for ALD Li2O/LiOH and MnO2 or MnO,103 as shown in Fig. 6(c). In their study, the tris(dipivaloylmethanato)manganese (Mn(thd)3), Li(thd), and O3 were used as precursors at the deposition temperature of 240 °C. However, it is very challenging to obtain pure LiMn2O4 through the supercycles. Moreover, they further developed a conversion process for using Li(thd)/O3 and LiOtBu/H2O treatment to convert ALD-MnO2 into LixMn2O4, in which the obtained LixMn2O4 films presented high electrochemical capacity and good cycling stability (Fig. 5(c)). There are other examples of the direct application of ALD MnO2 as a cathode104 or converting the MnO/MnO2 into LiMn2O4 through (electro)chemical methods.105,106
LiFePO4 is one of the most popular cathode materials for commercialized LIBs because of its excellent cycling stability, environmental friendliness, and promising safety. Some important breakthroughs in recent years have allowed its successful commercialization.107–109 The research of ALD LiFePO4 started from FePO4 as the base. Gandrud et al. synthesized FePO4 for the first time by ALD, combining two sub-cycles of FeOx and POx.110 The precursors used in this recipe are trimethyl phosphate (Me3PO4) and H2O/O3 as oxygen sources for POx, while Fe(thd)3 (Hthd = 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate) and O3 are used for FeOx. The as-deposited films are amorphous and a post annealing treatment at 600 °C was required to obtain the crystalline trigonal FePO4. However, the amorphous FePO4 was found to be electrochemically active and provide exceptional cyclability with a capacity of 178 mA h g−1. Sun et al. also reported ALD-deposited FePO4 on carbon nanotubes and other 3D carbon nanostructures for cathode applications in LIBs.111,112 PE-ALD deposited FePO4 was reported by Detavernier's group using Me3PO4 plasma, O2 plasma, and tert-butylferrocene as precursors with an exceptionally high GPC of 1.1 nm per cycle.113 The as-deposited films were amorphous with a composition of FeP1.5O4.7 and further formed a trigonal FePO4 after annealing to 700 °C in air. Furthermore, Sun et al. developed ALD LiFePO4 by a combination of Fe2O3, POx, and Li2O subcycles, which is the first report using ALD to fabricate complex compounds with four elements. Fig. 6(d) shows the schematic diagram of the ALD LiFePO4 process, in which the ratio of the different subcycles is the key to obtaining the proper stoichiometry. Similarly, post-treatment is necessary to obtain the crystalline LiFePO4. The annealed LiFePO4/CNTs exhibited exceptional battery performance with excellent rate capability, high power density, and long lifetime. Other types of phosphates, such as vanadium phosphate and titanium phosphate, have been further developed by Detavernier's group via plasma enhanced-ALD (PEALD) and used as cathode materials for LIBs.71,114
In this section, the recent development of ALD-fabricated electrode materials, including both cathodes and anodes, has been summarized in detail. (1) Metal oxides, including SnO2, ZnO, TiO2, etc., have been deposited by ALD and used as anode materials for LIBs. The morphology, structures, and thickness of the metal oxides are precisely controlled by ALD parameters. Some other compounds, including metal nitrides, metal phosphates, and metal sulfides, have also been fabricated by ALD and used as anode materials for LIBs. (2) Organic electrode materials have been developed and deposited by MLD as anode materials for LIBs, however, the electrochemical performances of the MLD-derived organic electrodes still need to be further improved. (3) Nanostructured materials, such as hollow structures and core–shell structures, were designed and realized by ALD with sacrificial templates. (4) Several types of cathode materials, such as V2O5, LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, and LiFePO4, were synthesized by ALD. Although promising progress has been obtained and various electrode materials have been synthesized by ALD, it should be noted that there are still several drawbacks of ALD/MLD for electrode fabrication. The slow GPC of the ALD/MLD films is a major concern, which is in the Å per cycle range for most deposition processes. In the reported literature, hundreds or even thousands of ALD cycles are required to obtain electrodes with reasonable active material mass loading. However, the time-consuming process is less commercially viable for standard battery technologies, particularly when compared with composite/powder-based electrodes.
2.1.1.2 ALD/MLD for cathode/electrolyte interface engineering. 
Cathode materials are considered as the limiting factor for the energy density and capacity of LIBs. As discussed above, layered LiCoO2, spinel LiMn2O4, and polyanion LiFePO4 are the primary groups of cathode materials.115,116 The layered LiCoO2 is the first developed and most widely used cathode material for commercial LIBs. However, the high cost, toxicity, limited capacity and chemical instability in the deep charged state have prevented its further applications for transportation and stationary storage. Compared to LiCoO2, spinel LiMn2O4 shows the advantages of material availability and environmental compatibility. However, the Mn dissolution of LiMn2O4 during electrochemical cycling leads to capacity fading especially when operating at temperatures above ambient. LiFePO4 is another promising cathode material with low cost, low toxicity, high safety, and excellent cycling performance. The challenges for LiFePO4 include poor rate performances and surface chemistry stability. More recently, LiNixMnyCo1−x−yO2 (NMC) and LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) have become popular because of their high operational voltage and specific capacities. For example, the NCA cathode possesses a high theoretical capacity of 265mA hg−1 (0.95 Li+ involving (re)-insertion), which is higher than other “4 V” cathode candidates. However, the Li transition metal oxide cathode still has serious challenges, such as phase transition, mechanical cracking, electrolyte decomposition, transition metal dissolution, conductivity, and air instability.117 Among these issues, the interface between cathode materials and electrolyte, which is referred to as the cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI), plays the most important role.118,119 At high oxidation potentials, the electrolytes decompose to form an interface with side products on the cathode materials, which is referred to as the CEI. On one hand, a stable and dense CEI can enhance the stability of the cathode materials by preventing the interfacial reactions, HF etching and transition metal dissolution. On the other hand, an unstable CEI may aggravate the interfacial reactions and cause an increase of the interfacial impedance and result in the fast degradation of the battery performance.120 To address the interfacial challenges and achieve a stable CEI, surface modification of cathode materials is the most effective approach, especially to prevent electrolyte decomposition and transition metal dissolution.121 The basic requirements of the coating layers are (1) controllable thickness. On one hand, a coating that is too thick will affect Li-ion or electron transportation. On the other hand, coatings that are too thin cannot totally prevent side reactions. (2) Uniform, conformable and continuous coating on cathode materials. (3) Good mechanical properties.122,123 To meet these requirements, ALD/MLD is the ideal technique due to its aforementioned attributes. Lee's group firstly reported the enhanced stability of LiCoO2 cathodes using surface coating by ALD, in which routine ALD Al2O3 was chosen as the coating material.124 From their study, only two cycles of ALD Al2O3 with a thickness of 3–4 Å can effectively improve the electrochemical performance, exhibiting capacity retention of 89% after 120 charge–discharge cycles, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Furthermore, they compared the performances of ALD coating directly on the electrode versus the powder. As a result, the capacity retention for ALD Al2O3 directly on the composite is slightly inferior to the capacity retention of ALD on powders. Several questions relating to the reaction mechanism during the ALD process on cathode materials have been raised. Elam's group used in situ and ex situ experimental characterization coupled with DFT calculations to elucidate the mechanism for ALD Al2O3 on LiMn2O4 cathodes (Fig. 7(d)).125In situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), quadrupole mass spectrometry (QMS), and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) measurements are combined to have a comprehensive study. It is very interesting to note that the ALD Al2O3 process on LiMn2O4 in the early cycles was different compared to the deposition on conventional substrates. The Al heteroatom bridged several oxygen atoms at the LMO surface initially, even doping into the LiMn2O4 surface. The initial few cycles of ALD Al2O3 lead to a reduction in the average Mn oxidation state, with a higher ratio of Mn3+, resulting in higher capacities.
 Fig. 7  Characterization and application of ALD Al2O3 coatings for cathode materials: (a) comparison between ALD coating directly on powders and electrodes; (b) in operando XAS for ALD coated cathodes; (c) STEM for interface characterization; (d) reaction mechanism during an ALD process for cathode applications; (e) effects of ALD coating on chemical reactions; (f) Al2O3 coating for full cells. 
In the past few years, several studies have reported the use of ALD Al2O3 as a surface coating for different types of cathode materials, such as LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, and LiNixMnyCo1−x−yO2.126–155 Leung et al. provided insight into the mechanism of ALD coating on the interface of cathode materials by first-principles calculations.156 The results revealed that with the oxide coating, e− tunnelling to the adsorbed ethylene carbonate (EC) falls within the nonadiabatic regime, resulting in reduced electrolyte decomposition. To better understand the mechanism of ALD Al2O3 coating for cathodes, in operando synchrotron-based X-ray diffraction (XRD) and in operando X-ray absorption near edge structure spectroscopy (XANES) were carried out to probe the structure and interfacial chemistry of cathode materials of LiNi0.4Mn0.4Co0.2O2 cathodes during electrochemical cycling.157 The operando XRD results indicated that the ALD Al2O3-coated electrodes displayed a higher level of reversibility in the shift of d-spacing following charge to 4.7 V. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 7(b), the operando XANES data revealed that the ALD coating can suppress the transformation of Co and Mn at low capacities, which was attributed to the protection of the Ni by preventing side reactions of the highly reactive oxygen at the Ni sites with the electrolyte and enabling reversible cycling.157 Besides synchrotron-based X-ray techniques, electron microscopy is another powerful tool to study the structure and morphology of the coatings. Wang's group used aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and high-efficiency spectroscopy to characterize and understand the functions and roles of the ALD Al2O3 coating layer for the Li1.2Ni0.2Mn0.6O2 cathode,158 as shown in Fig. 7(c). The atomic-level imaging and nanoscale chemical composition analysis from STEM and EELS revealed that the ALD Al2O3 coating can mitigate the side reactions between cathode and electrolyte, eliminate the surface structure transformation, and suppress the reduction of Mn at the particle surface. Most of the reported studies believe that the ALD Al2O3 plays a role as a chemical scavenger of corrosive HF and the physical blockage of electrolyte decomposition. However, Dahn's group proposed a new mechanism recently, combining published thermochemistry data with new density functional theory calculations.159 As shown in Fig. 7(e), 19F and 31P solution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy were applied to understand the surface chemistry. Their results showed that the LiPF6-containing liquid electrolyte solution can chemically react with ALD Al2O3 cathode coatings to produce LiPO2F2, which is a well-known and effective electrolyte additive. Moreover, it is a universal phenomenon observed in both NMC622 and NCA cathodes with ALD Al2O3 coating, in which LiPO2F2 is found in electrolyte solutions stored for 14 days.
Generally, ALD Al2O3 has been widely recognized and proven as an effective coating for various cathode materials with enhanced electrochemical performances. Potential mechanisms were proposed to explain the functions of the ALD Al2O3 layers. The most popular mechanism is that the ALD Al2O3 can prevent electrolyte decomposition, HF corrosion, and transition metal dissolution. However, recent literature suggests the potential for other possibilities. In this case, the functions and roles of ALD Al2O3 in performance enhancement are still worth further exploration.
Besides ALD Al2O3, other metal oxides have also been used as coatings for various cathode materials, including ZrO2, ZnO, TiO2, CeO2, Ga2O3, MgO and FeOx.160–182 Most of these metal oxides showed similar functions with ALD Al2O3 and the electrochemical performances were enhanced with a few cycles of ALD metal oxide. However, the comparison between different metal oxide coatings is critical. Wang's group first studied ALD ZnO, ZrO2, and Al2O3 as surface modification layers for LiMn2O4.183 All of the ALD-coated LiMn2O4 electrodes demonstrated improved cyclability compared to the bare electrode, in which ZnO is the most effective oxide coating. However, this conclusion is a bit different from the earlier work on ALD ZnO and Al2O3 for LiCoO2, in which the Al2O3 coated LiCoO2 delivered better performances than that of ZnO coated LiCoO2. Sun's group also compared the different metal oxides, including Al2O3, TiO2, and ZrO2 as coatings for LiCoO2 cathodes,184 as shown in Fig. 8(a). From their results, the Al2O3 coating demonstrated the best cycling stability while the ZrO2 coating contributes to the best rate capability. The reasons behind the observations can be attributed to multiple factors, including; (1) Al2O3 possesses the highest bandgap energy (Eg = 9.00 eV) and is most effective in suppressing phase transitions during electrochemical cycling; (2) the higher electrical conductivity of ZrO2 leads to higher rate performances. One of the consensuses from this area of research is that ALD Al2O3 is the best coating among the different metal oxides in terms of cycling stability. Moreover, the electrical conductivity of metal oxides affects the rate performances of the cathode materials.
 Fig. 8  Other ALD/MLD coatings for cathode applications: (a) different metal oxides; (b) FePO4; (c) AlPO4; (d) LiTaO3 solid-state electrolyte; (e) LiAlO2 solid-state electrolyte; (f) LiAlF4 solid-state electrolyte. 
Phosphates, including FePO4 and AlPO4, are another family of coating material for cathodes, which have also been deposited by ALD.185–187 For example, as shown in Fig. 8(b), FePO4 was developed by Sun's group as a coating for LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4.185 When the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 was coated with 40 cycles of ALD FePO4, the capacity retention increased up to 100%. Compared to the regular metal oxides, ALD FePO4 can provide both electron/ion diffusion across the surface. Another candidate material, AlPO4, presented a much higher thermal resistivity than Al2O3, leading to enhanced high-temperature electrochemical performances. The DSC profiles of the charged pristine high energy NMC (HEMNC), Al2O3-coated HENMC, and AlPO4-coated HENMC are shown in Fig. 8(c). The DSC results show that the decomposition temperatures of pristine high energy NMC (HEMNC), Al2O3 coated HENMC, and AlPO4 coated HENMC are 219 °C, 223 °C, and 237 °C, respectively. The thermal stability improvement induced by the AlPO4 coating can be ascribed to the high thermal stability of phosphate, leading to better electrochemical performances at high temperatures.
Metal oxide coatings are still limited by their ionic conductivity and Li-ion transport across the interface of the electrode particles. In this case, the development of surface coatings with Li-ion conductivity is necessary and solid-state electrolyte thin films are the ideal candidates. As shown in Fig. 8(d), Sun et al. reported for the first time the ALD solid-state electrolyte (SSE) LiTaO3 as a coating for an NMC cathode.188 A 5 nm LiTaO3 coating was proved to be beneficial for preventing transition metal dissolution into the electrolyte and aided in maintaining the microstructure of NMC. As a result, the electrochemical performance of NMC was significantly improved with as low as 5 cycles of LiTaO3 coating. Meanwhile, another Li-ion conductive film, LiAlO2, was also used as a surface modification for LiCoO2 and NCA.189–191 For example, Cui's group developed a chemically inert and ionically conductive LiAlO2 interfacial layer on LiCoO2 by ALD. It was found that the LiAlO2-coated LiCoO2 cathode was able to deliver a much higher specific capacity than that of the Al2O3 coating, which can be attributed to the ionic conductivity of LiAlO2. Moreover, the stability of the LiAlO2-coated LiCoO2 cathode in an extended electrochemical window of 2.75–4.60 V showed significant improvement compared to the bare LiCoO2 cathode, as shown in Fig. 8(e). From these studies, it has been proven that Li-ion conductive films fabricated by ALD are more promising as a coating for cathode materials compared to metal oxide coatings. However, the currently developed ALD SSE films still present low ionic conductivity (10−6–10−9 S cm−1), which cannot meet the requirements for fast Li-ion transport across the interface. Moreover, the relationship between the ionic conductivity of the coating and the electrochemical performance is still unclear.
Based on computational simulations, fluoride materials have the widest electrochemical windows and are especially favoured for their high potential stability (up to 5 V).192,193 Fluoride chemistry has been widely studied in the ALD community, for either deposition or etching. Several types of fluorides, including MgF2, AlF3, and AlWxFy were deposited as a coating for high-voltage cathode materials, including LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 and LiCoO2.194–199 AlF3 is the most popular fluoride ALD coating, which uses TMA as the Al precursor and another F containing compound (HF, TaF5 or hexafluoroacetylaceton) as the F precursor. As a result, the cathode materials coated with ALD fluoride materials delivered remarkable performances at high voltage. However, the poor ionic conductivity of metal fluorides such as AlF3 has limited their further improvement. In this case, Cui's group designed an ALD LiAlF4 process to be applied for high Ni content NMC811.200 Compared to other potential coatings such as Li3N, Li2O, LiF, LiAlO2, and Li3PO4, LiAlF4 demonstrates a wider electrochemical window and ideal chemical stability (Fig. 8(f)). The ionic conductivity of ALD LiAlF4 is around 3.5 ± 0.5 × 10−8 S cm−1, which is much higher than that of the metal fluoride of LiF and AlF3. The ALD interfacial layer is chemically and electrochemically stable as well as Li-ion conductive, resulting in improved cycling stability and rate performances of the NMC-811 cathode.
Most ALD coatings are generally amorphous and used as deposited. The continuous ALD films will shrink and form island-like structures after high-temperature annealing.201 However, recent studies have discovered that post-treatment of ALD coatings can modify the structures of the cathode material itself. As shown in Fig. 9(a), a two-step surface modification method was developed by the Sun's group to deposit ALD TiO2 on spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode materials with a subsequent post-annealing treatment.202 A TiMn2O4-like spinel phase was formed resulting from the reaction of TiO2 with the surface LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. The TiMn2O4-like spinel phase can combat the impedance growth from continuous irreversible structural transition and alleviate the electrolyte decomposition during electrochemical cycling. The electrochemical results revealed that 25 ALD TiO2 cycles appeared to produce the optimal thickness that yields improved stability, coulombic efficiency, discharge capacity, and rate capability.
 Fig. 9  Function of ALD films more than coating. (a) Multisite Ti occupation by ALD TiO2; (b) tailoring grain boundaries with ALD Li3PO4; (c) dual functions of grain boundary engineering and surface coating. 
In addition to the degradation of the cathode surface, the permeation and penetration of liquid electrolytes along the grain boundaries and cracks in the secondary particles are another serious issue that worsens the decay of the electrochemical performance. In particular, for the Ni-rich NMC (LiNixMnyCo1−x−yO2) cathode, when the Ni content is above 0.8, there is a phase transition that occurs near the end of charge, causing an abrupt anisotropic shrinkage (or expansion during discharge), which is similar to LiNiO2. This phase transition has residual stress that causes internal microcracks and allows the cracks to propagate to the surface of the cathode particles, leading to the electrolyte penetration and degradation of the exposed surfaces.203 To address this challenge, the ALD solid-state electrolyte Li3PO4 was infused into the grain boundaries of a Ni-rich NMC cathode material,204 as shown in Fig. 9(b). 10 nm of Li3PO4 was firstly deposited on the surface of Ni-rich NMC by ALD. After annealing at 600 °C for two hours in the air, the Li3PO4 was successfully infused along the grain boundaries of the secondary particles. The infused solid-state electrolyte within the grain boundaries played several roles in improving the electrochemical performances, including; (1) providing fast channels for Li-ion transport; (2) preventing the penetration of the liquid electrolyte into the boundaries; (3) eliminating intergranular cracking and layered-to-spinel phase transformation. The capacity retention and voltage stability of the cathode were significantly improved with this grain boundary modification. However, after thermal infusion, the ALD Li3PO4 almost completely disappeared from the surface of the NMC particles, resulting in exposure of the particle surface to the electrolyte. With this in mind, based on the Li3PO4 infused NMC cathode, another layer of ALD Li3PO4 was further deposited on the exterior surface.205 With the dual functional grain boundary engineering and surface coating, superior cycling stability was achieved even with high voltage cut-offs (91% retention after 200 cycles at 2.7–4.7 V), as shown in Fig. 9(c).
Until recently, MLD coatings have rarely been reported as coatings for cathode materials. The major concern is the high voltage stability of the organic components in the MLD films. However, it is still interesting to explore the application of MLD coatings for cathode materials due to the unique properties of MLD, such as high flexibility. To extend the applicability of MLD-type coatings, new polymers with good electronic or ionic conductivity and high voltage stability should be developed for cathode applications. Moreover, the films derived from MLD are another possibility for cathodes. For example, a uniform carbon–Al2O3 composite coating was deposited on NMC-622 by the pyrolysis of MLD alucone under argon.206 The C–Al2O3 coated NCM-622 exhibited enhanced electrochemical performances with higher reversible capacity, better rate capability, and stability. In the MLD-derived composite coating, the Al2O3 plays a role in suppressing the undesirable side reactions and stabilizing the layered structure, and the conductive carbon in the composite enhances the transport of electrons.
In this section, we have summarized the application of ALD/MLD films in addressing the interfacial issues for different cathode materials. (1) ALD Al2O3 is the most popular coating for cathode materials and has been widely studied over the past ten years. The electrochemical performances are effectively enhanced with ultrathin Al2O3 coatings. Furthermore, the mechanism and interface evolution have been deeply understood using advanced characterization techniques. In addition, other metal oxides have also been deposited on cathode materials, and among them, ALD Al2O3 is generally considered as the best coating in terms of electrochemical performance. (2) Solid-state electrolytes have been deposited by ALD as coatings for cathode materials, such as Li3PO4 and LiAlO2. Compared to the metal oxides, even with thicker layers, solid-state electrolyte coatings enable better Li-ion conduction across the interface and enhanced performance. (3) Other ALD materials, including phosphates and fluorides are developed to modify the interface. On one hand, the metal phosphates present higher thermal resistivity, which is beneficial for high-temperature applications. On the other hand, the metal fluoride demonstrates a wide electrochemical window for high voltage cathode materials. (4) Beyond surface modification, ALD films are further designed to tailor the structure of the cathode, such as preventing phase transition and engineering grain boundary.
The general requirements of the coatings for cathode materials are discussed above, including controllable thickness, uniformity and conformity. These requirements can be achieved with ALD/MLD techniques; however, there are extra requirements for the application of ALD materials as coating layers. (1) A wide electrochemical window. The ALD coatings for cathodes are required to be electrochemically stable at high potential, preventing the decomposition of the liquid electrolyte. (2) Chemically stable with a cathode and an electrolyte. The ALD coatings on the cathode are required to be stable when deposited on the cathode and in contact with liquid electrolytes. (3) High Li-ion conductivity. The fast Li-ion transport across the interface leads to low resistance and better rate performances. A thicker coating also can be realized with high Li-ion conductivity. (4) Good mechanical properties. The mechanical properties are also critical for maintaining the structure and volume expansion of the materials, which should be considered for the coating design.207
2.1.1.3 ALD/MLD for anode/electrolyte interface engineering. 
The SEI layer on the anode materials is formed due to the decomposition of the electrolyte at the low electrochemical potential. The SEI continuously grows in these electron/electrolyte-participated reactions and the thickness of the SEI layer is not homogeneous with dual-layer structure and various components. The generally recognized description of the SEI structure is the mosaic model, in which the layer close to the anode surface contains species of low oxidation states of Li2O, Li3N, LiF, LiOH, and Li2CO3. The outer layer near the surface consists of high oxidation state species such as ROCO2Li, ROLi, and RCOO2Li, which is related to the solvent decomposition process. It is widely regarded that the properties of the SEI layer are the key factor determining the electrochemical performances of the anode materials. Graphite is a commercialized anode material that is widely used for its low electrochemical potential, minimal volume change, and low cost. The solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer related to the side reactions between the anode materials and electrolyte is one of the key factors determining the overall electrochemical performance of the battery. Lee's group was the first to report ALD Al2O3 as a coating for graphite,208 as shown in Fig. 10(a). Graphite with an ALD Al2O3 coating on both the powder and electrodes was compared at an increased temperature of 50 °C for charge–discharge cycling. The decomposition of the SEI at increased temperature is exothermic and considered to initiate thermal runaway. The electrochemical data indicated that the Al2O3 coating on graphite electrodes presented much better cycling performance than that of Al2O3 coating directly on the powders. The mechanism is explained in the schematic diagram in Fig. 10(a). When depositing Al2O3 on the powders, the graphite and current collector were isolated by the insulating Al2O3 film and the electrical conductivity was disrupted. Moreover, ALD Al2O3 coated directly on the electrode enables electrical pathways between interconnected particles, which is necessary for electronic conductivity. Another interesting work demonstrated the application of ALD Al2O3 coatings on both LiCoO2 and graphite for full cells,209 as shown in Fig. 7(f). It was observed that the full cell with coating on both the cathode and anode delivered better electrochemical performance compared to that of the bare electrodes and coating on an individual electrode. ALD and MLD coatings on other carbon anode materials, such as carbon nanotubes and carbon fibres, have also been reported to improve electrochemical performance.210–212
 Fig. 10  ALD/MLD coatings for anodes: (a) ALD Al2O3 for graphite; (b) ALD Al2O3 for SnO2; (c) ALD Al2O3 for Si; (d) MLD alucone (Al-GLY) for Si; (e) in situ TEM for MLD alucone coated Si; (f) MLD alucone (Al-HQ) for Si. 
Sn-Based materials, including tin oxides, tin sulfides, and stannates, are attractive anode materials for LIBs with high theoretical capacity and improved safety.213–215 However, the large volume fluctuation of Sn-based materials is the biggest challenge limiting their further application.216 The volume change during electrochemical cycling causes the continuous consumption of electrolyte and accumulation of a thick SEI layer, leading to the performance degradation of Sn-based materials. To address these issues, Sun's group demonstrated ALD Al2O3 coating on SnO2 based anodes217 (Fig. 10(b)). It was found that the particle sizes of the SnO2 electrodes affected the volume change of the electrodes, resulting in the need for Al2O3 coating layers with optimized thickness. The well-defined ALD Al2O3 layer can (1) relieve the volume expansion and mechanical failure; (2) act as an artificial interface to block the undesirable reactions and decomposition of the electrolyte, resulting in significantly enhanced cycling stability. Furthermore, other ALD films, such as HfO2 and TiO2 have also been deposited as protective coatings for Sn-based anodes, including Sn, SnO2, and SnS2.218–222 Nevertheless, it has been proven difficult for thin ALD coatings to accommodate the large volume fluctuation of Sn-based anodes. Fan's group designed a hollow wire-in-tube structure of SnO2@TiO2 on a carbon cloth with a high mass loading by ALD.223 This hollow SnO2@TiO2 structure presented radically improved rate capability and cycling stability compared to both bare SnO2 nanowires and solid electrodes. This study extends the application of ALD for anodes beyond surface coating to nanostructure engineering. Other kinds of anode materials, including Li4Ti5O12, MoO3, MnOx, NiCo2O4, Fe2O3, and Fe3O4, etc., have also been studied as ALD coatings designed to improve the electrochemical properties of anode materials.224–238
Si is an excellent alternative for graphite due to its high theoretical capacity of 4200 mA h g−1, low discharge potential (∼0.2 to 0.3 V vs. Li/Li+), natural abundance, low cost and environmental friendliness.239–243 Si and its composites have attracted enormous attention in recent years for industrial applications. However, the alloying process of Si anodes leads to a large volume expansion (∼400% ) during cycling, low ionic conductivity, and unstable SEI.244 Similar to other anode materials, the SEI is a critical factor for Si-based electrodes, and ALD/MLD displays great potential to stabilize the interface. Huang's group first reported ALD Al2O3 on patterned amorphous Si anodes for LIBs.245 As shown in Fig. 10(c), 20 cycles ALD alumina-coated Si electrodes presented excellent cycling performance with an initial charge capacity of 1125 mA h g−1 and a retained capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. From the SEM images after cycling, cracks are observed on the bare Si columns. Remarkably, with the conformal ALD Al2O3 coating, the small cracks and pinholes of Si were reduced, resulting in high coulombic efficiency and good cycling performance. The reduced cracking with ALD Al2O3-coated Si was also investigated by in situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) in detail.246 It has been proven through first-principles investigations that the intrinsic ionic conductivity of ALD Al2O3 is very low, but the Li diffusion energy barrier becomes lower as lithiation proceeds and LiAlO2 is formed.247 To further improve the electrochemical performance, Hwang's group proposed multiple approaches combining the ALD technique with a vinylene carbonate (VC) electrolyte additive.248 With the combination of these strategies, the stability of the Si anode was significantly improved due to the formation of a more stable SEI. Moreover, other ALD coatings, such as TiN, TiO2, and ZnO, were used for Si anodes and led to improved performances.249–254 Mitlin's group provided a detailed comparison between Al2O3, TiN, and TiO2 coatings on the inner, the outer, or both surfaces of hollow Si nanotubes.255 Optimal performance was achieved for Si nanotubes with ALD TiO2 on both sides, enabling a capacity retention of 1700 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2C, which is significantly improved compared to the bare Si nanotubes. The TiO2 layer, which consists of amorphous TiO2 and cubic LiTiO2, displayed both high ionic and electronic conductivity leading to fast lithiation kinetics. However, ALD films with only high electronic (TiN) or only ionic (Al2O3) conductivity are not nearly as effective.255
In contrast to ALD materials, MLD layers have become more attractive as coatings for Si anodes. The MLD films, including organic–inorganic hybrid layers and polymer layers, are considered to be more mechanically robust and highly flexible, which is beneficial for relieving the large volume change in the Si anode during lithiation and delithiation.256 Ban's group first applied MLD alucone for Si nanoparticles, using TMA and glycerol (C3H5(OH)3) forming the Al–GL hybrid films (Fig. 10(d)).257 The Al–GL coating on the Si anode provided significant improvement in cycling stability, rate, and CE. It was concluded that the Al–GL layers maintained a mechanically robust, resilient, and highly conductive network for the Si electrodes, and are stable against liquid electrolyte, allowing for long and stable cycle life. To understand the influence of MLD alucone coatings on the performances of Si nanoparticles, in situ TEM analysis was carried out on both uncoated and alucone-coated Si nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 10(e).258,259 The MLD alucone coating on Si nanoparticles can reduce the formation of Li2O, resulting in fast and highly reversible lithiation kinetics. It was also clarified that the alucone coating possesses good mechanical flexibility and fast Li+ conductivity.258 Furthermore, the DFT calculations by Ma et al. revealed that the alucone film is electronically and ionically conductive after saturation with Li atoms, which is in agreement with the observed morphology and electrochemical analysis.260 Rather than alucone with glycerol linkers, another type of MLD alucone (Al-dioxybenzene, Al-HQ) was developed using TMA and hydroquinone as precursors (Fig. 10(f)).261 During the MLD deposition and subsequent treatment, a longitudinal crosslinking reaction occurred between the aluminum-dioxybenzene chains. The 3D cross-linked network led to improved conductivity and mechanical properties. High flexibility of the Al-HQ coating enabled the accommodation of volume expansion and maintenance of the mechanical integrity of the Si electrodes, resulting in excellent cycling performance and high rate capability with a reversible capacity of over 1500 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles. More recently, Ban's group further developed a nanoscale polyamide coating by MLD on a Si anode with excellent electrochemical performance.262
In this section, we discuss the typical examples of ALD/MLD coatings for anode materials in LIBs, such as graphite, Sn-based materials, and Si anodes. The roles of ALD/MLD coatings are summarized as (1) forming a stable artificial SEI to prevent the side reactions between anodes and liquid electrolytes. (2) Relieving the volume change of alloy-based anodes (Sn and Si). ALD Al2O3 is the most popular and widely developed coating for different anodes. However, due to the volume change of most anode materials, coatings with better mechanical properties are highly desired. In this case, MLD coatings with high flexibility are more promising as protective layers for anode materials, especially for Si anodes.
There is still significant room for exploring the engineering of electrode interfaces by ALD/MLD. Firstly, better mechanical properties, including flexibility and stiffness, are among the major requirements for accommodating the large volume changes. Secondly, both ionic and electronic conductivity are required to provide pathways for Li-ions and electrons across the surface of the electrodes. Thirdly, the chemical and electrochemical stabilities towards liquid electrolytes are the most basic requirements for a high-performance ALD/MLD coating.
2.1.1.4 ALD/MLD for 2D/3D micro-batteries. 
Additionally, as unique thin film deposition techniques, ALD/MLD are considered as promising approaches for the fabrication of thin-film batteries and 3D micro-batteries.35,263 It is possible to deposit uniform electrodes and electrolytes on 2D flexible substrates (such as polymers) and more complex 3D substrates with these techniques.
A thin film solid-state battery (SSB) was demonstrated by Stewart et al., in which the tin oxynitride was deposited by ALD using tetrakisdimethylamido(tin), H2O, and N2 plasma as precursors.264 LiPON was deposited by ALD as SSEs and Li was deposited by e-beam evaporation. In the thin film SSBs, the SnNy anodes demonstrated more stable performances than the SnO2 or SnOxNy films, which retained 75% of their capacity over 200 cycles compared to only 50% for SnO2. Another example of thin film SSBs was reported by the same group, in which LiPON was deposited by ALD as an SSE and LiCoO2 and Si were deposited as the cathode and anode, respectively.
Besides the 2D configuration, the 3D electrodes of hierarchical CNTs@FePO4 architecture were designed by ALD. Compared to the 2D electrodes, the 3D CNTs@FePO4 nanostructure displays 16 and 33 times higher areal capacity Li and Na ion batteries, which is 64 and 33 μA h cm−2 after 180 cycles, respectively.112 Lethien's group reported another 3D electrode design by ALD for micro-batteries, in which an anatase TiO2 negative electrode was coated on 3D tubes with Li3PO4 as an electrolyte.265 A high surface capacity of 0.37 mA h cm−2 was achieved by this proposed approach.
Pearse et al. also demonstrated a 3D micro full cell by ALD, in which all the active battery components including electrodes, solid electrolyte, and current collectors were deposited by ALD onto Si wafers with arrays.266 The 3D micro-battery fabricated by ALD utilized a prelithiated LiV2O5 as a cathode, Li2PO2N as a solid electrolyte, SnNx as an anode and TiN and Ru as current collectors with a deposition temperature at or below 250 °C. Remarkably, the 3D micro-batteries fabricated by ALD exhibit a reversible capacity of 2.6 μA h cm−2 up to 100 cycles. Moreover, by using a 3D substrate with ALD deposition, the areal discharge capacity of the cell is 9.3 times higher than the integrating planar cells. This work provided a new opportunity for the realization of long-sought 3D micro-batteries by ALD techniques.


2.1.2 ALD/MLD for next generation Li batteries. 
2.1.2.1 ALD/MLD for Li–O2 batteries. 
Li–O2 batteries provide high theoretical energy densities up to 3–5 times larger than LIBs and have significant potential for application in EVs and large-scale energy storage systems.267–269 However, the development of Li–O2 batteries has been greatly hindered by the sluggish oxygen evolution reaction (OER) process during charge, which is caused by the poor charge conductivity of the discharge product, Li2O2. In addition, the liquid electrolyte is decomposed from reactive superoxide species during discharge, and Li2O2 suffers from side reactions with the defect sites on the carbon cathode.270,271 A thin layer of Li2CO3 could be created at the interface of Li2O2 and carbon, as shown in reactions (R1) and (R2). Li2O2 + C + 1/2O2 → Li2CO3 (ΔG = −542.4 kJ mol−1)(R1) 2Li2O2 + C → Li2O + Li2CO3 (ΔG = −533.6 kJ mol−1)(R2)
The insulating nature of carbonate species generates high interfacial resistance, contributing to the large voltage polarization during discharge/charge.272 Hence, surface modification of the air electrodes is critical to prevent the accumulation of side products on the carbon surface and tune the formation mechanism of the discharge products. ALD not only enables uniform surface coating on flat surfaces but can also form thin films on 3D or mesoporous structures, which is ideal for modifying the air electrode in Li–O2 batteries. Amine's group demonstrated ALD deposited Al2O3 on super P conductive carbon particles to cover the defect sites, preventing unwanted side reaction of the electrolyte with the carbon.273 Then Pd nanoparticles were further coated on the carbon surface by ALD. Pd nanoparticles created active sites for crystalline Li2O2 formation and served as the catalyst during the Li2O2 decomposition (Fig. 11(a)). Compared to the charge overpotential of the bare carbon-based cathode (over 1 V), the ALD-coated material shows a much lower charge potential of 0.2 V. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that the Al2O3 was inert to TEGDME solvent and could prevent the dissociation of TEGDME molecules in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 11  ALD/MLD for Li–O2 air electrode design: (a) Pd/Al2O3/C; (b) Pd/C; (c) silver cluster. 
Detailed studies (Fig. 11(b)) on Pd/Al2O3/C materials with 1, 3 and 10 ALD cycles of Pd catalysts revealed the role of ALD in relation to the electrochemical performance of Li–O2 batteries.274 ALD enabled the formation of Pd nanoparticles in the range of 2–8 nm with uniform dispersion on the carbon substrate. Although with high charge overpotential, the Pd/Al2O3/C electrode with 3 ALD cycles delivers a high capacity of 6600 mA h g−1, suggesting that the full coverage of the carbon defects may prevent the decomposition of the electrolyte. For the case of the electrode with 10 ALD cycles, the cell shows a low charge overpotential of 3.3 V, which is probably due to improved electronic conductivity and more crystallization sites created by the Pd nanoparticles on the electrode surface. Similar nano-architecture by ALD could also be expanded to other catalysts such as Pd/ZnO/C.275 The catalyst further lowered the charge potential to 3.0 V, supporting the synergic effect of ZnO and Pd nanoparticles. Subsequently, other ALD metal oxides, including TiO2, In2O3, Fe2O3, and ZnO, were deposited either on carbon electrodes or catalysts to prevent the corrosion and side reactions between air electrodes and electrolyte.276–281 The electrode architecture achieved by ALD opened a new door for the prevention of side reactions and guided the new design of functional catalysts in Li–O2 batteries.
The defect sites on the carbon could react with Li2O2 compromising the electrochemical performance, which is difficult to rule out when focusing on fundamental studies. We employed ALD to cover the surface defect sites and silver clusters are further loaded to probe the different scenarios during the discharge process in Li–O2 batteries.282 Silver clusters with different sizes (3, 9, and 15 atoms) were deposited on ALD-modified carbon by the magnetron sputtering method.283–286 It was found that the morphology of the discharge products has a high dependency on the cluster size, and the Li2O2 formation is through a solution-mediated process (Fig. 11(c)). DFT results supported that superoxide species had a weaker bonding to Ag15 clusters and thus LiO2 reached a supersaturated solution, growing on the nucleation sites as LiO2 containing product and leading to the low charge overpotential. The form of LiO2 was proved to be present in Li–O2 cells and showed fast kinetics during charge.267 Meanwhile, in Ag3 and Ag9 based electrodes, LiO2 underwent a disproportionation reaction to form Li2O2 in the electrolyte and then deposited on the electrode surface, resulting in high charge potential in galvanostatic mode. Another effective catalyst deposited by ALD for air electrodes for Li–O2 batteries is Ru or RuO2 nanoparticles.287 Wang's group reported the selective deposition of Ru onto the b planes of TiSi2 nanonets by ALD as a catalyst for Li–O2 batteries.288 The selective deposition was a result of different interface energetics proven by DFT calculations. As a result, extensive cyclability (>100 cycles) with confirmed Li2O2 formation and decomposition was obtained. Furthermore, Sun and his group further designed a 3D nanostructure using a conductive and porous matrix of Mn3O4 nanowire and carbon nanotube composite film as substrates. Then, the ALD RuO2 nanoparticles with an extremely low loading (just 2.84 wt%) were uniformly deposited on the matrix to form the composite electrode.289 The Mn3O4/CNTs–RuO2 electrode delivered a high specific capacity, improved round-trip energy efficiency, and ultra-long cycle life.
In this section, the recent results of the application of ALD for Li–O2 batteries have been summarized and discussed. Several critical challenges for Li–O2 batteries were effectively addressed by ALD. Firstly, catalysis was widely used to decrease the overpotential for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). ALD is an ideal coating technique for catalysts in Li–O2 batteries, especially for noble metals such as Pd and Ru. Secondly, the corrosion and side reaction between the carbon electrodes and electrolyte is one of the major issues limiting the performance of Li–O2 batteries. Benefitting from the uniform coverage of ALD, thin metal oxides were used to protect the carbon electrode and catalysis with significantly improved cycling stability.
2.1.2.2 ALD/MLD for Li–S batteries. 
Li–S batteries are highly sought after for their high theoretical energy density of 2600 W h g−1 and the wide abundance of elemental sulfur. However, several problems have plagued the development of Li–S batteries including poor electrical conductivity of sulfur, side reactions of electrode materials with electrolyte, Li dendrite formation, and dissolution of polysulfide species, leading to rapid capacity fading. ALD/MLD are promising techniques that have been shown to eliminate many of these issues through various mechanisms. For example, there have been several studies using ALD/MLD modified cathodes to prevent polysulfide dissolution.290–297 Other cases have used ALD to modify the separator and trap dissolved polysulfides.298 More recently, ALD has been applied to Li metal anodes to further prevent side reactions and extend the cycling lifetime of Li–S batteries significantly, which will be discussed in detail in the following section. As a result, ALD/MLD are promising coating techniques for addressing the issues of Li–S battery systems.
As one of the earliest examples of ALD for S cathodes, Elam et al. utilized low-temperature ALD of Al2O3 on S8 cathodes at 50 °C to improve the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries (Fig. 12(a)).297 The low-temperature ALD process suppressed the sublimation of S, which is important for retaining the electrode capacity. Moreover, depending on the number of ALD cycles, different morphologies ranging from Al2O3 nanoparticles to thin films can be obtained. The mechanism of improved performance is postulated to differ depending on the morphology of the ALD coating. For ALD Al2O3 nanoparticles, it is believed that they adsorb polysulfides, effectively eliminating the shuttling effect and improving coulombic efficiency. In contrast, ALD Al2O3 thin films on the S cathode act as a physical barrier to prevent the dissolution of polysulfides into the electrolyte.
 Fig. 12  ALD for Li–S batteries: (a) ALD Al2O3 – encapsulated S cathodes for Li–S batteries. (b) ALD V2O5 coated CNTs for S confinement and adsorption. (c) ALD MgO and ZnO-coated rGO sulfur-composite aerogels for polysulfide trapping. 
As one of the primary roles of ALD coatings for Li–S batteries, many materials have been used to adsorb polysulfide species. Pint et al. recently used an ALD process for V2O5 on CNTs to anchor polysulfides and achieve long cycle life.295 After optimization of the ALD coating thickness, a balance between polysulfide anchoring and high S confinement within the CNT channels was achieved, leading to Li–S batteries with 73% capacity retention after 450 cycles (Fig. 12(b)). Several other ALD materials have been explored for applications in Li–S batteries, such as MgO and ZnO, as exemplified by Shi et al.293 They developed a reduced graphene oxide (rGO)–sulfur composite aerogel which was modified by ALD ZnO or MgO as an electrode for Li–S batteries (Fig. 12(c)). While batteries with both ALD coatings had enhanced electrochemical performance relative to the uncoated electrodes, it was found that ZnO was more effective than MgO. The authors carried out DFT calculations which revealed that ZnO has a significantly higher binding energy towards Li–S* radical species (5.40 eV) compared to MgO (1.22 eV). Because of this, it is believed that ALD ZnO is more effective in inhibiting polysulfide shuttling. The ZnO-modified electrode could achieve a discharge capacity of 998 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.2C with minimal capacity fading after 100 cycles.
ALD has proven to be a powerful tool for application in Li–S batteries. The wide range of ALD chemistries can be applied on either the anode, separator, or cathode to directly enhance electrochemical performance. While multiple ALD coatings have been shown to interact with polysulfide species, there is still relatively little work studying the effects of different metal centers or how they may affect the interconversion of S species during electrochemical cycling. Nevertheless, ALD chemistries often need reaction temperatures greater than 100 °C, which may cause S sublimation and reduce the capacity of electrodes. In this case, MLD coatings with lower deposition temperatures may prove vital for future improvements.
MLD has recently been shown to be advantageous for applications in Li–S batteries. Traditionally, Li–S batteries have been cycled in ether electrolytes due to the reversible transformation between elemental S and Li2S species through polysulfide intermediates. Nevertheless, ether electrolytes have narrow electrochemical stability windows and have low flash points which cause severe safety concerns. In an ideal scenario, Li–S batteries may be better suited for carbonate electrolyte systems due to their better thermal stability. However, conventional Li–S batteries are unable to operate in carbonate electrolytes due to the irreversible side reactions between polysulfide intermediates and carbonate solvents.
Recently, Sun et al. discovered that MLD alucone coatings on carbon–S cathode composites can enable stable electrochemical cycling of Li–S cells in carbonate systems.294 The alucone coating serves multiple functions including acting as a protective barrier against side reactions and plays a role in the interconversion of S species. In a typical Li–S battery with ether electrolyte, two cathodic reactions occur at around 2.3 V and 2.1 V during the lithiation of sulfur corresponding to the reduction of cyclo-S8 to long-chain polysulfides and short-chain sulfide species, respectively (Fig. 13(a)). In comparison, the pristine carbon–S cathode in a carbonate electrolyte exhibits a broad CV peak at 2.5 V that is irreversible in subsequent cycles, which can be attributed to the formation of long-chain polysulfides. However, upon applying as little as 10 cycles of MLD alucone on the carbon–S cathode, the Li–S batteries show reversible cycling of S species, albeit with electrochemical activity at different potentials compared to traditional Li–S voltages, suggesting an alternative reaction route. The Li–S cells were shown to not only cycle better with alucone coated cathodes in carbonate electrolyte at increased temperatures, but also the cells actually performed better than that with conventional ether electrolytes. This work highlighted the ability of MLD to enable Li–S batteries with longer life in new types of electrolyte systems, which is important for their commercialization.
 Fig. 13  MLD for Li–S batteries: (a) MLD alucone coating on a microporous S cathode can enable long cycle life in carbonate electrolytes. (b) The working mechanism of MLD coating on S cathodes in a carbonate electrolyte studied by in situ XANES showing solid-state interconversion between cyclo S8 and Li2S. 
Shortly after, Sun's group further revealed the working mechanism of alucone coated S in Li–S batteries by in operando XANES studies.299 S K-edge XANES of Li–S batteries with alucone-coated S cathodes revealed different reaction mechanisms found in ether versus carbonate electrolyte systems (Fig. 13(b)). In conventional ether electrolytes, the alucone coating does not affect the interconversion of S intermediates, following the traditional reaction scheme. However, in a carbonate electrolyte, the in operando S K-edge XANES reveals that the MLD coating enables cyclo-S8 molecules to be directly reduced to Li2S in a solid-phase reaction without the formation of polysulfide intermediates. Moreover, high-performance Li–S pouch cells were fabricated with MLD-coated S cathodes in carbonate electrolyte for the first time. A first discharge capacity of over 1100 mA h g−1 at a 0.05C rate was achieved, resulting in an energy density at the cell level of over 200 W h kg−1. This work provided important information on the reaction mechanisms of Li–S batteries in carbonate electrolytes and the role of MLD alucone coatings in achieving high electrochemical performances.
It is expected that new MLD coatings may provide alternative reaction chemistries for Li–S batteries and more work in the future should be focused on studying the effects of different MLD thin films and their interactions with S cathodes.
2.1.2.3 ALD/MLD for solid-state Li batteries. 
All-solid-state Li batteries (ASSLBs) based on solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) have attracted significant attention recently due to their capability of achieving high energy density and improved safety compared to liquid-based electrolyte systems. One of the major components of SSBs is the solid-state electrolyte (SSE), which requires a wide voltage stability window and good ionic conductivity. Until now, several types of SSEs, including oxide, sulfide, halide, and polymer electrolytes, have been developed to replace the flammable liquid electrolyte in conventional batteries.300–303 The organic polymer-based SSE poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) is one of the earliest developed SSEs for SSBs. However, the ionic conductivity of polymer SSEs at room temperature is generally in the range of 10−5–10−6 S cm−1, which is still far away from practical applications. An ionic conductivity of over 10−4 S cm−1 can be achieved at high operation temperatures (65–80 °C). For the oxide SSEs such as perovskite (Li3.3La0.56TiO3), NASICON (LiTi2(PO4)3), and garnet (Li7La3Zr2O12), the ionic conductivities at room-temperature are around 10−5–10−3 S cm−1. The sulfide-based SSEs possess the highest ionic conductivity of 10−2 S cm−1 (Li10GeP2S12) among all different types of SSEs. Although significant progress has been achieved for the development of high ionic conductive SSEs, the fabrication of thin film SSEs at the nanoscale is also important for thin film batteries, 3D micro-batteries and interface engineering of electrode materials. In the past few years, various thin films SSEs, such as Li3PO4, LiTaO3, LiNbO3, LiSiO4, Li7La3Zr2O12, and LiPON, have been fabricated by ALD.201,304–309 However, the ionic conductivities of the developed ALD SSEs are around 10−8–10−9 S cm−1, which cannot be directly used as SSEs for SSBs. Moreover, these ALD SSEs are generally amorphous and the high-temperature post-annealing can cause shrinkage of the films, resulting in island-like structures. A recent achievement from Dasgupta's group reported an amorphous lithium borate-carbonate (LBCO) film which can be prepared by ALD, yielding the highest Li-ion conductivity (2.2 × 10−6 S cm−1 at room temperature) among all previously reported ALD-prepared Li-ion conductive compounds.310 Although it is difficult for the ALD LBCO films to be directly used as SSEs for SSBs, they are still promising as an interface modification between SSEs and cathode/anode electrodes.
One of the most inhibiting factors of ASSLBs is the side reaction between anode/cathode and the SSE. Surface modification of the interface with ALD/MLD techniques has been demonstrated as a promising strategy that can alleviate specific problems associated with parasitic side reactions. On the anode side, the direct use of Li metal in the ASSLBs has problems associated with poor contact, uncontrollable side reactions and the formation of Li dendrites. Hu et al.311 coated ALD-Al2O3 on a garnet electrolyte (Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12, LLCZN) to increase the interfacial contact and reduce the interfacial impedance from 1710 Ω cm−2 to 1 Ω cm−2 (Fig. 14(a)). The intimate contact is derived from the high binding energy of Li with lithiated Al2O3. In addition, the ultrathin lithiated Al2O3 can provide conductive Li+ ion pathways and prevent the garnet decomposition. Sun et al. compared the ALD-Al2O3 coating process on the Li metal anode and the NASICON-type LATP [Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7 (PO4)3].312 These results showed that the ALD coating on the electrolyte enables a much more stable Li/LATP interface. Both Li penetration and Ti reduction are prevented by the dense ALD-Al2O3 coating (Fig. 14(b)). Apart from improving the interfacial stability of Li/oxide-based SSEs by coating ALD-Al2O3, MLD-prepared inorganic–organic coating (alucone) has been developed as well to alleviate the interface problem between Li metal and Li10SnP2S12 sulfide-based SSEs313 (Fig. 14(c)). An alucone interlayer, as an artificial SEI, significantly suppresses the side reactions by blocking electron transfer. Very recently, Dasgupta et al. used a suite of operando microscopy and spectroscopy techniques to study the impact of the ALD-Al2O3 on the electro-chemo-mechanical degradation of Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) sulfide electrolytes (Fig. 14(d)). This ALD-Al2O3 interlayer was confirmed to delay degradation of the Li/LGPS interface by modifying the interphase chemistry and morphology.314
 Fig. 14  ALD for improved anode interface in SSBs: (a) ALD Al2O3 for LLZO and Li metal; (b) ALD Al2O3 for LATP and Li metal; (c) MLD alucone for LSPS and Li metal; (d) using operando microscopy and XPS to study the impact of the ALD-Al2O3 on the electro-chemo-mechanical degradation of LGPS. 
On the cathode side, the interfacial problem mainly exists between oxide cathode materials and sulfide-based SSEs. Due to the different affinities of Li+ ions towards oxides and sulfides, the space charge effect is one of the main obstacles that renders poor cycling stability. Moreover, the variable-valence-state transition metal elements in the cathode materials are reactive with sulfide electrolytes. It is recognized that the development of Li-ion conductive and chemically/electrochemically inactive cathode coating materials is essential. Lee's group demonstrated that ALD-Al2O3 layers coated on LiCoO2 (LCO) cathode materials can effectively prolong the cycle life of the ASSLBs.315 High-resolution TEM and EELS aided in observing that the ALD-Al2O3 layer can reduce the thickness of the formed interface. The interdiffusion of elements from LCO cathode materials and Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 SSEs is also inhibited, as shown in Fig. 15(a). Sun et al. further demonstrated ALD processes for amorphous and Li-ion conductive LiNbOx (LNO), LiPOx (LPO), and LiZrOx (LZO) coating layers on LCO and NMC cathode materials.316–318In situ XANES results imply that the LNO shell can suppress the interfacial reactions between LCO and Li10GeP2S12 during the charging and discharging processes (Fig. 15(b)), and a similar functionality was also verified for the LPO-coated and LZO-coated cathode materials. It should be noted that ALD processes (i.e. sub-cycles and deposition temperatures) can be easily tuned to fabricate conformal cathode coating layers with different ionic conductivities, which is demonstrated in the LZO coating by Zhao et al. (Fig. 15(c)). In addition to the binary and ternary coating materials, the amorphous ALD-LBCO (including Li, B, C, and O elements) layer was verified to work well in a thin film battery, which shows a very promising ionic conductivity of 2.2 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 25 °C (Fig. 15(d)).310 Therefore, ALD-LBCO is anticipated to be an ideal protection layer when applied to cathode materials for ASSLBs. In addition to the ionic conductivity of the interfacial layer, the electronic conductivity is also an important factor that can determine the battery performance. Recently, Deng et al. employed MLD to prepare poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) as a semiconducting additive for cathode composites in the sulfide-based solid-state batteries319 (Fig. 15(e)). The MLD-PEDOT modification not only significantly suppresses the side reactions but also realizes effective electron transfer at the cathode/SSE/carbon three-phase interface.
 Fig. 15  (a) ALD Al2O3 for LiCoO2 and SSEs; (b) ALD LiNbO3 for LiCoO2 and SSEs; (c) tuning the ionic conductive LZO coating via controlling the ALD process; (d) ALD deposited lithium borate-carbonate as SSEs; (e) MLD PEDOT coatings for additives in cathode composite to tune the electronic conductivity of the interface. 
SSBs are promising energy storage systems and the future target for the battery community. However, the development of SSEs and interfacial issues are the major hurdles that need to be overcome for practical applications. Meanwhile, the application of ALD and MLD for SSBs is still in the early stage. To play a more important role, new ALD and MLD films with high ionic conductivity, electronic conductivity, and wide electrochemical windows need to be developed.
2.1.2.4 ALD/MLD for Li metal anodes. 
The practical energy density of present LIBs (∼240 W h kg−1) has nearly approached its physicochemical energy density limit with only a 7–8% increase per year.320 With a super high capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and the lowest electrochemical potential (−3.04 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode), Li metal is strongly regarded as the most promising candidate for next-generation Li metal batteries (LMBs) beyond traditional LIBs. To date, some fundamental issues including poor safety and cycling stability still hinder the practical applications of the Li metal anode. Firstly, the formation of dendrites during electrochemical plating/stripping can penetrate the separator, triggering the failure of the battery due to internal short circuits. The risk of thermal runaway and cell combustion arising from shorting will significantly increase. Secondly, the formation of unstable SEI components due to uncontrolled side reactions between Li metal and liquid electrolyte leads to poor coulombic efficiency. In addition, the large volume fluctuation of Li during electrochemical cycling owing to its hostless nature further causes the formation of “dead” Li deposits and further aggravates parasitic side reactions.35 The stability of the SEI is the most important factor that needs to be addressed in order to prevent further side reactions between Li and electrolyte. Nevertheless, naturally-formed SEI is heterogeneous with respect to composition, ionic conductivity, and mechanical properties, leading to fracture upon electrochemical cycling and continuous side reactions between Li and the electrolyte.321,322 Therefore, an interphase design is critical to improving the stability of the SEI and is considered to be an effective approach to enhance the performance of Li metal anodes. The functions of the artificial SEI are summarized as: (1) a strong physical barrier against dendrite propagation; (2) preventing the side reactions between Li metal and the electrolyte; (3) regulating the Li+ flux on the surface of Li metal and uniformizing the Li nucleation and deposition.323 There have been many studies reporting the construction of surface coatings on Li as a protective film, including metal oxides,324,325 solid-state electrolytes,326,327 and polymers.328,329 These ex situ strategies can be realized by various coating techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition,330 wet chemical methods,331 and physical vapor deposition.332 Among all of the coating methods, ALD is believed to be very promising due to its conformal coverage and accurate control over thickness in the nanoscale regime.19 Ultra-thin protective films with homogeneous composition can be deposited on Li metal, and all the features achieved by ALD can be beneficial towards meeting the requirement of an ideal SEI. As an analogue technique to ALD, MLD is employed for the deposition of polymeric films rather than inorganic materials by ALD. As previously mentioned, MLD provides several unique advantages such as tunable electrochemical properties and improved mechanical performance while maintaining the advantages of ALD.333
The investigation of ALD metal oxides for Li metal protection was reported by Noked's group for the first time.325 In their work, a ∼14 nm thick ALD Al2O3 layer was coated on Li by plasma-enhanced ALD (PEALD) with trimethylaluminum (TMA) and O2 plasma. When tested in Li–S batteries, the ALD-protected anodes showed improved capacity retention compared to bare Li for up to 100 cycles (Fig. 16(a)). Moreover, this Al2O3 layer can effectively prevent the corrosion of the Li surface when exposed to the atmosphere, sulfur, and electrolyte. Following this work, there have been other studies on the protective effects of ALD Al2O3 for Li. Dasgupta's group used TMA and H2O as precursors to deposit an optimized ∼2 nm ultrathin Al2O3 layer and investigated the plating/stripping of symmetric Li–Li cells.334 They observed a greatly improved lifetime enabled by the coating layer and a smooth Li surface after 1000 electrochemical cycles. This work demonstrated that Li can transport through Al2O3 during the Li plating process, which was confirmed from XPS results that indicated that Al still remained on the surface after Li plating. Based on their first work, Noked's group further studied the protective effects of ALD coating on Li against organic electrolyte quantitatively using mass spectrometry and in situ AFM.335 They confirmed that both electrochemical degradation and solvent corrosion can be efficiently suppressed by ALD Al2O3. Moreover, Elam's group investigated the growth mechanism of ALD Al2O3 deposition on Li by in situ quartz crystal microbalance and found enhanced wettability of the Li surface towards electrolytes.336 Promisingly, the cycling life of ALD protected Li was four times longer than bare Li when the volume of electrolyte was only 5 μL. Furthermore, Cui's group applied ALD Al2O3 on a 3D hollow carbon host, which can guide Li deposition inside the hollow carbon spheres and prevent direct electrolyte contact, resulting in a high coulombic efficiency of 99% over 500 cycles.337 Other than Al2O3, Cho's group recently reported a ZrO2 encapsulation layer on Li metal by plasma-thermal activated ALD for the first time, as shown in Fig. 16(b).338 This conformal and ionically conductive ZrO2 layer with high-k dielectric properties can suppress side reactions and stabilize Li metal. The protected Li also exhibited good heat tolerance up to 170–180 °C due to the high thermal resistance of ZrO2.
 Fig. 16  ALD/MLD for Li metal anodes: (a) ALD Al2O3; (b) ALD ZrO2; (c) ALD LiF; (d) MLD organic polyurea; (e) MLD hybrid inorganic–organic alucone; (f) MLD hybrid inorganic–organic zircone; (g) ALD-MLD dual protective layer. 
The development of lithium-containing compounds via ALD is also considered as a promising strategy to stabilize the Li metal anode. Elam's group developed an ultrathin and ionically conducting ALD LixAlyS coating to stabilize the SEI and decrease the interfacial resistance.339 In this ALD process, a newly developed coating of Al2S3 by tris(dimethylamido) aluminum(III) and H2S is combined with a reported process for Li2S by combining lithium tert-butoxide (LiOtBu) and H2S subcycles. The electrochemically deposited Li with LixAlyS coating was found to maintain a smooth surface, and the cycle life of Li–Cu cells was doubled compared to the bare Li. A new ALD process enabling the deposition of LiF (Fig. 16(c)) directly on Li was also developed recently by Elam's group.340 In the synthesis of ALD LiF, LiOtBu and HF/pyridine solution were used as precursors for deposition at 150 °C, which is below the melting point of Li. A high shear modulus of 58 GPa was detected by nanoindentation measurements, which is higher than that required to prevent the growth of Li dendrites. Owing to the high dielectric value and great stability of LiF, the protected Li showed a stable coulombic efficiency of ∼99.5% for 170 cycles. Furthermore, Cui's group demonstrated selective ALD LiF deposited on the defect sites of h-BN films.341 The LiF was primarily deposited on the defects of h-BN, thereby saturating the h-BN crystallites. As a result, the protected electrodes exhibit excellent cycling stability with more than 300 cycles at relatively high coulombic efficiency in an additive-free carbonate electrolyte.
To date, polymeric films have been reported as effective coating materials for Li metal with some interesting and unique mechanical properties. The fabrication of various MLD nanoscale coatings on Li has been reported by Elam's group and Sun's group. Different from ALD coatings, MLD coatings have good flexibility, lower density, and high softness, which can lead to improved electrochemical performance when using artificial SEI. A type of pure polymeric coating of ‘polyurea’ was reported to stabilize the SEI by our group for the first time, as shown in Fig. 16(d).342 Abundant polar groups in this polymer can redistribute the Li-ion flux and lead to a uniform Li plating/stripping process. Both XPS and TOF-SIMS results confirmed that nitrogen remained on the surface after electrochemical cycling, suggesting that the protective film is mechanically robust upon electrochemical cycling. As a result, a three-fold increase in cycle life was achieved in symmetric cells at a current of 3 mA cm−2 and higher capacity retention was obtained in Li–LFP batteries for 200 cycles. A hybrid inorganic–organic MLD coating, alucone, has been reported by both Sun's group and Elam's group for use as a protective layer for Li metal anodes (Fig. 16(e)).343,344 With a composition consisting of (–Al-O-CH2-CH2-O–)n repeating units, alucone is synthesized by the sequential reactions of TMA and ethylene glycol (EG). Our results showed that alucone-protected Li had superior electrochemical performance compared to that of ALD Al2O3 coatings.343 The reason for the improved performance was revealed by RBS measurements on both electrochemically cycled Al2O3 and alucone coated Li. The results demonstrated that the alucone coating was more effective than Al2O3 in preventing film fracture under the large volume change during Li plating/stripping. Elam's group also found a similar conclusion that alucone coating can stabilize Li against dendrite growth and minimize side reactions.344 Their results showed that the protected Li can yield longer cycle life and 39.5% higher capacity after 140 cycles in Li–S batteries with a high mass loading of ∼5 mg cm−2. Sun et al. recently reported the fabrication of MLD zircone as a protective layer on Li metal at 130 °C using zirconium tert-butoxide and ethylene glycol as precursors, as shown in Fig. 16(f).345In situ synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy was used to study the lithiation process of the zircone thin films. Promisingly, the zircone-coated Li showed a 10-fold increase in cycle life in Li–O2 batteries compared to those with unprotected Li due to its excellent air stability.
The electrical and mechanical properties of MLD thin films are different compared with their ALD counterparts. When used as protective coatings on Li, dense ALD films are expected to block the electron transport and reduce unwanted side reactions, whereas porous MLD films are expected to better accommodate the volume changes during plating/stripping because of their improved flexibility. Recently reported by Sun et al., a dual protective layer for Li metal anodes was fabricated by combining ALD and MLD, leading to significantly enhanced electrochemical performances.346 Inspired by natural SEI formation, this dual protective layer consisted of organic alucone as the outer layer and inorganic Al2O3 as the inner layer. The concept and design of the ALD/MLD recipe are shown in Fig. 16(g). The mechanical properties of the protective layer were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The results showed both high strength and local flexibility, which are beneficial for suppressing crack formation upon electrochemical cycling. Results from SEM demonstrated that dendrite growth and dead Li formation can be effectively suppressed by the introduction of a dual-layer. Moreover, surface and interface analysis by both TOF-SIMS and RBS indicated an excellent robust feature of the protective layer. This work demonstrates the precise control over coating thickness and composition enabled by ALD and MLD techniques, which is difficult to achieve by other methods.
In this section, we have summarized the application of ALD/MLD coatings to address the challenges of Li metal anodes. The reasons for their enhanced electrochemical performances are mainly: (1) the electronically insulating properties of the coatings can induce Li deposition underneath the films. (2) The protective layers can serve as a physical barrier to suppress dendrite growth and/or accommodate volume change. (3) Side reactions between electrolyte and Li can be suppressed by coating. Ionic conductivity plays a crucial role in SEI as the Li-ion transport through the interphase considerably affects the electrochemical performances.347 However, there are still very few reports on the fabrication of ALD/MLD coatings with high ionic conductivity directly on lithium. We strongly believe the development of new ALD/MLD processes for ionically conductive coatings on Li is of great importance to realize stable Li metal anodes for next-generation LMBs.


2.1.3 ALD/MLD for Na batteries and beyond. 
2.1.3.1 ALD/MLD for Na ion batteries. 
With the continuous consumption of resources due to the large demand for Li-ion batteries, the availability of Li sources has been dramatically reduced. Thus, it is necessary to develop a new energy storage system to replace Li-based batteries.348,349 Na batteries, including Na-ion batteries (NIBs) and room temperature Na metal batteries, are recognized as promising alternatives to Li batteries due to the lower price and natural abundance of sodium, and similar intercalation chemistry to lithium.350–352 The electrodes, including both the cathode and anode, are still the key components for high-performance Na batteries. ALD/MLD can be used for the fabrication of electrodes and engineering of the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. Sun et al. were the first to demonstrate an ALD-fabricated sodium titanate as an anode for NIBs.353 As shown in Fig. 17(a), the NaOtBu, titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP), and H2O were used as precursors at a deposition temperature of 200–275 °C. One ALD supercycle consists of two ALD sub-cycles, which include NaOtBu–H2O and TTIP–H2O. The as-deposited sodium titanate was amorphous, and crystalline Na0.23TiO2 was obtained after a post-annealing treatment. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were used as the substrate for electrode fabrication. The sodium titanates on CNTs delivered excellent electrochemical properties as anodes for NIBs with high energy density, exceptional rate performances and long lifespans. As shown in Fig. 17(a), the as-deposited amorphous sodium titanates demonstrated better electrochemical performances with high capacity compared to the crystalline Na0.23TiO2. Another work reported nitrogen-doped TiO2 on CNTs (N-TiO2/CNTs) fabricated by plasma-enhanced ALD using N2 plasma.354 Furthermore, Rao et al. have grown ultrathin crystalline epitaxial thin films of MoS2 on c-sapphire by ALD.355 The MoS2 films showed a high density of nanowalls and exhibited a high surface to volume ratio. The cell with the ALD-grown MoS2 nanowall network presented remarkable electrochemical performances in both LIBs and NIBs, delivering a specific capacity of 667 mA h g−1 and 1710 mA h g−1 for LIBs and NIBs, respectively.
 Fig. 17  ALD/MLD for Na-ion batteries: (a) ALD fabricated sodium titanate; (b) ALD Al2O3 for Sn anode; (c) ALD TiO2 for CuO anode; (d) ALD Al2O3 for Na2/3(Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13)O2. 
Similar to their application in LIBs, ALD/MLD techniques are also used to modify the SEI layer for anode materials in NIBs. Hu's group designed a novel hybrid nanostructure (Fig. 17(b)), consisting of Sn nanoparticles (SnNPs) attached to carbon nanofibers (CNFs) with another thin layer of ALD Al2O3 for use as an anode in NIBs.356 As shown in Fig. 17(b), without the ALD coating, the SnNPs detach and fall off from the underlying CNF substrate after sodiation/desodiation cycles. In contrast, the ALD Al2O3 coating could conduct sodium ions after forming the Na–Al–O layer, allowing for the uniform sodiation of the SnNP core. The volume change of SnNP during cycling was accompanied by a conformal swelling and shrinking of the Na–Al–O layer. It was verified by in situ TEM that the ALD Al2O3 coating was robust and deformed coherently with the SnNPs during the sodiation/desodiation process, effectively limiting the volume changes during cycling. As a result, the electrochemical stability was improved with the ALD Al2O3 coating. Liu et al. further demonstrate the concept using a composite anode of SnO2 nanoparticles on carbon cloth (CC) with the surface coating layer of ALD Al2O3.357 Moreover, the ALD metal oxides of Al2O3 and TiO2 have also been deposited as a protective layer for conversion-type anodes such as CuO and NiCo2O4.358,359 For example, Li's group demonstrated CuO nanowire electrode arrays grown on 3D Cu foams with ALD TiO2 as protective coatings (as shown in Fig. 17(c)).359 The CuO nanowire arrays delivered a high specific capacity of 592 mA h g−1 and remarkable cycling performances with a high capacity retention of 82% over 1000 cycles.
On the cathode side, ALD Al2O3 was also used to engineer the interface for different cathode materials, such as Na2/3(Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13)O2, P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 and Na3V2(PO4)3.360–366 For example, our group reported an ALD Al2O3 coating for P2-type Na2/3(Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13)O2 with an optimized thickness of 2 Al2O3 cycles, as shown in Fig. 17(d). Thick ALD Al2O3 can reduce the utilization of active materials and increased the charge-transfer resistance upon cycling.360 The role of ALD metal oxide coating in NIBs is similar to that of LIBs, which prevents the side reactions between the cathode and electrolyte, minimizes the transition metal dissolution, and provides structural stability against mechanical stresses which occur during the cycling process.
2.1.3.2 ALD/MLD for Na metal batteries. 
Room temperature Na metal batteries (NMBs), including Na–S, Na–Se, and Na–O2 batteries, present higher energy densities compared to traditional LIBs and NIBs.367–370 Sun's group demonstrated non-noble ALD Co3O4 catalysts on CNTs as an air electrode for Na–air batteries.371 As shown in Fig. 18(a), a conformal layer of Co3O4 was formed on the CNT substrates by an ALD technique. In contrast, mechanically mixed CNT/Co3O4 nanocomposites were prepared for comparison. The ALD deposited Co3O4–CNTs air electrodes can effectively improve the utilization of the catalytic centres and orientate the growth of the discharge products, resulting in an increased capacity and extended lifespan. Furthermore, we designed another 3D structured air electrode for Na–O2 batteries,372 in which graphene foam was used as the substrate and mesoporous Mn3O4 with ALD Pd deposition was decorated on the graphene foam. In this 3D air electrode, the mesoporous Mn3O4 and Pd nanoclusters acted as ORR and OER catalysts, respectively, resulting in a stable electrochemical performance for over 100 cycles in Na–O2 batteries.
 Fig. 18  ALD/MLD for Na metal batteries: (a) ALD Co3O4 as a catalyst for Na–air batteries; (b) ALD TiO2 for Na–S batteries; (c) MLD alucone for a Na metal anode. 
ALD has also been extended to Na–S and Na–Se battery applications. As shown in Fig. 18(b), we designed a novel structured cathode material for Na–S batteries.373 The C/S/BaTiO3 composites were firstly fabricated via electrospinning and a subsequent annealing process. Then, ALD TiO2 was deposited on the C/S/BaTiO3 composites as the protective layer. With the ALD TiO2 coating, the electrode showed enhanced stability with a discharge capacity of 611 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles. The ALD coating can effectively adsorb the polysulfides, suppress the volume changes, reduce the interfacial resistance, and facilitate charge transfer and ion transport, resulting in improved electrochemical performances. Moreover, the ALD Al2O3-coated (Se/porous N-doped carbon nanofibers)@Se composites were rationally designed and fabricated as free-standing cathodes for Na–Se batteries. The ALD coated composite electrode with high Se loading (67%) delivered the high specific capacity of 503 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles with almost 100% capacity retention at the current density of 0.5 A g−1. The major function of the ALD Al2O3 is to serve as an artificial barrier to limit the dissolution of sodium polyselenides and mitigate the shuttle effects in the electrolyte.
For room temperature Na metal batteries, the Na metal anode is another serious challenge that needs to be overcome. As an alkali metal, the issues of a Na metal anode can be summarized as (1) Na dendrite growth; (2) unstable SEI and dead Na layer formation; and (3) infinite volume change.374,375 For the individual subcategories of Na metal batteries, there are other problems specific to the full cell system. For example, the O2 diffusion to the anode is also a critical issue in Na–O2 batteries.376 Our previous review has summarized the recent development of Na metal anodes in detail.377 ALD/MLD can play an important role in addressing the interfacial issues. Hu's group and our group reported ALD Al2O3 as a protective layer for the Na metal anode.378,379 The ultrathin Al2O3 coating serves as a stable artificial SEI for Na metal, resulting in both carbonate-based and ether-based symmetric cells with enhanced electrochemical performances. Furthermore, our group firstly demonstrated MLD alucone coatings for Na metal.380 As shown in Fig. 18(c), the MLD alucone presented strong surface bonding on the surface of Na metal. Fig. 18(c) also shows the electrochemical performances of the symmetrical cells for both Na@25alucone and the pristine Na foil at 1 mA cm−2/1 mA h cm−2 in the NaPF6–carbonate electrolyte. From the results, the Na@25alucone presented more stable plating/stripping performances with reduced dendrite growth and double the lifetime.
ALD was also used to fabricated SSEs for Na-based SSBs. Nuwayhid et al. firstly demonstrated a thermal ALD process for sodium phosphorus oxynitride (NaPON), thin-film SSEs.381 In the ALD process, sodium tert-butoxide (NaOtBu) and DEPA were used as precursors with the deposition temperature at 250–400 °C. The ALD process produced a conformal film with a stoichiometry of Na4PO3N, corresponding to a sodium polyphosphazene structure. The ionic conductivity of the NaPON film was as high as 1.0 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 25 °C and up to 2.5 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 80 °C with an activation energy of 0.53 eV. Their promising result makes NaPON a viable SSE or passivation layer for Na-based SSBs.
2.1.3.3 ALD/MLD for other batteries. 
The application of ALD/MLD has also been extended to other battery systems, such as Al-ion, K-ion, and Zn-ion batteries.382–385 For example, Huang's group demonstrated uniformly coated ALD amorphous V2O5 on CNTs as a cathode for K-ion batteries.385 The V2O5@CNT sponge cathode deposited by ALD exhibits a reversible capacity of 206 mA h g−1 and stable cycling performances in the carbonate-based electrolyte. Liu et al. utilized ALD Al2O3 coating to modify the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on a biomass carbon anode in K-ion batteries and improve the average CE from 99.0% to 99.6%.386 ALD protection coatings were also proposed to be effective for Zn metal anodes, where ALD TiO2 and Al2O3 was used as a demonstration.387 The ALD layer can prevent gas generation on the Zn metal anode and maintain effective contact between the Zn and electrolyte, resulting in enhanced coulombic efficiency. The protected Zn metal anode can be cycled in the Zn–MnO2 batteries over 1000 cycles with a capacity retention of 85%. Furthermore, ALD was used to deposit nanoscale ZnO on the current collector as a binder-free cathode for rechargeable Al-ion batteries.383 The electrochemical results showed that the binder-free ALD grown ZnO cathode manifested a high initial discharge capacity of 2563 mA h g−1, which was significantly higher than that of the cells fabricated with the ZnO powder as the cathode. However, the capacity decay is serious with only 245 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 400 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. Further efforts are needed to stabilize the cycling stability of this cathode material for Al-ion batteries.
In this section, the applications of ALD/MLD for Na batteries and beyond (including Na-ion batteries, Na-metal batteries, Al-ion batteries, Zn-ion batteries) have been discussed in detail. The studies on this topic are not as prominent compared to Li metal batteries, but promising progress has been reported. Firstly, several types of electrode materials were fabricated by ALD with controllable structure and thickness. Secondly, the ALD coating was deposited as a coating for both anode and cathode electrolytes in different battery systems. On the cathode side, the ALD layers were used to prevent side reactions and transition metal dissolution during cycling. On the anode side, the ALD coating served as a buffer layer to relieve the volume change and stabilize the SEI layer. In particular, the ALD/MLD coatings were effective for metal anodes, such as Na metal and Zn metal anodes. Thirdly, ALD was shown to be capable of fabricating catalysts for the air electrode in Na–O2 batteries.

2.2 ALD/MLD for supercapacitors

2.2.1 ALD for electrode fabrication. 
Supercapacitors are another important electrochemical energy storage system with higher power density compared to batteries.388 However, the energy density of supercapacitors is not as high as traditional LIBs. This makes supercapacitors suitable for applications that require short power bursts but not necessarily high energy density.389,390 Another great advantage of supercapacitors is the extremely long lifetime due to the charge storage mechanism, which is based on splitting charge at the surface of the electrodes in an electric double layer without chemical reactions.391–393 Moreover, supercapacitors are generally safer than batteries for high power-rating charging and discharging.394,395
The performance of supercapacitors is highly dependent on the surface/near-surface reactions on the electrodes, which is one of the most significant factors for determining the performance of the supercapacitor. ALD/MLD has been used to deposit active materials on different substrates to fabricate composite electrodes for supercapacitors.230,400,401 For example, Yushin's group fabricated VO2/multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) composite electrodes by ALD with controlled thickness and porosity, greatly improving the electrical conductivity and cycling stability (Fig. 19(a)).396 The results show that the thin VO2 films on the MWCNTs present higher capacitance, in which the 10 nm thick VO2 exhibited the highest capacitance of 1550 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Moreover, the charge–discharge tests show stable performance with high capacitance retention over 5000 cycles. TiO2 is also a promising candidate with impressive capacitance behaviour. However, the low ion diffusion coefficient and high electrical resistance limit its further application.402,403 To address these issues, Sun et al. deposit TiO2 on graphene to prepare TiO2–G composites for supercapacitors.397 As shown in Fig. 19(b), the surface of the wrinkled graphene is uniformly covered by TiO2 nanoparticles, in which the particle size is 10 nm after 100 ALD cycles. The 50 cycles-TiO2–G and 100 cycles-TiO2–G composites deliver the capacity of 75 F g−1 and 84 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV, respectively. The composite electrode shows good cycling performance up to 1000 cycles at 2 A g−1, as shown in Fig. 19(b). The composite electrode deposited by ALD possesses excellent conductivity for charge transfer and open structures for ion diffusion. Furthermore, their group demonstrated that ALD TiO2 coated on CNTs could lead to a higher capacitance of 135 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with excellent stability over >1000 cycles.404 Other transition metal oxides, such as NiO, Co3O4, Mn3O4, Fe2O3, WO3, etc., were deposited by ALD on different conductive substrates to fabricate electrodes for supercapacitors.405–410 For example, NiO is one of the most popular electrode materials due to the high theoretical specific capacitance of 2573 F g−1, environmental friendliness and low cost. Qin's group applied the ALD technique to deposit NiO nanoparticles of various sizes on nanoporous graphene (NG) as the electrode for a supercapacitor.405 The NiO/NG composite with 500 ALD cycles presented the best performance with a high specific capacitance of up to 1005.8 F g−1 at current densities of 1 A g−1. The ALD deposited metal oxides with controlled size and uniform coverage provide short ion diffusion pathways and the conductive substrate can significantly enhance the conductivity of the metal oxides. Moreover, noble metal oxides, such as RuO2, are considered as one of the highest performing pseudocapacitive material candidates.411 Realized by ALD, a very small amount of RuO2 (∼9.3 wt% Ru) leads to a 40% increase in capacitance for the graphene electrodes,398 as shown in Fig. 19(c). Moreover, the strong chemical bonding between RuO2 and graphene results in excellent cycling stability with over 92% capacitance retention over 4000 cycles.
 Fig. 19  ALD fabricated electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) ALD VOx;396 (b) ALD TiO2;397 (c) ALD RuO2;398 (d) ALD Co9S8.399 
Additionally, metal sulfides and metal nitrides have also been used as electrode materials for supercapacitors.412 This was exemplified by Wang's group, in which a Co9S8 film was deposited on a Ni foam electrode.399 The deposition process used bis(N,N-diisopropylacetamidinato)cobalt(II) and H2S as the precursors for the ALD Co9S8 process, as shown in Fig. 19(d). With 2000 ALD cycles, 54 nm Co9S8 was coated on the Ni foam to form the Co9S8/NF electrode. In the 2 M KOH aqueous electrolyte, the excellent specific capacitances of 1645, 1616, 1544, 1493, 1378, and 1309 F g−1 can be obtained for the Co9S8/NF electrode at the current densities of 3, 6, 12, 15, 30, and 45 A g−1, respectively. Furthermore, the prepared electrode exhibited stable long-term cycling performance with 94% retention at a current density of 45 A g−1 up to 2000 cycles. Other metal sulfides, such as MoS2 and SnS2, were also developed by ALD as electrodes for supercapacitors.413,414 For example, molybdenum hexacarbonyl [Mo(CO)6] and H2S were used as precursors to deposit MoS2 on Ni foam substrates.413 A high areal capacitance of 3400 mF cm−2 was obtained for the MoS2@NF electrode with an optimized MoS2 thickness of 400 ALD cycles at a current density of 3 mA cm−2. A high cycling stability (>80% specific capacitance retention) was achieved for over 4500 cycles.


2.2.2 ALD for the design of nanostructures. 
To further improve the performance of supercapacitor electrodes, nanostructured materials need to be rationally designed in order to enhance the surface area and porosity. ALD/MLD techniques are promising techniques that can be used to design various nanostructures by using sacrificial templates. Lei's group designed well-defined Pt nanotube arrays and Pt/MnO2 core–shell nanotubes by ALD in anodic alumina templates and used them as current collectors.415 In this process, the Pt NT array was first grown on the pre-patterned alumina template by ALD. Unlike the conventional ALD process for Pt deposition, an innovative ALD process for Pt was developed with a low N2 filling step used after pulsing. In their ALD Pt deposition process, the nucleation delay phenomenon largely decreased, and half of the Pt precursor was saved to obtain a similar Pt film deposited by the conventional ALD process. After the Pt deposition, mixed polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) solution was used on the surface of the template followed by dissolving the backside alumina template. Then, a thin MnO2 layer was deposited on the Pt nanotubes by electrodeposition. The diameter and length of the Pt nanotubes are 180 nm and 2 μm, respectively. The MnO2 shells were electrodeposited on Pt cores and controlled by the deposition times, as shown in Fig. 20(a). When the MnO2 deposition time was 30 s, the tube diameter and the shell thickness was about 240 and 30 nm, while the diameter and thickness reach up to about 340 and 80 nm respectively for 90 s deposition time (Fig. 20(a)). The Pt/MnO2-30 s delivered a higher capacity of 793 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 compared to the 530 F g−1 of Pt/MnO2-90 s. Moreover, the Pt/MnO2 presents good rate capability at different current densities, as shown in Fig. 20(a), which was attributed to the superior surface area of the Pt nanotube that could enable fast and reversible faradaic reactions along with short ion diffusion paths. Another nanostructured TiC hollow sphere array was fabricated on a conductive substrate by the ALD-assisted template synthesis strategy,416 as shown in Fig. 20(b). In a typical process, close-packed PS spheres were used as a template on the graphite substrate. ALD TiO2 was deposited on the template and the PS spheres were dissolved by toluene. Finally, the monolayer of TiC hollow nanosphere arrays was successfully formed after a high-temperature carbothermal reaction. The designed electrode delivered excellent electrochemical performances with high capacitance, ultra-long lifespan over 75000 cycles with a high capacity retention of 98% and promising rate capability. Another interesting structure of TiO2/MnO2–C core/shell arrays were designed and fabricated using a combination of ALD and electrodeposition methods,417 as shown in Fig. 20(c). A high specific capacitance of 880 F g−1 at 2.5 A g−1, exceptional rate performances of 735 F g−1 at 30 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability of 94.3% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles were obtained for the TiO2/MnO2–C electrodes. Some other nanostructures were further developed using ALD-assisted methods.238,417–423 In a typical process, different types of templates are used to deposit ALD films. Afterwards, the templates are removed or transferred to create nanostructures by post-treatment processes. Then, the 3D nanostructures with high surface area and short ion diffusion paths are achieved with significantly improved electrochemical performances.
 Fig. 20  ALD-designed nanostructured electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) MnO2/Pt;415 (b) TiC;416 (c) TiO2/MnO2–C.417 


2.2.3 MLD for electrode design. 
MLD has also been reported as a fabrication method for electrode materials in supercapacitors. Because MLD films generally consist of pure polymers or organic–inorganic hybrid films, they are used to design porous metal oxides and carbon-containing composites with post-treatment methods. Qin's group was the first to demonstrate the use of MLD to design electrodes for supercapacitors, in which aromatic polyimide (PI) films were deposited on the surfaces of graphene and then carbonized to produce a nitrogen-doped carbon layer on graphene.424 The as-prepared N-doped carbon layer-coated graphene electrodes exhibited a high capacitance of 290.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with excellent rate properties and stability. In another example, a gap shell structure with an ultrathin and conformal porous carbon coating was successfully constructed through ALD and MLD processes followed by annealing and etching.425 The as-obtained composite electrode exhibited a high capacitance of 1034.6 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with superior rate capability. The gap-porous carbon derived by ALD/MLD can not only maintain the electrochemical reactivity of nickel sulfide but also provide a protective layer with a buffer area for volume change.
In this section, we summarized the development of ALD/MLD techniques for supercapacitor applications. Firstly, different materials, including metal oxides, metal sulfides and metal nitrides, were deposited by ALD on various conductive substrates to fabricate composite electrodes for supercapacitors. The conductive substrates, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes and Ni foam, provide improved electronic conductivity for the ALD-deposited materials. The nanoscale materials deposited by ALD can provide uniform coverage and short ion diffusion pathways, resulting in enhanced electrochemical performances. Secondly, by combining with other methods or using templates, ALD was used to design and fabricate nanostructured materials with high surface areas. Thirdly, MLD was used to create porous metal oxides and carbon-containing composites by post-treatment methods. However, the study of MLD films for supercapacitor applications is still in a state of infancy. This application of MLD is expected to be explored further in the future.

3. ALD/MLD for energy conversion
3.1 ALD/MLD for electrocatalytic reactions

3.1.1 ALD/MLD for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. 
3.1.1.1 ALD of Pt on different substrates for improving ORR activity. 
Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are promising alternative power sources for transportation and portable applications due to their high efficiency in converting the chemical energy from hydrogen into electrical energy, near room temperature operation, and zero emissions.426 During the operation of PEFCs, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is the rate-limiting reaction due to its inherently sluggish kinetics. Therefore, in order to achieve widespread commercial implementation of PEMFCs, developing a promising catalyst for enhanced oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) kinetics is of great significance. Platinum is reported as the most effective catalyst used for the ORR in PEMFC.427,428 However, Pt is still facing a great challenge for commercial applications in PEMFCs due to its gradually increasing price and low abundance in the earth. ALD is a promising technique to solve the problems associated with reducing cost. ALD can not only precisely control the particle sizes ranging from single atom, sub-nanometer clusters, or nanoparticles in high-aspect-ratio and porous materials, but can also be used to design novel structures through surface engineering of the substrate to improve the activity of Pt catalysts.429
Aaltonen et al. made great progress in ALD synthesis by deposition of Ru metal from RuCp2 and O2, and the process has been extended to other metals such as Pt, Rh, and Ir.430,431 The intrinsic roughness of the surface induced by noble metal ALD processes can effectively increase the surface area of the catalyst, leading to a more efficient device.19,432 Due to the self-limiting characteristic of the ALD process, the precursor should be volatile and thermally stable. In addition, precursors must chemisorb on the surface or react rapidly with the substrates and react aggressively with each other.433 Until now, Pt precursors such as MeCpPtMe3, Pt(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetonato) and platinum(II) hexafluoroacetylacetonate [Pt(hfac)2] have been investigated for the deposition of Pt. However, Pt(acac)2 has lower thermal stability, which makes it an unsuitable precursor for thermal ALD.434,435 When using Pt(hfac)2 as the precursor, the formalin should be used as the reactants and the ALD process was found to be only effective at relatively high temperatures (200 °C).436 Therefore, MeCpPtMe3 is the most widely used Pt precursor in ALD for the preparation of Pt NPs used in the ORR. During the ALD Pt process, the island growth of Pt NPs occurs instead of thin film formation. In a whole Pt ALD cycle, the Pt precursors firstly bond with the functional groups on the surface of the substrates. Then the chemical ligands are removed by the introduction of O2 or O3. The formed Pt atoms might aggregate to small clusters due to the limited number of functional groups on the substrate surface, which leads to the formation of Pt NPs instead of a thin film on the substrates. Hence, the selection of the substrate is of great importance for ALD Pt NPs, and it can significantly determine the ORR activity of the catalysts. Pt nanoparticles (NPs) are deposited on substrates such as oxides, carbon materials and other metals.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are one of the most widely used carbon substrates for the deposition of Pt. Chen and co-workers prepared three carbon nanotube-supported Pt nanoparticles (Pt/CNT) with different sizes by tuning the number of ALD cycles (Fig. 21(a)).437 In addition, they compared the ALD-prepared catalysts with those obtained by impregnation methods. During the ORR test, the ALD-Pt/CNT catalysts showed much higher activity and selectivity than those of the impregnation-Pt/CNT catalysts. It was found that the well-controlled Pt particle size and distribution, desirable Pt0 4f binding energy, and the Cl-free Pt surfaces of the ALD-Pt/CNT catalysts contributed to the outstanding ORR performance. Besides carbon-based supports, Yang and co-workers fabricated fibrous membranes of niobium-doped titania-supported platinum catalysts (Pt@Nb–TiO2) by a two-step approach (Fig. 21(b)).438 Firstly, they synthesized Nb–TiO2 fibrous membranes by electrospinning. Then the Pt NPs were deposited on Nb–TiO2 by ALD. The as-prepared catalysts were further post-treated at 200 °C in 5% H2 to improve the conductivity of Nb–TiO2 fibres and obtain Pt NPs with better crystallinity. After the post-treatment, the ORR activity could reach as high as 0.28 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE) and it had very good stability with only a ∼10% loss in ORR activity after 30k cycles. When Pt is deposited on TiSi2 nanonets, Pt nanoparticles were observed to only grow on the (020) planes and the NPs exhibited 5-fold twinned structures with planes exposed, as shown in Fig. 21(c).439 The interaction between Pt and the TiSi2 nanonet b planes was the key to the formation of twinned Pt nanoparticles. At 0.9 V vs. RHE, the current density of the Pt/TiSi2 catalysts was 0.16 mA cm−2, which is considerably higher than that of Pt/C (0.1 mA cm−2). The availability of non-carbon electrode constructions, such as the Pt@Nb–TiO2 and Pt/TiSi2, permits fundamental studies to discern the role of the carbon support in existing devices.
 Fig. 21  ALD of Pt NPs on different substrates by using MeCpPtMe3 for ORR: (a) Pt NPs on CNTs; (b) Pt NPs on Nb–TiO2; (c) Pt NPs on TiS2; (d) Pt single atoms on octahedral Pd NPs. 
To improve the mass activity of Pt catalysts and thereby reduce the cost of the catalyst, one of the most direct routes is to increase their atom utilization efficiency (AUE) by reducing the particle size to clusters or even single atoms.440 However, the single atom Pt catalysts exhibit a 2 electron process instead of a 4 electron process during the ORR.441 DFT results indicate that the breaking of the O–O bond can readily occur on Pt nanoparticles. Meanwhile, for single atoms, the O2 molecule is end-on adsorbed on isolated Pt atoms (which avoids O–O cleavage), resulting in the selective production of H2O2.442,443 It has been reported that Pt single atoms can not only be deposited on carbon-based supports,444,445 but also on a metal surface, forming the single atom alloys (SAAs). Sun et al. successfully deposited Pt single atoms on octahedral Pd NPs due to the similar lattice constants between Pd and Pt. To obtain Pt single atoms, we only conducted one cycle of ALD by using MeCpPtMe3 and O2 as precursors.446 The atomic-resolution STEM image (Fig. 21(d)) clearly illustrates the presence of Pt-isolated atoms on the Pd(111) surfaces. With the formation of the SAA structure, the Pt atoms on Pd exhibited more metallic state compared to that on NCNTs. The coordination number of Pt–Pd is fitted to be 0.8 in the EXAFS spectra, which further provides direct evidence of the presence of isolated Pt atoms on octahedral Pd particles. In the ORR, the octahedral Pt/Pd SAA catalysts exhibited a mass activity of 1.09 A mg−1 normalized by the Pt mass at 0.9 V vs. RHE, which is 8.3 times greater than that of the Pt/C catalyst (0.13 A mg−1).
3.1.1.2 Improvement of the ORR durability by area selective ALD and MLD. 
In addition to the activity, durability is another important parameter for evaluating Pt catalysts. The harsh conditions (strong acid environment, high oxygen concentration, high humidity and etc.) at the cathode might gradually deactivate Pt catalysts, resulting in the loss of Pt performance due to Pt NP migration and agglomeration. Thus, there is a significant need for the development of highly active and durable Pt catalysts that can withstand harsh conditions for long-term testing. It has been reported that the creation of the porous layer of inorganic oxide is an effective route for the stabilization of supported metal NPs. The surrounding oxide layer, which has weaker bonding to metal NPs, can provide an additional energy barrier to restrict the diffusion and migration of the metal NPs across the biphasic support surface. However, for many methods, precise control over the thickness of the porous overlayers is difficult to achieve and results in a decrease in ORR activity from mass transfer resistance. By using ALD, the thickness of the stabilizer can be precisely controlled. McNeary et al. stabilized carbon black-based Pt catalysts with ALD-deposited TiO2.447 They found that ten cycles of TiO2 ALD on the functionalized substrate yielded well dispersed, locally homogeneous TiO2 structures that could surround the small Pt nanoparticles. The catalysts with the addition of TiO2 ALD nanostructures maintained around 70% mass activity after the accelerated durability testing (ADT).
By manipulating the surface functional groups of Pt catalysts, area selective ALD can be achieved, which means that the location of deposited materials is precisely controlled, avoiding the coverage of Pt active sites.336,448,449 One of the most successful designs for highly stable catalysts is Pt catalysts encapsulated in zirconia nanocages by area-selective ALD.450 The synthetic strategy is depicted in Fig. 22(a). The ALD Pt NPs were firstly deposited on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs). Then oleylamine was attached to the Pt NP surface as a blocking agent, which results in the selective deposition of zirconia around the Pt NPs, instead of on the Pt surface due to the blocking agent. The Pt catalyst encapsulated in zirconium nanocages showed very high activity and stability towards the ORR in acid media. The novel catalyst exhibited 9 times higher stability than ALD-Pt on NCNTs without the zirconia nanocage and 10 times higher stability compared to the state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C catalyst. Pt NPs encapsulated in a zirconia nanocage also showed six times greater ORR activity than a Pt/C catalyst. The remarkably stable performance with this novel catalyst is attributed to the presence of the zirconia nanocages, which prevent Pt NPs from migrating and agglomerating on the support. In addition, the higher surface area of small Pt NPs and the synergistic effects between Pt and ZrO2 resulted in the enhanced activity of Pt/ZrO2 catalysts. Besides ZrO2, TaOx has also been reported as an alloying additive that can enhance the activity and durability of various catalysts. Our group deposited TaOx NPs on a commercial Pt/C catalyst by area-selective ALD.451 Due to the blocking agent, TaOx particles are selectively nucleated and grown around Pt NPs. With the formation of the triple-junction structure at the interface, the sample with 35 ALD cycles of TaOx on the Pt/C surface exhibited superior stability compared with Pt/C. After 120 h ADT, the activity in a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) remained 88%. These examples show that it is critical to design novel Pt encapsulation catalysts with open or holey nanocage architectures by precisely controlling ALD metal oxide layers. The open or holey nanocage architectures are essential for achieving good performance because they allow reactants, such as oxygen and protons, to reach the Pt surface.
 Fig. 22  ALD/MLD for Pt catalyst stabilization: (a) area-selective ALD of ZrO2; (b) MLD alucone-derived porous carbon layer; (c) ALD of Pt on N-Ta2O5; (d) ALD of Pt on ZrC substrates. 
Molecular layer deposition (MLD), as an analogue of ALD, has been employed to produce inorganic–organic hybrid thin films with many advantages. Alucone is considered as a promising material as the interlayer to improve the stability of catalysts. However, the poor conductivity of MLD coatings greatly hinders their application in electrochemical systems. Recently, Sun et al. prepared a porous structure by annealing the alucone MLD layer. With the deposition of Pt NPs on the porous structure, the Pt catalysts were anchored on the surface and exhibited good performance.452 As shown in Fig. 22(b), 30 cycles of MLD alucone (TMA–GLY) thin film were firstly deposited on the NCNTs using sequential exposures of TMA and glycerol at 150 °C. After annealing the NCNT-MLD material at 400 °C for 3 h, Pt NPs are selectively deposited on the porous structure by an ALD method. The Pt catalysts show significantly enhanced ORR activity and durability compared to that without the MLD interlayer.
3.1.1.3 Improvement of ORR durability by enhancing the interactions between Pt single atoms and supports. 
Carbon-based substrates have many advantages, such as large surface area, high electrical conductivity and well-developed pore structure, and thus have been widely applied as the support material in electrochemistry. However, the weak interactions between the carbon support and metal particles lead to Pt NP migration and agglomeration, and eventually a rapid degradation of electrocatalyst performance. To solve these issues, enhancing the interaction between Pt NPs and carbon supports by ALD oxide has been proposed. The strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs) can improve the activity and durability of the Pt catalysts by tuning the electronic structure and hindering metal particle migration. In addition, the preparation of metal oxide-decorated carbon composites for the deposition of Pt NPs can maintain the good electroconductivity of the substrates. By introducing metal oxide NPs to the position between the Pt catalyst and carbon support, a stable and strong interface between the Pt and metal oxide can be achieved, which plays a significant role in preventing the rapid degradation of the catalytic activity.
For example, Sun et al. synthesized extremely stable Pt NPs immobilized on a carbon support via a bridge layer of nitrogen-doped tantalum oxide (N-Ta2O5).331 Firstly, the Ta2O5 NPs were developed by ALD to decorate the carbon black surface. Then, NH3 treatment of the ALDTa2O5/C support was conducted to dope N species, leading to the formation of N-doped-Ta2O5/C with enhanced conductivity. Finally, a microwave-assisted ethylene glycol (EG) reduction method was used to deposit Pt NPs on different supports. X-ray absorption spectroscopy indicated that the total unoccupied density of states of Pt in the Pt/N-ALDTa2O5/C is higher than that of 0.826 for Pt/ALDTa2O5/C and 0.795 for Pt/C. This result provides the most direct evidence for the electronic effects and SMSIs formed between the Pt NPs and N-Ta2O5/C support. The as-prepared Pt/N-ALDTa2O5/C catalyst showed around two times higher mass activity compared to Pt/C after 10000 cycles of ADT (Fig. 22(c)). Another metal oxide used for increasing the interaction between Pt and the support is ZrO2. Cheng and co-workers synthesized ALD-ZrO2/nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets (ZrO2/NGNs) as the support for Pt NPs.453 The unique triple-interface of ZrO2–Pt–NGN induced strong interaction between the Pt NPs and supports. As a result, the Pt–ZrO2/NGN catalyst exhibited 2.2 times higher durability than that of Pt/NGNs in ORR testing. These attempts provide more strategies for the preparation of well-dispersed, nanoscale metal compounds for carbon surface modification towards achieving controllable and well-defined metal–support interfaces.
In addition to the introduction of metal oxides between the carbon support and Pt NPs, the substitution of the carbon-based support with other materials is another promising strategy for improving the durability of Pt catalysts. Among various supports, ZrC has many advantages, such as high conductivity, strong electrochemical corrosion resistance, high stability, and good thermal conductivity, which makes it as a good substitute for Vulcan XC-72 (carbon black) support. Based on this, Sun et al. used a ZrC support as a substitute for a carbon-based support for the ALD of Pt NPs.454 As shown in Fig. 22(d), we synthesized a robust Pt-on-ZrC nanocomposite catalyst with strong metal–support interactions by ALD. The quantitative XANES results showed that the interactions between Pt and the ZrC support by ALD are much higher than that prepared from the conventional chemical reduction method. Due to the strong interaction between Pt and ZrC, the exhibited ORR activity was 9 times greater than Pt/C after the extended durability test.
3.1.1.4 ALD for MEA systems. 
On the anode side, the fast hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) is driven by a small amount of Pt/C catalyst. However, when the Pt loading is lower than 0.025 mg cm−2, the HOR performance would obviously decrease due to the very thin layer thickness. Therefore, the Pt loading at the anode needs to be further decreased for fuel cell automotive applications. Hsieh et al. directly deposited Pt NPs by ALD on a gas diffusion electrode consisting of CNT and GO. The MEA was fabricated using an ALD-Pt electrode as the anode to study the performance of a single cell, which offered improved catalytic activity.455,456 Recently, Shu et al. deposited Pt NPs on a gas diffusion layer by the ALD method.457,458 The formed catalyst layer exhibited around 2.5 times higher mass activity than that of the MEA with the anode prepared using the commercial catalyst. Perng and co-workers grew Pt NPs on nitric acid-treated CNTs with ALD for catalysis in PEMFCs.459 The Pt loading amount of the anode and cathode (0.019 and 0.044 mg cm−2, respectively) in the MEA is significantly reduced. In addition, the PEMFC test indicated that the specific power density of ALD-prepared MEA is 11 times higher than that made from commercial catalysts. This result revealed that ALD can significantly decrease the Pt loading of the electrodes in PEMFCs. To achieve extremely low Pt loading while maintaining high PEMFC performance and durability, Sun et al. prepared a series of membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) with low Pt loading in the anode layer through the use of ALD.460 The best ALDPt-MEA with an ultralow anode Pt loading of 0.01 mg cm−2 displays a high surface area of 155 m2 gPt−1. During the PEMFC test, the ALDPt-MEA exhibited a power density of 0.78 W cm−2, and maintained around 90% after ADT (Fig. 23(a)). The above studies demonstrated that the application of ALD for Pt deposition directly on the carbon layer of the electrodes can effectively reduce the Pt loading while enhancing the Pt dispersion, utilization, and durability, thus enhancing their performance on MEA anodes.
 Fig. 23  The application of ALD towards the fabrication of MEA systems: (a) ALD fabrication of ultra-low Pt loading anode; (b) ALD-modified silicon-based inorganic–organic membrane. 
In addition to the fabrication of active Pt catalysts, ALD has also been applied for the improvement of membrane properties. Moghaddam and Shannon prepared a silicon-based inorganic–organic membrane as a substitute for Nafion-based PEMFCs (Fig. 23(b)).461 Silicon-based inorganic–organic membranes have a number of advantages over Nafion, including higher proton conductivity, a lack of volume change, and membrane electrode assembly capabilities. A silicon membrane with pore diameters of ∼5–7 nm was firstly fabricated, followed by the addition of a self-assembled molecular monolayer on the pore surface. Plasma-directed atomic layer deposition (PD-ALD) was employed to create a 2 nm thick hydrophilic silica aperture at the mouth of the pores. With the formation of the silica layer, the diameter of the pores is reduced, and the proton conductivity value is significantly increased, which is two to three orders of magnitude higher than that of Nafion at low humidity. The MEA with this membrane exhibited much higher power density than previously achieved with a dry hydrogen feed and an air-breathing cathode. Inside the membrane, the catalysts are expected to catalyze water production. The introduction of metal oxide nanoparticles that have hygroscopic properties, such as TiO2, can absorb the water produced in the cathode reaction. Uhm and Lee coated an ultrathin layer of hydrophilic TiO2 on a hydrophobic microporous gas diffusion layer (GDL) at the cathode by ALD to maintain the power performance of PEFC cathodes operating under extremely low humidity.462 They found that the TiO2-coated GDL resulted in higher performance than the as-received GDL at low humidity operation.


3.1.2 ALD for electrocatalytic small organic molecule oxidation. 
3.1.2.1 ALD for electrocatalytic methanol oxidation. 
The direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) has received more and more attention due to its high efficiency, high power density and short start-up transient-response time. Despite considerable advances in these points, the widespread application of DMFCs has been hindered by several technical and economic barriers. The low electrocatalytic activity of commercial Pt/C catalysts toward the MOR and serious CO poisoning are the most severe challenges. By using ALD, Hsieh et al. fabricated Pt NPs on carbon powders, offering superior catalytic activity toward MOR. They found that the ALD-Pt catalyst offers not only an improved catalytic activity toward methanol oxidation but also superior CO tolerance, as compared to commercial P/C. The substrates for Pt loading can also significantly affect the MOR activity.463 Qin and co-workers prepared a Pt/CNT catalyst coated with N-doped carbon (NC-Pt/CNTs) by ALD (Fig. 24(a)).464 Firstly, Pt NPs and polyimide (PI) are sequentially deposited on CNTs by ALD. Subsequently, the catalysts were annealed at 600 °C in a H2 atmosphere, and the PI was carbonized to produce porous N-doped carbon. It was observed that the current density of NC-Pt/CNTs was 0.76 A mgPt−1, which is 2.7 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C and 1.7 times higher than that of Pt/CNTs. The interactions between Pt and the N-doped carbon can weaken the Pt–CO bond, resulting in enhanced catalytic activity and durability for the MOR.
 Fig. 24  ALD Pt and Pd NPs for electrocatalytic small organic molecule oxidation: (a) Pt–CNTs for MOR; (b) Pt–SnO2 for MOR; (c) Pt SACs on graphene for MOR; (d) Pt NPs–GO for FOR; (e) Pt NPs on porous carbon for FOR; (f) Pd NPs on SnO2–TiO2 for EOR. 
In addition to carbon substrates, metal oxide substrates have proven to be effective in minimizing the effect of CO poisoning. Peng and co-workers prepared a Pt@ZnO catalyst on carbon cloth via ALD.465 Firstly, they deposited a ZnO seed layer on carbon cloth, followed by hydrothermal growth of high-density vertical aligned ZnO nanorods (NRs). To increase the surface hydrophilicity of the ZnO NR arrays, UV light irradiation was used prior to the deposition of Pt NPs on ZnO by ALD. XPS results indicated that Zn(OH)2 species were formed on the ZnO NR arrays, which may enhance CO tolerance via a bifunctional mechanism. The negative binding energy shift of the Pt 4f peak and the positive shift of the Zn 2p peak suggest that charge transfer occurs between the ZnO support and the Pt NPs. The electronic modification of surface Pt atoms via ligand effects could lower the adsorption energy of CO and improve the electrocatalytic activity on MOR. Thanks to the ZnO substrates, the catalysts exhibited 90% higher methanol oxidation activity than commercial Pt/C with the same Pt loading. Sun and co-workers deposited a 1.5 nm SnO2 interfacial layer to anchor Pt NPs on CNTs by using SnCl4 and H2O as precursors (Fig. 24(b)).466 In the electrochemical testing, the ECSA of Pt–SnO2/CNTs is 1.36 times higher than that of Pt/CNTs. In addition, the Pt–SnO2/CNTs also shows higher activity towards the MOR than Pt/CNTs, as indicated by a 52 mV more negative onset potential, along with larger specific and mass activities. Recently, Mo2C has also been used as an anode material for the direct oxidation of hydrocarbons in fuel cells. Chen and co-workers demonstrated a highly active and stable Pt nanoparticle/Mo2C nanotube catalyst for methanol electro-oxidation.467 The peak current density of Pt NPs/Mo2C for the MOR is 1.5 times higher than that of the commercial Pt/C catalysts.
A convenient way to modify the strong CO intermediate bonding interactions with the Pt catalyst is to make alloys or bi-metallic surfaces. To obtain bimetallic catalysts, the two metal precursors should have similar properties, as the ALD process is carried out using one precursor cycle followed by another precursor cycle. For example, Sairanen et al. prepared Pt–Co bimetallic catalysts by using Pt(acac)2 and Co(acac)3 as precursors.434 When compared with ALD mono-metallic Pt, the onset potential decreased by 50 mV and the current intensities of the Pt–Co catalysts were 1.5 times higher, which might be attributed to the electronic effect of Co on Pt. Other widely used catalysts for MOR are Pt–Ru bimetallic catalysts. It has been reported that the removal of CO is much faster on a Pt–Ru surface than on pure Pt.468,469 For instance, Johansson and co-workers prepared highly dispersed Ru-decorated Pt nanoparticles using MeCpPtMe3, Ru(EtCp)2 and O2 as the precursors.470 The Pt nanoparticles decorated with 5 ALD Ru cycles exhibited much better catalytic activity towards the MOR compared with the undecorated Pt catalyst. Shim and co-workers synthesized Ru onto a porous Pt mesh by ALD and applied the heterogeneous Pt–Ru catalysts directly as the anode in direct methanol solid oxide fuel cells (DMSOFCs).471 The obtained Pt/Ru catalyst after 100 ALD cycles outperformed pure Pt by more than 1 order of magnitude in terms of power output. The authors also deposited Ru by ALD on a porous Ni mesh to substitute Pt catalysts. The maximum power density of the Ni/ALD Ru sample was found to be comparable to that of the Pt/ALD Ru sample, despite the dramatic reduction (<10%) in precious metal catalyst loading.472 The good performance of the Ni/ALD Ru sample is due to the stabilizing effect of the Ni surface after ALD deposition of Ru and the prevention of carbon formation.
Decreasing the size of Pt nanoparticles is an effective route to increasing the surface area of Pt catalysts. In addition, the formation of clusters and single atoms can improve atom utilization to a new level. In 2013, Sun et al. reported a practical synthesis for single Pt atoms anchored to graphene nanosheets using the ALD technique.473 In this study, the Pt catalysts from single atoms, subnanometer clusters to nanoparticles were precisely controlled by the ALD method. Among the three types of Pt catalysts, the single atom catalysts exhibited the best activity (Fig. 24(c)). XAFS analysis revealed that the superior performance of single atoms was contributed by the low-coordination environment and partially unoccupied 5d states.
3.1.2.2 ALD for electrocatalytic formic acid oxidation. 
The fuel cells based on formic acid are particularly well-suited for applications related to room-temperature power generation and portable electronics. The performance of a direct formic acid fuel cell (DFAFC) is largely determined by the catalyst deposited on the anode for formic acid oxidation (FAO). Pt is an effective catalyst for FAO. Hsieh and co-workers fabricated Pt nanocatalysts supported on graphene oxide (GO) sheets by ALD and investigated their electrocatalytic performance in FAO.474,475 The ALD-Pt atoms were decorated on the edges of the GO sheets with the presence of dangling bonds and oxygen functionalities (Fig. 24(d)), which resulted in unique FAO catalytic activity. During the FAO process on Pt, the ratio of the current density of the first anodic peak (J1st) to the second anodic peak (J2nd) clearly provides a clue regarding the reaction pathway (direct or indirect oxidation). They found that the ratio of J1st/J2nd for the Pt–GO catalyst is approximately 99.8%, and a high ratio of 93.7% can be reached after 100 CV cycles, indicating that the ALD-Pt catalyst displays the capability to regenerate the CO-adsorbed surface after cycling. The presence of Pt–O species can increase the anti-poisoning ability during FAO in addition to improvement of the catalytic activity. The Pt–O species can induce abundant Pt–Oads and Pt–(OH)ads to strip the CO-adsorbed sites (according to this reaction step: Pt–(CO)ads + Pt–Oads → 2Pt + CO2), thus resulting in a high CO tolerance.
Pd can substitute Pt for electrochemical FAO due to its good stability and high-power densities. In addition, the reaction pathway of formic acid is on Pd a direct dehydrogenation process without the formation of CO species. Santinacci et al. prepared three-dimensionally (3D) nanoarchitectured Pd–Ni bimetallic catalysts by ALD on high-aspect-ratio nanoporous alumina templates.476 The deposition of NiO is carried out with the use of nickelocene and O3 precursors and the formed NiO film is reduced to metallic Ni by a reductive annealing process under a H2 atmosphere. The growth of Pd clusters uses palladium hexafluoroacetylacetone (Pd(hfac)2) and formaldehyde, which is commonly used for Pd ALD. The electron microscopy images show a homogeneous deposition of granularly-structured Pd onto the Ni substrate. The deposited Pt NPs preferred the growth along the [220] direction on the amorphous NiO film. The oxidized Ni is a more suitable substrate for obtaining three-dimensional growth of Pd islands, which are ideal for electrocatalytic applications. The FAO on the Pd/Ni nanocatalysts proceeds through a direct dehydrogenation mechanism according to the cyclic voltammetry curves. The as-prepared Pd/Ni bimetallic system Pd (40 ALD cycles)/Ni (1000 ALD cycles) demonstrates a high activity of 0.83 A mg−1 toward the FAO, with a Pd loading amount of 0.06 ng cm−2. The strong interaction between Pd and Ni, the electronic effects between the alloyed Pd/Ni metals and the mass transport effect in 3D nanostructures might be the reason for the enhanced electrochemical properties. Besides the deposition of Pd on the substrates, ALD was also used to deposit a SiO2 layer for stabilizing Pd-based catalysts for FAO. Zahmakiran et al. prepared trimetallic PdCoNi NPs supported on TiO2 nanopowders (PdCoNi/TiO2) by a wet-impregnation method. After the preparation, ALD was utilized to improve the catalytic durability of PdCoNi/TiO2 by growing SiO2 layers among the PdCoNi alloy NPs by using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane and oleylamine as the Si source and surface protection groups, respectively.477 Due to the existence of free –NH2 functionalities, the resulting PdCoNi/TiO2-ALD-SiO2 nanocatalyst displays almost two times higher activity than PdCoNi/TiO2 in FAO. The –NH2 functionalities grafted onto the support might affect the formic acid adsorption/storage process. The O–H bond cleavage in formic acid is facilitated by the –NH2 functionalities leading to the formation of metal-bound formate species which accelerate the dehydrogenation process and produce H2 and CO2. Moreover, the SiO2 layer-protected PdCoNi alloy NPs showed unprecedented catalytic stability against sintering and leaching throughout the reusability experiments.
3.1.2.3 ALD for electrocatalytic ethanol oxidation. 
Ethanol has also been applied in the fuel cells, due to their low cost, easy storage, low toxicity and pollutant emission, and high energy density. In addition, ethanol can be easily produced in large quantities by the fermentation of biomass from agriculture. However, the C–C bond is difficult to break at low temperature during the ethanol oxidation process. Hence, the development of highly active electrocatalysts is critical to achieving the commercialization of direct ethanol fuel cells (DEFCs). Hsieh et al. investigated the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) activity of ALD Pt NPs with different sizes and found that the ALD-Pt catalysts with smaller size exhibited relatively high catalytic activity, CO tolerance, and stability.478
However, the ethanol oxidation kinetics on Pt-based catalysts in acidic media is slow, incomplete, and mostly leads to the production of acetic acid and acetaldehyde. Pd is considered to be a promising alternative to Pt for the EOR in an alkaline medium due to it being relatively more abundant and having higher tolerance towards carbonaceous species from ethanol oxidation. Rikkinen and co-workers demonstrated that Pd nanoparticle catalysts on a porous carbon support can be prepared with ALD.479 Due to the narrow size and good dispersion on the carbon support (Fig. 24(e)), the ALD-Pd/C exhibited better mass activity compared with the commercial material. Chen and Wang used chemical vapor-deposited three-dimensional graphite-coated nickel foam as the substrate for the deposition of Pd NPs.480 Benefitting from the advantages of ALD, the Pd loading can be reduced to as low as 50 μg cm−2. The peaking current density of ALD-Pd/GNF with 450 cycles was about 2.64 times (39.97 mA cm−2) higher than that of commercial Pd/C (15.17 mA cm−2). Nevertheless, carbon-based materials are not stable and corrode under these reaction conditions. TiO2 is well-known for its high stability and its strong metal–support interaction with Pt group metals. Baranova and Santinacci grew Pd NPs with precisely controlled sizes on TiO2 nanotubes (TNTs) by ALD.481 They found that the EOR activity of Pd NPs can be enhanced by annealing the TiO2 nanotubes, since anatase is more conductive than the amorphous TiO2. The 500 ALD cycle Pd/TNTs system showed the best catalytic activity and satisfactory stability in alkaline media. The peak current for ethanol oxidation can reach approximately 2.25 A mg−1. In addition to TNTs, they also investigated the EOR activity of Pd NPs on SnO2-coated TNTs (Fig. 24(f)). The XPS results indicated that the top surface of the SnO2 layer is reduced to metallic Sn during the deposition of the Pd particles, which facilitated the ALD process of Pd.482 The activity of Pd NPs for the EOR was further enhanced on SnO2 compared with that on TiO2 surfaces. The positive impact of the addition of Sn species on a Pd catalyst can be attributed to the preferred deposition of Pd on metallic Sn, facilitation of OH adsorption on the SnO2 layer, and the strong metal–support interaction between Pd and SnO2. These studies indicated that the use of ALD to grow metallic nanoparticles onto three-dimensional nanostructured substrates appears to be a very promising approach for the preparation of well-defined catalysts for ethanol and other alcohol electrooxidation.


3.1.3 ALD for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reactions. 
The electrochemical oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the core reaction process in water splitting for renewable energy conversion devices. However, due to the slow reaction kinetics of the OER, the energy conversion efficiency is limited to a certain extent. At present, the commercial electrocatalysts for the OER are RuO2 catalysts. Unfortunately, high cost and poor durability have hindered their further development and applications. Therefore, it is of great importance to developing effective OER catalysts by various methods. Finke and Hoffmann reported that ALD fabricated TiO2 coatings on IrO2, RuO2 and F-doped SnO2 can tune the surface charge density, and consequently tune the catalytic activity of the electrocatalyst.483 For example, the TiO2/IrO2 catalyst exhibited a current density of 0.9 mA cm−2 at 350 mV overpotential, which is a 9-fold increase compared with that of IrO2. With the different ALD cycles of TiO2, the oxidation state of Ti and the potential of zero charge can be adjusted, resulting in the tuned activity of the electrocatalysts.
To substitute the noble metals, many researchers have developed highly catalytic and low-cost transition metal compounds. Nowadays, cobalt and cobalt oxides have been extensively applied in electrocatalysis, especially for the OER, because of their high catalytic activity and good stability. By using ALD, the as-prepared Co-based catalysts can be uniformly deposited onto the substrates and the thickness can be accurately controlled. Yilmaz and Uyar reported ALD of highly monodisperse Co3O4 nanocrystals of different sizes on N-doped electrospun carbon nanofibers (Co@nCNFs) for the OER.484 The obtained Co@nCNFs with an average Co3O4 particle size of 3 nm exhibited the turnover frequency (TOF) value of 0.14 s−1 at an overpotential of 550 mV, which is ca. 3 and ca. 15-fold higher than those of bulk Co and the standard state-of-the-art IrOx catalyst, respectively. Li and co-workers synthesized a homogeneous N-doped cobalt oxide thin film on high-surface-area CNTs (N–CoOx/CNTs) by plasma-enhanced ALD at 200 °C.485 The overpotential of the OER for the N–CoOx/CNTs electrocatalyst was only 420 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 25(a)). They found that the intrinsic crystal structure and chemical composition of cobalt oxides were tailored after N-doping and the resulting NCoOx/CNTs electrocatalyst displays remarkable electrocatalytic activity and stability towards the OER. In addition to oxides, a uniform thin layer of Co9S8 was synthesized on CNTs by using bis(N,N′-diisopropylacetamidinato)cobalt(II) and H2S precursors.486 With the deposition of 200 ALD cycles, a 7 nm Co9S8 thin layer on the CNTs can be obtained as shown in Fig. 25(b). The ALD-synthesized Co9S8/CNT catalyst exhibited an overpotential of 369 mV with a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is much smaller than that of RuO2 (409 mV), and CoOx/CNT (431 mV). The Tafel slope of an ALD-synthesized Co9S8/CNT electrocatalyst was 58 mV dec−1, indicating that the Tafel kinetics of the Co9S8/CNT electrocatalyst was favored during the OER process. In addition, the LSV curves were maintained well after the 2000 cycles scan, which indicated the good stability of the ALD-prepared Co9S8 electrocatalyst. Cobalt phosphate (CoPi)-based electrocatalysts have also exhibited good performance towards the OER. Palma et al. deposited CoPi films by using bis(cyclopentadienyl)cobalt(II) (CoCp2), trimethyl phosphate and O2 as precursors.487 The Co-to-P atomic ratio can be controlled by tuning the ALD process and is found to significantly affect the activity of the prepared electrocatalyst. The current density increased from 1.77 mA cm−2 to 2.89 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. RHE, concurrently with a Co-to-P ratio increase from 1.6 to 1.9. The results highlight the role of stoichiometric composition of Co in CoPi on its activity. Rongé et al. developed a plasma-enhanced process to obtain CoPi films without the need for a phosphidation step. The as-prepared CoPi films exhibited an overpotential of 509 mV with a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is much smaller than that of Co3O4.488 In addition, this catalyst can enable hydrogen evolution after either a thermal or electrochemical reduction step.
 Fig. 25  ALD fabrication of OER catalysts: (a) N-doped CoOx/carbon nanotubes; (b) Co9S8 on CNTs; (c) MnO catalysts; (d) NiO film; (e) MoS2 on Co foam; (f) MoS2 nanoflakes on CFP. 
Besides Co-based transition metals, Mn- and Ni-based metal oxides were also prepared by ALD for the OER. For example, Bent et al. prepared MnO catalysts on glassy carbon electrodes through the use of a Mn(EtCp)2 precursor.489 The as-deposited films of MnO can be converted to Mn2O3via annealing. In OER testing, the Mn2O3 catalyst could reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.81 V, while the MnO catalyst required 1.84 V, as shown in Fig. 25(c). The small differences in the OER are attributable to differences in surface area. Following this study, the authors prepared NiO thin films using Nickelocene and O3 at 275 °C.490 The ALD-grown NiO thin films were studied as an OER electrocatalyst with the incorporation of Fe from the electrolyte. They characterized the activity of NiO towards the OER in both trace Fe and Fe-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolytes and found that the Fe-saturated electrolyte significantly increases the OER activity of the NiO films. Bein further confirmed that when a 1 nm layer of the PE–ALD NiO catalyst is deposited on a porous transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate, their OER activity can be further improved (Fig. 25(d)).491
Mo–S sites along the edges of MoS2 are very active for the OER owing to the excellent chemisorption of the oxygen-containing intermediates. Liu and co-workers reported ALD of ultrafine MoS2 nanocrystals over a porous Co foam by using Mo(CO)6 and H2S as precursors (Fig. 25(e)).492 The ALD-derived Co@MoS2 only requires an overpotential of 270 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the Co@MoS2 electrode exhibited excellent stability, showing no noticeable degradation after operating at 20 mA cm−2 for 50 hours and 100 mA cm−2 for an additional 50 hours. In order to further improve the activity, plasma treatment was proved as an effective route to generate vacancies and structural disorder on the surface of MoS2, which can further increase the exposure of the active site. Liu et al. fabricated MoS2 nanoflakes that were obtained by ALD using MoCl5 and H2S on a carbon fibre paper (CFP) surface (Fig. 25(f)).493 When the CFP@MoS2 was treated by plasma for 20 s, the current density increased to 80.42 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V vs. RHE, which is two times higher than that of CFP@MoS2 (43.89 mA cm−2). In addition, the Tafel slope decreased from 65.8 to 61.2 mV dec−1 when the plasma treatment time increases from 0 to 20 s, which further indicates that the plasma treatment can improve the activity of MoS2 nanoflakes.


3.1.4 ALD for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions. 
3.1.4.1 ALD of Pt-based catalysts. 
Hydrogen is a clean fuel and can be applied as the energy source in PEMFCs. Water electrolysis is considered a promising green route for the production of hydrogen. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is one half-reaction during water electrolysis, and Pt-based catalysts have exhibited good activity during the hydrogen evolution process. The HER process on Pt particles contains two half-reactions, which are the Volmer reaction and the desorption reaction (Heyrovsky reaction or Tafel reaction). Many previous studies indicated that the Tafel mechanism usually occurs on Pt NPs due to the high H coverage on Pt surfaces. By using the ALD method, Pt-based catalysts have been synthesized to decrease the Pt content, thus reducing the cost. Alshareef and co-workers reported the fabrication of monolithic, self-standing, 3D graphitic carbon scaffolds with conformally deposited Pt by ALD (Fig. 26(a)).494 The as-prepared Pt on a 3D network of laser-scribed graphene (Pt/LSG) electrode exhibited comparable activity with the benchmark Pt/C electrode. It should be noted that the mass loading (0.04 mg cm−2) of Pt/LSG was much smaller than that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.5 mg cm−2). The synergistic effect between the ALD Pt and the 3D network of the laser scribed graphene provides an avenue for maximized utilization of Pt loading and enhanced HER activity. Another reported strategy to lower Pt loadings by ALD is to use tungsten monocarbide (WC) as the support.495 Chen et al. deposited Pt onto WC powders using ALD to obtain a Pt–WC core–shell catalyst for the HER. The Pt–WC core–shell exhibited equivalent HER activities compared to bulk Pt catalysts, while the Pt loading amount is reduced 10 times.
 Fig. 26  ALD fabrication of HER catalysts: (a) Pt NPs on 3D graphitic carbon; (b) Pt single atoms and clusters; (c) Pt–Ru dimer catalysts; (d) MoS2 thin films; (e) TiO2 modified MoS2 nanoflakes; (f) RuOx@Pd NPs. 
Downsizing noble metal nanocatalysts to clusters or even single atoms is an effective strategy to significantly increase their catalytic activity and efficiency. In 2013, Sun et al. firstly reported isolated single Pt atoms anchored to graphene nanosheets by an ALD method for the MOR. Subsequently, we synthesized Pt single atoms on N-doped graphene nanosheets (NGNs) through the ALD method (Fig. 26(b)).496 The HER activity and reaction mechanism on Pt single atoms were carefully investigated. At an overpotential of 0.05 V, the mass activity of the ALD50Pt/NGNs catalyst reached 10.1 A mg−1, which was much greater than the ALD100Pt/NGN catalyst and Pt/C catalyst. Synchrotron characterization and DFT analysis revealed that the Pt single atoms are strongly anchored on the substrates due to the SMSIs. In addition, according to the DFT results, the interaction between single Pt atoms and N-dopants is much larger than that of Pt atoms/C-substrates, indicating that Pt atoms are bonded to N-sites. Due to the unique electronic structure of Pt single atom catalysts, several H could adsorb on one Pt atom, followed by the formation of H2 on the isolated Pt atom. According to the DFT calculations results, during the HER process, four H atoms can be adsorbed on Pt single atoms, and the interaction between the Pt and H atoms reduced the repulsion between the H atoms. The desorption process is similar to the Tafel reaction (Hads + Hads → H2), and leads to a Tafel slope that is similar to the Volmer–Tafel mechanism (29 mV dec−1).497
Recently, dual-metal catalysts were found to greatly enhance catalytic performance due to the synergistic effects. The method by pyrolyzing two metal precursors simultaneously has been reported as a successful route for the preparation of dual-metal catalysts. However, the detailed location of each metal site can hardly be controlled. The ALD technique provides the possibility to achieve atomically precise metal clusters, even bimetallic catalysts. Through careful control of the ALD deposition conditions, the second metal can be selectively deposited on the initial metal deposition sites, enabling the formation of bimetallic dimer structures. Very recently, Sun et al. successfully prepare high-quality one-to-one A–B bimetallic dimer structures (Pt–Ru dimers) by ALD. As shown in Fig. 26(c),498 the atomic resolution HAADF-STEM images illustrate that a dimer-like structure was successfully prepared by a two-step ALD process. The different contrast of the two atoms reflects that the dimer is composed of Pt and Ru. The EXAFS R space curve fitting results based on the Ru K-edge and Pt L3-edge indicated that the coordination number of Pt–Ru is close to 1, confirming the formation of Pt–Ru dimer structures. Benefiting from the unique bimetallic dimer sites, the Pt–Ru dimers exhibited 50 times higher HER activity compared to commercial Pt/C catalysts and the dimer structure was maintained after the long-term durability test. The Pt–Ru dimer HER mechanism and reaction route were systematically explained by first-principles calculations. We found that when three hydrogen atoms connect with the Pt atom (3H–Pt), and three bonds with the Ru atom (3H–Ru), a hydrogen atom can be released from the Ru atom. The Pt–Ru dimer generates a synergistic effect by modulating the electronic structure which evolves from metallic to semiconducting during the hydrogen adsorption, resulting in an increase in the unoccupied orbitals and a decrease of the bonding between the Ru and H, thus playing a vital role in the high HER activity. These findings demonstrate that the remarkable performance of the single Pt atoms and Pt–X dimer can be mainly attributed to their unique electronic structure. In addition, these ALD approaches for SACs provide a promising approach for the rational design of highly active and stable bimetallic dimers, which have great potential for application in various catalytic reactions.
3.1.4.2 ALD of MoS2 catalysts. 
Recently, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has attracted attention due to its biomimetic hydrogen evolving activity. It should be noted that MoS2 has poor activity for the HER in its bulk form, which is due to the small amount of HER active sites at the basal planes. The HER activity of MoS2 can be improved by tuning the exposed surface of the crystalline MoS2 to increase the number of active edge sites. Min and co-workers prepared an amorphous MoS2 catalyst on Au by the ALD method. During the ALD process, the molybdenum hexacarbonyl (Mo(CO)6) and dimethyldisulfide (CH3S2CH3) are employed as Mo and S precursors, respectively.499 The required overpotential for a designated current density of 100 μA cm−2 on the MoS2 film is 165 mV. The turnover frequency on each active site of the amorphous MoS2 film is calculated to be 3 H2 per s at 0.215 V. The Tafel slope is 47 mV dec−1 indicating that the HER process follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism on the amorphous MoS2 surface. However, the weak adhesion of MoS2 on Au caused the unstable activity of the ALD-MoS2/Au catalysts. The authors tried to use carbon fibre papers (CFPs) as the alternative to replace the Au substrate, as CFPs can provide a large surface area and strengthen the adhesion of the ALD MoS2.500 Different from the amorphous MoS2 on a Au surface, the ALD-MoSx on CFP exhibited a mixture of amorphous and nano-crystalline phases. Because of the formation of nano-crystalline MoS2, the turnover frequency of the MoSx/CFP is smaller than that of the amorphous ALD-MoS2/Au. However, the MoSx/CFP catalyst exhibits very good stability with no obvious change in the polarization curves after 1000 CV cycles, due to the strong interaction between MoSx and CFP. To achieve the direct growth of nanocrystalline MoS2 by ALD, Bae and Shin demonstrated that the nonideal growth mode operates when MoS2 is deposited by ALD on planar surfaces using MoCl5 and H2S as the precursors (Fig. 26(d)).501 This nonideal mode of growth shows that the growth thickness does not linearly increase with the number of cycles. Interestingly, the relative ratios of the edge sites and basal planes of MoS2 can be controlled by tuning the ALD conditions. At low growth temperatures, the MoS2 with mixed 2H and 1T phases can be deposited due to the incorporation of chlorine impurities. They found that the as-prepared planar MoS2 films exhibited good HER performance, with a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at −0.3 V and a Tafel slope of 50–60 mV dec−1.
To make the MoS2 more active, many studies focused on synthesizing MoS2 catalysts with more edge sites or to further improve the active edge sites by modification. Kim and Kuech attempted to make use of basal plane sites which account for the majority of the MoS2 materials in bulk form.502 They firstly ALD deposited TiO2 on the bulk MoS2 particles. A thin layer of TiO2 is formed on the edge sites of the MoS2 and TiO2 islands are formed on the basal planes. Then they dissolved the TiO2 layers by an in situ electrochemical activation method. After this process, the localized surface distortions are created on the MoS2 basal planes. The TiO2 coatings on the basal planes and edge sites completely disappeared on the surface of MoS2 catalysts after the electrochemical activation process, as shown in Fig. 26(e). In addition, the degree of surface distortion on the MoS2 basal planes can be tuned by controlling the ALD TiO2 coating cycles from 10 to 50. With the increase of the surface distortions on the MoS2 basal plane, the HER catalytic activity was increased. The as-prepared MoS2 catalysts exhibited a much smaller Tafel slope (80–90 mV dec−1) compared with that of pristine MoS2 (180 mV dec−1). According to the DFT calculations, the hydrogen-binding energy is reduced on the local flexure of MoS2 layers, which results in the improved HER kinetics. This result suggests that the ALD technique can be used for the decoration of the catalysts by induced physical changes including defects, defect-mediated strain, and flexure of surface layers.
3.1.4.3 ALD of other catalysts. 
Transition metal sulfides have high stability and conductivity, which allows them to be applied from catalysis to photovoltaics. Among them, nickel sulfide exhibited good activity for the HER. Farha and Hupp constructed nickel sulfide (NiSx) layers by using bis(N,N′-di-tert-butylacetamidinato)nickel(II) (Ni(amd)2) vapor and hydrogen sulfide gas as the precursors.503In situ quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) studies revealed a linear GPC of 9.3 ng cm−2 per cycle growth behavior for NiSx films. The ALD NiSx catalysts exhibited the overpotential of 440 and 576 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in acidic and pH 7 phosphate buffer aqueous reaction media, respectively. In addition to two binary sulfides, ternary sulfides can also be achieved by the ALD method. For example, FexCo1−xSy films were grown by ALD at 120 °C from the precursors, including bis(N,N′-diisopropylacetamidinato)-cobalt(II), bis(N,N′-diisopropylacetamidinato)iron(II), and H2S.504 The ternary FexCo1−xSy was achieved by repeatedly growing one or multiple cycles of FeSy followed by one or multiple cycles of CoSy. In addition, the elemental composition of the ternary sulfide FexCo1−xSy can be tuned by controlling the cycle ratio of FeSy and CoSy. The as-prepared Fe0.54Co0.46S0.92/CNTs/CC electrode achieved −10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of −70 mV in alkaline solution, which indicates the effectiveness of the ALD method. Transition-metal carbides (TMCs) have also attracted a lot of attention due to their peculiar electronic structures and their broad applications in electrocatalysis. Wang and co-workers synthesized smooth, pure, crystalline nickel carbide (Ni3C) films on CNTs by using bis(1,4-di-tert-butyl-1,3-diazabutadienyl)nickel(II) and H2 plasma with an ideal self-limiting ALD growth fashion.505 The as-prepared ALD Ni3C/CNT catalyst showed an onset overpotential of −77 mV (at −0.1 mA cm−2), and an overpotential of −132 mV to reach −10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH aqueous solution.
Recently, several studies reported that rationally designed Ru-based catalysts exhibited good HER performance. For example, the anomalous crystalline structure of Ru on g-C3N4 was prepared by Qiao et al. and it exhibited comparable HER activity with Pt in alkaline solutions.506 By using ALD, Sun et al. fabricated Pd@RuOx core–shell catalysts by using octahedral and cubic Pd NPs with two typical surface atom arrangements as the substrates (Fig. 26(f)).507 Due to the similar lattice constants of Pd and Ru, Ru atoms were selectively deposited on Pd particles instead of N-doped CNT substrates by using bis(ethylcyclopentadienyl)ruthenium(II) and O2 as precursors. The ALD cycles can easily tune the thickness of the RuOx shell. The as-prepared octahedral Pd@RuOx/NCNT exhibited better activity and stability for the HER in acid solution compared with the cubic one. According to the XAS and XPS results, the Ru shell consists of metallic Ru and Ru(IV). DFT calculation results indicated that the H* can be easily detached on the octahedral Pd@RuOx, and resulted in a better HER activity.

3.2 ALD/MLD for photoelectrocatalysis

3.2.1 ALD/MLD for photovoltaics. 
3.2.1.1 ALD/MLD for dye-sensitized cells (DSSCs). 
Renewable solar energy is regarded as the most promising alternative clean energy source for fossil fuels. To realize cost-effective and performance-competitive solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been extensively explored since 1991 and garnered increasing research attention over the past few decades.508,509 The advantages of DSSCs are their low cost, simple manufacturing process, lightweight, flexibility, low toxicity, etc. A typical DSSC consists of several parts, including the photoanode on a conductive substrate, sensitizer, electrolyte and counter electrode.510,511 The excited electrons are generated from the photoanode under the visible light irradiation when the photoanode experiences photo-excitation of the absorbed dye molecules. The electrons are then injected into the conduction band of a semiconductor and further to produce the electric current with an external circuit. The dye is then restored to the original state by electron donation from the redox electrolyte. Moreover, the charge is returned from the external to the cycling circuit on the counter electrode in the cell.512 The performances of the DSSCs are determined by each component in the cell. For example, the function of the photoanode in DSSCs is to support the sensitizer loading and transport the photo-excited electrons from the sensitizer to the external circuit. In this case, both high surface area and fast charge transportation are the keys to achieving high-efficiency photoanodes for DSSCs.
ALD and MLD techniques have been used to design and fabricate photoanode materials for DSSCs.513,514 To minimize the time scale for transferring the injected electrons to the conducting oxide, a thin semiconductor oxide is required on the conductive substrate. ALD is an ideal technique to fabricate core–shell-structured photoanodes. TiO2 is one of the most widely used semiconductor photoanode materials and can also be easily deposited by ALD technique.515–523 As shown in Fig. 27(a), a thin TiO2 shell was deposited by ALD onto high surface area ITO and ZrO2 core nanoparticles.524 The ALD TiO2 was deposited at 120 °C with a GPC of 0.6 Å using TiCl4 and H2O as precursors. With an N719 dye, the results indicate that with the increase of the thickness of the TiO2 shell (to 1.8–2.4 nm), the short-circuit current densities, open-circuit voltages, and back electron transfer lifetimes all increased. When further increasing the thickness of TiO2 (>3 nm), electron trapping in the TiO2 shell occurs, increasing back electron transfer (BET) and decreasing device efficiencies. In addition, ALD-designed core–shell photoelectrodes can provide a practical alternative for maximizing solar cell efficiencies by enhancing electron transport through mesoporous films. Another candidate metal oxide for photoanode applications is ZnO, which is also a routine material deposited by ALD.525,526 Grätzel's group fabricated a ZnO nanoshell by ALD on a 2.5 μm thick Al2O3 mesoporous scaffold and used it as a photoanode for DSSCs, as shown in Fig. 27(b).527 With a ZnO nanoshell of 3–6 nm, a maximum power conversion efficiency of 4% was achieved with the standard organic sensitizer and Co2+/Co3+ redox mediator. A high-power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7% was achieved with a similar ZnO nanostructure in the CH3NH3PbI3 based solid-state solar cells. The comparison of the photovoltaic performance and the electron transfer dynamics between different metal oxide photoanodes is also interesting. However, the morphological differences between the different metal oxides hamper the fair comparison. ALD techniques can circumvent this issue by depositing these oxides on an insulating mesoporous template and using them directly as photoanodes. Grätzel's group deposited different thicknesses of ZnO and TiO2 on mesoporous alumina for photoanode applications in DSSCs.528 The results showed that the best performance was achieved with 5 nm ZnO or TiO2 overlayer films yielding a high-power conversion efficiency of 4.4%. Moreover, the transport rate of electrons through ZnO is faster compared to the TiO2.
 Fig. 27  ALD-derived photoanodes for DSSCs: (a) ALD TiO2; (b) ALD ZnO; (c) ZnO–TiO2 core–shell; (d) ZnO–TiO2 coaxial; (e) TiO2 inverse-opal; (f) ZnO–TiO2 hierarchical structure. 
In addition, other types of core–shell structures were developed by ALD as a photoanode for DSSCs.529–542 In 2006, Yang's group demonstrated the core–shell structures of Al2O3 or TiO2 shells on ZnO nanowires by ALD,543 as shown in Fig. 27(c). The results showed that the ALD Al2O3 could act as an insulating barrier regardless of thickness and that the cell Voc could be improved at the expense of a larger decrease in Jsc. However, when the TiO2 shell thickness was 10–25 nm, it caused an obvious increase in Voc, resulting in an improvement in conversion efficiency up to 2.25%. Another similar TiO2–ZnO core–shell structure was demonstrated with a TiO2 shell on ZnO nanocrystallites.544 The ultrathin layer of ALD-TiO2 can effectively enhance the power conversion efficiency from 5.2% to 6.3%. The ALD-TiO2 layer increases the open-circuit voltage and suppressed surface charge recombination without impairing the photocurrent density. Hupp et al. designed a doubly coaxial photoanode architecture based on templated SiO2 aerogels.545 As shown in Fig. 27(d), the first layer of ZnO was deposited on the template by ALD to create the electronically interconnected, low density, and high-surface-area semiconductor framework. Then, another layer of thin conformal oxide of alumina, zirconia, or titania was further deposited via ALD to suppress the dissolution of ZnO. The doubly coaxial structure of the SiO2–ZnO–TiO2 photoanode showed 2 orders of magnitude faster electron transport compared to the SiO2–TiO2 structure. The fast electron transport by the coaxial core–shell–shell structure enables good charge-collection efficiencies even with redox shuttles capable of rapidly intercepting injected electrons.
Surface area is an important parameter that affects the sensitizer loading and cell efficiency. The design of a hierarchical nanostructure is an effective approach to increasing the effective surface area. ALD has been used to fabricate hierarchical nanostructures using a sacrificial template or through the combination of other approaches. For example, 3D colloidal silica was used as a sacrificial template on a conductive substrate.546 After the deposition of ALD TiO2, the silica spheres were etched using a 2% HF solution to form the TiO2 inverse opal photoanode. The Ta-doped TiO2 films were deposited by repeated super-cycles of two groups of sub-cycles dedicated for Ta2O5 and TiO2, respectively. The content of Ta in the TiO2 films affects the cell performances. The photoconversion efficiency was effectively increased by Ta doping, which increased the electron concentration. However, excessive Ta doping decreased the Jsc and photoconversion efficiency. The 3.4 atom%-doped TiO2 inverse opal electrode presented a high photoconversion efficiency of 1.56%, which was 23% higher than that of pure TiO2.546 In another study, different sizes of polystyrene spheres were used as a template and then ALD was applied to deposit TiO2 thin layers (Fig. 27(e)).547 The results showed that the TiO2 inverse opal with a size of 288 nm demonstrated a high power conversion efficiency of 2.22%. The smaller size of the TiO2 inverse opal with higher surface areas led to higher efficiency. More complex nanostructures were further designed for a novel self-assembled 3D ZnO nanostructure.548 As shown in Fig. 27(f), a poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) micro-template was used to fabricate a ZnO 3D host backbone by ALD. Afterwards, ZnO nanowires were grown on the 3D host backbone via a hydrothermal method. Finally, another 10 nm dense TiO2 overlayer was deposited throughout the 3D ZnO host by ALD. With an increased surface area attributed to the ZnO nanowires, the photocurrents increased to 4 mA cm−2. The ALD TiO2 overlayer can effectively reduce dark currents, recombine the photogenerated electrons from the conduction band of the semiconductor to the electrolyte and increase the transport rate.
Beyond the design core–shell structure photoanodes, ALD has been more widely used to modify the interfaces in DSSCs, including passivation, barrier, and blocking layers. Different metal oxides have been demonstrated to engineer the interfaces in DSSCs. For example, ALD Al2O3 is one of the most popular and routine materials used for this purpose.549–554 As shown in Fig. 28(a), ALD Al2O3 was deposited on cadmium sulfide (CdS) quantum dot-sensitized solar cells as a barrier layer.555 It was found that the ALD Al2O3 layer can suppress the dark current and increase electron lifetimes with increasing Al2O3 thickness. The thickness of the ALD barrier layer affected the performance of the cell, in which a thin layer leads to an increase in open-circuit voltage and efficiency, however, a thicker layer resulted in a loss of photocurrent and decreased efficiency. Other metal oxides, such as Ga2O3, TiO2, In2O3, etc., were also developed to modify the interface of the photoanodes.556–558 As shown in Fig. 28(b), the surface of the porous substrate was passivated using a sub-nanometer-thick Ga2O3 tunnelling overlayer by ALD.557 The ALD Ga2O3 leads to a high open-circuit potential of 1.1 V with an organic D–π–A sensitizer and a cobalt redox mediator. Moreover, the electron back reaction is effectively reduced with the Ga2O3 overlayer, which leads to improved charge collection efficiency and fill factor up to 30% and 15%, respectively. To understand the influence of tunnelling layers on blocking the interfacial charge carrier recombination reaction (Fig. 28(c)), the recombination characteristics, electronic properties on the surface, transport rate, and injection dynamics were investigated for different metal oxides of Ga2O3, ZrO2, Nb2O5, and Ta2O5.559 The results showed that both Ga2O3 and ZrO2 are good candidates as tunnelling layers to limit the interfacial recombination of photogenerated carriers. Moreover, pentavalent oxides such as Nb2O5 and Ta2O5 introduce shallow donor levels below the conduction band of titanium dioxide.559
 Fig. 28  ALD layer modification for the interface in DSSCs: (a) Al2O3; (b) Ga2O3; (c) different metal oxides. 
One of the issues of DSSCs is the charge loss which occurs at the interface between the conductive substrate and electrolyte. To suppress the substrate/electrolyte recombination, a thin oxide blocking layer is usually used on the surface of the conductive substrate. Different metal oxides, such as Al2O3, HfO2, TiO2, etc., have been deposited by ALD and used as blocking layers.560–567 For example, Parsons's group demonstrated an ALD TiO2 layer as a blocking layer for DSSCs with significantly impeded charge recombination in functional DSSCs, leading to improved photocurrents, open-circuit photovoltages, and fill factors.560 Compared to the blocking layer fabricated by other methods (hydrolysis and spin casting), with the thinner ALD films, a better performance was achieved, which is attributed to the lower pinhole density.
Besides the photoanode, the counter electrode is another important component of DSSCs. The electrons were transferred by the counter electrode from the external circuit back to the redox electrolyte, further catalyzing the reduction of the redox couple. Different conductive materials, such as Pt, Ru, metal sulfides, and metal nitrides, etc. have been studied as counter electrodes for DSSCs.510,512,514 ALD was also applied to fabricate the counter electrode, including Pt, Ru, conductive polymers and MoS2, etc.568–573 For example, Pt nanoparticles were deposited by ALD on indium tin oxide/polyethylene naphthalate substrates.568 The ALD deposited Pt showed better performance compared to the electrodeposited and sputtered Pt counter electrodes with relative improvements in the efficiency of 19% and 29%, respectively. In addition, ALD was shown to be practical for fabricating a large area counter electrode with an efficiency of 3.1%.
3.2.1.2 ALD/MLD for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). 
The metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) utilize novel thin-film photovoltaic technology and have attracted increasing attention over the past decade due to their remarkable PCE of over 25%.574,575 Generally, the PSCs have a sandwich-type structure including a conductive substrate, perovskite layer, and charge transport layer (electron transport layer and hole transport layer).576–578 The cell performance and stability are determined by several factors, such as perovskite/contact interfaces, internal and external degradation, etc.579–581 The ALD fabrication method is regarded as a promising tool to address the challenges in PSCs.
ALD is ideal for the fabrication of perovskite thin films due to its advantages which include controllable thickness and uniformity. For ALD-derived perovskite, another advantage is the improved adhesion with a wide range of substrates. However, the direct growth of halide compounds by ALD is challenging. In 2015, Sargent's group demonstrated an ALD-assisted process to synthesize perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 thin films.582 As shown in Fig. 29(a), the ALD PbS was first deposited as a seed layer on the glass substrate, in which H2S and Pb(tmhd)2 were used as precursors. The GPC of PbS was ∼1.3 Å. Afterwards, the PbS film was converted to PbI2 through exposure to iodine gas. The PbI2 was subsequently converted to CH3NH3PbI3 through a 60 s dip in methylammonium iodide in IPA. The surface roughness and morphology are shown in the AFM images in Fig. 29(a). The morphology of the final CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film is primarily determined by the methylammonium iodide treatment, and the thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film is thicker than the initial ALD PbS film. Another similar process was reported by Julien et al.,583 as shown in Fig. 29(b). The PbS thin films were firstly deposited on planar and porous substrates by ALD, in which the polycrystalline p-type PbS films are found to be stoichiometric and pure. The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film was obtained by annealing the ALD PbS film at 150 °C in the presence of vapors from methylammonium iodide. As seen in the XRD results, the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 was successfully synthesized by this multistep approach. The SEM images indicate that the grain size of the ALD PbS is approximately 40–70 nm and the converted perovskite film has a more densely packed layer with large grain sizes. The direct synthesis of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 has yet to be successful. However, Popov et al. have moved forward to fabricate metal iodides by ALD,584 which are closer to the ALD perovskite CH3NH3PbI3. In their process, lead silylamide (Pb(btsa)2) and SnI4 were used as precursors and the deposition temperature was below 90 °C. The roughness of the substrate surface significantly affected the crystalline texture and morphology of the PbI2 films, in which the films are dense on smooth substrates and porous on rough substrates. This ALD PbI2 film presents high film quality, uniformity, and scalability.
 Fig. 29  ALD-derived perovskite thin films of CH3NH3PbI3. 
Charge transport layers are essential for the performance and efficiency of PSCs.585,586 The charge transport layer is used to selectively extract photo-generated charges from the perovskite layer and transport the electrons/holes to the electrodes.587,588 The charge transport layers are generally divided into electron transport layers, which transport photo-excited electrons, and hole transport layers, which transport holes. The main characteristics required of an ideal charge transport layer include charge selectivity, high conductivity, chemical stability, transparency, and pinhole-free dense morphology.578 Meanwhile, the thickness of the charge transport layers is required to be thin in order to reduce the charge transfer resistance of the photogenerated charges. With this in mind, ALD is an ideal approach to deposit a charge transport layer with conformal and dense film growth. Among the different materials, TiO2 has been extensively studied as a charge transport layer in PSCs. In the early studies, the ALD TiO2 layers were deposited as a hole blocking layer in PSCs.589,590 For example, Grätzel's group demonstrated the sub-nanometer ALD TiO2 overlayer for high efficiency solid-state mesoscopic solar cells using a perovskite absorber, which effectively blocked the parasitic back reactions.589 Subsequently, ALD-TiO2 was further studied as an electron transport layer for PSCs.507,591–604 Jung's group reported flexible perovskite solar cells with a high power conversion efficiency of 12.2%. As shown in Fig. 30(a), the amorphous and compact TiO2 was deposited by ALD with a thickness of 20 nm. The fast electron transport leads to the excellent performance of the PSCs, which was proven by the time-resolved photoluminescence and impedance studies. Additionally, the flexibility of the device is remarkable, in which it can maintain 95% of the initial PCE after 1000 bending cycles with a bending radius of 10 mm. Afterward, Li's group further investigated the effect of TiO2 thickness on the performance and clarified the mechanism behind the improved performance.605 Different thicknesses of the TiO2 film, ranging from 5–20 nm, were optimized, in which a high efficiency of 13.6% was achieved with the 10 nm thick TiO2 layer. The optimized electron transport layer provided by ALD-TiO2 delivered several advantages including high transmittance, low leakage current, and low charge transfer resistance and recombination rate.605 The post-treatment process of the ALD-TiO2 electron transport layer also influences cell performance. Martinson et al. explored two strategies which include annealing at 500 °C and UV-O3 treatments for the ALD-TiO2 electron transport layer.339 The results showed that the room-temperature UV-O3 treatment for ALD-TiO2 is considered as a more effective way to improve the efficiency comparable to crystalline TiO2 thin films synthesized by higher temperature methods. To show the advantages of ALD-TiO2, other methods were also investigated for the fabrication of TiO2 electron transport layers. Tian's group demonstrated a comparison between ALD and spin-coating methods for the synthesis of TiO2 electron transport layers.606 Compared to the spin-coating, the ALD TiO2 electron transport layer is more uniform, and presented reduced interfacial charge accumulation, and accelerated electron transport. In another study, the ALD approach was proven to be superior to the spray pyrolysis and sol–gel methods.565 The results showed that high-temperature sintering is not mandatory to achieve high-performance PSCs and that low-temperature fabrication of a compact layer by ALD can provide high efficiency on flexible substrates.
 Fig. 30  ALD deposited charge transport layers for PSCs: (a) TiO2; (b) Al2O3; (c) SnO2; (d) GaN; (e) NiO. 
SnO2 is another promising electron transport layer candidate for PSCs due to its deep conduction band, high electron bulk mobility, wide optical bandgap, and excellent chemical stability.575,607–611 Hagfeldt's group firstly demonstrated the use of ALD SnO2 instead of TiO2 as an electron transport layer with an almost hysteresis-free efficiency of 18% and a high voltage up to 1.19 V.612 Compared to TiO2, the PSCs with SnO2 as an electron transport layer delivered better performances with high voltages and remarkably good stability over time. A barrier-free charge transport across the SnO2/perovskite interface was achieved, resulting in highly stable current densities. Moreover, the ALD deposition parameters have obvious influences on the properties of the deposited materials. As shown in Fig. 30(c), Hu et al. studied different oxidant precursors, including H2O, O3, and O2 plasma, for use in the deposition of ALD SnO2 and their effects on the PSCs.613 The results showed that the ALD SnO2 electron transport layer deposited using O3 has the best performance with a stable PCE of 15.3% and a remarkably high Voc of 1.17 V. During the ALD process, an interfacial layer of PbI2 was formed between the SnO2 and perovskite. Different oxidant precursors resulted in different extraction barriers at the interfaces, in which the barriers were the largest for H2O-deposited SnO2 and the smallest one is O3-deposited SnO2. The smaller barrier led to superior electron extraction. Another important parameter for the ALD process is the deposition temperature. Kuang et al. studied the ALD SnO2 electron transport layer deposited at different temperatures in the range of 50–200 °C.614 The ALD-SnO2 deposited at 200 °C contributed to cell stability; however, the efficiency decreased by approximately 50% for the counterpart device using the 50 °C SnO2. The post-treatment of the ALD layers also has an influence on the cell performance. Jeong et al. demonstrated ALD-SnO2 exposed to different post-annealing temperatures of 180 °C and 300 °C and used them as electron transport layers.615 As a result, the PSCs with the ALD SnO2-180 °C layer showed the highest power conversion efficiency of 18.3% and better reproducibility. The higher power conversion efficiency of ALD SnO2-180 °C based PCSs compared to the as-deposited SnO2 was attributed to the enhanced electron-transport properties, thus improving the electrical conductivity. However, although the conductivity of the ALD SnO2-300 °C was highest, the poor hole blocking ability of ALD SnO2-300 °C led to a lower power conversion efficiency. Another similar study was demonstrated by Wang et al.,616 in which the PSCs with a lower temperature (100 °C) post-treatment under air resulted in a higher power conversion efficiency of 20.3% than that of the PSCs with the as-deposited SnO2 and SnO2 annealed at higher temperatures of 200 and 300 °C.
Some other materials, such as GaN, and Nb2O5, etc. have also been demonstrated as electron transport layers for PSCs.617–619 For example, as shown in Fig. 30(d), Wei et al. deposited a compact and amorphous n-type GaN layer by plasma-enhanced ALD at 280 °C to be used as an electron transport layer for PSCs.618 The GaN-based PSCs exhibited higher efficiency of 15.18% with less hysteresis than the GaN-free device (10.38% efficiency). The improved performance with the GaN layer can be attributed to the improved electron extraction and reduced recombination at the FTO/perovskite interface. In addition, the bilayer structure was further designed as an electron transport layer for PSCs.620 As shown in Fig. 30(b), an ultra-thin Al2O3 insulating layer was deposited between the electron transport layer of ZnO and perovskite for PSCs.621 This insulating layer with an electron transport layer can suppress the carrier's recombination process and improve the conversion efficiency of PSCs. The designed interface with ZnO/Al2O3 resulted in PSCs with high efficiency of 15.55%, in which the thickness of the Al2O3 insulating layer is only 4 Å. Another bilayer structure of TiO2/WO3 was designed and fabricated by a combination of ALD and spin-coating processes on a conductive substrate to prevent the contact between the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and perovskite.602 The PSCs with the TiO2/WO3 electron transport bilayer exhibited an enhanced power conversion efficiency of up to 20.14%, which was much better than the single WO3 or TiO2 electron transport layer-based devices.
For the hole transport layers, NiO has proven to be one of the most popular materials due to its good optical transparency, high chemical stability, and ability to align the band edges of the perovskite layers.575,578 The advantages of NiO as a hole transport layer can be summarized as: (1) suitable work function and large bandgap; (2) efficient hole extraction and low electrode polarization restricted to the interface of NiO; (3) high transparency in the visible spectral range.586 ALD holds obvious advantages in the fabrication of NiO hole transport layers compared to other methods, such as sol–gel processes.622–624 Seo et al. first demonstrated ultra-thin NiO by ALD as a hole transport layer for PSCs.625 The results showed that the work function and hole concentration of the thin NiO hole transport layers increased due to the overlap of the Debye length, resulting in an enhanced photovoltaic activity. A post-annealing process of the NiO layer can reduce the hydroxylated NiOOH on the surface, leading to higher electrical conductivity and better interfacial properties. The inverted planar PSCs with ALD NiO hole extraction layers exhibited a high efficiency of up to 16.40% with negligible hysteresis. Similarly, another work also demonstrated the influence of the post-treatment of ALD NiO on the PSC performances.626 The PSCs with post-annealed ALD NiO layers delivered a higher efficiency of 17.07% when compared to the pristine NiO-based device, which had an efficiency of 13.98%. To improve the device reliability for large-scale fabrication, an atmospheric pressure spatial ALD process was developed to deposit NiO hole extraction layers, as shown in Fig. 30(e).627 The PSCs with NiO hole extraction layers exhibited a high-power conversion efficiency of 17.1%. The NiO obtained by spatial ALD has improved uniformity with an average roughness of <0.6 nm. Importantly, the simply prepared and high-quality ALD NiO films are compatible with the large-throughput fabrication of perovskite optoelectronics.
The passivation layers at the perovskite absorber and contact layer interfaces in PSCs are generally used to reduce the concentration of surface defects that induce undesirable carrier recombination. ALD Al2O3 is one of the most commonly used passivation layer materials for PSCs.628–636 For example, as shown in Fig. 31(a), a thin layer of ALD Al2O3 was deposited on CH3NH3PbI3−xClx for PSCs to reduce the hysteresis loss and stabilize the devices against humid conditions.637 As a result, the PSCs with the ALD Al2O3 layer exhibited a high efficiency of 18.8% with a significantly reduced hysteresis. Furthermore, the Al2O3 passivation layer can significantly improve the PSC's stability against ambient humidity while retaining 60–70% of the initial efficiency after 70 days. However, the pristine cell without the Al2O3 layer suffered from a drastic fall to 12% of its initial PCE during the study period. In another study, two ALD layers were deposited for the PSCs; one being a ZnO passivation layer and the other one being the Al2O3 encapsulation layer, as shown in Fig. 31(b).638 The fabricated PSC device showed a remarkable efficiency of 16.5% with high reproducibility. The Al2O3 encapsulation layer can effectively enhance the ambient stability of the PSCs due to its ability to act as an effective gas diffusion barrier. To further improve the operational stability of PSCs in a humid environment, an alternating organic–inorganic encapsulation structure was deposited by ALD/MLD and found to exhibit an excellent water vapor transmittance rate, as shown in Fig. 31(c).639 The PSCs with the Al2O3/alucone hybrid encapsulation layer survived at 80% relative humidity and 30 °C for over 2000 h while preserving 96% of its initial performance.
 Fig. 31  ALD deposited passivation and encapsulation layers: (a) Al2O3; (b) ZnO and Al2O3; (c) alucone and Al2O3. 


3.2.2 ALD/MLD for photoelectrochemical water splitting. 
Another important energy conversion device is the photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting cell, which splits water into H2 and O2 through the use of sunlight.640–642 It is a renewable approach to convert solar energy into storable fuels. In a PEC water-splitting cell, the photoelectrodes mainly consist of H2-evolving p and O2-evolving photoelectrodes. For the O2-evolving photoanode, n-type semiconductor materials are used to drive the holes to the interface between the semiconductor and electrolyte.643–645 Electron–hole pairs are generated when the energy of the light is greater than the bandgap on the photoanode. The holes, where the water oxidation occurs, move to the surface. The protons are reduced to form molecular hydrogen and the electrons are collected at the metal cathode.642,646 On the H2-evolving photocathode, the p-type semiconductor facilitates electron transfer to the electrolyte interface for the reduction reaction. The proton proton is reduced by acquiring the electrons to evolve hydrogen gas at the photocathode surface, and the holes move back to the counter electrode, where water oxidation takes place.642,646 Therefore, the choice of semiconductor material is the key to achieving high-performance PEC water splitting devices.647–650 The semiconductor generally requires a suitable bandgap, high conductivity, excellent stability and low cost, and should be environmentally friendly.
Fe2O3 possesses a suitable bandgap and low-cost, which makes it a desirable candidate as a photoelectrode for PEC water splitting devices.651–655 Wang's group demonstrated ALD Fe2O3 on a TiSi2 nanonet as a photoelectrode,656 as shown in Fig. 32(a). The TiSi2 nanonet was used as a charge transport layer to improve the charge collection. The photocurrents of 1.6 and 2.7 mA cm−2 were achieved at 1.23 and 1.53 V (vs. RHE) without any additional oxygen-evolving catalysts. Another p-LaFeO3/n-Fe2O3 heterojunction structure was reported by Chen's group.657 The La2O3 layer was first deposited on the β-FeOOH nanorods by ALD, followed by the formation of the p-LaFeO3/n-Fe2O3 heterojunction which was obtained by a post-annealing process. Because of the well-matched band levels of LaFeO3 and α-Fe2O3, the photocurrent density was promoted from 0.37 to 0.58 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE. The significant improvement could be attributed to the accelerated charge separation within the space depletion layer induced by the built-in potential.657
 Fig. 32  ALD-fabricated photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices: (a) Fe2O3; (b) TiO2; (c) WO3; (d) Ta3N5; (e) SnO2. 
TiO2 was the first reported photoelectrode for water splitting; however, it's solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency is the major limitation.658–663 The main challenges for the TiO2 photoelectrode are the carrier diffusion length, optical penetration depth, and inefficient electron collection. Peng et al. demonstrated an ALD TiO2 layer on nano antimony-doped tin oxide (nanoATO) films as photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting, as shown in Fig. 32(b).664 The nanoATO-ALD TiO2 photoelectrode delivered a high photocurrent density of 0.58 mA cm−2 under 1.5 G AM (∼sunlight of 100 mW cm−2), which is 3 times higher than that of the planar TiO2 electrodes on FTO glass. It was further reported that the thickness of the ALD TiO2 layer and post-treatment process are also critical factors that affect the water splitting capabilities.665 ALD TiO2 was deposited on hematite nanorod arrays as photoelectrodes. In this study, different post-annealing temperatures of 400, 650 and 750 °C, were investigated. It was found that with an annealing temperature of 650 °C, significant photocurrent can be observed. Furthermore, the thickness of the ALD TiO2 was optimized. Below a critical thickness, the PEC performance was steadily enhanced. If the thickness of the TiO2 layer was too thick, the hole transfer from hematite to liquid was blocked because of the formation of a substantive heterojunction. With the optimized annealing temperature and thickness for the ALD TiO2 layer, a high photocurrent of 1.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE) under AM 1.5 simulated solar illumination was achieved.
In addition to TiO2, other metal oxides, such as Ga2O3, SnO2, ZnO, HfO2, WO3, etc., have been deposited by ALD on different substrates and used as effective photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices.57,666–677 For example, as shown in Fig. 32(c), Zhao et al. compared two different deposition techniques which included sputtering and ALD for the deposition of WO3 thin film photoelectrodes.678 For the sputtered WO3, the film possessed obvious nanosized holes throughout the surface. Meanwhile, for the ALD WO3 film, no obvious microholes or other physical defects were observed. The highest performance was achieved for WO3 films deposited by ALD after annealing in air, which led to the fewest physical defects and an appropriate amount of oxygen vacancies.678 Another Nb-doped SnO2 was deposited by ALD and demonstrated by Grätzel's group (Fig. 32(e)).679 The doped films were deposited using SnO2 and Nb2O5 subcycles in which the content of Nb was controlled from 0–4%. The conductivity of the SnO2 was improved with Nb-doping, in which the conductivity reached a maximum with 2% Nb in SnO2. With another layer of hematite, the architecture showed a significant photocurrent plateau of 2.26 mA cm−2 at 1.4 V vs. RHE.
Besides the metal oxide, metal nitrides such as tantalum nitride have received increasing attention due to their favourable bandgaps and band edge positions that straddle both the reduction and oxidation potentials of water.680,681 Narkeviciute et al. fabricated core–shell Ta3N5 on a Si substrate by ALD (Fig. 32(d)).680 The Ta3N5 was obtained by the nitridation of amorphous Ta2O5 under NH3. The thinner Ta3N5 shells resulted in superior photocurrents and absorbed-photon-to-current efficiencies indicating minimal carrier diffusion lengths on the order of tens of nanometers.
Similar to other applications, ALD is also used to design different 3D-structured photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices aimed towards achieving high specific surface area, direct electron transport pathways, and excellent light-harvesting abilities.170,682–691 In an early study, Cheng's group reported a 3D ordered urchin-like hollow TiO2/ZnO nanorod structure on transparent FTO as a photoanode for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation,692 as shown in Fig. 33(a). In a typical process, a monolayer of PS microspheres was assembled onto the FTO substrate to act as a sacrificial template. Then, 20 nm of TiO2 and 10 nm of ZnO were deposited onto the PS spheres by ALD. Afterwards, ZnO nanorods were grown onto the surface of TiO2/ZnO hollow spheres with a hydrothermal approach. With a CdS sensitizer, a photocurrent of 3.6 mA cm−2 (at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) was generated by the urchin-like TiO2/ZnO photoanode, which is much higher than that of the 2D and 1D structure. The higher surface area provided by the nanostructured electrode for quantum dot loading contributed to the enhanced light scattering ability. Another interesting 3D-structured cactus-like WO3@ZnWO4@ZnO–ZnO was demonstrated by Zhang's group, fabricated by combining ALD with a hydrothermal process.693 As shown in Fig. 33(b), the well-aligned WO3 nanosheet array was grown on FTO glass by the hydrothermal method. Subsequently, the amorphous ZnO layer was coated on the WO3 nanosheets by ALD and further annealed in air to form a ZnWO4 buffer layer. Finally, another set of ZnO nanosheets was grown on the surface by a secondary hydrothermal process. As a result, the fabricated 3D photoelectrode photocurrent density was 3.8 times higher (∼1.57 mA cm−2) at 1.23 V vs. RHE than the pristine WO3 photoanode after long-term continuous illumination. Their group further developed another ZnO–GaON core–shell nanowire structure by PE-ALD,694 as shown in Fig. 33(c). The ZnO nanowire was firstly grown on the FTO substrate via a hydrothermal method with an ALD ZnO seed layer. Afterwards, a GaON film was further deposited on the ZnO nanowire by a PE-ALD process. To grow the GaON film, NH3 and O2 gas were introduced simultaneously at a specific flow ratio in the plasma pulse step. The unique structure of ZnO–GaON core–shell nanowires with optimized ALD GaON shell thickness exhibited a significant electric field enhancement and light trapping ability, which improved the photocurrent from ∼0.24 (pristine ZnO) to 2.25 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE.
 Fig. 33  ALD-derived 3D structured photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices: (a) TiO2–ZnO; (b) WO3@ZnWO4@ZnO–ZnO; (c) ZnO–GaON. 
To improve the PEC device performance, numerous transition-metal/metal oxides, such as nickel (and NiO) and cobalt (and Co3O4), have been used as catalysts for oxygen-evolution. ALD was also widely reported as a method to deposit transition-metal catalysts on photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting.609,695–700 Yang et al. fabricated a conformal, biphasic CoOx catalyst by PE-ALD and used it as a photoelectrode with high activity and compatibility.701 A compact and continuous nanocrystalline Co3O4 spinel was deposited by PE-ALD, which provides effective protection for the underlying substrate. Furthermore, disordered surface layers composing of Co(OH)2 were obtained at a reduced deposition temperature and significantly improved electrocatalytic activity. This Co(OH)2 layer promoted chemical and structural transformation, leading to a high concentration of catalytically active sites. As a result, the Co3O4/Co(OH)2 thin films exhibited high activity towards water splitting with enhanced durability.
Passivation layers are widely used to suppress the surface recombination that occurs on photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices. ALD is an ideal technique to deposit the passivation layer, which has also been introduced in the above sections for solar cells. TiO2 is one of the most popular materials as a passivation layer and has been deposited by ALD.591,702–710 For example, Yang's group fabricated an epitaxial rutile TiO2 shell by ALD on TiO2 nanowires as the passivation layer.711 When coated with a 150-ALD-cycle TiO2 shell, the photocatalytic activity of the 1.8 μm long TiO2 nanowire was enhanced 1.5 times (1.5 V vs. RHE) higher, reaching a current density of 1.1 mA cm−2. This ALD TiO2 coating improved the charge collection efficiency due to the passivation of surface states and an increase in surface area. Moreover, Paracchino et al., examined several factors that determine the performance and stability of Cu2O photocathodes with ALD-deposited overlayers.712 It was found that the ALD deposition temperature is critical towards the device performance, and determines the energy level positions as well as crystallinity. With a more crystalline overlayer, 62% stability over 10 hours of testing was achieved for the Cu2O photocathodes. Some other metal oxides deposited by ALD, such as Al2O3, SnO2, Ta2O5, ZnO, etc., were also reported as passivation layers for PEC water splitting devices.713–720 For example, ALD Al2O3 was deposited on TiO2 nanotubes as a passivation layer and was used as a photoanode for PEC water splitting.721 The optimized ALD coating exhibited an enhanced photocurrent density by 0.8 times compared to the pristine TiO2 nanotubes. The improvement was mainly ascribed to the reduction of the electron–hole recombination and decreased surface defect density combined with the field-effect passivation induced by the ALD Al2O3 shells. In another work, 2 nm of ALD-ZnO was fabricated on the spin-cast PC71BM thin-film n-type organic semiconductor photoanode as a passivation layer.722 As a result, the passivated photoelectrode exhibited increased stability for 1000 s and a photocurrent of 30 μA cm−2 at E = 1.23 V versus RHE, which was nearly 300% and 600% of those in the un-passivated PC71BM, respectively. The results revealed that the ALD ZnO can tunnel the hole transfer through passivation layers and improve the adhesion to the organic semiconductor, thus lowering Ohmic resistance.

4. Large scale ALD/MLD
With significant efforts from the community, ALD and MLD techniques have been widely proven as effective and promising tools for energy storage and conversion applications, particularly for the fields of batteries and fuel cells. However, one of the major concerns is the practicality of large-scale deposition for industrial applications.723 To address this concern, large-scale spatial ALD systems have been proposed and developed.724 In a spatial ALD process, the precursors are pulsed simultaneously and continuously, but at a different physical location in the reactor.725–727Fig. 34(a) shows the concept of roll-to-roll ALD, which uses a typical spatial ALD process. In this roll-to-roll process, the reactor is divided into individual spaces, exposing the precursors to the substrate in different regions and moving the substrates through the reactor.728–731 This roll-to-roll ALD process allows very high deposition rates while maintaining the desired ALD properties such as film quality and conformality. Subsequently, another roll-to-roll reactor was designed, consisting of a central drum that contains one or more half-reaction zones for individual precursors, as illustrated in Fig. 34(a). This upgrade allows for the avoidance of the mechanical contact between the deposition side of the foil and the reactor and further minimizes the amount of moving parts.728 These roll-to-roll ALD reactors are ideal for large scale flexible substrates requiring fast deposition rates.732 For energy storage and conversion applications, they are promising to carry out roll-to-roll ALD coatings on electrodes at the industrial level.
 Fig. 34  Large scale ALD/MLD: (a) roll-to-toll techniques for flexible substrates; (b) rotary reactor for powder; (c) fluidized bed reactor for powder. 
Another reactor design is used for large-scale powder depositions. It is also very important and practical for energy storage and conversion applications, such as ALD/MLD coatings on cathode/anode powders for batteries, and catalysis deposition on carbon powders for fuel cells. One of the options for ALD/MLD deposition on powders is the rotary reactor, which is presented in Fig. 34(b). The rotary reactor allows for static reactant exposures that can utilize the ALD precursors more efficiently.733–735 Another possibility is the fluidized bed reactor, which has been studied intensively for different ALD/MLD processes.736–749 For example, Fig. 34(c) shows a typical fluidized bed reactor for ALD deposition on powder. This reactor allows for the optimization of the process variables at any scale. Combined with in situ mass spectrometry, the precursors can be fully utilized to maximize precursor utilization and surface saturation. Some ALD companies have already commercialized the fluidized bed reactor with the capabilities of process material at the ton level, as shown in Fig. 34.750 Moreover, many types of films can be deposited in these reactors on virtually any particle substrate using this gas-phase reaction process.738
5. Conclusions
In this comprehensive review, we summarize the development and understanding of ALD/MLD techniques for energy storage and conversion applications, focusing on batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting. In general, ALD/MLD are very promising techniques that can address the challenges for energy storage and conversion due to their unique properties such as precise thickness control, excellent uniformity and conformity, and tunable composition. The main content of this review is as follows:
(1) ALD/MLD techniques are used to fabricate electrode materials for LIBs and NIBs. Various types of metal oxides (SnO2, ZnO, and TiO2, etc.) have been deposited on different substrates (such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, and stainless steel) as anode materials. Several Li/Na-containing compounds (LiCoO2, LiFePO4, and NaTiOx) have been developed as cathodes for LIBs and NIBs. Meanwhile, MLD is proposed to synthesize organic electrodes for batteries. Benefitting from the advantages of ALD/MLD, the morphologies, structures, compositions, and particle sizes are precisely controlled by adjusting the ALD/MLD parameters, resulting in excellent electrochemical performances. However, as we discussed above, the drawbacks of ALD/MLD for electrode fabrication are also obvious. The major concern is the low GPC of ALD/MLD films, which is in the range of Å per cycle for most of the procedures. To reach a high enough loading of the active materials, hundreds or even thousands of ALD cycles are required to obtain a thick electrode. This time-consuming process has less commercial viability for standard battery technologies, particularly when compared with composite/powder-based electrodes. Nevertheless, it still needs to be pointed out that ALD/MLD is still promising for the design and fabrication of thin film batteries or micro-batteries with thin electrodes.
(2) Rather than electrode fabrication, ALD/MLD is more promising for the engineering of the interface between the electrode and electrolytes in LIBs and NIBs, especially on the cathode side. ALD Al2O3 is the most popular coating layer used to modify the surface of cathode materials. The electrochemical performances of Al2O3-coated cathode materials are significantly improved with only a few cycles of ALD. The protection mechanism of ALD Al2O3 has been intensively studied by different approaches, such as in operando XRD, in operando XANES, and STEM-EELS. The most widely recognized explanation is that the thin ALD Al2O3 can prevent the electrolyte decomposition, HF corrosion, and transition metal dissolution. Some other metal oxides have been further investigated as a coating for cathode materials, in which ALD Al2O3 still performs the best among them. However, the metal oxides are generally non-ionic conductive, which will limit the Li-ion transport across the interface. In this case, Li-ion conductive solid-state electrolytes have been developed to replace the metal oxide coatings for cathode materials. The solid-state electrolyte coating enables fast Li transport and achieves even better electrochemical performances compared to their respective metal oxides. Beyond surface coating, ALD films are used to tailor the structures of the cathodes with further post-treatments, such as doping the lattice and modifying the grain boundary.
(3) On the anode interface of LIBs and NIBs, the ALD/MLD coatings serve two purposes. On one hand, the ALD/MLD layers are deposited as an artificial SEI to prevent the side reactions between the anode materials and liquid electrolytes. On the other hand, the ALD/MLD surface coating can relieve the volume change of the anode materials during lithiation/delithiation. Generally, when depositing coating layers for anodes, MLD presents more promising properties and better electrochemical performances compared to ALD due to the enhanced flexibility for volume change accommodation. Beyond the conventional anode materials, Li metal and Na metal are excellent candidates for next-generation Li metal batteries and Na metal batteries, respectively. The application of ALD/MLD has also been extended to artificial SEI fabrication for Li and Na metal anodes. Similar to regular anodes, the MLD layers deliver better performances than that of ALD coatings for alkali metal anodes. Additionally, the organic–inorganic hybrid coatings have been proven to be ideal layers with excellent electrochemical, chemical and mechanical properties. Moreover, the ALD/MLD techniques have been applied to address the interfacial issues for SSBs, in which ALD/MLD layers are used to prevent the side reaction between the electrodes and SSEs.
(4) ALD/MLD has also been used to deposit catalysts with controllable particle sizes for metal–air batteries and fuel cells. For metal–air batteries, precisely controlled catalysis is the key to tune the discharge product composition and morphologies. Moreover, selective ALD deposition can be applied to stabilize the catalysts. For electrocatalytic applications, ALD has been shown to be an ideal technique to deposit catalysts with controllable particle sizes in high-aspect-ratio and porous materials. It can be further used to design novel structures and modify the surface of the substrate to stabilize the catalysts. Moreover, ALD can be used to precisely deposit single atoms and even dimer catalysts on the different substrates, which improves the activity to a new level.
(5) ALD/MLD has been used to develop nanostructure materials for different applications, such as batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting. Generally, different types of templates are used to deposit ALD films. Afterwards, the templates are removed or transferred to create hollow nanostructures by post-treatment processes. Finally, the 3D nanostructures with high surface area and short ion diffusion paths are achieved with significantly improved performances for different energy-related devices.
(6) For photovoltaics of DSSCs, perovskite and photoelectrochemical water splitting, ALD/MLD is used to deposit the core–shell structure of the photoelectrode with minimized electron transfer routes to the conductive substrate. Moreover, ALD has been more widely used to modify the interfaces in DSSCs, including passivation, barrier, and blocking layers, with significantly improved performances.
(7) The potential of large scale ALD/MLD for energy applications has been further discussed. On one hand, roll-to-roll ALD/MLD has been widely developed for flexible substrates and is suitable for battery electrodes, fuel cell membranes and solar cell substrates. On the other hand, the rotary and fluidized bed reactors are designed for the mass production of powder samples, which is ideal for cathode/anode material manufacturing.
6. Perspective
Significant progress in the fields of ALD/MLD for energy applications has been reported over the past decade and ALD/MLD techniques are gradually becoming recognized by the energy storage and conversion communities as powerful and effective tools. However, challenges still remain and need to be addressed, at the same time, enormous potential is expected to be exploited. We list the detailed potential directions and perspectives below.
(1) Extension of other ALD chemistries for energy applications. Currently, the most popular materials deposited by ALD for energy applications are various metal oxides and noble metals. In the ALD community, other types of materials, such as nitrides, sulfides, and fluorides, have been successfully synthesized by ALD (or PEALD). These materials have unique properties compared to metal oxides and are expected to be applied in energy applications. For example, metal nitrides generally show higher electronic conductivity and chemical stability compared to metal oxides, and can be used as a substrate for fuel cell catalysis or as coatings for cathode/anode materials for batteries. Furthermore, metal fluorides have been predicted to have the widest electrochemical stability windows, especially at high potential. These materials would be ideal coatings for cathode materials in batteries. With this in mind, more opportunities and possibilities should arise for ALD/MLD chemistry in energy applications.
(2) Development and application of new MLD chemistry. The developed MLD chemistries are plentiful and attractive, however, their application in energy is still in an early stage. Firstly, the organic electrodes fabricated by MLD for Li and Na storage are interesting with various electrochemical active sites. Secondly, the fabrication of Li-ion and Na ion conductive MLD films is also challenging, putting forward the requirement for new MLD chemistries. Meanwhile, for fuel cell applications, highly conductive and catalytically active MLD thin films are expected to be explored as catalysts in fuel cells. Furthermore, the post-treatment of MLD films can be used to design and synthesize porous and carbon-containing films.
(3) Investigation of the properties of ALD/MLD films. Although numerous materials have been synthesized by ALD/MLD techniques, their properties have not been fully studied, such as chemical stability, electrochemical stability, and mechanical stability. These properties are always predicted from simulations or inferred from the same bulk materials. However, the properties of ALD/MLD films at the nanoscale or atomic scale are relatively different compared to the bulk materials. In this case, the understanding and characterization of ALD/MLD films at the nanoscale are critical for the community.
(4) Tuning of the mechanical properties of ALD/MLD films. Recent studies reveal that the mechanical properties also affect the electrochemical performances of the electrode, particularly the materials with large volume change. However, there are few examples of research focusing on the mechanical properties of the ALD/MLD films. Thus, it is also important to connect the mechanical properties of the coating layer to the electrochemical performances of the batteries.
(5) Rationally designing films by ALD/MLD. Various individual ALD/MLD films have been studied for energy applications. However, individual films cannot meet all the requirements for different applications. The combination of different ALD/MLD films for hybrid coating designs is required to meet the demands of specific applications.
(6) Mechanistic insight behind the electrochemical performance. It has been widely proven that ALD/MLD is effective in improving the performances of various systems. However, the functionality and mechanisms of ALD/MLD layers are still unclear. Thus, advanced characterization methods, especially in situ techniques, are the key for providing a deep understanding and will provide guidance towards future ALD/MLD material design.
(7) Currently, there is a need to demonstrate the practical applications of ALD/MLD technologies in energy storage and conversion for large-scale production. In particular, it is urgent to realize the mass production of ALD coatings on powder materials, such as cathode materials for batteries.
Author contributions
X. Sun and J. Lu supervised the overall work; Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Amine, J. Lu, and X. Sun designed the content of the review; J. Liu and Y. Zhao organized the introduction; L. Zhang wrote the electrocatalytic reactions for fuel cell application section; K. Adair wrote the Li–S batteries application section and edited the manuscript; Y. Sun wrote the Li-metal anode application section; F. Zhao wrote the solid-state Li battery application section; T. Wu and B. Xuan focused on the Li–O2 battery applications; Y. Zhao organized and wrote all the other parts of Li-ion batteries, Na batteries and beyond, supercapacitors, and photoelectrocatalysis applications; all authors read and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
X. Sun would like to acknowledge the funding support by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada Research Chair Program (CRC), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), Ontario Research Fund (ORF), Mitacs and the University of Western Ontario (UWO). Y. Zhao would like to acknowledge the Mitacs Elevate Postdoctoral Fellowship. J. Liu is grateful for funding support from NSERC, CFI, BC Knowledge Development Fund (BCKDF), and the University of British Columbia (UBC). The work at Argonne National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Vehicle Technologies Office. Argonne National Laboratory is operated for DOE Office of Science by UChicago Argonne, LLC, under contract number DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 540–550 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, K. Amine, J. Lu and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15806 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, B. Fang, D. Zhang, A. Li, D. P. Wilkinson, A. Ignaszak, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 1–34 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, K. Wang, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y.-C. Cao, F. Wei and L. Mai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1991–2015 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalluri, M. Yoon, M. Jo, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou, J. Cho and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605807 CrossRef .
J. Kim, H. Lee, H. Cha, M. Yoon, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702028 CrossRef .
X. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801323 CrossRef .
J. Song, B. Xiao, Y. Lin, K. Xu and X. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703082 CrossRef .
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
N. Tian, B.-A. Lu, X.-D. Yang, R. Huang, Y.-X. Jiang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 54–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leskela and M. Ritala, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 409, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leskela and M. Ritala, Angew. Chem., 2003, 42, 5548–5554 CrossRef CAS .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Li, S. K. Karuturi, A. I. Tok and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1522–1528 RSC .
C. Marichy, M. Bechelany and N. Pinna, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1017–1032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Noked, C. Liu, J. Hu, K. Gregorczyk, G. W. Rubloff and S. B. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2336–2346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mäntymäki, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Coatings, 2018, 8, 277 CrossRef .
V. P. Prasadam, N. Bahlawane, F. Mattelaer, G. Rampelberg, C. Detavernier, L. Fang, Y. Jiang, K. Martens, I. P. Parkin and I. Papakonstantinou, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 396–423 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, X. Q. Yang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3589–3615 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Wang, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 527–545 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889–1904 RSC .
B. Ahmed, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 250–271 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500405 CrossRef .
L. Ma, R. B. Nuwayhid, T. Wu, Y. Lei, K. Amine and J. Lu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600564 CrossRef .
W. Lu, L. Liang, X. Sun, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Hou, J. Sun and C. Yuan, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 325 CrossRef .
X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10127–10149 RSC .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, X. Song, D. Xiong, M. Zhao, D. Li and S. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 338, 34–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and X. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 899–914 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Zheng and X. Sun, Joule, 2018, 2, 2583–2604 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. M. Knoops, M. E. Donders, M. C. M. van de Sanden, P. H. L. Notten and W. M. M. Kessels, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 010801 CrossRef .
X. Meng, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 296–328 CrossRef .
O. Nilsen, V. Miikkulainen, K. B. Gandrud, E. Østreng, A. Ruud and H. Fjellvåg, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .
K. Share, A. Westover, M. Li and C. L. Pint, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 154, 3–19 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, K. C. Lau, D. Geng and X. Meng, Batteries Supercaps, 2018, 1, 41–68 CrossRef CAS .
O. Tiurin and Y. Ein-Eli, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901455 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, L. Du, G. Zhang, F. Su, W. Wang and S. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906890 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Chen, H. Dai, Q. Hu, S. Liao and S. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 513–533 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, Y. Kong, Z. Zhang, G. Huang and Y. Mei, J. Mater. Res., 2019, 35, 701–719 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Meng, J. Liu, D. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, J. Yang, R. Li, X. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, K. B. Jinesh, R. R. Prabhakar, V. S. Kale and S. Madhavi, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 720–725 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, X. Sun, S. M. George, C. Zhou, J. Lian and Y. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27735–27742 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmed, D. H. Anjum, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Nazarov, M. Y. Maximov, P. A. Novikov, A. A. Popovich, A. O. Silin, V. M. Smirnov, N. P. Bobrysheva, O. M. Osmolovskaya, M. G. Osmolovsky and A. M. Rumyantsev, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2017, 35, 01B137 CrossRef .
M. Y. Maximov, P. A. Novikov, D. V. Nazarov, A. M. Rymyantsev, A. O. Silin, Y. Zhang and A. A. Popovich, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 6571–6577 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, M. N. Banis, D. Geng, X. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Li, H. Abou-Rachid and X. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 132–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, D. Geng, J. Liu, R. Li and X. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 165602 CrossRef .
C. Ban, M. Xie, X. Sun, J. J. Travis, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. C. Dillon, J. Lian and S. M. George, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 424002 CrossRef .
M.-L. Lee, C.-Y. Su, Y.-H. Lin, S.-C. Liao, J.-M. Chen, T.-P. Perng, J.-W. Yeh and H. C. Shih, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 410–416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, X. Sun, C. Zhou, A. S. Cavanagh, H. Sun, T. Hu, G. Wang, J. Lian and S. M. George, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A974–A981 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, G. Jia, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, H. Geng, J. Xu, W. Mai, Q. Yan and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600375 CrossRef .
J. Liu, P. Zhou, T. Han, J. Huang, J. Liu, J. Li and P. V. Braun, Mater. Lett., 2018, 219, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Panda and H. Shin, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2015, 19, S5-694 CrossRef .
M. Li, X. Li, W. Li, X. Meng, Y. Yu and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 57, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Hong and S. O. Kim, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 27–34 CrossRef .
S. Lu, H. Wang, J. Zhou, X. Wu and W. Qin, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1184–1192 RSC .
X. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Xie, H. Sun, T. Hu, F. Lu, S. M. Scott, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7319–7326 RSC .
M. Yu, A. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11419–11424 RSC .
X. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Xie, T. Hu, H. Sun, G. Xin, G. Wang, S. M. George and J. Lian, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10703–10706 RSC .
Keith E. Gregorczyk, A. C. Kozen, X. Chen, M. A. Schroede, M. Noked, A. Cao, L. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 464–473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fleischmann, M. Zeiger, A. Quade, A. Kruth and V. Presser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18675–18684 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, D. Choudhury, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 706–713 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, D. Choudhury, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6606–6615 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, S. Sinha, A. Dhara, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17445–17453 RSC .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, A. Dhara, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38024–38032 RSC .
T. Dobbelaere, F. Mattelaer, P. M. Vereecken and C. Detavernier, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2017, 35, 041513 CrossRef .
X. Meng, Y. Cao, J. A. Libera and J. W. Elam, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9043–9052 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, K. He, D. Su, X. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Ren, H.-H. Wang, W. Weng, L. Trahey, C. P. Canlas and J. W. Elam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5435–5442 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, X. Liu, M. Qi, J. Xiang, J. Yin, Q. Chen and X. Xia, Mater. Technol., 2017, 32, 888–892 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742–769 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Jing, S. Gheytani, K. Y. Lee, P. Liu, A. Facchetti and Y. Yao, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 841–848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and Y. Yao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1690–1706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem, 2018, 4, 2786–2813 CAS .
M. Nisula and M. Karppinen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nisula and M. Karppinen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7027–7033 RSC .
Y. Fang, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Matter, 2019, 1, 90–114 CrossRef .
W. T. Jing, Y. Zhang, Y. Gu, Y. F. Zhu, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, Matter, 2019, 1, 720–733 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, B. Yan, D. Xiong, D. Li, S. Lawes and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502175 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Chem, 2018, 4, 972–996 CAS .
C. G. Carvajal, S. Rout, R. Mundle and A. K. Pradhan, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Fan, D. Gong, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1104–1111 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jeun, K. Y. Park, D. H. Kim, W. S. Kim, H. C. Kim, B. S. Lee, H. Kim, W. R. Yu, K. Kang and S. H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8480–8483 RSC .
J. Luo, X. Xia, Y. Luo, C. Guan, J. Liu, X. Qi, C. F. Ng, T. Yu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, Z. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, N. C. Fan, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6040–6047 RSC .
C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, D. Chao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee, S. Seo, C. Bae and H. Shin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2363–2371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Ren and C. Cheng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 274002 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jean, H. Kwak, W.-S. Kim, H.-C. Kim, K.-Y. Park, H. Kim, H.-S. Yang, W.-R. Yu, K. Kang and S.-H. Hong, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 2365–2371 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, Y. Zhao, L. Dong, X. Song, D. Li, C. Langford and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 32–44 CrossRef CAS .
E. Østreng, K. B. Gandrud, Y. Hu, O. Nilsen and H. Fjellvåg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15044–15051 RSC .
H. Jung, K. Gerasopoulos, A. A. Talin and R. Ghodssi, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mattelaer, K. Geryl, G. Rampelberg, J. Dendooven and C. Detavernier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13121–13131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fleischmann, D. Leistenschneider, V. Lemkova, B. Krüner, M. Zeiger, L. Borchardt and V. Presser, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8653–8662 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, E. Pomerantseva, P. Banerjee, K. Gregorczyk, R. Ghodssi and G. Rubloff, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1255–1261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, E. Pomerantseva, K. Gregorczyk, R. Ghodssi and G. Rubloff, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4294 RSC .
F. Mattelaer, K. Geryl, G. Rampelberg, T. Dobbelaere, J. Dendooven and C. Detavernier, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 114658 RSC .
M. E. Donders, W. M. Arnoldbik, H. C. M. Knoops, W. M. M. Kessels and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A3066–A3071 CrossRef CAS .
V. Miikkulainen, A. Ruud, E. Østreng, O. Nilsen, M. Laitinen, T. Sajavaara and H. Fjellvåg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 118, 1258–1268 CrossRef .
F. Mattelaer, P. M. Vereecken, J. Dendooven and C. Detavernier, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3628–3635 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Young, H.-D. Schnabel, A. M. Holder, S. M. George and C. B. Musgrave, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7895–7907 CrossRef CAS .
H.-E. Nieminen, V. Miikkulainen, D. Settipani, L. Simonelli, P. Hönicke, C. Zech, Y. Kayser, B. Beckhoff, A.-P. Honkanen, M. J. Heikkilä, K. Mizohata, K. Meinander, O. M. E. Ylivaara, S. Huotari and M. Ritala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15802–15814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5163–5185 RSC .
J. Wang and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1110–1138 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Liu, J. Wang, M. N. Banis, B. Xiao, A. Lushington, W. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, G. Liang and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 929 CrossRef .
K. B. Gandrud, A. Pettersen, O. Nilsen and H. Fjellvåg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9054–9059 RSC .
J. Liu, B. Xiao, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 162, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. Wang, Q. Sun, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600468 CrossRef .
T. Dobbelaere, F. Mattelaer, J. Dendooven, P. Vereecken and C. Detavernier, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3435–3445 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dobbelaere, F. Mattelaer, A. K. Roy, P. Vereecken and C. Detavernier, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 330–338 RSC .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Chen, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6505–6602 RSC .
B. Xiao and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802057 CrossRef .
C. Zhan, T. Wu, J. Lu and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 243–257 RSC .
Y. Ding, Z. P. Cano, A. Yu, J. Lu and Z. Chen, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 1–28 CrossRef CAS .
I. Takahashi, H. Kiuchi, A. Ohma, T. Fukunaga and E. Matsubara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9243–9248 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X.-Z. Yuan, L. Zhang, D. Song, K. Shi and C. Bock, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 43–80 CrossRef .
J. Liu and X. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 024001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 020501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, A. C. Dillon, M. D. Groner, S. M. George and S.-H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, R. E. Warburton, K.-S. Chen, J. A. Libera, C. Johnson, Z. Yang, M. C. Hersam, J. P. Greeley and J. W. Elam, Chem, 2018, 4, 2418–2435 CAS .
J.-T. Lee, F.-M. Wang, C.-S. Cheng, C.-C. Li and C.-H. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4002–4006 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan, J. A. Jeevarajan and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1465–1469 RSC .
L. A. Riley, S. Van Atta, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. Yan, S. M. George, P. Liu, A. C. Dillon and S.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3317–3324 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. Scott, Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. Yan, A. C. Dillon, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 414–418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Seok Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. Yan, S. M. George and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1298 CrossRef .
H.-M. Cheng, F.-M. Wang, J. P. Chu, R. Santhanam, J. Rick and S.-C. Lo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7629–7637 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan and Y. Wang, Ionics, 2012, 19, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Y. Liu, S. L. Candelaria, G. Cao, J. Liu and Y.-H. Jeong, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 01A123 CrossRef .
M. Bettge, Y. Li, B. Sankaran, N. D. Rago, T. Spila, R. T. Haasch, I. Petrov and D. P. Abraham, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 346–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, G. Ham, B.-S. Jin, S.-M. Lee, Y. M. Lee, G. Wang and H.-S. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 608, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, M. Ge, J. Rong, Y. Che, N. Aroonyadet, X. Wang, Y. Liu, A. Zhang and C. Zhou, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim, J. J. Travis, E. Hu, K.-W. Nam, S. C. Kim, C. S. Kang, J.-H. Woo, X.-Q. Yang, S. M. George, K. H. Oh, S.-J. Cho and S.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, A. Zhou, J. Xu, B. Yang, L. Wang and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Kim, H. J. Choi, J. H. Lee, S. Y. Yoo, J. W. Kim, J. H. Shim and B. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 184, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim, D. H. Kim, D. Y. Oh, H. Lee, J. H. Kim, J. H. Lee and Y. S. Jung, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1254–1262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, S. Cui, Z. Zhuo, W. Yang, X. Wang and F. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25105–25112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Zhang, D. Qian and Y. S. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 203, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Waller, P. D. Brooke, B. H. Rainwater, S. Y. Lai, R. Hu, Y. Ding, F. M. Alamgir, K. H. Sandhage and M. L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, T. Hu, L. Yang and Y. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63250–63255 RSC .
D. H. K. Jackson and T. F. Kuech, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dannehl, S. O. Steinmuller, D. V. Szabo, M. Pein, F. Sigel, L. Esmezjan, U. Hasenkox, B. Schwarz, S. Indris and H. Ehrenberg, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43131–43143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neudeck, A. Mazilkin, C. Reitz, P. Hartmann, J. Janek and T. Brezesinski, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 5328 CrossRef .
H. V. Ramasamy, S. Sinha, J. Park, M. Gong, V. Aravindan, J. Heo and Y.-S. Lee, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2019, 10, 196–205 CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Gao and X. Liang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A2021–A2027 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, X. Huang, T. Liu, Z. Xie, Y. Wang, K. Tian, L. Bu, H. Wang, L. Gao and J. Zhao, Coatings, 2019, 9, 92 CrossRef .
J. Song, X. Han, K. J. Gaskell, K. Xu, S. B. Lee and L. Hu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2745 CrossRef .
S. Fang, D. Jackson, M. L. Dreibelbis, T. F. Kuech and R. J. Hamers, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
T. Teranishi, Y. Yoshikawa, M. Yoneda, A. Kishimoto, J. Halpin, S. O’Brien, M. Modreanu and I. M. Povey, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Croy, D. C. O’Hanlon, S. Sharifi-Asl, M. Murphy, A. Mane, C.-W. Lee, S. E. Trask, R. Shahbazian-Yassar and M. Balasubramanian, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3891–3899 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, R. Wang, Y. Gong, B. He and H. Wang, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 107 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leung, Y. Qi, K. R. Zavadil, Y. S. Jung, A. C. Dillon, A. S. Cavanagh, S. H. Lee and S. M. George, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14741–14754 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Wise, C. Ban, J. N. Weker, S. Misra, A. S. Cavanagh, Z. Wu, Z. Li, M. S. Whittingham, K. Xu, S. M. George and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6146–6154 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, J. Zheng, X. Zhang, R. Xu, K. Amine, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang and C.-M. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 857–863 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hall, R. Gauthier, A. Eldesoky, V. S. Murray and J. R. Dahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, G. Qu, J. C. Flake and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8108–8110 RSC .
J. Zhao and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11867–11876 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, I. Belharouak, L. Li, Y. Lei, J. W. Elam, A. Nie, X. Chen, R. S. Yassar and R. L. Axelbaum, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1299–1307 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Kong, C. Ren, G.-A. Tai, X. Zhang, A.-D. Li, D. Wu, H. Li and F. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 433–439 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Cho, M. V. Chen, A. C. MacRae and Y. S. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16231–16239 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Kong, S.-S. Wang, G.-A. Tai, L. Zhu, L.-G. Wang, H.-F. Zhai, D. Wu, A.-D. Li and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 657, 593–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Laskar, D. H. Jackson, Y. Guan, S. Xu, S. Fang, M. Dreibelbis, M. K. Mahanthappa, D. Morgan, R. J. Hamers and T. F. Kuech, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10572–10580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanty, K. Dahlberg, D. M. King, L. A. David, A. S. Sefat, D. L. Wood, C. Daniel, S. Dhar, V. Mahajan, M. Lee and F. Albano, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26532 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Patel, J. Park and X. Liang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 98768–98776 RSC .
C. Qin, J. Cao, J. Chen, G. Dai, T. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, A. Li and Y. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9669–9675 RSC .
K. Sharma, D. Routkevitch, N. Varaksa and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 01A146 CrossRef .
M. Xie, X. Sun, H. Sun, T. Porcelli, S. M. George, Y. Zhou and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 537–544 RSC .
J.-Z. Kong, H.-F. Zhai, X. Qian, M. Wang, Q.-Z. Wang, A.-D. Li, H. Li and F. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 694, 848–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Laskar, D. H. Jackson, S. Xu, R. J. Hamers, D. Morgan and T. F. Kuech, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11231–11239 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mattelaer, P. M. Vereecken, J. Dendooven and C. Detavernier, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601237 CrossRef .
S. Sarkar, R. L. Patel, X. Liang and J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30599–30607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, R. L. Patel, K. Y. Shen, X. Wang, R. L. Axelbaum and X. Liang, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 906–916 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, J.-W. Lin, Y.-H. Yu, K.-H. Lai, K.-F. Chiu and C.-C. Kei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16941–16950 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Su, T. Wang, K. Yuan, C. Chen, S. Liu, T. Huang, J. Wu, H. Lu and A. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7890–7901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahn, E. K. Jang, S. Yoon, S.-J. Lee, S.-J. Sung, D.-H. Kim and K. Y. Cho, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 484, 701–709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, J. Cai, G.-L. Xu, L. Li, Y. Ren, X. Meng, K. Amine and Z. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2723–2730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Shang, X. He, T. White, J. Park and X. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 513–524 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao and Y. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 17, 1049–1058 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Liu, X. Meng, Y. Tang, M. N. Banis, J. Yang, Y. Hu, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 57–69 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, J. Liu, Q. Sun, B. Wang, M. N. Banis, D. Zhao, Z. Wang, R. Li, X. Cui, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500022 CrossRef .
S. Deng, B. Xiao, B. Wang, X. Li, K. Kaliyappan, Y. Zhao, A. Lushington, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, H. Wang and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, B. Wang, J. Liu, K. Kaliyappan, Q. Sun, Y. Liu, G. Dadheech, M. P. Balogh, L. Yang, T.-K. Sham, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 120–130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, A. Lushington, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 768–778 RSC .
O. Srur-Lavi, V. Miikkulainen, B. Markovsky, J. Grinblat, M. Talianker, Y. Fleger, G. Cohen-Taguri, A. Mor, Y. Tal-Yosef and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A3266–A3275 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Zhao, Y. Liu, H. Wang, C. Liu, T. Wu, P.-C. Hsu, D. Lin, Y. Jin and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3754–3764 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, X. Meng, J. W. Elam, S. Hao, C. Wolverton, C. Kim and J. Cabana, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3128–3134 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Richards, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 266–273 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, X. He and Y. Mo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23685–23693 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kraytsberg, H. Drezner, M. Auinat, A. Shapira, N. Solomatin, P. Axmann, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and Y. Ein-Eli, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, A. U. Mane, J. W. Elam and J. R. Croy, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1917–1920 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. K. Jackson, M. R. Laskar, S. Fang, S. Xu, R. G. Ellis, X. Li, M. Dreibelbis, S. E. Babcock, M. K. Mahanthappa, D. Morgan, R. J. Hamers and T. F. Kuech, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 031503 CrossRef .
J. S. Park, A. U. Mane, J. W. Elam and J. R. Croy, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3724–3729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Lee, H. Sun, J. M. Wallas, S. M. George and M. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9614–9619 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shapira, O. Tiurin, N. Solomatin, M. Auinat, A. Meitav and Y. Ein-Eli, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6809–6823 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, A. D. Sendek, E. D. Cubuk, X. Zhang, Z. Lu, Y. Gong, T. Wu, F. Shi, W. Liu, E. J. Reed and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7019–7027 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kazyak, K.-H. Chen, K. N. Wood, A. L. Davis, T. Thompson, A. R. Bielinski, A. J. Sanchez, X. Wang, C. Wang, J. Sakamoto and N. P. Dasgupta, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3785–3792 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, H. Liu, J. Liu, Q. Sun, B. Wang, K. Kaliyappan, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, Y. Liu, R. Li, T. K. Sham, G. A. Botton, M. Cai and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703764 CrossRef .
H.-H. Ryu, K.-J. Park, C. S. Yoon and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1155–1163 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, J. Zheng, J. Liu, B. Wang, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, C. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, J. Zheng, J. Lu, Y. Li, P. Yan and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Kong, Y. Chen, Y.-Q. Cao, Q.-Z. Wang, A.-D. Li, H. Li and F. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 799, 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amirmaleki, C. Cao, B. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Cui, J. Tam, X. Sun, Y. Sun and T. Filleter, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18730–18738 RSC .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, L. A. Riley, S. H. Kang, A. C. Dillon, M. D. Groner, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2172–2176 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, P. Lu, A. S. Cavanagh, C. Ban, G.-H. Kim, S.-H. Lee, S. M. George, S. J. Harris and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lahiri, S.-M. Oh, J. Y. Hwang, C. Kang, M. Choi, H. Jeon, R. Banerjee, Y.-K. Sun and W. Choi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13621 RSC .
A. J. Loebl, C. J. Oldham, C. K. Devine, B. Gong, S. E. Atanasov, G. N. Parsons and P. S. Fedkiw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1971–A1978 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Wang and F.-M. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, K. Wang, M. Zong, L. Wang, W. Zhang and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14480 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Huang, X. Sun, H. Huang, K. Wang, M. Zong and Q. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Song, X. Li, Q. Sun, N. Cheng, S. Lawes and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 35–62 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, B. Yan, D. Li, S. Lawes and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 869–884 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Yang, J. Liu, X. Li, R. Li, M. Cai, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2306 RSC .
N. Yesibolati, M. Shahid, W. Chen, M. N. Hedhili, M. C. Reuter, F. M. Ross and H. N. Alshareef, Small, 2014, 10, 2849–2858 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan and C. Yuan, J. Electrochem. Energy Convers. Storage, 2016, 13, 021004 CrossRef .
M. Mao, F. Yan, C. Cui, J. Ma, M. Zhang, T. Wang and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3830–3836 CrossRef CAS .
B. Joshi, E. Samuel, M.-W. Kim, S. Park, M. T. Swihart, W. Y. Yoon and S. S. Yoon, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Chen, R. Hu, J. Liu, J. Cui, W. Zhou and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4374–4385 RSC .
C. Guan, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Fan, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4852–4858 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Snyder, S. A. Trebukhova, B. Ravdel, M. C. Wheeler, J. DiCarlo, C. P. Tripp and W. J. DeSisto, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, M.-H. Hon, Y.-W. Chung and I.-C. Leu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2010, 102, 545–550 CrossRef .
J. Liu, X. Li, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 93, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, M. Xie, J. Zhong, H.-T. Sun, X. Sun, S. Scott, S. M. George, C.-S. Liu and J. Lian, Carbon, 2014, 76, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Lipson, K. Puntambekar, D. J. Comstock, X. Meng, M. L. Geier, J. W. Elam and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 935–940 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmed, M. Shahid, D. H. Nagaraju, D. H. Anjum, M. N. Hedhili and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13154–13163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, Y. Wang, M. Zacharias, J. Wang and H. J. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 014001 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Jung, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 631–641 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, H. Zhao and B. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 165403 CrossRef .
X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Sang, J. Ma, H. Shi, X. Liu, J. Lu and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Rehman, Y. Xu, X. Du, X. Sun, I. Ullah, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, B. Zhang and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 445, 359–367 CrossRef .
S. Xie, D. Cao, Y. She, H. Wang, J. W. Shi, M. K. H. Leung and C. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7782–7785 RSC .
J. K. Yoon, S. Nam, H. C. Shim, K. Park, T. Yoon, H. S. Park and S. Hyun, Materials, 2018, 11, 803 CrossRef .
Y. Jin, H. Yu, Y. Gao, X. He, T. A. White and X. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 436, 226859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Liang, R. Wang, B. He, Y. Gong and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19115–19122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feng, M. Li, W. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli, X. Xiao, M. Cai and Z. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702737 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, R. Yi, Y. C. Li, J. Song, S. Chen, Q. Huang, T. E. Mallouk and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17359–17367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Chen, F. Pan, Y. Cui and K. Amine, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 35–53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dou, L. Shi, G. Chen and D. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 149–198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Li and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4938–4941 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Becker, S. M. Prokes and C. T. Love, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 530–537 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Kim and Y. Qi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F3137–F3143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hy, Y. H. Chen, H. M. Cheng, C. J. Pan, J. H. Cheng, J. Rick and B. J. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13801–13807 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kohandehghan, P. Kalisvaart, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, E. Memarzadeh and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12850 RSC .
J. Li, X. Xiao, Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3387–3391 CrossRef CAS .
E. Memarzadeh Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, K. Cui, A. Kohandehghan, M. Kupsta, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13646–13657 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, G. Xu, Y. Lu, S. Zhang, L. Xue, J. S. Jur and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11417–11425 RSC .
B. Zhu, N. Liu, M. McDowell, Y. Jin, Y. Cui and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, D. Yan, C. Yu, L. Cao, C. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Zhu, Y.-S. Hu, S. Dai, J. Lu and W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, B. Farbod and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2504–2516 RSC .
S. B. Son, Y. Wang, J. Xu, X. Li, M. Groner, A. Stokes, Y. Yang, Y. T. Cheng and C. Ban, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40143–40150 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Piper, J. J. Travis, M. Young, S. B. Son, S. C. Kim, K. H. Oh, S. M. George, C. Ban and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1596–1601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, D. M. Piper, M. Gu, J. J. Travis, S. M. George, S.-H. Lee, A. Genc, L. Pullan, J. Liu, S. X. Mao, J.-G. Zhang, C. Ban and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11816–11823 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, H. Yang, P. Yan, J. J. Travis, Y. Lee, N. Liu, D. M. Piper, S. Zhang, C. Ban, S.-H. Lee, P. Zhao, S. M. George, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Cui and C.-M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5559–5566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, J. M. Martinez de la Hoz, I. Angarita, J. M. Berrio-Sanchez, L. Benitez, J. M. Seminario, S. B. Son, S. H. Lee, S. M. George, C. Ban and P. B. Balbuena, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11948–11955 CrossRef CAS .
D. Molina Piper, Y. Lee, S.-B. Son, T. Evans, F. Lin, D. Nordlund, X. Xiao, S. M. George, S.-H. Lee and C. Ban, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wallas, B. C. Welch, Y. Wang, J. Liu, S. E. Hafner, R. Qiao, T. Yoon, Y.-T. Cheng, S. M. George and C. Ban, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4135–4143 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Zhu and M. H. A. Shiraz, Front. Energy Res., 2018, 6, 10 CrossRef .
D. M. Stewart, A. J. Pearse, N. S. Kim, E. J. Fuller, A. A. Talin, K. Gregorczyk, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2526–2534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Létiche, E. Eustache, J. Freixas, A. Demortière, V. De Andrade, L. Morgenroth, P. Tilmant, F. Vaurette, D. Troadec, P. Roussel, T. Brousse and C. Lethien, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601402 CrossRef .
A. Pearse, T. Schmitt, E. Sahadeo, D. M. Stewart, A. Kozen, K. Gerasopoulos, A. A. Talin, S. B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and K. E. Gregorczyk, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4286–4294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Y. J. Lee, X. Luo, K. C. Lau, M. Asadi, H. H. Wang, S. Brombosz, J. Wen, D. Zhai, Z. Chen, D. J. Miller, Y. S. Jeong, J. B. Park, Z. Z. Fang, B. Kumar, A. Salehi-Khojin, Y. K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nature, 2016, 529, 377–382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, L. Li, J. B. Park, Y. K. Sun, F. Wu and K. Amine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5611–5640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 443–467 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Luntz, V. Viswanathan, J. Voss, J. B. Varley, J. K. Nørskov, R. Scheffler and A. Speidel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3494–3499 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Varley, V. Viswanathan, J. K. Nørskov and A. C. Luntz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 720–727 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Y. Lei, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, P. Du, J. Wen, R. S. Assary, U. Das, D. J. Miller, J. W. Elam, H. M. Albishri, D. A. El-Hady, Y. K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2383 CrossRef .
Y. Lei, J. Lu, X. Luo, T. Wu, P. Du, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. T. Miller, Y. K. Sun, J. W. Elam and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4182–4189 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, M. Piernavieja-Hermida, J. Lu, T. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Ren, D. Miller, Z. Zak Fang, Y. Lei and K. Amine, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 164003 CrossRef .
J. Yang, D. Ma, Y. Li, P. Zhang, H. Mi, L. Deng, L. Sun and X. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Mi, S. Luo, Y. Li, P. Zhang, L. Deng, L. Sun and X. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2017, 368, 88–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bae, D.-H. Ko, S. Lee, H.-D. Lim, Y.-J. Kim, H.-S. Shim, H. Park, Y. Ko, S. K. Park, H. J. Kwon, H. Kim, H.-T. Kim, Y.-S. Min, D. Im and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702661 CrossRef .
C. Gong, L. Zhao, S. Li, H. Wang, Y. Gong, R. Wang and B. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 338–347 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jung, D.-W. Choi, C. K. Lee, K. R. Yoon, S. Yu, J. Y. Cheong, C. Kim, S.-H. Cho, J.-S. Park, Y. J. Park and I.-D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, K. Tan, Y. Gong, H. Wang, R. Wang, L. Zhao and B. He, J. Power Sources, 2019, 437, 226908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, L. Cheng, K. C. Lau, E. Tyo, X. Luo, J. Wen, D. Miller, R. S. Assary, H. H. Wang, P. Redfern, H. Wu, J. B. Park, Y. K. Sun, S. Vajda, K. Amine and L. A. Curtiss, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, Science, 2010, 328, 224 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kwon, G. A. Ferguson, C. J. Heard, E. C. Tyo, C. Yin, J. DeBartolo, S. N. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. Kropf, J. Greeley, R. L. Johnston, L. A. Curtiss, M. J. Pellin and S. Vajda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5808–5817 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, L. M. Molina, M. J. Lopez, J. A. Alonso, B. Hammer, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and S. Vajda, Angew. Chem., 2009, 48, 1467–1471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, J. P. Greeley, C. L. Marshall, L. A. Curtiss, G. A. Ballentine, J. W. Elam, S. Catillon-Mucherie, P. C. Redfern, F. Mehmood and P. Zapol, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Shin, G. W. Seo, K. Kwon, K.-N. Jung, S. I. Lee, E. Choi, H. Kim, J.-H. Hwang and J.-W. Lee, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 047702 CrossRef .
J. Xie, X. Yao, I. P. Madden, D. E. Jiang, L. Y. Chou, C. K. Tsung and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8903–8906 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. N. Banis, Q. Sun, M. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, S. Li, X. Han, B. Xiao, Z. Song, R. Li, J. Qiu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, D.-C. Lee, A. Magasinski, W.-I. Cho and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1308–1315 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, A. Lushington, J. Liu, R. Li and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9757–9760 RSC .
M. Yu, W. Yuan, C. Li, J.-D. Hong and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7360 RSC .
M. Yu, A. Wang, F. Tian, H. Song, Y. Wang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5292–5298 RSC .
X. Li, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, W. Xiao, J. Liu, B. Wang, Y. Ye, K. Nie, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, R. Li, J. Guo, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3545–3549 CrossRef CAS .
R. Carter, L. Oakes, N. Muralidharan, A. P. Cohn, A. Douglas and C. L. Pint, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7185–7192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Lu, J. Zhou, X. Wu, W. Qin, O. Ogoke and G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 102–112 RSC .
X. Meng, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, Y. Ren, W. Lu and J. W. Elam, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700096 CrossRef .
X. Han, Y. Xu, X. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Wan, H. Zhu, Y. Liu, H. Li, G. Rubloff, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Banis, A. Lushington, X. Yang, Q. Sun, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, Q. Li, B. Wang, W. Xiao, C. Wang, M. Li, J. Liang, R. Li, Y. Hu, L. Goncharova, H. Zhang, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4509 CrossRef .
Z. Gao, H. Sun, L. Fu, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705702 CrossRef .
F. Zheng, M. Kotobuki, S. Song, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 198–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, W. Li, K. R. Adair, M. N. Banis, Y. Hu, T. K. Sham, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Zhao, S. Lu, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902125 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miura, N. C. Rosero-Navarro, A. Sakuda, K. Tadanaga, N. H. H. Phuc, A. Matsuda, N. Machida, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, X. Li, A. Lushington, M. Cai, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20260–20267 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Liu, Q. Sun, R. Li, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 504007 CrossRef .
A. C. Kozen, A. J. Pearse, C.-F. Lin, M. Noked and G. W. Rubloff, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5324–5331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nisula, Y. Shindo, H. Koga and M. Karppinen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6987–6993 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Liu, M. Norouzi Banis, Q. Sun, Y. Zhao, R. Li, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31786–31793 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, Q. Sun, K. R. Adair, R. Li, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1654–1661 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kazyak, K.-H. Chen, A. L. Davis, S. Yu, A. J. Sanchez, J. Lasso, A. R. Bielinski, T. Thompson, J. Sakamoto, D. J. Siegel and N. P. Dasgupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19425–19437 RSC .
X. Han, Y. Gong, K. K. Fu, X. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Liu, H. Wang, G. Rubloff, Y. Mo, V. Thangadurai, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 572–579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Sun, Y. Zhao, B. Wang, P. Kaghazchi, K. R. Adair, R. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Y. Kuo, Y. Hu, T. K. Sham, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu, X. Song and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31240–31248 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Liang, X. Li, X. Lin, R. Li, K. R. Adair, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Davis, R. Garcia-Mendez, K. N. Wood, E. Kazyak, K.-H. Chen, G. Teeter, J. Sakamoto and N. P. Dasgupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6291–6302 RSC .
J. H. Woo, J. E. Trevey, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. S. Choi, S. C. Kim, S. M. George, K. H. Oh and S.-H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1120–A1124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, K. R. Adair, Q. Sun, Y. Liu, F. Zhao, S. Deng, X. Lin, R. Li, Y. Hu, T. K. Sham, H. Huang, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Ren, M. Norouzi Banis, S. Deng, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, C. Wang, X. Yang, W. Li, J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, K. Adair, R. Li, Y. Hu, T.-K. Sham, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Lu, J. Luo and X. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2480–2488 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, X. Li, Z. Ren, W. Li, J. Luo, J. Liang, J. Liang, M. N. Banis, M. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Sun, Q. Sun, R. Li, Y. Hu, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Lu, J. Luo and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 117–123 CrossRef .
S. Deng, Y. Sun, X. Li, Z. Ren, J. Liang, K. Doyle-Davis, J. Liang, W. Li, M. Norouzi Banis, Q. Sun, R. Li, Y. Hu, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Lu, J. Luo and X. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1243–1251 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, X. Wang and Y. S. Meng, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, P. Lu, Z. Liu, Y. Qi, L. G. Hector, H. Li and S. J. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15476–15487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Wang, W. Li, B. Wu, W. Jia, Y. Wang, J. Li and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 16–23 CrossRef .
A. C. Kozen, C.-F. Lin, A. J. Pearse, M. A. Schroeder, X. Han, L. Hu, S.-B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5884–5892 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, X. Yue, J. Meng, J. Wang, X. Wang, H. Chen, D. Shi, J. Fu, Y. Zhou, J. Chen and Z. Fu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 414–422 CrossRef .
N.-W. Li, Y.-X. Yin, C.-P. Yang and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
N.-W. Li, Y. Shi, Y.-X. Yin, X.-X. Zeng, J.-Y. Li, C.-J. Li, L.-J. Wan, R. Wen and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C.-C. Fang and N.-L. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701482 CrossRef .
D. Lin, Y. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, K. Liu, B. Dunn and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3731–3737 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, M. N. Banis, L. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Yang, D. Banham, Y. Zhao, J. Liang, M. Zheng, R. Li, S. Ye and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 716–725 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Jia, S. Chen, P. Gao and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18326–18378 RSC .
E. Kazyak, K. N. Wood and N. P. Dasgupta, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6457–6462 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Lin, A. C. Kozen, M. Noked, C. Liu and G. W. Rubloff, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600426 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Q. Zhu, Y. Lang, K. Cao, S. Chu, B. Shan and R. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1648–1652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Wang, H. R. Lee, K. Yan, Y. Li, F. Shi, W. Huang, A. Pei, G. Chen, R. Subbaraman, J. Christensen and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 5168 CrossRef .
P. K. Alaboina, S. Rodrigues, M. Rottmayer and S.-J. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32801–32808 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kim, R. T. Haasch, D. H. Cao, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. B. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24310–24314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, K.-S. Chen, X. Chen, G. Ramirez, Z. Huang, N. R. Geise, H.-G. Steinrück, B. L. Fisher, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, M. F. Toney, M. C. Hersam and J. W. Elam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26972–26981 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, L. Liao, Y. Gong, Y. Li, F. Shi, A. Pei, J. Sun, R. Zhang, B. Kong, R. Subbaraman, J. Christensen and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 3170 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, Y. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Liang, C. Wang, Q. Sun, X. Lin, K. R. Adair, J. Luo, D. Wang, R. Li, M. Cai, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806541 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, Q. Sun, X. Li, A. Lushington, B. Wang, R. Li, F. Dai, M. Cai and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700417 CrossRef .
L. Chen, Z. Huang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. A. Libera, K. C. Klavetter, K. R. Zavadil and J. W. Elam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7043–7051 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Adair, C. Zhao, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhao, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15797–15802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Amirmaleki, Q. Sun, C. Zhao, A. Codirenzi, L. V. Goncharova, C. Wang, K. Adair, X. Li, X. Yang, F. Zhao, R. Li, T. Filleter, M. Cai and X. Sun, Matter, 2019, 1, 1215–1231 CrossRef .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao, F. Wei, J.-G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500213 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, W. H. Lai, Z. Miao and S. L. Chou, Small, 2018, 14, 1702514 CrossRef .
M. Á. Muñoz-Márquez, D. Saurel, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700463 CrossRef .
W. Luo, F. Shen, C. Bommier, H. Zhu, X. Ji and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 231–240 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, T. Rojo and X. Li, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 133–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, F. A. Soto, M. Gu, K. S. Han, J. Song, H. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, V. Murugesan, K. T. Mueller, D. Reed, V. L. Sprenkle, P. B. Balbuena and X. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801441 CrossRef .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, B. Xiao, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, R. Li, J. Guo, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24281–24288 RSC .
J. Lin, D. Ma, Y. Li, P. Zhang, H. Mi, L. Deng, L. Sun and X. Ren, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 13101–13107 RSC .
M. B. Sreedhara, S. Gope, B. Vishal, R. Datta, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2302–2310 RSC .
X. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Jia, Y. C. Chen, J. Wan, N. Weadock, K. J. Gaskell, T. Li and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Fang, M. Ge, J. Rong, C. Shen, A. Zhang, H. A. Enaya and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kou, X. Li, H. Shan, L. Fan, B. Yan and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17881–17888 RSC .
J. Ni, Y. Jiang, F. Wu, J. Maier, Y. Yu and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707179 CrossRef .
K. Kaliyappan, J. Liu, A. Lushington, R. Li and X. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2537–2543 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alvarado, C. Ma, S. Wang, K. Nguyen, M. Kodur and Y. S. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26518–26530 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, L. RuiXian, J. Feng, C. Long, G. Wang, H. Kou, M. Zhao, L. Dong, X. Li and D. Li, Mater. Lett., 2017, 205, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kaliyappan, J. Liu, B. Xiao, A. Lushington, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701870 CrossRef .
C. Luo, A. Langrock, X. Fan, Y. Liang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18214–18220 RSC .
Y. Xu, M. Zhou, C. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Liang, Y. Fang, M. Wu, L. Cheng and Y. Lei, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, X. Jia, J. Wang, K. Liao, W. Zhou, Y. Wang and Z. Shao, Composites, Part B, 2019, 173, 106913 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yadegari, Q. Sun and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7065–7093 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, X. Lin, H. Yadegari, W. Xiao, Y. Zhao, K. R. Adair, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1473–1484 RSC .
H. Yadegari and X. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1532–1540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, F. Sun, Q. Sun, S. Wang, J. Luo, C. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, R. Li and X. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9024–9031 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, J. Liu, X. Li, B. Wang, H. Yadegari, A. Lushington, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhao, W. Xiao, N. Chen, J. Wang, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606662 CrossRef .
H. Yadegari, M. Norouzi Banis, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 286–295 RSC .
D. Ma, Y. Li, J. Yang, H. Mi, S. Luo, L. Deng, C. Yan, M. Rauf, P. Zhang, X. Sun, X. Ren, J. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705537 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Yang, L. Y. Kuo, P. Kaghazchi, Q. Sun, J. Liang, B. Wang, A. Lushington, R. Li, H. Zhang and X. Sun, Small, 2018, 14, e1703717 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Liang, Q. Sun, L. V. Goncharova, J. Wang, C. Wang, K. R. Adair, X. Li, F. Zhao, Y. Sun, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4119–4125 RSC .
X. Lin, Q. Sun, H. Yadegari, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, J. Liang, A. Koo, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801904 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, K. R. Adair and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2673–2695 RSC .
W. Luo, C.-F. Lin, O. Zhao, M. Noked, Y. Zhang, G. W. Rubloff and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601526 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, H. Yadegari, B. Wang, W. Xiao, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606663 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, Q. Zhang, P. Kaghazchi, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, B. Wang, R. Li and X. Sun, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5653–5659 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Nuwayhid, A. Jarry, G. W. Rubloff and K. E. Gregorczyk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21641–21650 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Schuppert, S. Mukherjee, A. M. Bates, E.-J. Son, M. J. Choi and S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 160–169 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pal, A. Mathur, A. Singh, S. Pakhira, R. Singh and S. Chattopadhyay, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12512–12523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yan, Q. Wei, P. He, Y. Dong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800848 CrossRef .
F. Ye, D. Lu, X. Gui, T. Wang, X. Zhuang, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Materiomics, 2019, 5, 344–349 CrossRef .
L. Tao, L. Liu, R. Chang, H. He, P. Zhao and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 463, 228172 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, H. Tong, X. Song, X. Song and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7836–7846 RSC .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
M. F. El-Kady, Y. Shao and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
H. Liu, X. Liu, S. Wang, H.-K. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 122–145 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Han, T. Yi, Y. He and X. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 31, 54–78 CrossRef .
D. Chen, K. Jiang, T. Huang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1901806 CrossRef .
S. Boukhalfa, K. Evanoff and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6872 RSC .
X. Sun, M. Xie, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. S. Cavanagh, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A364–A369 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, L. Zhang, A. Zuzuarregui, K. Gregorczyk, L. Li, M. Beltran, C. Tollan, J. Brede, C. Rogero, A. Chuvilin and M. Knez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20513–20519 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Y. Shao, Y. Su and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6689–6695 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hong, M. Cho and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1899–1906 CrossRef CAS .
L. Iglesias, V. Vega, J. GarcÃa, B. Hernando and V. C. M. Prida, Front. Phys., 2015, 3, 12 Search PubMed .
P. Avasthi, A. Kumar and V. Balakrishnan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1484–1495 CrossRef CAS .
F. Naeem, S. Naeem, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Mei and G. Huang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 92 CrossRef .
X. Sun, M. Xie, J. J. Travis, G. Wang, H. Sun, J. Lian and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2013, 117, 22497–22508 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, C. Chen, P. Huang, F. Duan, S. Zhao, P. Li, J. Fan, W. Song and Y. Qin, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 504001 CrossRef .
C. Guan, X. Qian, X. Wang, Y. Cao, Q. Zhang, A. Li and J. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 094001 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Silva, G. Clavel, Y. Fan, P. Amsalem, N. Koch, R. F. Silva and N. Pinna, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600313 CrossRef .
L. Yu, G. Wang, G. Wan, G. Wang, S. Lin, X. Li, K. Wang, Z. Bai and Y. Xiang, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13779–13786 RSC .
Z. Hai, M. Karbalaei Akbari, Z. Wei, C. Xue, H. Xu, J. Hu and S. Zhuiykov, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 625–633 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and H. He, Vacuum, 2017, 143, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Warren, F. Sammoura, F. Tounsi, M. Sanghadasa and L. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15568–15575 RSC .
E. Kao, C. Yang, R. Warren, A. Kozinda and L. Lin, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 240, 160–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, S. Sahoo, S. Sinha, S. Yeo, H. Kim, R. N. Bulakhe, J. Heo, J. J. Shim and S. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40252–40264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ansari, N. Parveen, D. K. Nandi, R. Ramesh, S. A. Ansari, T. Cheon and S. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 10225 CrossRef .
L. Wen, Y. Mi, C. Wang, Y. Fang, F. Grote, H. Zhao, M. Zhou and Y. Lei, Small, 2014, 10, 3162–3168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, J. Zhan, Y. Wang, X. Wang and J. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18717–18722 RSC .
Q. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Chi, J. Zhang and Z. Ji, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 055405 CrossRef .
Y.-Q. Cao, X. Qian, W. Zhang, S.-S. Wang, M. Li, D. Wu and A.-D. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A3493–A3498 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, G. Wan, Y. Qin and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 283–294 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, C. Shen, E. Kao, R. Warren, R. Zhang, K. S. Teh, J. Zhong, M. Wei, B. Li, Y. Chu, M. Sanghadasa, A. Schwartzberg and L. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704754 CrossRef .
L. Yu, G. Wan, X. Peng, Z. Dou, X. Li, K. Wang, S. Lin and G. Wang, RSC
Adv., 2016, 6, 14199–14204 RSC .
S. A. Sherrill, J. Duay, Z. Gui, P. Banerjee, G. W. Rubloff and S. B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15221–15226 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xia, N. Wei and H. N. Alshareef, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 611–621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Gao, B. Zhang, S. Zhao and Y. Qin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 315, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Fang, C. Liu, Y.-Q. Cao and A.-D. Li, J. Mater. Res., 2019, 35, 738–746 CrossRef .
B. C. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, Z. Y. Zhou, S. P. Chen, C. D. Xu, D. Su, M. E. Schuster and S. G. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11152–11154 RSC .
L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
N. Cheng, Y. Shao, J. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 220–242 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aaltonen, A. Rahtu, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, C130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aaltonen, M. Ritala, T. Sajavaara, J. Keinonen and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1924–1928 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Elliott, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9179–9182 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Richey, C. de Paula and S. F. Bent, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 040902 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sairanen, M. C. Figueiredo, R. Karinen, A. Santasalo-Aarnio, H. Jiang, J. Sainio, T. Kallio and J. Lehtonen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 148–149, 11–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Utriainen, M. Kröger-Laukkanen, L.-S. Johansson and L. Niinistö, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 157, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Anderson, N. Leick, J. W. Clancey, K. E. Hurst, K. M. Jones, A. C. Dillon and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8960–8970 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gan, J. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Chen, D. Niu, Y. Qin, X. Duan and X. Zhou, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 45, 59–66 CrossRef .
Q. Du, J. Wu and H. Yang, ACS Catal., 2013, 4, 144–151 CrossRef .
J. Xie, X. Yang, B. Han, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6337–6345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. T. Roling, X. Wang, M. Vara, M. Chi, J. Liu, S. I. Choi, J. Park, J. A. Herron, Z. Xie, M. Mavrikakis and Y. Xia, Science, 2015, 349, 412–416 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shen, W. Chen, Q. Peng, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Cao, Y. Wang, W. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 2099–2110 CAS .
S. Siahrostami, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, M. Karamad, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, B. Wickman, M. Escudero-Escribano, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, T. W. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. Stephens and J. Rossmeisl, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Liu, S. Liu, M. Norouzi Banis, Z. Song, J. Li, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, Y. Zhao, R. Li, M. Zheng, S. Ye, Z.-J. Zhao, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9350–9358 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. McNeary, A. E. Linico, C. Ngo, S. van Rooij, S. Haussener, M. E. Maguire, S. Pylypenko and A. W. Weimer, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 973–984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, J. Zhang, K. Cao, M. Gong, Y. Lang, X. Liu, S. Chu, B. Shan and R. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 522–530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, J. Cai, J. Zhang, J. Yang, L. Shi, K. Cao, R. Chen and B. Shan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 101–111 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, X. Li, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, B. Wang, N. Cheng, L. Yang, D. Banham, R. Li, S. Ye and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9760–9767 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, K. Adair, Z. Song, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, J. Li, S. Wang, R. Li, S. Ye and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, D. Geng, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights and X. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 15967–15974 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, M. Norouzi Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, S. Mu, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1450–1455 RSC .
C.-T. Hsieh, Y.-Y. Liu, D.-Y. Tzou and W.-Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26735–26743 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Hsueh, C.-C. Wang, C.-C. Kei, Y.-H. Lin, C. Liu and T.-P. Perng, J. Catal., 2012, 294, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shu, D. Dang, D.-W. Xu, R. Chen, S.-J. Liao, C.-T. Hsieh, A. Su, H.-Y. Song and L. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 177, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shu, S.-J. Liao, C.-T. Hsieh, A. K. Roy, Y.-Y. Liu, D.-Y. Tzou and W.-Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C. C. Wang, C. C. Kei, Y. C. Hsueh and T. P. Perng, Small, 2009, 5, 1535–1538 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, M. Norouzi Banis, H. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Li, K. Doyle-Davis, R. Li, S. Knights, S. Ye, G. A. Botton, P. He and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5365–5374 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moghaddam, E. Pengwang, Y. B. Jiang, A. R. Garcia, D. J. Burnett, C. J. Brinker, R. I. Masel and M. A. Shannon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choun, S. Chung, H. Jeon, S. Uhm and J. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 24, 108–111 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh, D.-Y. Tzou and M.-T. Jiang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 794, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Gao and Y. Qin, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 1038–1043 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Su, Y.-C. Hsueh, C.-C. Kei, C.-T. Lin and T.-P. Perng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11610–11618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Wang, X. Meng, Y. Zhong, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 11085–11092 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, W. Yang, C. Ma, Y. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Chen, P. Duchesne, J. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Hu, M. N. Banis, P. Zhang, F. Li, J. Li and L. Chen, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, T. M. Gür, F. B. Prinz and S. F. Bent, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3024–3032 CrossRef CAS .
A.-C. Johansson, J. V. Larsen, M. A. Verheijen, K. B. Haugshøj, H. F. Clausen, W. M. M. Kessels, L. H. Christensen and E. V. Thomsen, J. Catal., 2014, 311, 481–486 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Johansson, R. B. Yang, K. B. Haugshøj, J. V. Larsen, L. H. Christensen and E. V. Thomsen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11406–11414 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jeong, J. W. Kim, K. Bae, H. Jung and J. H. Shim, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1914–1921 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jeong, J. W. Kim, J. Park, J. An, T. Lee, F. B. Prinz and J. H. Shim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30090–30098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
C.-T. Hsieh, W.-Y. Chen, D.-Y. Tzou, A. K. Roy and H.-T. Hsiao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17837–17843 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh, H.-T. Hsiao, D.-Y. Tzou, P.-Y. Yu, P.-Y. Chen and B.-S. Jang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 149–150, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
L. Assaud, E. Monyoncho, K. Pitzschel, A. Allagui, M. Petit, M. Hanbucken, E. A. Baranova and L. Santinacci, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 162–172 CrossRef .
N. Caner, A. Bulut, M. Yurderi, I. E. Ertas, H. Kivrak, M. Kaya and M. Zahmakiran, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 470–483 CrossRef CAS .
R.-S. Juang, C.-T. Hsieh, J.-Q. Hsiao, H.-T. Hsiao, D.-Y. Tzou and M. M. Huq, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 845–851 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rikkinen, A. Santasalo-Aarnio, S. Airaksinen, M. Borghei, V. Viitanen, J. Sainio, E. I. Kauppinen, T. Kallio and A. O. I. Krause, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23067–23073 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, J. Chen, J. Zhang, A. Li, Y. Zeng, F. Zhou, G. Wang and R. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13207–13216 RSC .
L. Assaud, N. Brazeau, M. K. Barr, M. Hanbucken, S. Ntais, E. A. Baranova and L. Santinacci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24533–24542 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. S. Barr, L. Assaud, N. Brazeau, M. Hanbücken, S. Ntais, L. Santinacci and E. A. Baranova, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17727–17736 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Finke, S. T. Omelchenko, J. T. Jasper, M. F. Lichterman, C. G. Read, N. S. Lewis and M. R. Hoffmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 358–365 RSC .
M. A. Khalily, B. Patil, E. Yilmaz and T. Uyar, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1224–1231 RSC .
X. Sun, X. Yang, H. Xiang, H. Mi, P. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Li and X. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 964–971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Guo and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21353–21361 RSC .
V. Di Palma, G. Zafeiropoulos, T. Goldsweer, W. M. M. Kessels, M. C. M. van de Sanden, M. Creatore and M. N. Tsampas, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 98, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rongé, T. Dobbelaere, L. Henderick, M. M. Minjauw, S. P. Sree, J. Dendooven, J. A. Martens and C. Detavernier, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 4166–4172 RSC .
K. L. Pickrahn, S. W. Park, Y. Gorlin, H.-B.-R. Lee, T. F. Jaramillo and S. F. Bent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1269–1277 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Nardi, N. Yang, C. F. Dickens, A. L. Strickler and S. F. Bent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500412 CrossRef .
A. G. Hufnagel, A.-K. Henß, R. Hoffmann, O. E. O. Zeman, S. Häringer, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing and T. Bein, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701531 CrossRef .
D. Xiong, Q. Zhang, W. Li, J. Li, X. Fu, M. F. Cerqueira, P. Alpuim and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2711–2717 RSC .
Y. Huang, L. Liu and X. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 095402 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nayak, Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, X. Wang, U. Buttner and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20422–20427 RSC .
I. J. Hsu, Y. C. Kimmel, X. Jiang, B. G. Willis and J. G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1063–1065 RSC .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Song, Q. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20794–20812 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T. K. Sham, M. Gu, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef .
S. Shin, Z. Jin, D. H. Kwon, R. Bose and Y. S. Min, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kwon, Z. Jin, S. Shin, W. S. Lee and Y. S. Min, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7180–7188 RSC .
T. A. Ho, C. Bae, S. Lee, M. Kim, J. M. Montero-Moreno, J. H. Park and H. Shin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7604–7614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, D. H. K. Jackson, D. Lee, M. Choi, T.-W. Kim, S.-Y. Jeong, H.-J. Chae, H. W. Kim, N. Park, H. Chang, T. F. Kuech and H. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701825 CrossRef .
Y. Cimen, A. W. Peters, J. R. Avila, W. L. Hoffeditz, S. Goswami, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12005–12012 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, Z. Guo, H. Li, R. Zhao and X. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2778–2785 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, Q. Guo, Z. Guo, H. Li, R. Zhao, Q. Chen, Z. Liu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4297–4304 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16174–16181 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z.-J. Zhao, M. Norouzi Banis, L. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Song, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, R. Li, M. Zheng, J. Gong and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24397–24406 RSC .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 RSC .
N. Tétreault and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8506 RSC .
K. Fan, J. Yu and W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 319–344 RSC .
J. M. Cole, G. Pepe, O. K. Al Bahri and C. B. Cooper, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7279–7327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, X. Wen, M. Wang, J. Iocozzia, N. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Palmstrom, P. K. Santra and S. F. Bent, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12266–12283 RSC .
D. H. Kim, M. D. Losego, Q. Peng and G. N. Parsons, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600354 CrossRef .
A. K. Chandiran, P. Comte, R. Humphry-Baker, F. Kessler, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2775–2781 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dirnstorfer, H. Mähne, T. Mikolajick, M. Knaut, M. Albert and K. Dubnack, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 01A116 CrossRef .
X. Gao, J. Chen and C. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 503–509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. H. Lee, J. Shin, S. H. Park, J. S. Kang, K. S. Han, M. M. Sung, N. Pinna and Y. E. Sung, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 504003 CrossRef .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese, S. Nanayakkara, T. Moot, J. Werner, J. Liu, B. To, S. T. Christensen, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. J. Koo, J. S. Jur, M. Woodroof, B. Kalanyan, K. Lee, C. K. Devine and G. N. Parsons, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4731–4738 RSC .
J. W. Lee, J. Lee, C. Kim, C. Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6804 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, H. Wang, G. Liu, M. Peng and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, J. S. Kang, J. Shin, J. Kim, S. J. Han, J. Park, Y. S. Min, M. J. Ko and Y. E. Sung, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8368–8377 RSC .
L. Alibabaei, B. H. Farnum, B. Kalanyan, M. K. Brennaman, M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3255–3261 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 2183–2187 CrossRef .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1560–1564 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Yella, M. I. Dar, C. Yi, S. A. Shivashankar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1190–1195 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. G. tzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2261–2268 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Jeong, B.-H. Choe, J.-H. Lee, J.-J. Lee and W.-Y. Choi, J. Electron. Mater., 2013, 43, 375–380 CrossRef .
A. R. Pascoe, L. Bourgeois, N. W. Duffy, W. Xiang and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25118–25126 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Garvey, B. H. Farnum and R. Lopez, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2400–2408 RSC .
R. R. Knauf, B. Kalanyan, G. N. Parsons and J. L. Dempsey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28353–28360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, W. Tian, J. Guo and L. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12765 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Yu, C. Bu, P. Liu, S. Bai, C. Liu, K. K. Kondamareddy, W. Sun, K. Zhan, K. Zhang, S. Guo and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 596–601 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. McCool, J. R. Swierk, C. T. Nemes, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2930–2934 CrossRef CAS .
L. Alibabaei, R. J. Dillon, C. E. Reilly, M. K. Brennaman, K. R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39018–39026 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karam, C. Guerra-Nuñez, R. Habchi, Z. Herro, N. Abboud, A. Khoury, S. Tingry, P. Miele, I. Utke and M. Bechelany, Mater. Des., 2017, 126, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maçaira, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Sol. Energy, 2017, 158, 905–916 CrossRef .
D. Wang, B. D. Sherman, B. H. Farnum, M. V. Sheridan, S. L. Marquard, M. S. Eberhart, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 9809–9813 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karam, R. Habchi, S. Tingry, P. Miele and M. Bechelany, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3705–3714 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, J. Fohlinger, Z. Zhang, P. B. Pati, J. Lin, T. Kubart, Y. Hua, J. Sun, L. Kloo, G. Boschloo, L. Hammarstrom and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3739–3742 RSC .
J.-Y. Kim, K.-Y. Shin, M. H. Raza, N. Pinna and Y.-E. Sung, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 36, 1157–1163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, Q. Zhang, B. B. Garcia, X. Zhou, Y. H. Jeong and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2329–2332 CrossRef CAS .
V. O. Williams, N. C. Jeong, C. Prasittichai, O. K. Farha, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6185–6196 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-K. Jeong, I. Kim and K.-H. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B749–B753 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 RSC .
P. Labouchere, A. K. Chandiran, T. Moehl, H. Harms, S. Chavhan, R. Tena-Zaera, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel and N. Tetreault, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400217 CrossRef .
C. Lin, F.-Y. Tsai, M.-H. Lee, C.-H. Lee, T.-C. Tien, L.-P. Wang and S.-Y. Tsai, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2999 RSC .
T. P. Brennan, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, B. E. Hardin, W. H. Nguyen, R. Mondal, C. D. Bailie, G. Y. Margulis, E. T. Hoke, A. Sellinger, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12130–12140 RSC .
T. P. Brennan, O. Trejo, K. E. Roelofs, J. Xu, F. B. Prinz and S. F. Bent, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7566 RSC .
X. Gao, D. Guan, J. Huo, J. Chen and C. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10438–10446 RSC .
W. Dong, L. Yang, T. Meng and Q. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 276, 116–120 CrossRef CAS .
G. Natu, Z. Huang, Z. Ji and Y. Wu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 950–956 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Roelofs, T. P. Brennan, J. C. Dominguez, C. D. Bailie, G. Y. Margulis, E. T. Hoke, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5584–5592 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ganapathy, B. Karunagaran and S.-W. Rhee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5138–5143 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, N. Tetreault, R. Humphry-Baker, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3941–3947 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Brennan, J. T. Tanskanen, K. E. Roelofs, J. W. F. To, W. H. Nguyen, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, B. E. Hardin, A. Sellinger, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24138–24149 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1615–1623 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, M. Woodroof, K. Lee and G. N. Parsons, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16408–16418 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Chen, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, N. G. Rudawski and K. J. Ziegler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20978–20984 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, T. Moehl, J. Yoon, A. K. Chandiran, F. Kessler, P. Gratia and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16799–16805 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, S. Chen and K. J. Ziegler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12824–12831 CrossRef CAS .
F. Di Giacomo, V. Zardetto, G. Lucarelli, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo, M. Creatore and T. M. Brown, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 460–469 CrossRef CAS .
V. Manthina and A. G. Agrios, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 598, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, A. Ge, B. Piercy, M. D. Losego and T. Lian, Chem. Phys., 2018, 512, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
D. Garcia-Alonso, V. Zardetto, A. J. M. Mackus, F. De Rossi, M. A. Verheijen, T. M. Brown, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300831 CrossRef .
W. L. Hoffeditz, M. J. Katz, P. Deria, A. B. Martinson, M. J. Pellin, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8646–8650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Noh and O. Song, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2014, 10, 263–266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abdelnasser, M. A. Sakr and M. Serry, Microelectron. Eng., 2019, 216, 111045 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jeong, S.-Y. Ham, B. Koo, P. Lee, Y.-S. Min, J.-Y. Kim and M. J. Ko, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 80, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Yun, H. Ra, J.-M. Kim, E. Oh, J. Lee, M.-H. Jeong, Y. J. Jeong, H. Yang and J. Jang, Org. Electron., 2019, 65, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Brinkmann, T. Gahlmann and T. Riedl, Sol. RRL, 2019, 4, 1900332 CrossRef .
J. A. Raiford, S. T. Oyakhire and S. Bent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1997–2023 RSC .
K. Deng and L. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600505 CrossRef .
B. Macco, H. C. M. Knoops, M. A. Verheijen, W. Beyer, M. Creatore and W. M. M. Kessels, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seo, S. Jeong, H. Park, H. Shin and N. G. Park, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2403–2416 RSC .
V. Zardetto, B. L. Williams, A. Perrotta, F. Di Giacomo, M. A. Verheijen, R. Andriessen, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 30–55 RSC .
P. Rong, S. Ren and Q. Yu, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 49, 336–349 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schulz, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3349–3417 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, P. Kanjanaboos, C. T. Wong, J. J. McDowell, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, Z. Ning, A. J. Houtepen and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Koch, M. K. S. Barr, P. Büttner, I. Mínguez-Bacho, D. Döhler, B. Winzer, E. Reinhardt, D. Segets and J. Bachmann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25112–25119 RSC .
G. Popov, M. Mattinen, T. Hatanpää, M. Vehkamäki, M. Kemell, K. Mizohata, J. Räisänen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1101–1109 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903106 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, X. Chen, J. Jin, W. Liu, B. Dong, X. Bai, H. Song and P. Reiss, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103860 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903249 CrossRef .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. T. Mayer, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, H. Chen, K. Zhang, C. Qin, J. Liu, W. Peng, A. Islam, E. Bi, F. Ye, M. Yin, P. Zhang and L. Han, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 052301 CrossRef .
A. Mettenbörger, Y. Gönüllü, T. Fischer, T. Heisig, A. Sasinska, C. Maccato, G. Carraro, C. Sada, D. Barreca, L. Mayrhofer, M. Moseler, A. Held and S. Mathur, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 415–427 CrossRef .
K. E. Roelofs, V. L. Pool, D. A. Bobb-Semple, A. F. Palmstrom, P. K. Santra, D. G. Van Campen, M. F. Toney and S. F. Bent, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600580 CrossRef .
A. E. Shalan, S. Narra, T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno, X. Shi, H.-P. Wu, M. M. Elshanawany, E. Wei-Guang Diau and H. Misawa, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1533–1540 RSC .
V. Zardetto, F. Di Giacomo, G. Lucarelli, W. M. M. Kessels, T. M. Brown and M. Creatore, Sol. Energy, 2017, 150, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tan, O. L. Hendricks, A. C. Meng, M. R. Braun, M. D. McGehee, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800191 CrossRef .
V. Zardetto, F. di Giacomo, H. Lifka, M. A. Verheijen, C. H. L. Weijtens, L. E. Black, S. Veenstra, W. M. M. Kessels, R. Andriessen and M. Creatore, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701456 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, K. Deng, H. Sun, B. Gu, H. Lu, F. Cao, J. Xiong and L. Li, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700614 CrossRef .
D. Chen, A. Su, X. Li, S. Pang, W. Zhu, H. Xi, J. Chang, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, S. Uchida, T. Kondo and H. Segawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 203902 CrossRef .
M. Kong, H. Hu, K. Qin, B. Dong, L. Wan and P. Guo, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 095501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Na, S. Lee, W.-G. Choi, C.-G. Park, S. O. Ryu and T. Moon, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2019, 37, 010902 CrossRef .
Y. You, W. Tian, L. Min, F. Cao, K. Deng and L. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 7, 1901406 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, W. Chai, Z. Zhang, D. Chen, J. Chang, S. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Org. Electron., 2019, 74, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Wang, H. Qu, J. Cheng, Y. Fang, C. Zhang and Q. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 696, 137786 CrossRef .
H. Lu, Y. Ma, B. Gu, W. Tian and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16445–16452 RSC .
L. Chen, J.-R. Wang, L.-Q. Xie, C. Zhan, Z. Qiu, J.-Z. Zhou, J.-W. Yan, B.-W. Mao and Z.-Q. Tian, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 68, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 RSC .
C. Wang, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, W. Liao, Y. Yu, A. Cimaroli, N. Shrestha, P. J. Roland, J. Chen, Z. Yu, P. Liu, N. Cheng, R. J. Ellingson, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12080–12087 RSC .
J. Kim, T. Iivonen, J. Hämäläinen, M. Kemell, K. Meinander, K. Mizohata, L. Wang, J. Räisänen, R. Beranek, M. Leskelä and A. Devi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5796–5805 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hoffmann, K. O. Brinkmann, J. Malerczyk, D. Rogalla, T. Becker, D. Theirich, I. Shutsko, P. Gorrn and T. Riedl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6006–6013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. Lee, G. Seo, S. Paek, K. T. Cho, A. J. Huckaba, M. Calizzi, D. W. Choi, J. S. Park, D. Lee, H. J. Lee, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800130 CrossRef .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 RSC .
T. Hu, T. Becker, N. Pourdavoud, J. Zhao, K. O. Brinkmann, R. Heiderhoff, T. Gahlmann, Z. Huang, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, D. Tobbens, B. Cheng, Y. Chen and T. Riedl, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606656 CrossRef .
Y. Kuang, V. Zardetto, R. van Gils, S. Karwal, D. Koushik, M. A. Verheijen, L. E. Black, C. Weijtens, S. Veenstra, R. Andriessen, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30367–30378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeong, S. Seo, H. Park and H. Shin, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2433–2436 RSC .
C. Wang, C. Xiao, Y. Yu, D. Zhao, R. A. Awni, C. R. Grice, K. Ghimire, I. Constantinou, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, P. Liu, J. Chen, N. J. Podraza, C.-S. Jiang, M. M. Al-Jassim, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700414 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Wu, P. Qiu, S. Liu, Y. He, M. Peng, D. Li, Q. Meng, F. Zaera and X. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25347–25354 RSC .
A. S. Subbiah, A. K. Dhara, N. Mahuli, S. Banerjee and S. K. Sarkar, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900878 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Chavan, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, S. S. Lote, S. P. Bhoite, A. Nimbalkar and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8098–8106 CrossRef CAS .
H. Si, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, D. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Xu, C. Yao, J. Wu and Z. Lan, Sol. Energy, 2018, 161, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jošt, T. Bertram, D. Koushik, J. A. Marquez, M. A. Verheijen, M. D. Heinemann, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Braunger, F. Lang, B. Rech, T. Unold, M. Creatore, I. Lauermann, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Schlatmann and S. Albrecht, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 583–590 CrossRef .
J. Tirado, M. Vásquez-Montoya, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. Ralaiarisoa, N. Koch, M. K. Nazeeruddin and F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4890–4899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seo, I. J. Park, M. Kim, S. Lee, C. Bae, H. S. Jung, N. G. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. Shin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11403–11412 RSC .
D. Koushik, M. Jošt, A. Dučinskas, C. Burgess, V. Zardetto, C. Weijtens, M. A. Verheijen, W. M. M. Kessels, S. Albrecht and M. Creatore, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12532–12543 RSC .
B. Zhao, L. C. Lee, L. Yang, A. J. Pearson, H. Lu, X. J. She, L. Cui, K. H. L. Zhang, R. L. Z. Hoye, A. Karani, P. Xu, A. Sadhanala, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and D. Di, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41849–41854 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Li, L. Wang, G. Niu, R. Gao and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11735 RSC .
J.-J. Shi, W. Dong, Y.-Z. Xu, C.-H. Li, S.-T. Lv, L.-F. Zhu, J. Dong, Y.-H. Luo, D.-M. Li, Q.-B. Meng and Q. Chen, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2013, 30, 128402 CrossRef .
X. Dong, X. Fang, M. Lv, B. Lin, S. Zhang, J. Ding and N. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5360–5367 RSC .
H. Wei, J. Shi, X. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, L. Zhu, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Meng and Q. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4937–4944 RSC .
M. Kot, C. Das, Z. Wang, K. Henkel, Z. Rouissi, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith and D. Schmeisser, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3401–3406 CrossRef CAS .
D. Koushik, W. J. H. Verhees, D. Zhang, Y. Kuang, S. Veenstra, M. Creatore and R. E. I. Schropp, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700043 CrossRef .
Y. Lv, P. Xu, G. Ren, F. Chen, H. Nan, R. Liu, D. Wang, X. Tan, X. Liu, H. Zhang and Z. K. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23928–23937 CrossRef CAS .
D. Koushik, L. Hazendonk, V. Zardetto, V. Vandalon, M. A. Verheijen, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5526–5535 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Yun, K. Noh, J. Kim, S. H. Noh, G.-H. Kim, W. Lee, H. B. Na, T.-S. Yoon, J. Jang, Y. Kim and S.-Y. Cho, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 14, 1900573 CrossRef .
D. Koushik, W. J. H. Verhees, Y. Kuang, S. Veenstra, D. Zhang, M. A. Verheijen, M. Creatore and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 91–100 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, K.-T. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y.-C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5122–5130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhao, G. Xu, T.-H. Han, J.-W. Lee, C. Chen, D. Bao, Y. Huang, Y. Duan and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104375 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7469–7484 RSC .
Y. He, T. Hamann and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2182–2215 RSC .
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
D. Li, J. Shi and C. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1704179 CrossRef .
S. Shen, J. Chen, M. Wang, X. Sheng, X. Chen, X. Feng and S. S. Mao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 98, 299–385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, G. Liu and L. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5192–5247 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
I. V. Bagal, N. R. Chodankar, M. A. Hassan, A. Waseem, M. A. Johar, D.-H. Kim and S.-W. Ryu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 21351–21378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bellani, M. R. Antognazza and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1801446 CrossRef .
S. Chandrasekaran, L. Yao, L. Deng, C. Bowen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, F. Peng and P. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4178–4280 RSC .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406–12409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2015, 159, 284–288 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, F. Cao, F. Wu, W. Tian and L. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79440–79446 RSC .
L. Steier, J. Luo, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, T. Sajavaara and M. G. tzel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11775 CrossRef CAS .
Gurudayal, R. A. John, P. P. Boix, C. Yi, C. Shi, M. C. Scott, S. A. Veldhuis, A. M. Minor, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. H. Wong, M. Gratzel and N. Mathews, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2449–2456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, J. Wang, Z. Feng, C. Du, Y. Wen, B. Shan and R. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12991–12998 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Cordova, Q. Peng, I. L. Ferrall, A. J. Rieth, P. G. Hoertz and J. T. Glass, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8584–8592 RSC .
D. Wang, H. Chen, G. Chang, X. Lin, Y. Zhang, A. Aldalbahi, C. Peng, J. Wang and C. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14072–14078 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavlenko, K. Siuzdak, E. Coy, M. Jancelewicz, S. Jurga and I. Iatsunskyi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30076–30085 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. El-Shazly, A. H. Hegazy, M. M. Rashad, M. F. El-Shahat and N. K. Allam, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 739, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kao, H. S. Park, X. Zang and L. Lin, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2019, 2019, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Gun, G. Y. Song, V. H. Quy, J. Heo, H. Lee, K. S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20292–20303 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, B. Kalanyan, P. G. Hoertz, A. Miller, D. H. Kim, K. Hanson, L. Alibabaei, J. Liu, T. J. Meyer, G. N. Parsons and J. T. Glass, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1481–1488 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, P. S. Bassi, P. P. Boix, Y. Fang and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16960–16966 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, N. Tetreault, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 223–232 RSC .
J. Ji, W. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Y. Wang, Y. Luo and L. Hu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2013, 24, 3474–3480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, C.-Y. Nam, C. T. Black, J. Kamcev and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13396–13402 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J.-J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 RSC .
M.-W. Kim, K. Kim, T. Y. Ohm, H. Yoon, B. Joshi, E. Samuel, M. T. Swihart, S. K. Choi, H. Park and S. S. Yoon, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 333, 721–729 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Tu, Y. Wang, Y. Su, J. Hu, B. Cai, J. Lu, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 45 CrossRef .
S. Haschke, Y. Zhuo, S. Schlicht, M. K. S. Barr, R. Kloth, M. E. Dufond, L. Santinacci and J. Bachmann, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801432 CrossRef .
X. Huai, L. Girardi, R. Lu, S. Gao, Y. Zhao, Y. Ling, G. A. Rizzi, G. Granozzi and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104020 CrossRef CAS .
T.-G. Kim, B. Joshi, C.-W. Park, E. Samuel, M.-W. Kim, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 798, 35–44 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, C.-Y. Chou, S.-R. Yi and H.-D. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28685–28697 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alfakes, C. Garlisi, J. Villegas, A. Al-Hagri, S. Tamalampudi, N. S. Rajput, J.-Y. Lu, E. Lewin, J. Sá, I. Almansouri, G. Palmisano and M. Chiesa, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 385, 125352 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Liu and T.-P. Perng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4238–4244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Balasubramanyam, R. Sinha, R. Lavrijsen, M. A. Verheijen, A. A. Bol and A. Bieberle-Hütter, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5887–5895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefik, M. Cornuz, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, S. Mhaisalkar and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5431–5435 CrossRef CAS .
I. Narkeviciute, P. Chakthranont, A. J. Mackus, C. Hahn, B. A. Pinaud, S. F. Bent and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7565–7572 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hajibabaei, D. J. Little, A. Pandey, D. Wang, Z. Mi and T. W. Hamann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15457–15466 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kargar, K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Choi, H. Jeong, G. Y. Jung, S. Jin and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9407–9415 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Yao, F. Wang, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 504005 CrossRef .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, D. Kong, B. Liu, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22953–22957 RSC .
Q. Nie, L. Yang, C. Cao, Y. Zeng, G. Wang, C. Wang and S. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Li, H. Ling, C. K. Tan, L. P. Yeo, A. C. Grimsdale and A. I. Y. Tok, Small, 2018, 14, e1800395 CrossRef .
X. Chai, H. Zhang, Q. Pan, J. Bian, Z. Chen and C. Cheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 668–676 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nasori, T. Dai, X. Jia, A. Rubiyanto, D. Cao, S. Qu, Z. Wang, Z. Wang and Y. Lei, J. Semicond., 2019, 40, 052701 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, C.-L. Dong, W. Zhou, Y.-R. Lu, Y.-C. Huang, Y. Liu, P. Guo, L. Zhao, W.-C. Chou and S. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118206 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, N. D. Quang, S. Majumder, E. Park, D. Kim, H.-S. Choi and H. S. Chang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 819, 153349 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Nandanapalli, D. Mudusu, J. S. Yu and S. Lee, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 558, 9–20 CrossRef .
C. Cheng, H. Zhang, W. Ren, W. Dong and Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 779–786 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, Q. Cao, X. Li, H.-Y. Chen, Y. Deng, Y.-Y. Wang, W. Luo, H.-L. Lu and D. W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 543–551 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Ma, J.-H. Yang, J.-J. Tao, K.-P. Yuan, P.-H. Cheng, W. Huang, J.-C. Wang, Q.-X. Guo, H.-L. Lu and D. W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104089 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, C. Du, R. Liu, J. Xie and D. Wang, J. Catal., 2013, 304, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Young and T. W. Hamann, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8727–8730 RSC .
S. Oh, S. Jung, Y. H. Lee, J. T. Song, T. H. Kim, D. K. Nandi, S.-H. Kim and J. Oh, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9755–9764 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, P.-H. Chou, Y.-H. Yu and C.-C. Kei, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, T. M. Gill and X. Zheng, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3499–3508 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Lee, T. H. Lee, C. Kim, M.-J. Choi, H. Park, S. Choi, J. Lee, J. Oh, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 420–429 CrossRef .
J. Yang, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, K. A. Walczak, M. Favaro, J. W. Beeman, L. H. Hess, C. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Gul, J. Yano, C. Kisielowski, A. Schwartzberg and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, G. Zeng, P. Pavaskar, Z. Li and S. B. Cronin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3115–3121 RSC .
H. Wang, W. Zhu, B. Chong and K. Qin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 90–99 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, R. Liu, C. Du, P. Dai, Z. Zheng and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12005–12011 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yun, G. Y. Song, B.-E. Ahn, S.-K. Lee, J. Heo, K.-S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 561–566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, S. Wu, X. Zhai, X. Gao and X. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Reed, H. Mehrabi, Z. G. Schichtl and R. H. Coridan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43691–43698 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, W. Tian, F. Wu, F. Cao and L. Li, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 35, 1740–1746 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, X. Li, C. K. Tan, C. Qian, A. C. Grimsdale and A. I. Y. Tok, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 800–806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, J. Hwang, T. H. Lee, H.-H. Kim, S.-P. Hong, C. Kim, M.-J. Choi, H. K. Park, S. S. M. Bhat, J. M. Suh, J. Lee, K. S. Choi, S.-H. Hong, J. C. Shin and H. W. Jang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123688 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673 RSC .
L. Kavan, L. Steier and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 121, 342–350 CrossRef .
S. W. Shin, M. P. Suryawanshi, H. K. Hong, G. Yun, D. Lim, J. Heo, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 470–481 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng, X. Peng, J. Liao, G. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li, Y. Qin, J. Wilson, A. Song and S. Lin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17404–17413 RSC .
M. Forster, R. J. Potter, Y. Yang, Y. Li and A. J. Cowan, ChemPhotoChem, 2018, 2, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haydous, W. Si, V. A. Guzenko, F. Waag, E. Pomjakushina, M. El Kazzi, L. Sévery, A. Wokaun, D. Pergolesi and T. Lippert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 123, 1059–1068 CrossRef .
R. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang, X. Zhao, G. Yang, A. Li, C. Wu, Q. Shen, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19621–19627 RSC .
J. Gao, X. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Li, C. Chen and J. Ni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 499, 143971 CrossRef CAS .
M.-W. Kim, B. Joshi, E. Samuel, H. Seok, A. Aldalbahi, M. Almoiqli, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 271, 118928 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gui, Z. Xu, H. Zhang, C. Cheng, X. Zhu, M. Yin, Y. Song, L. Lu, X. Chen and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17053–17058 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Yan, D. W. Shaffer, X. Ye, B. H. Layne, J. J. Concepcion, M. Liu and C.-Y. Nam, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 324–335 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Jarmo Maula, Chin. Opt. Lett., 2010, 8, 53–58 CrossRef .
P. Poodt, D. C. Cameron, E. Dickey, S. M. George, V. Kuznetsov, G. N. Parsons, F. Roozeboom, G. Sundaram and A. Vermeer, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 010802 CrossRef .
A. Goulas and J. R. van Ommen, KONA Powder Part. J., 2014, 31, 234–246 CrossRef .
D. Muñoz-Rojas, T. Maindron, A. Esteve, F. Piallat, J. C. S. Kools and J. M. Decams, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 96–120 CrossRef .
D. Muñoz-Rojas and J. MacManus-Driscoll, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 314–320 RSC .
P. Poodt, R. Knaapen, A. Illiberi, F. Roozeboom and A. van Asten, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 01A142 CrossRef .
K. Ali, K.-H. Choi, J. Jo and Y. W. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2014, 136, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ali, K.-H. Choi and N. M. Muhammad, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 380–387 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirvikorpi, R. Laine, M. Vähä-Nissi, V. Kilpi, E. Salo, W.-M. Li, S. Lindfors, J. Vartiainen, E. Kenttä, J. Nikkola, A. Harlin and J. Kostamo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 164–169 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Maydannik, T. O. Kääriäinen, K. Lahtinen, D. C. Cameron, M. Söderlund, P. Soininen, P. Johansson, J. Kuusipalo, L. Moro and X. Zeng, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2014, 32, 051603 CrossRef .
J. A. McCormick, K. P. Rice, D. F. Paul, A. W. Weimer and S. M. George, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2007, 13, 491–498 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sharma, R. A. Hall and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A132 CrossRef .
D. J. Higgs, J. W. DuMont, K. Sharma and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2018, 36, 01A117 CrossRef .
L. F. Hakim, J. Blackson, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2005, 11, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Hakim, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, S375–S381 CrossRef .
D. M. King, J. A. Spencer, X. Liang, L. F. Hakim and A. W. Weimer, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 9163–9171 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, K. S. Barrett, Y. B. Jiang and A. W. Weimer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2248–2253 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Liang and A. W. Weimer, Powder Technol., 2012, 221, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Duan, X. Liu, B. Shan and R. Chen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86, 075101 CrossRef .
S. Adhikari, S. Selvaraj and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800581 CrossRef .
L. F. Hakim, J. H. Blackson and A. W. Weimer, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 6199–6211 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Liang, C. S. Carney, L. F. Hakim, P. Li and A. W. Weimer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 607–615 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Liang, P. Li and A. W. Weimer, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 8517–8523 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Liang, Y. Zhou, C. S. Carney, L. F. Hakim, P. Li and A. W. Weimer, Powder Technol., 2008, 183, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
D. Longrie, D. Deduytsche and C. Detavernier, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2014, 32, 010802 CrossRef .
J. R. Wank, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, Powder Technol., 2004, 142, 59–69 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Wank, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 762–765 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.forgenano.com/products/morpheus/
        .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yang Zhao
	Dr Yang Zhao is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Zhao received his BS and MS degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical University (Xi'an, China) in 2011 and 2014, respectively. He obtained his PhD degree under the supervisor of Prof. Xueliang (Andy) Sun from the University of Western Ontario in 2018. Then, he had his postdoc training at the University of Western Ontario and the Advanced Light Source of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 2019–2020. His research interests focus on atomic/molecular layer depositions, next-generation batteries, and synchrotron-based X-ray techniques.

Lei Zhang
	Dr Lei Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2008) and PhD degree in Nanomaterial Chemistry (2014) from Xiamen University with Prof. Zhaoxiong Xie. He was a visiting graduate student at Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Younan Xia's group from 2012 to 2014. From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Postdoc at Tianjin University. He is currently a postdoctoral associate with Professor Xueliang Sun at the University of Western Ontario. His research interests include the design and synthesis of metal nanomaterials and single atom catalysts for fuel cells, carbon dioxide reduction, and water splitting devices.

Jian Liu
	Dr Jian Liu is an Assistant Professor in the School of Engineering at the University of British Columbia (UBC) Okanagan campus, Canada. Dr Liu received his PhD in materials science (2013) from the University of Western Ontario (Canada), and worked as an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory prior to joining UBC in January 2017. His current research interests focus on advanced nanofabrication techniques, material design for Li-ion batteries and beyond, and interfacial control and understanding in energy storage systems.

Khalil Amine
	Dr Khalil Amine is a Distinguished Fellow and leader of the Advanced Battery Technology programs at Argonne National Laboratory. Currently Dr Amine serves as a member of the U.S. National Research Council on battery-related technologies. Dr Amine is a 2003 recipient of Scientific America's Top Worldwide Research 50 Research Award, a 2009 recipient of the U.S. Federal Laboratory Award for Excellence in Technology Transfer and a six-time recipient of the R&D 100 Award. He has filed over 207 patents and has over 632 publications. From 1998 to 2018, he was the most cited scientist in the field of batteries.

Jun Lu
	Dr Jun Lu is a chemist at Argonne National Laboratory. His research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology, with a main focus on technology beyond Li-ion batteries. He received his bachelor's degree in chemistry physics from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2000. He completed his PhD in materials science from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah in 2009. Following a DOE-EERE postdoctoral fellowship under Vehicles Technology Program, he joined the Division of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at Argonne National Laboratory as a chemist in 2015.

Xueliang Sun
	Prof. Xueliang (Andy) Sun is a Canada Research Chair in Development of Nanomaterials for Clean Energy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and Canadian Academy of Engineering and Full Professor at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr Sun received his PhD in materials chemistry in 1999 from the University of Manchester, UK, which he followed up by working as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of British Columbia, Canada and as a Research Associate at L'Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Canada. His current research interests are focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

 	Fig. 1  The mechanism, properties, large-scale potential, and applications for energy storage and conversion of ALD/MLD techniques.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of (a) ALD for inorganic films and (b) MLD for hybrid inorganic–organic films.	 

 	Fig. 3  Publication numbers in the past ten years with the keywords of (a) atomic layer deposition (ALD); (b) molecular layer deposition (MLD); (c) ALD & battery, ALD & fuel cell, ALD & supercapacitor, ALD & photovoltaics, ALD & water splitting; (d) MLD & battery, MLD & fuel cell, MLD & supercapacitor, MLD & photovoltaics, MLD & water splitting. (Based on Web of Science.)	 

 	Fig. 4  ALD and MLD metal oxide anodes: (a) ALD SnO2; (b) ALD TiO2; (c) ALD V2O5; (d) ALD ZnO; (e) lithium terephthalate; (f) lithiated quinone.	 

SnO2	SnCl4 and H2O	Graphene nanosheets	200 °C	793 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles	
45

400 °C	499 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles	

Tin(IV)-butoxide and plasma O−	Stainless steel	200 °C	646 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles	
46

Tetrakis(dimethylamino) tin and H2O	Reduced graphene oxide	150 °C	800 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles	
47

Tetrakis(diethylamido) tin and O3	MXenes	150 °C or 200 °C	843 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles	
48

Sn(C2H5)4 and O2 plasma	Silicon and stainless steel	150 °C and 200 °C	650 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles	
50

TiO2	TiCl4 and H2O	Reduced graphene oxide	120 °C	120 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles	
53

TiCl4 and H2O	Graphite	—	∼230 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
54

Titanium tetraisopropoxide and H2O	Graphene nanosheets	100 °C	140 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
59

TiCl4 and H2O	Carbon nanotubes	120 °C	120 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles	
55

TiCl4 and H2O	Carbon black	200 °C	128 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
60

TiCl4 and H2O	CNTs/CFP	120 °C	178 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles	
56

ZnO	Diethyl zinc and H2O	Graphene nanosheets	120 °C	540 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
62

Zn(C2H5)2 and H2O	Graphene	150 °C	490 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
63

Diethyl zinc and H2O	Carbon black	150 °C	769 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles	
61

MoS2	Mo(CO)6 and H2S	Carbon	170 °C	851 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles	
67

MoN	Mo(CO)6 and NH3	Carbon	170 °C	700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
68

MoO3	Mo(CO)6 and O3	Carbon nanotube	165 °C	150 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles	
66

V2O5	Vanadyl oxytriisoprop-oxide and H2O	Graphene	150 °C	892 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
64

RuO2	Ru(C9H13)2 and O2	Carbon nanotube	210–240 °C	∼600 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
65

W2N	W(CO)6 and NH3	Stainless steel	180–195 °C	25 μA h cm−2 after 200 cycles	
69

WS2	W(CO)6 and H2S	Stainless steel	180–195 °C	13 μA h cm−2 after 100 cycles	
70


 	Fig. 5  Nanostructured anodes fabricated by ALD: (a) SnO2@TiO2; (b) TiO2@Fe2O3.	 

 	Fig. 6  ALD-fabricated cathodes: (a) V2O5; (b) LiCoO2; (c) LiMn2O4; (d) LiFePO4.	 

 	Fig. 7  Characterization and application of ALD Al2O3 coatings for cathode materials: (a) comparison between ALD coating directly on powders and electrodes; (b) in operando XAS for ALD coated cathodes; (c) STEM for interface characterization; (d) reaction mechanism during an ALD process for cathode applications; (e) effects of ALD coating on chemical reactions; (f) Al2O3 coating for full cells.	 

 	Fig. 8  Other ALD/MLD coatings for cathode applications: (a) different metal oxides; (b) FePO4; (c) AlPO4; (d) LiTaO3 solid-state electrolyte; (e) LiAlO2 solid-state electrolyte; (f) LiAlF4 solid-state electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 9  Function of ALD films more than coating. (a) Multisite Ti occupation by ALD TiO2; (b) tailoring grain boundaries with ALD Li3PO4; (c) dual functions of grain boundary engineering and surface coating.	 

 	Fig. 10  ALD/MLD coatings for anodes: (a) ALD Al2O3 for graphite; (b) ALD Al2O3 for SnO2; (c) ALD Al2O3 for Si; (d) MLD alucone (Al-GLY) for Si; (e) in situ TEM for MLD alucone coated Si; (f) MLD alucone (Al-HQ) for Si.	 
Li2O2 + C + 1/2O2 → Li2CO3 (ΔG = −542.4 kJ mol−1)	(R1)
2Li2O2 + C → Li2O + Li2CO3 (ΔG = −533.6 kJ mol−1)	(R2)

 	Fig. 11  ALD/MLD for Li–O2 air electrode design: (a) Pd/Al2O3/C; (b) Pd/C; (c) silver cluster.	 

 	Fig. 12  ALD for Li–S batteries: (a) ALD Al2O3 – encapsulated S cathodes for Li–S batteries. (b) ALD V2O5 coated CNTs for S confinement and adsorption. (c) ALD MgO and ZnO-coated rGO sulfur-composite aerogels for polysulfide trapping.	 

 	Fig. 13  MLD for Li–S batteries: (a) MLD alucone coating on a microporous S cathode can enable long cycle life in carbonate electrolytes. (b) The working mechanism of MLD coating on S cathodes in a carbonate electrolyte studied by in situ XANES showing solid-state interconversion between cyclo S8 and Li2S.	 

 	Fig. 14  ALD for improved anode interface in SSBs: (a) ALD Al2O3 for LLZO and Li metal; (b) ALD Al2O3 for LATP and Li metal; (c) MLD alucone for LSPS and Li metal; (d) using operando microscopy and XPS to study the impact of the ALD-Al2O3 on the electro-chemo-mechanical degradation of LGPS.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) ALD Al2O3 for LiCoO2 and SSEs; (b) ALD LiNbO3 for LiCoO2 and SSEs; (c) tuning the ionic conductive LZO coating via controlling the ALD process; (d) ALD deposited lithium borate-carbonate as SSEs; (e) MLD PEDOT coatings for additives in cathode composite to tune the electronic conductivity of the interface.	 

 	Fig. 16  ALD/MLD for Li metal anodes: (a) ALD Al2O3; (b) ALD ZrO2; (c) ALD LiF; (d) MLD organic polyurea; (e) MLD hybrid inorganic–organic alucone; (f) MLD hybrid inorganic–organic zircone; (g) ALD-MLD dual protective layer.	 

 	Fig. 17  ALD/MLD for Na-ion batteries: (a) ALD fabricated sodium titanate; (b) ALD Al2O3 for Sn anode; (c) ALD TiO2 for CuO anode; (d) ALD Al2O3 for Na2/3(Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13)O2.	 

 	Fig. 18  ALD/MLD for Na metal batteries: (a) ALD Co3O4 as a catalyst for Na–air batteries; (b) ALD TiO2 for Na–S batteries; (c) MLD alucone for a Na metal anode.	 

 	Fig. 19  ALD fabricated electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) ALD VOx;396 (b) ALD TiO2;397 (c) ALD RuO2;398 (d) ALD Co9S8.399	 

 	Fig. 20  ALD-designed nanostructured electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) MnO2/Pt;415 (b) TiC;416 (c) TiO2/MnO2–C.417	 

 	Fig. 21  ALD of Pt NPs on different substrates by using MeCpPtMe3 for ORR: (a) Pt NPs on CNTs; (b) Pt NPs on Nb–TiO2; (c) Pt NPs on TiS2; (d) Pt single atoms on octahedral Pd NPs.	 

 	Fig. 22  ALD/MLD for Pt catalyst stabilization: (a) area-selective ALD of ZrO2; (b) MLD alucone-derived porous carbon layer; (c) ALD of Pt on N-Ta2O5; (d) ALD of Pt on ZrC substrates.	 

 	Fig. 23  The application of ALD towards the fabrication of MEA systems: (a) ALD fabrication of ultra-low Pt loading anode; (b) ALD-modified silicon-based inorganic–organic membrane.	 

 	Fig. 24  ALD Pt and Pd NPs for electrocatalytic small organic molecule oxidation: (a) Pt–CNTs for MOR; (b) Pt–SnO2 for MOR; (c) Pt SACs on graphene for MOR; (d) Pt NPs–GO for FOR; (e) Pt NPs on porous carbon for FOR; (f) Pd NPs on SnO2–TiO2 for EOR.	 

 	Fig. 25  ALD fabrication of OER catalysts: (a) N-doped CoOx/carbon nanotubes; (b) Co9S8 on CNTs; (c) MnO catalysts; (d) NiO film; (e) MoS2 on Co foam; (f) MoS2 nanoflakes on CFP.	 

 	Fig. 26  ALD fabrication of HER catalysts: (a) Pt NPs on 3D graphitic carbon; (b) Pt single atoms and clusters; (c) Pt–Ru dimer catalysts; (d) MoS2 thin films; (e) TiO2 modified MoS2 nanoflakes; (f) RuOx@Pd NPs.	 

 	Fig. 27  ALD-derived photoanodes for DSSCs: (a) ALD TiO2; (b) ALD ZnO; (c) ZnO–TiO2 core–shell; (d) ZnO–TiO2 coaxial; (e) TiO2 inverse-opal; (f) ZnO–TiO2 hierarchical structure.	 

 	Fig. 28  ALD layer modification for the interface in DSSCs: (a) Al2O3; (b) Ga2O3; (c) different metal oxides.	 

 	Fig. 29  ALD-derived perovskite thin films of CH3NH3PbI3.	 

 	Fig. 30  ALD deposited charge transport layers for PSCs: (a) TiO2; (b) Al2O3; (c) SnO2; (d) GaN; (e) NiO.	 

 	Fig. 31  ALD deposited passivation and encapsulation layers: (a) Al2O3; (b) ZnO and Al2O3; (c) alucone and Al2O3.	 

 	Fig. 32  ALD-fabricated photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices: (a) Fe2O3; (b) TiO2; (c) WO3; (d) Ta3N5; (e) SnO2.	 

 	Fig. 33  ALD-derived 3D structured photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting devices: (a) TiO2–ZnO; (b) WO3@ZnWO4@ZnO–ZnO; (c) ZnO–GaON.	 

 	Fig. 34  Large scale ALD/MLD: (a) roll-to-toll techniques for flexible substrates; (b) rotary reactor for powder; (c) fluidized bed reactor for powder.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
