Biomimetic photonic materials derived from chitin and chitosan  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC05381C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC05381C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 796-817Biomimetic photonic materials derived from chitin and chitosan

        
          
            Erlantz 
            Lizundia
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Thanh-Dinh 
            Nguyen
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Rebecca J. 
            Winnick
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Mark J. 
            MacLachlan
          
          
        
      *cde
aLife Cycle Thinking Group, Department of Graphic Design and Engineering Projects, Faculty of Engineering in Bilbao, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Bilbao 48013, Spain
bBCMaterials, Basque Center for Materials, Applications and Nanostructures, UPV/EHU Science Park, 48940 Leioa, Spain
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, BC V6T 1Z1 Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. E-mail: mmaclach@chem.ubc.ca
dStewart Blusson Quantum Matter Institute, University of British Columbia, 2355 East Mall, BC V6T 1Z4 Vancouver, Canada
eWPI Nano Life Science Institute, Kanazawa University, 9201192 Kanazawa, Japan
Received 
      16th November 2020
    , Accepted 22nd December 2020First published on 12th January 2021AbstractInsight into the hierarchical structures of carbohydrate nanofibrils such as chitin and cellulose is important in order to exploit their unique geometrical features for materials innovation and emerging applications. Chitin nanofibrils are responsible for the outstanding mechanical strength in exoskeletons of some animals, and for the iridescence of some insects. The appearance of structural colors in chitin-constituted insect shells inspires scientists to mimic their photonic properties in artificial analogues, paving the path towards new optical technologies. Although the intricate organization of chitin nanofibrils in these structures was recognized several decades ago, the use of chitin nanofibrils in biomimetic templating, to transfer their sophisticated structures into solid-state materials, has only recently been exploited. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) are high aspect ratio nanomaterials prepared by acid hydrolysis of the most abundant carbohydrate in plants. Similar to chitin nanofibrils, CNCs are readily dispersible in water and present an intriguing self-assembly behavior that can be exploited as a lyotropic liquid-crystalline template to fabricate photonic materials. Extended efforts of this research strategy are necessary to seek new organized structures of carbohydrate nanofibrils and to develop synthetic methods that offer access to novel biomimetic materials that combine chirality, coloration, and mesoporosity through colloidal templating and self-assembly. This Review summarizes recent progress to create functional optical materials templated by nanochitin and compares it with developments using nanocellulose.
Erlantz Lizundia
Erlantz Lizundia is Associate Professor at the Faculty of Engineering in Bilbao, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU). He received his PhD in Advanced Materials Engineering in 2011 at the UPV/EHU. He joined the University of British Columbia (Canada) and ETH Zurich (Switzerland) in 2016 and 2018 as a visiting scientist. His work aims to develop novel multifunctional materials using renewable materials as a platform source for optical, sensing, energy storage, environmental remediation, and actuator applications. Erlantz also works on the ecodesign of novel materials and technologies through life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology.
Thanh-Dinh Nguyen
Thanh-Dinh Nguyen received his PhD in chemical engineering from Laval University in 2011. He later joined the MacLachlan group at the University of British Columbia as a Postdoctoral researcher, where he was awarded a NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship. In 2016, he was appointed Research Associate at the same University. His research spans the area of materials chemistry including inorganic materials and biopolymer materials. His research interests focus on the inspiration of new structures from the supramolecular self-assembly, biomimicry, and cluster evolution to develop hierarchical materials at micro- and nanoscales for applications. He has published over 60 research and review articles and book chapters in the fields of chemistry and materials science.Rebecca Winnick earned her Master's degree in Chemistry from UBC in 2017, where she worked on chitin-containing materials with Prof. MacLachlan. She has had an eclectic career, working as a research chemist, wetland restoration specialist, fish biologist, forklift driver, touring musician, square dance caller, and festival organizer. She is currently living in Virginia and studying to become a massage therapist, specializing in Myofascial Release.
Mark J. MacLachlan
Mark MacLachlan is Professor of Chemistry at the University of British Columbia. He started at UBC in 2001, was promoted to Associate Professor in 2007, and has been Professor since 2011. His research interests span from supramolecular chemistry and macrocycles to nanomaterials and photonic structures. In particular, his group has been focused on the development of new materials from cellulose and chitin nanocrystals. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and holds the Canada Research Chair in Supramolecular Materials.
1. Introduction
Hierarchically structured materials have received a lot of attention from researchers in materials chemistry and device physics due to their unique properties.1,2 Controlling organization of components at the micro- and nano-scales is a major goal in constructing porous materials with complexity.3,4 The integrated components of the multi-scale assembly can lead to advanced functions that enable the design of futuristic products, devices or systems for diverse applications.5 Of particular interest is the family of sophisticated materials including colloidal liquids,6 chiral polymers,7 and hydrogels/aerogels.8 Recent advances in the nanostructural organization of materials at the molecular level make them novel candidates for investigating many applications in life sciences. As the future application options for such materials appear to be endless, it is important to find economical and sustainable ways to obtain these materials.
Supramolecular chemistry exploits the weak interactions between building units to make structures with greater complexity,9 and is a promising method to construct materials with a hierarchical arrangement of components. Supramolecular biotemplating employs natural substances as scaffolds to construct other materials with hierarchical organization (e.g., synthetic nacre,10 supramolecular films,11 and others).12 One effective approach deals with the self-assembly of hierarchical biopolymers into integrated materials.13 The key to success is thus to develop new architectures of biopolymers through materials synthesis and natural resource extraction. Polysaccharides and polypeptides can show a high level of structural sophistication, including helicity and periodicity over wide length scales, making them interesting templates to fabricate advanced functional materials.14,15
Chitin is a major structural component in the exoskeletons (shells) of arthropods, containing ∼6 wt% nitrogen from acetamide groups.16 In the exoskeletons, poly-N-acetylglucosamine chains crystallize into fibers with sizes ranging from nanometers to micrometers. Owing to its simple derivatization and good biocompatibility, chitin has been widely explored for making enzyme-sensing hydrogels17 and bioplastics.18
Many biological materials are formed by the hierarchical assembly of multiple distinct building blocks. Although the combination of organic and inorganic materials (typically collagen-mineral) often results in enhanced mechanical properties, the hierarchical organization of such structures is primarily responsible for their remarkable properties. For example, in layered architectures, a structural toughening effect takes place at different length scales,19 maximizing energy dissipation through crack bridging, deflection, arrest and twisting, and providing enhanced strength and toughness to the material. Such organization featuring a layered and rotating microstructure of fibers uniaxially arranged in-plane is known as the twisted plywood structure or Bouligand structure, in honor of Yves Bouligand, who studied these structures in detail.20,21 This microstructure is responsible for providing a natural dermal armour to the Arapaima gigas freshwater fish to resist the bite of piranhas.22 Because of such remarkable properties, several authors have pursued the study of nanocomposites comprising cellulose or chitin nanofibrils that have the Bouligand structure.23,24
Some arthropods with chitin-containing exoskeletons, such as beetles, butterflies and peacock mantis shrimp, display bright iridescent colors resulting from selective interaction of light with their periodically ordered exoskeletal structures.25 The formation of periodic chitin-based fibrillar assemblies in the exoskeleton is thought to be the result of the evolution of organisms over millions of years for multiple functions, including mechanical robustness and photonic properties (Fig. 1a–c).26 The fact that chitin nanofibrils in some beetles and other arthropods organize into twisted plywood structures, whose periodic rotation is left-handed (LH) within a domain, leads the structural assemblies to reflect circularly polarized (CP) light.27,28 Interestingly, the helicoidal arrangement of chitin nanofibrils in these arthropods is a solid-state manifestation of optically active chiral nematic (cholesteric) liquid crystals (LCs).29 As summarized in the scheme in Fig. 1d, the selective reflection of light by a chiral nematic structure is described according to the equation, λmax = navgPsinθ, where λ, navg, P, and sinθ are the reflected wavelength, average refractive index of the material, helical pitch length, and angle of incidence relative to the normal of the film, respectively.30 Thus, the iridescence in arthropod exoskeletons with a chiral nematic structure (e.g., jewel beetles) is angle dependent and depends on the pitch and refractive index of the structure. One intriguing consequence of this structure is that the reflected light is circularly polarized. Besides chiral nematic ordering, other examples exist in which hierarchical organization is successfully used by organisms to generate iridescence. Animals such as the Hypolimnas butterfly present a chitinous thin lamina that enhances the blue iridescence of their dorsal wings due to color interplay effects between different thin plates.31 Based on these examples, optimized by evolution over millions of years, a fascinating modern research area is the preparation and exploitation of natural photonic materials with long-range structural order.15
 Fig. 1  Structural coloration of arthropods in nature. Photographs of (a) jewel beetle,27 (b) butterfly, (c) peacock mantis shrimp,28 and the corresponding SEM images (below) of the chitin-containing structures in their exoskeletons. (d) Origin of the photonic properties arising from the selective reflection of circularly polarized light by a chiral nematic structure. The rods depict the average orientation of the director, which rotates through the film thickness. The relationship of helical pitch P with circularly reflected light is governed by λmax = navgPsinθ. Adapted from ref. 27 and 28 with permission from Science. 
Other examples of hierarchically structured materials based on chitin that do not display iridescent properties can also be found in nature. For example, Cyphochilus beetle scales are composed of a nanostructured network of chitin filaments that remain oriented parallel to the surface of the 7 μm thick scales.32 Such structural anisotropy increases the scattering strength in the orthogonal direction to the scale surface, providing a high brightness and unique whiteness characterized by a total reflectance of 70% over the visible range.33,34 Hierarchical natural nanostructures also enable some animals to have sharp vision. This is especially relevant underwater, where the reduced refractive index contrast between scattering elements and the surrounding environment limits vision. Indeed, the sensitivity and visual acuity of mantis shrimp crustaceans (Nannosquillidae) have been ascribed to the polycrystalline domains in the tapetum layer, which enhances bioluminescence detection underwater at night by providing a high reflectivity in an ultrathin layer.35 This ordered periodic structure reduces the marked angle dependence of the color of a cholesteric LC, allowing the development of materials with isotropic structural colors.36
The transfer of chirality shown in many biological hierarchical materials into synthetic materials is an exciting area of research where scientists are making outstanding progress. These biomimetic materials, inspired by nature, are being explored for novel applications.11,37–39 In this context, the helicity, chemical reactivity, and nanoscale characteristics of chitin nanofibrils endow these new building units with unique material properties (Fig. 2). Transferring the chirality of chitin into photonic porous solids is an interesting way to investigate their promising potential in optical sensing,15 electrochemical chiral sensing,40 and enantioselective adsorption.41 One approach for constructing these desired materials is the templating of helicoidal chitin structures with suitable precursors.11,42–44 Therefore, the colorful structures of chitin-constituted arthropod exoskeletons inspire sophisticated tactics to develop artificial analogues for photonic technologies. More excitingly, spindle-shaped chitin nanocrystals can be obtained by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of the crude chitin fibrils extracted from arthropod's shells.45 The chitin nanospindle colloids and other chitin derivatives such as phenylcarbamate chitosan and glycol chitin can form a liquid crystalline phase above a critical concentration. The liquid-crystalline phase of chitin nanocrystals can be preserved upon drying of solvent in the dispersion to yield solid films. Chitin nanocrystals can form a flexible hydrogen-bonded network from fibrils with secondary amino-terminated surfaces, which makes it possible to template functional composites that can potentially be converted into new materials.
 Fig. 2  Optically active helicoidal structures of chitin nanofibril assemblies. Anisotropic chitin nanocomponents naturally self-organize into a chiral nematic phase in the cuticles inside crustacean shells and chemically self-assemble into a liquid crystal mesophase. Adapted from ref. 38 and 51 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
In the family of carbohydrates, cellulose is structurally similar to chitin. Cellulose [(C6H10O5)n] is composed by β-(1 → 4)-linked D-glucose units, but chitin contains a polymer of N-acetylglucosamine units [(C8H13O5N)n]. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) can also be prepared from acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of native cellulose fibrils. CNCs46 and other cellulose derivatives, such as hydroxypropyl cellulose47 and ethylcellulose,48 can form a lyotropic chiral nematic LC phase above a critical concentration. The liquid crystalline phase of CNCs is preserved upon drying of solvent in the dispersion to yield solid films that resemble the chitin structures in jewel beetle shells and mantis shrimps.27,28 With LH chiral nematic structure, the films appear colorful, reflecting LH-CP light whose wavelength can be tuned when their pitch is controlled during the assembly of CNCs. CNCs are a LC template that has been used to produce a family of photonic mesoporous materials that mimic the structures of iridescent beetle shells.49 The synthetic approach is the supramolecular assembly of helically nanostructured templates with suitable precursors to generate composites that recover large, freestanding iridescent films (e.g., silica, organosilica, germania, resin) with chiral nematic organization after template removal.50
Assemblies of chitin nanocrystals can have chiroptical features similar to CNCs that make them useful as either photonic platforms or precursors to fabricate optically active helicoidal materials. Crustacean shells discarded from seafood processing are an abundant and economical chitin source to develop new materials. However, the chitin in crustacean shells is generally too disordered to render them iridescent.52,53 Therefore, the development of photonic chiral nematic materials from crustacean shells opens up a new window for investigating many applications.54
Scientists have taken advantage of diverse carbohydrate nanofibrils for the development of multifunctional biomimetic materials. Among them, those based on chitin, chitosan and cellulose have shown prominent functionalities to fabricate hierarchically arranged materials. While cellulose and chitosan are naturally available as the first and second most abundant biopolymers on earth, respectively, chitosan is obtained after a partial deacetylation of chitin, yielding a linear polysaccharide bearing N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and D-glucosamine units linked through β-(1 → 4) glycosidic linkages. Since their properties largely depend on the source material and synthetic conditions, Table 1 provides a general overview of the main extraction routes and properties of those carbohydrate nanofibrils. Here we review recent work in the use of chitin nanofibrils and its family of carbohydrates as either templates or precursors to fabricate new functional materials with chiroptical properties. We focus on chitin-derived materials, but also include some examples using CNCs. Unlike many previous reviews on chitin-based materials, this review emphasizes successful efforts to transfer the ordered arrangement of chitin, cellulose, and their derivatives into solids to develop advanced optical materials. We first discuss chiroptical properties of biopolymer-based components and their potential in templating to develop photonic materials. Following that, we explore the possibility of using chitin and cellulose nanocrystals and their LCs as a sustainable precursor for generating semiconductors and hydrogels, and as a platform for functional photonic composites. The last section highlights interesting discoveries of unique structural properties of the biopolymer-derived materials and their potential applications such as in stimuli-responsive optical materials, chiral separation, displays, and photonic plastics.
Table 1 Main properties of carbohydrate nanofibrils derived from chitin, chitosan and cellulose




Carbohydrate nanofibril
Main fabrication route
Dimensions
Crystallinity index (Xc)
Surface potential
Thermal degradationa
Mechanical propertiesb
Chiral nematic structure





a Thermal degradation is determined as the onset of thermal degradation temperature (first 5 wt% loss) measured by thermogravimetric analysis under N2 atmosphere.
b Mechanical properties correspond to individual carbohydrate nanofibrils. Eaxial: axial elastic modulus; σ = tensile strength. N.R.: not reported.





Chitin nanofibrils38,51,55–57
Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of king crab endocuticles or lobster exoskeletons
∅: 10–18 nm
∼90%
+43 mV
N.R.
N.R.
Yes




L: 300–500 nm












Chitin nanofibrils58,59
Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of shrimp shells
∅: 10–50 nm
∼90%
+40 to +60 mV
∼300 °C

E
axial: 60 GPa
Yes




L: 50–300 nm












Chitin nanofibrils60
Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of raw chitin
∅: 50 nm
N.R.
+37 mV
>300 °C

σ = 7.5 GPa
Yes




L: 200–1000 nm












Chitin nanofibrils61,62
Mild mechanical agitation from mushrooms
∅: 10 nm
From 44 to 56%
+33 mV
230–280 °C
N.R.
N.R.




L: 143 nm
79% (HCl-hydrolysis)










Chitosan nanofibrils58,63
Hot alkali treatment of purified shrimp shells
N.R.
N.R. (low crystallinity)
N.R.
N.R.
N.R.
Yes






Cellulose nanocrystals46,64
Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellulose
∅: 3–10 nm
>85%
−40 to −30 mV
∼180 °C

E
axial: 110–220 GPa
Yes




L: 150–2000 nm







σ = 7.5–7.7 GPa




Cellulose nanofibers65,66
TEMPO-assisted mechanical destructuring
∅: 5–30 nm
From 40 to 80%
−60 to −40 mV
∼250 °C

E
axial: 86 GPa
N.R.




L: 1000–5000 nm







σ = 1.57 GPa




Bacterial cellulose67–69
Synthesized via bottom-up approach by bacteria
∅: up to 100 nm
From 60 to 80%
−30 to −20 mV
∼320 °C

E
axial: 114 GPa
N.R.




L: up to 100 μm














2. Chitin liquid crystals
Many biomacromolecules, including polysaccharides, collagen, proteins and DNA, are known to form lyotropic LCs in water. Lyotropic LCs have diverse applications such as DNA encapsulation, release of bioactive molecules or control over food processing.70 They are also intriguing templates for the construction of periodic mesoporous materials.71–73 Some lyotropic mesogens are capable of forming a cholesteric, or chiral nematic, liquid crystal in certain solvents. Such chiral nematic LCs can be iridescent and selectively reflect CP light when the pitch of the helical structure is about the same size as the wavelength of visible light.74 The chiral LC phase may be used to template solid-state materials with unique photonic properties. Application opportunities include chiral separations, optical elements, sensors, and catalyst supports.12,75,76
In 1996, Revol and Marchessault investigated the effect of electrostatic interaction on the phase separation behavior of chitin liquid crystals.77 Murray and Neville further studied the effects of pH and temperature and the role of the electrostatic interactions on the phase separation of chitin suspensions.78,79 In 2004, Belamie, Davidson and Giraud-Guille reproduced Revol and Marchessault's 1996 preparation of a chiral nematic suspension of chitin microfibers in aqueous media.80 They found that after acid-hydrolysis, the suspension can exist as an isotropic phase, chiral nematic phase, or a coexistence of both phases. With an increase in chitin concentration, the solution transitioned from isotropic to biphasic and then to chiral nematic. When the ionic strength reached 10−2 M, the solution did not phase separate in the bulk, but rather exhibited birefringence that increased from dark to very bright when viewed between crossed polarizers (small anisotropic droplets that do not coalesce or sediment are formed). The pitch of the chiral structure varied from about 40 to 100 μm depending on the concentration of HCl. The origin of chirality in chitin suspensions is unknown, and the authors did not comment on the handedness of the phase.
Similar to CNCs, which are obtained through a controlled hydrolysis of cellulose, chitin nanocrystals can be chemically extracted from chitin sources, such as crab shells. In order to obtain materials with homogeneous structural and photonic properties, controlling extraction parameters is of pivotal relevance. Our group's early efforts to prepare lyotropic chitin LCs using methods similar to the Revol and Marchessault work failed to generate chiral nematic LCs (Fig. 3a).51 After hydrolysis, large chitin nanocrystal aggregates sedimented rather than giving a homogeneous suspension. Surface deacetylation and subsequent hydrolysis was pursued to improve homogeneity (alkali conditions followed by hydrolysis in 4 M HCl). The amount of free primary amine groups on chitin nanorod surfaces increased with no chitin degradation, increasing the positive surface charge density. A strong birefringence with optically anisotropic rod-like textures that resemble those of clay liquid crystals was obtained (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  Photographs (middle) and POM images (right) of (a) lyotropic LCs of chitin nanorods prepared from acid hydrolysis,45 and (b) chitin nanorods prepared from sequential deacetylation and hydrolysis.45,55 Adapted from ref. 45 and 55 with permission from Elsevier and the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although some works have reported the development of homogeneous, smooth and transparent films from aqueous chitin LC solutions, such materials lacked the iridescence associated with chiral nematic order.55,81 A long-range alignment of chitin nanofibrils into layered structures could be observed, but no twisting typical of chiral nematic structures was apparent. The failure to form chiral nematic phases was ascribed to natural variations among chitin sources.
Other authors have also pursued chiral nematic order in chitin nanocrystals.60,82 Araki and coworkers performed reductive amination between the surface amino groups on chitin nanocrystals and terminal aldehydes on monomethoxy poly(ethylene glycol) (mPEG) to form mPEG-grafted chitin nanorods.82 This surface functionalization led to an aqueous colloidal suspension of grafted chitin nanorods that displayed a greatly enhanced stability and homogeneity. Birefringence in the material likely resulted from improved long-range order of the anisotropic mesogens. The mPEG-grafted chitin LCs had higher homogeneity than the chitin nanofibril LCs prepared from sequential deacetylation and hydrolysis. However, despite such high stability, a chiral structure was not achieved.
Liu and co-workers reported the formation of a liquid crystalline phase having a local lamellar ordering using chitin nanocrystals extracted from raw chitin.60 As shown in Fig. 4a, the dispersion exhibited an intense color under a polarizing microscope. The Vignolini group has recently shown that the self-assembly behavior of water-dispersed chitin nanocrystals can be finely controlled to yield well-ordered solid chiral nematic films with tailored helical pitch (Fig. 4b).59 The reaction conditions used for chitin nanocrystal fabrication (hydrolysis acidity and time, tip sonication energy input, degree of acetylation) affect the liquid crystalline behavior. It was found that the hydrolysis duration affects the surface charge to a larger extent than the hydrochloric acid concentration (ζ-potential values ranging from 39 to 55 mV), while chitin acetylation prior to hydrolysis enhances the nanocrystal aspect ratio with no surface damage. The authors also found that decreased chitin nanocrystal concentrations in the aqueous dispersion lowers the pitch, while higher surface charges lead to increased LC pitch values, up to a maximum of 250 μm. As summarized in Fig. 4c, medium pH and ionic strength can be changed to tailor the helicoidal ordering in the dry films, resulting in a wide modulation of pitch values from 650 to 3720 nm. Similar results have also been reported for CNCs, where parameters such as salt addition, pH control or evaporation time control the pitch (and thus iridescence) of resulting solid films.46 Overall, the authors conclude that 3 M HCl at reflux for 270 min is the preferred reaction condition for an efficient chitin nanocrystal extraction.
 Fig. 4  Controlling the self-assembly behavior of liquid-dispersed chitin nanocrystals. (a) POM image of a chitin nanocrystal dispersion in an oil phase exhibiting hierarchical cholesteric architectures.60 (b) Cross-section SEM image of a chiral nematic chitin nanocrystal solid film showing its Bouligand structure and pitch. (c) The chiral nematic pitch in suspension and solid state (100 wt% concentration) can be easily tuned by varying the HCl and NaCl concentration. Adapted from ref. 59 and 60 with permission from ACS Publications. 
Sato et al. proposed a new pathway to surface functionalize chitosan nanorods in organic solvent to synthesize a chitin-based lyotropic LC.63 The surface functionalization of chitosan nanorods with 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide afforded hydrophobic functionalized chitosan nanocrystals that could form a cholesteric LC phase of chitosan phenylcarbamate in dimethylformamide (DMF). Functionalized chitosan LCs exhibited fingerprint textures that look similar to those for lyotropic CNC LCs.83 Interestingly, the authors first demonstrated the formation of iridescent chitosan films after drying the chitosan phenylcarbamate suspension in DMF. Functionalized chitosan nanorods organized into a long-range LH chiral nematic order that reversed to a right-handed (RH) phase with increasing 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide content.
It should thus be asked, “Why do chitosan nanocrystals form a chiral nematic phase upon functionalization with 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide?” The authors claimed that steric effects of the modified chitosan nanocrystals were significantly increased, causing strong repulsive forces between nanorods and thus improving the chiral nematic order. This functionalization procedure is an interesting strategy to create chiral nematic LCs with tunable chirality. More importantly, these lyotropic LCs could potentially be used as a platform material to template solid photonic materials.
The high surface area and long-range order of chitin nanorod LCs make them attractive for templating periodic mesoporous inorganic materials. This concept was shown in the pioneering work of Alonso and Belamie in 2010,84 who used chitin LCs obtained from Revol and Marchessault's procedure to template mesoporous silicas. This was achieved via sol–gel condensation of a silica precursor in a chitin nanorod suspension comprising water and ethanol. After solvent-exchanging to pure ethanol, the solvent was slowly evaporated over a month in the presence of a strong magnetic field, which aligned the nanorods. The suspensions were spray dried and then calcined to yield nematically-ordered mesoporous silica microparticles.
In later work, silica/chitin composite films were obtained after the evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) of a homogeneous aqueous chitin suspension with a silica precursor.55 The chitin template in the composites was then removed by calcination under air to recover silica films that were crack-free, optically transparent, mesoporous, and freestanding. SEM images of the silica films showed a long-range ordered alignment into a pseudo-layered structure, replicating the nematic organization of the chitin nanorod template. This procedure was also extended to create crack-free, large mesoporous organosilica films with a nematic structure obtained after the co-condensation of 1,2-bis(trimethoxysilyl)ethane in an aqueous chitin suspension followed by selective decomposition of the chitin template in hot 6 M H2SO4. Due to the larger dimensional shrinkage suffered by the silica after calcination (in comparison with acid-catalyzed hydrolysis), average pore sizes of the silica films (4–7 nm) were smaller than those of the organosilica films (9–14 nm).
Silica/chitin composites can also be pyrolyzed under an inert atmosphere to convert chitin into nitrogen-doped carbon. The silica component in the composites can then be etched away by an alkali solution to recover a highly mesoporous, freestanding nitrogen-doped carbon film with a layered structure that has nematic organization. It was found that these mesoporous nitrogen-doped-carbon materials could act as an efficient supercapacitor electrode with a specific capacitance of 180 F g−1, which is comparable with the capacitance of other mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbons derived from the chitin structure of king crab cuticle.38 Tin oxide nanoparticles can also be incorporated into mesoporous layered nitrogen-doped carbon to significantly improve the supercapacitor performance of the material.55
3. Chitin nanocrystals with chiral nematic structures in nature
As discussed, obtaining photonic films with chiral nematic structure from chitin is challenging and, prior to Vignolini's work from 2019,59 it was difficult to produce chiral nematic films of chitin with controlled structure. While struggling to develop chiral nematic chitin nanocrystals, we turned our focus to the natural Bouligand structure found inside crustacean shells to obtain iridescent chiral nematic mesoporous chitin membranes.85,86
There are many iridescent beetle species in nature.87 Jewel beetles, for example, have a brightly colored exoskeleton containing a LH chiral nematic structure of chitin nanocrystals. The structural origin of CP iridescence in jewel beetles has been explored in detail and it has been found that the helicoidal chitin exoskeletal structures produce LH-CP iridescence.27 Other photonic chitin structures can also be found in colorful butterfly wings, but they often organize into gyroid phases rather than into a chiral nematic arrangement.88
Structural organization of chitin is responsible for the color in many insects. This is not surprising as the exoskeletal structures of beetles and butterflies are often used to investigate photonic properties. On the contrary, many crustaceans – shrimps, crabs, lobsters, etc. – do not appear iridescent on their outer shells.89 Knowing that chitin nanofibrils are also the major structural component of the crustacean exoskeletons,90 we wondered why brilliant iridescent colors are not observed on the exterior of their outer shells.
To answer this question, we explored the exoskeletal structures of crustaceans. We initially examined king crabs as a representative crustacean. Our first surprising observation was slight iridescent colors apparent on the inside despite the dull, non-iridescent appearance of their outer shells.38 These colorful layers are known to be mineralized chitin-protein endocuticles. To gain insight into this observed coloration, we analyzed the king crab exoskeleton throughout its thickness by electron microscopy. We found that the endocuticles have a helicoidal lamellar structure with a higher degree of order in comparison with the outer layers of the shell. With careful observation of the shell cross sections, we recorded a long-range ordered organization of chitin fibrils that gradually becomes less ordered from the inside to outside of the exoskeleton. These structural features provide a plausible explanation for the fact that the structural colors apparent in the interior of crustacean shells are not transferred to the external part. This observation is similar to results first reported by Bouligand in 1972,21 who described the presence of twisted chitin fibril layers in several crustacean endocuticles as opposed to the inhomogeneous layered structures found in the outer shells. By separating the cuticles from inside of the crab shells, we were able to produce iridescent chiral nematic mesoporous chitin nanofibril membranes.38
To obtain intact cuticles from a crab exoskeleton, we carried out the deproteinization of the shells by treating them with hot alkali solutions (Fig. 5a).38,58 The endocuticles were carefully delaminated by peeling off the outer sides of the resulting shells. Finally, the endocuticles were treated with dilute acid to remove minerals, affording pure 200–300 μm thick chitin cuticle membranes that retain the shape of the original exoskeleton (Fig. 5b). These membranes were several centimeters large and quite flexible. The purified and delaminated chitin cuticles showed a color intensity resembling the pristine exoskeletons. In contrast to the structural rigidity of the raw shells, the chitin cuticles swell easily in water, reversibly changing color from green to violet upon air-drying.
 Fig. 5  Chiral nematic mesoporous chitin membranes from crab endocuticles. Photographs of king crab leg (a) before and (b) after sequential chemical purification and delamination to obtain iridescent chitin cuticles,58 (c) POM image of chitin cuticle membranes, (d) SEM image viewed along edge of chitin membranes, (e) CD spectra of chitin (red) and dried chitin (blue) membranes and UV-Vis spectrum of wet chitin membranes (orange). (f) Nitrogen sorption isotherms of chitin membranes after supercritical drying with CO2. Adapted from ref. 38 and 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Structural analyses confirmed that the delaminated cuticles are made of α-chitin crystalline fibrils mineralized with calcium carbonate, resembling the chemical composition of the outer shells.38 This fact suggests that within the cuticle composites, chitin fibrils act as a polymeric matrix to support the calcium carbonate crystals. The combination of chitin and calcite into a naturally twisted structure makes cuticles potentially useful as novel composites for the fabrication of hardened bioceramics by either templating or scaffolding approaches.91,92 The obtained α-chitin structure is analogous to that of chitin nanospindle-like crystalline colloids for the design of nematic liquid crystals prepared from acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of the deproteinized and decalcified crab shells.51
When they are viewed by polarizing optical microscopy, the chitin cuticle membranes (Fig. 5c) reveal an anisotropic, birefringent structure with a fingerprint texture similar to that observed for chiral nematic CNC films.93 The structural organization of the purified chitin cuticle membrane was assessed by SEM (Fig. 5d), where a long-range orientational order of aligned chitin fibrils was observed. Chitin fibrils in the cuticle membranes have diameters of ∼8–10 nm and lengths of ∼500–800 nm. For comparison, these are similar in diameter but longer than the chitin nanospindles obtained by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of the purified chitin in crustacean shells.51 A coarsely layered structure of nanofibrils that organize into a twisted phase throughout its entire thickness is observed. Circular dichroism (CD) spectra (Fig. 5e) of water-swollen chitin cuticles show a positive signal centered at ∼750 nm that closely matches the position of the reflectance peak, confirming that the purified chitin cuticle has a LH helicoidal structure. Chitin cuticle membranes have a mesoporous structure resulting from the selective removal of minerals and protein embedded within the interstices between chitin fibrils. Furthermore, porosity can be retained upon supercritical drying of ethanol-soaked membranes with CO2 as shown by the nitrogen sorption isotherms of chitin membranes before (black) and after (red) supercritical drying in Fig. 5f. As chitin structures display remarkable mechanical properties due to their hierarchical order, helicoidal mesoporous chitin cuticle membranes present an ultimate tensile strength of ∼22 MPa, which remains above the mechanical strength of LC chitin-assembled films (∼10 MPa, 0.5%).58 Because the helical pitch is found within the visible spectral region, the membrane shows vivid structural color. As a result, it can be concluded that the LH chiral nematic arrangement of the chitin nanofibrils in the crab cuticle membranes provides iridescent materials with a selective reflection of LH-CP light.
The LH chiral nematic chitin nanofibril structure in the crab cuticles looks similar to those of chitin in the jewel beetle's shells,34 and of cellulose in the Pollia condensata fruit.91 More interestingly, these crustacean shells allow one to obtain mesoporous structures with tunable photonic properties after selective removal of the mineral component. The chitin cuticles are also analogous to photonic solid films cast from cholesteric liquid crystals.94 We found that the naturally twisted chitin structure of the crab cuticles resembles iridescent CNC films, where the nanocrystals organize into a LH chiral nematic phase.93 The self-assembly of the lyotropic CNC suspensions, however, often yields non-porous films instead of the swollen mesoporous structure obtained with chitin cuticles. A comparable porous structure was obtained by exploiting helicoidal CNC-templated composites, whereupon an aqueous CNC suspension was combined with melamine-urea-formaldehyde resins to give a composite structure with chiral nematic order. Following subsequent alkali treatment, photonic mesoporous cellulose films whose structure resembles the chitin cuticle were obtained.95 These cellulosic mesoporous films showed responsive photonic properties, changing color when they swelled in different liquids.95 It should be pointed out that the chitin cuticle membranes show improved mechanical properties in comparison with mesoporous CNC films.
Several efforts have been made to improve the long-range order of chiral nematic chitin structures extracted from crustacean shells,96,97 but most of the reports fail to obtain materials with photonic properties. To the best of our knowledge, structurally colored shells have only been described in less-common mantis shrimps, while the selective extraction of purified chiroptical chitin structures from their shells is barely known.28 The concept of preparing iridescent chitin materials from king crab cuticles, as we described above, could potentially be applied to other crustacean species, possibly allowing iridescent, photonic membranes to be made from discarded seafood waste.
4. Chiral photonic mesoporous chitosan materials
Chitosan is a biocompatible, partially deacetylated derivative of chitin and can be made by treating chitin with hot alkali or enzymes.98,99 Exposure of primary amine groups on the surface of chitosan makes it considerably more versatile for functionalization than chitin.100 Chitosan with periodically ordered structures represents a novel material to develop colorimetric sensors and hydrogels with improved surface properties. However, making lyotropic chitosan LCs remains as a challenge due to its low crystallinity and high gelation tendency. Consequently, most of the work so far has focused on LCs based on chitin rather than chitosan.101 However, there is an exciting report on the formation of cholesteric LCs of phenylcarbamate-modified chitosan in the presence of ionic liquids.63 In this case, the modified chitosan forms a cholesteric liquid-crystalline phase that leads to vivid colors. Finding facile ways to create photonic chitosan structures remains as an open research area with potential uses in materials design and optical technologies.
We discovered that surface deacetylation of chitin membranes with a hot concentrated alkali solution yielded freestanding, iridescent chitosan membranes.38 The resulting chitosan film showed a decreased crystallinity of α-chitin fibrils, but preserved the original shape and morphology of the chitin film. The chitosan membranes are transparent and flexible, with fast swelling kinetics in water, suggesting that the deacetylation of N-acetyl groups in chitin nanofibrils facilitates reversible swelling of the membranes.38 Surprisingly, the chitosan membranes show enhanced iridescence compared to the chitin cuticles, as shown in Fig. 6a.38 The chitosan membrane shows a green iridescence that is apparent under a LH circularly polarizing filter but nearly disappears under a RH circularly polarizing filter (Fig. 6b), consistent with a LH chiral nematic structure. The green iridescence of the chitosan appears not only in the direction of specular reflection, but also from other tilt angles with respect to the membranes. When observed between crossed polarizers, the chitosan membranes show birefringence and regions with fingerprint textures, which look similar to those of chiral nematic CNC films.15 UV-Vis spectra of the chitosan membranes show a reflectance peak at ∼500 nm, which matches well with the corresponding positive CD signal (Fig. 6c). These results indicate that chitosan nanofibrils are organized into a chiral nematic phase (Fig. 6d). SEM observations confirm this, where the chiral nematic organization of chitosan nanofibrils is apparent and even appears more ordered than the original chitin sample (Fig. 6e and f).
 Fig. 6  Photonic chiral nematic mesoporous chitosan nanostructured membranes. (a) Photograph of iridescent chitosan membranes from shrimp shells.58 (b) Photographs of chitosan membrane taken through LH (left) and RH (right) CP filters. (c) UV-Vis and CD spectra of iridescent chitosan membrane. (d) Schematic of LH chiral nematic ordered structure of chitosan nanofibrils in photonic mesoporous membrane. (e and f) Different magnified SEM cross-sectional images of chitosan membranes. Adapted from ref. 38 and 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Based on our results with crab shells, we wondered if it would be possible to transform a full crustacean shell into a chiroptical chitosan structure. To test this, we investigated the transformation of chitin nanofibrils by surface deacetylation using shrimps as a source material.58 SEM observations indicate that shrimp chitin nanofibrils have a more inhomogeneous structure than that found in crabs. Importantly, the endocuticles of the shrimp shells are much thinner than those of the crab shells, complicating extraction of intact chitin cuticles. Due to this poor organization of the chitin fibrils in shrimp shells, structural coloration of shrimp shells is rare. One example we are aware of is peacock mantis shrimps, which exhibit a characteristic iridescence on their outer shells.28 Electron microscopy analyses showed that there is a chiral nematic arrangement of chitin nanofibrils.
We explored using shrimp shells, which have an inhomogeneous layered structure of chitin, protein, and calcite, and do not show structural coloration.58 Shrimp exoskeletons were sequentially treated with dilute alkali and acid solutions to remove protein and minerals, resulting in white chitin shells that were not iridescent. Under these conditions, chitin undergoes deacetylation while preventing the hydrolysis of fibrils.102 We found that the chitosan products obtained after hot alkali treatment were transparent and mechanically flexible membranes about 150–250 μm thick and retaining the original shapes of the shrimp shells; they appeared iridescent violet-green after drying. SEM of the alkali-treated membranes showed structural features analogous to the mesoporous α-chitosan in the crab cuticles obtained upon surface deacetylation of chitin. Mesoporous chitosan membranes undergo reversible swelling, changing the positive CD signal from ∼550 to ∼660 nm upon swelling. SEM images confirm that chitosan nanofibrils are organized into a LH helical phase having a layered structure throughout its entire thickness. Our results show that the structural features from LH chiral nematic order to CP iridescence and nanoscale dimension are analogous to those of photonic cellulose films,93 although the higher mechanical toughness and faster photonic response upon swelling of chitosan membranes make them more suitable than CNCs for many scientific and industrial applications.
Although fungi have been used as source materials for chitin nanofiber extraction,61 crustaceans are generally preferred as they represent the largest source of chitin globally, with millions of tons of discarded shells every year.103 Therefore, scientists have been looking for ways to add value to this waste stream. Commonly, shells have been used as a source material to develop fertilizers,104 cosmetics or vitamins.105 Our work dealing with the transformation of the crustacean shells into chiroptical mesoporous chitosan nanostructures provides a novel approach to exploit the photonic properties of shells through biomimicry. These materials can be used as an economically novel platform for the scalable production of porous nitrogen-doped carbon,41 bioinspired templated solids,106 or hydrogels,58 presenting a Bouligand (twisted plywood) organization with potential application in optical sensing,58 chiral separation,41 load-bearing functions,107 or energy storage.55
5. Photonic materials templated by chitin nanofibrils
Templating of periodically ordered structures is an elegant strategy for synthesizing chiroptical porous materials.108,109 Different levels of structural complexity can be obtained depending on the supramolecular organization of the chiral template, whose structure can be captured in a solid during co-assembly with a suitable precursor.110–112 Indeed, this approach can be used to obtain photonic structures by transfer of the long-range order of the helicoidal template into the solid phase.113 Our group and others have exploited helicoidal structures of chitin and CNCs as templates to develop new photonic materials with great potential for chiroptical applications.15,38,106,114
Following the preparation of the colorful chitin membranes from crab shells, we realized that the enhanced mesoporosity and crystallinity provides unique structural features for templating with secondary components.38 The general procedure involves the introduction of reagents into the pores of a chitin template and then removal of chitin to obtain a replica. We first used silica precursors to demonstrate this concept. Typically, chitin cuticle membranes were infiltrated with tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) followed by hydrolysis and condensation. Upon drying, silica-encapsulated chitin composites that showed some iridescence were obtained (Fig. 7a). Preservation of the LH chiral nematic order of chitin nanofibrils in the composites was confirmed by optical and electron microscopy. Finally, we removed the chitin template in the composites by calcination or sulfuric acid-catalyzed hydrolysis to generate mesoporous silicas. The resulting silica products were large, freestanding glasses that kept the original shape of the chitin membranes, with a little shrinkage, and showed green-violet iridescence (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  Biomimetic templating of photonic chiral nematic mesoporous silica by chitin nanofibrils. Photographs of (a) chiral nematic silica/chitin composites and (b) chiral nematic mesoporous silica films, (c) UV-Vis spectrum of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (blue); CD spectra of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (blue) and water-soaked chiral nematic mesoporous silica (black). (d) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (black: adsorption, red: desorption); inset: BJH pore size distribution calculated from the adsorption branch of the isotherm. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
When viewed between crossed polarizers, the iridescent silica films showed fingerprint textures analogous to those observed in the chitin membranes. CD spectra of the silica films showed a strong positive signal at ∼620 nm, matching the wavelength of the UV-Vis reflectance peak (Fig. 7c). Thus, the silica films are iridescent and selectively reflect LH-CP light because the LH chiral nematic organization of the chitin nanofibrils was transferred to the silica films. The iridescent silica films obtained after calcination showed a blue shift relative to the silica/chitin composites, which is ascribed a decrease of the helical pitch as a result of the thermal shrinkage of silica.
Nitrogen adsorption (Fig. 7d) indicated that the silica films are mesoporous with a surface area and pore size distribution of ∼850 m2 g−1 and ∼3–8 nm, respectively. These mesoporous silica films have a larger surface area than the mesoporous silica templated by LCs of chitin51 and cellulose.113 This effect was ascribed to the thinner silica walls obtained during the TMOS hydrolysis within the limited space between chitin nanofibrils. Due to the shrinkage of the materials upon calcination, the pore diameters of the silica films are smaller than the chitin nanofibril diameters of 10–18 nm measured by electron microscopy. The mesoporous silica films exhibit uniform pore size distributions and low microporosity.
Transfer of the chiral nematic order of chitin nanofibrils to the mesoporous silica films was evident in SEM images (Fig. 8a–c). Cross-sectional views of the materials show a long-range layered structure with fibrillar features twisted in a counter-clockwise direction that are analogous to the pristine chitin membranes. These features resemble those of CNC-templated silica films.113 The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 8d) of a mesoporous silica film reveals long cylindrical pores with diameters of ∼5–8 nm that appear organized into layers, characteristic of the chiral nematic mesostructure and resembling the mesoporous silica films templated by CNCs.113 Overall, these results demonstrate that the LH chiral nematic organization of chitin nanofibrils was successfully imprinted in the mesoporous silica.
 Fig. 8  Electron microscopy images of chiral nematic mesoporous silica templated by chitin. SEM images viewed along cross sections (a,c) and edges (b), and TEM image (d) of chiral nematic mesoporous silica films. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
This templating process can be used to make other solid-state materials beyond silica. For example, mesostructured corundum replicas were obtained by the thermal reduction of the chiral nematic mesoporous silica films with aluminum.115 These materials may be of interest for catalysis and optical sensing.
The integration of functional semiconducting components into hierarchically ordered structures is of great interest for optical sensors, photocatalysts, and photovoltaic cells. Several researchers have focused on the fabrication of biomimetic photonic titanium dioxide (TiO2), a popular semiconductor for dye-sensitized solar cells. Liu et al.116 replicated the structure of butterfly wings using titania. In their process, purified chitin of butterfly wings was infiltrated with TiCl4, a titania precursor, by ultrasonication to produce titania replicas after calcination of the resulting titania-chitin composites. Thanks to the fine hierarchical structure and ordered mesopores, the titania materials have a narrow bandgap energy of ∼2.94 eV, absorbing light in the visible range of 400–500 nm, while the optical absorption of non-nanostructured titania was below 400 nm. The authors later improved upon their method by using magnetron sputtering for titania biotemplating.117 This method led to the enhancement of the photocurrent density and photoelectrochemical conversion. A remarkably enhanced photocurrent density and photoelectrochemical conversion were achieved, and these results were attributed to the biomimetic structure. Indeed, the use of the butterfly scaffold in these titania materials increased the power conversion efficiency from 5.5 to 8.7%. Similarly, Zhang et al.118 created photoanode structures for dye sensitized solar cells by templating titania onto butterfly wings. The authors studied the light harvesting efficiency of differently organized structures and found that quasi-honeycomb structures are highly effective for light trapping. Similar to fiber-optic cables, the high internal reflection of the structure is able to trap the light and minimize external reflection. Anti-reflective titania structures have also been templated with cicada wings as shown by Zada et al.,119 who used a sol–gel process to create a “nano-nippled” surface with angle-dependent anti-reflective properties. It was shown that the gradient refractive index between air and the surface can function as a light trap. Butterfly wings have also been used to template ZnO semiconductors to obtain butterfly replicas with cathodoluminescent properties, where electricity stimulates the release of photons.120 Later, the same group scaled up the process to achieve ZnO replicas of the entire butterfly wing.121 The resulting semiconductor replicas were iridescent and maintained the structural features of the wings at the sub-micrometer level, making them attractive for UV light-emitting diodes and high-efficiency photonic devices.
Light absorption properties of hierarchically microstructured materials can also be enhanced using nanoparticles. Accordingly, Tian et al.122 activated the surface of butterfly wings with amine moieties and then deposited Au and CuS nanoparticles within the supported structure to create centimeter-scale photothermal conversion materials. Plasmon coupling from the nanoparticles combined with the antireflective quasi-photonic butterfly structure, led to enhanced broadband light absorption in the red and infrared regions. Magnetophotonic crystals of hematite were templated on butterflies by Peng et al.123 These materials are capable of transmitting specific wavelengths of light. Interestingly, their energy gap can be manipulated by external forces, i.e. magnetic fields.
Tunable magnetophotonic crystals have potential applications as magnetic field sensors, optical switches, and magneto-optical isolators. Tang et al.124 fabricated conducting polypyrrole (PPy) biosensors with high surface area and controlled porosity using butterfly wings as templates. When the biosensor was exposed to dopamine, it displayed a ∼10-fold increased sensitivity compared with PPy powder. The growth of Ag nanoparticles onto butterfly wings through adsorption onto the periodically arrayed fiber stems and air-gaps of wing surfaces was used to obtain materials with a tailored photonic bandgap.125 A gradual increase of the reflectance peak maximum from 335–355 nm to 680–730 nm with increasing reaction time was observed due to the effective surface adsorption mediated by insertion and conversion of Ag+ to Ag0 through the chitin layers of the wings. To mention a few more photonic materials templated with beetle chitin, Galusha et al.126 templated silica onto beetle shells using a sol–gel infiltration process, and the chitin was then removed by acid-etching to leave inverse photonic silica with vivid reflection properties. Chemical template removal was preferred over calcination, which caused deformation of the structure. The photonic chitin structure of beetle carapaces was cast with an elastomer by Guerrero et al.127 The resulting material had no visible structural color, but exhibited diffraction when probed with an Ar+ laser at 488 nm. All these works demonstrate the potential of chitin to develop materials with ordered structures for a wide range of applications.
6. Responsive photonic chitosan-based hydrogels
The amino groups of chitosan can act as binding sites for additives to undergo a crosslinking process of nanofibrils and turn the material into a hydrogel.128 Hydrogels are high-water content materials prepared after the cross-linking of polymers.129 These networks readily absorb water and undergo swelling without dissolving. Whereas physically cross-linked hydrogels are held together by weak intermolecular interactions and are susceptible to degradation, chemically cross-linked networks have improved chemical and mechanical stability.130 In chitosan gels, physical cross-linking occurs through electrostatic, van der Waals, and hydrogen bonding forces between chitosan chains. This network formation is reversible and could be obtained by simply mixing together the components that make up the hydrogel under the appropriate conditions.131 Due to their short lifetimes and biocompatibility, they are used for short-term biomedical applications. On the other hand, chemically-crosslinked networks are obtained by using small cross-linker molecules, secondary polymerizations or irradiation.131 Usually, the primary amines of chitosan are reacted to form irreversible inter- or intramolecular bridges. The fabrication of chitosan photonic hydrogels may be possible if the primary chitosan fibrils organize into a structural form with long-range periodic order, opening novel avenues for the development of biocompatible hydrogels,96 with potential application in tissue engineering, infection-sensing, wound dressing, or optical sensing.
In this regard, smart photonic hydrogels that can respond to external stimuli with a change in color have received a great deal of attention.132,133 Indeed, photonic hydrogels based on natural polymers are of particular interest for practical applications in optical sensors for biomedicine.134 Due to the marked swelling capacity of hydrogels, pH sensing emerges as one of their most promising applications. Among all pH sensing devices, optical pH sensors are attractive due to the possibility of remote sensing, avoidance of electrical interference and feasibility of miniaturization.135 This would enable the replacement of current fluorophore dyes used as optical pH indicators, which limit the life-cycle, biocompatibility and stability of sensors.136 A plausible solution may come from the development of photonic materials with novel hierarchical structures.
Photonic crystals (PCs) represent another class of hierarchically arranged micro/nanostructures with photonic properties. PCs are organized structures with periodic refractive index modulation at the sub-micron scale, resulting in vivid colors provided the photonic gap is within the visible wavelength range (in analogy to chiral nematic structures).54 One-dimensional, two-dimensional and three-dimensional PCs can be found depending on the structural organization. An example of a one-dimensional PC is the brick-and-mortar structure of mollusk shells, which is composed of successively arranged inorganic plates and protein layers, providing shells with iridescent colors.140 However, it should be noted that the light reflected by the PCs does not show any specific handedness, in sharp contrast with chiral nematic structures, which reflect circularly polarized light.141 Considering that the protonation state of the amino groups of chitosan may affect the extent of swelling, a PC incorporating chitosan gels may be used as a pH sensor. PCs were therefore constructed through the preparation of chitosan hydrogels and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) in the presence of concentrated acid.142 After chitosan dissolution and bottom-up self-assembly of uniform silica particles, the formed interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) showed pH-responsive photonic properties. It was observed that the crystal lattice reversibly swells and shrinks as a function of pH, producing a shift in the diffracted wavelength and generating a color change dependent on the pH. The chitosan–TEOS IPN system showed an increase of the reflected wavelength with increasing H+ concentration (decreasing pH), suggesting a swelling of the crystal lattice.
Similarly, Chen et al. showed a PC material based on functionalized poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) gelated crystalline colloidal array (GCCA) with chitosan showing diffraction within the visible spectrum depending on the surrounding pH.134 Indeed, the diffraction wavelength was red-shifted by ∼165 nm when increasing the pH from 1 to 9, making this system useful for application at biologically-relevant pH. Inspired by the sub-micrometer three-dimensional structure found in the sunset moth (Chrysiridia rhipheus), Zang et al. developed optical pH sensors by embedding individual wing scales into a pH-sensitive chitosan/PVA IPN.137 As shown in Fig. 9a, these novel hydrogel PCs serve as “biological physical dyes” thanks to the reflectance changes occurring with a change in pH. In another paper, an iridescent moth's wing was used as a natural periodic biotemplate to obtain a pH-sensitive hydrogel able to reversibly blue-shift the maximum of the reflectance peak from 730 to 470 nm when the medium pH increased from 7 to ∼14.143 However, the red-shift was only 27 nm when the samples were swollen in acidic solutions. This was the first report of using natural PCs as a physical dye to develop physical responsive pH indicators. An interesting approach to fabricate tunable photonic crystals with hierarchical structures using biotemplates was carried out by Yang et al., who coated polymethylacrylic acid onto Morpho butterfly wings to yield photonic crystals (PMAA-PCs) that inherit the intricate and highly interconnected network of the original wing scales (Fig. 9b–d).138 pH tunable PCs with hierarchical structures were fabricated by treating butterfly wings with HCl(aq) followed by dipping the wings into a 10 wt% NaOH solution to transform the surface chitin of the original butterfly into chitosan.
 Fig. 9  (a) Reflectance changes of pH-sensitive chitosan/PVA IPN in basic environments. Adapted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Hierarchical structures of pH-responsive PCs from Morpho butterfly wings after PMMA synthesis on treated butterfly wings to transform their surface from chitin to chitosan. (c) Representative spectral responses of a PC to different pH values; (d) reversibility of the diffraction resonance after multiple pH cyclings. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from ACS Publications. (e) Transmission spectra of a CNC/PAAm hydrogel soaked in varying concentrations of aqueous ethanol. Adapted from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Then, this template was immersed into a solution of MAA monomer, cross-linker, and thermal initiator. Polymerization was initiated at 65 °C for 24 h, yielding hierarchically structured PMAA-PCs. PMAA layers were subsequently formed to obtain hierarchical photonic structures that showed a pH-induced color change with a unique U transition. This U-shape transition resulted from the competing electrostatic interactions between –NH3+ of chitosan and the –COO− groups of PMAA (leading a blue shift) and the ionization of the two functional groups in the alkali and acid environment (leading a red shift). Moreover, these PCs reversibly swell/deswell, indicating a good durability of the PMMA-PCs. Although these butterfly scales are small and fragile, this work showed a proof of concept of using natural templates for the development of photonic crystals. However, in contrast with the chiral nematic structures discussed in this work, the light reflected by the PCs derived from Morpho butterfly wings was not circularly polarized.
Several efforts have been devoted to produce iridescent hydrogels with chiral nematic order using biomaterials as a platform source. In this sense, Kelly et al.139 reported in 2013 the development of stimuli-responsive photonic hydrogels with chiral nematic structures based on the self-assembly of CNCs with different hydrogel monomers. These hydrogels respond to variations in swelling with a change in the helical pitch, resulting in a macroscopic change in iridescence as depicted in Fig. 9e. Using a CNC/polyacrylamide (PAAm) mixture, it was possible to obtain a continuous blue shift of the hydrogel after its immersion in water/ethanol mixtures, with the extent of this blue shift dependent on the proportion of ethanol. Moreover, because of the different energy of mixing,144 it was possible to modify the swelling response of hydrogels through the selection of different monomers such as N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm), acrylic acid (AAc), 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate (HEMa) and polyethylene glycol methacrylate (PEGMa). For example, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm)/CNC hydrogels showed temperature-responsive photonic properties, while CNC surface modification with different cations allowed tailoring the extent of swelling in different media (water, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, acetone).
More recently, Nguyen et al. reported for the first time the fabrication of photonic hydrogels based on deacetylated chitin membranes (DCM) derived from king crab cuticles (Fig. 10).38 Discarded crustacean exoskeletons and shells were used to construct large and flexible freestanding hydrogels with a Bouligand-type organization and tunable iridescent colors. As shown in Fig. 10a, upon drying, the iridescence of DCMs changed from red to green and then rapidly returned to red when they were soaked in water. Such rapid color change suggests that deacetylation of N-acetyl groups in chitin nanofibrils enables the swelling/deswelling of the DCM. The characteristic long-range orientational order of chitin fibrils was retained in the membranes (Fig. 10b). The red-shift upon swelling from ∼500 to ∼750 nm shown in Fig. 10c was ascribed to the increase in the pitch of the chiral nematic organization, indicating that the DCM functions as a responsive photonic polymer (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  Responsive photonic chiral nematic deacetylated chitin membranes (DCMs). (a) Photographs of tunable iridescence of DCMs in water during drying of water. (b) SEM image of a DCM. (c) UV-Vis and CD spectra of wet (red) and dried (blue) DCM. (d) Tunable helical pitch of the swollen membranes. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
A further advance in the development of photonic chiral nematic hydrogels was accomplished by using mesoporous chitosan nanofibrils as a platform for the templating of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) (Fig. 11).58 The membranes were first treated with acetic anhydride. Interestingly, the chitosan membranes show a several-fold increase in thickness to form transparent hydrogels when they swell in water. Structural and elemental analyses confirmed that the acetylation with the amino groups of chitosan induces a decrease in crystallinity of α-chitosan fibrils. This behavior could cause noticeable reduction of hydrogen bonding between fibrils to result in large swelling of the resultant membranes in water. Images of the swollen acetylated chitosan hydrogel (Fig. 11a and b, for the optical photograph and POM image, respectively) show optically anisotropic textures with increased pitch distance relative to the pristine chitosan structures.
 Fig. 11  Photonic chiral nematic hydrogels based on chitosan. (a) Photograph of swollen acetylated PMMA/chitosan hydrogels, (b) POM image of swollen PMMA/chitosan hydrogels, (c) CD and UV-Vis spectra of PMMA/chitosan hydrogels swollen at pH ∼ 1.4. (d and e) SEM cross-sectional images of dried PMMA/chitosan hydrogels. Adapted from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
After soaking the membrane with methyl methacrylate, photopolymerization with UV light generated iridescent PMMA/chitosan hydrogels. The composite was a true replica of the original biotemplate, as the resulting material preserved the original shape and structural coloration of the mesoporous template. Dried composites show a positive CD signal at ∼650 nm, slightly red shifted relative to the pristine chitosan (Fig. 11c), indicating the retention of the LH chiral nematic structure during processing. When fully swollen, the hydrogels show a reflectance peak at ∼1200 nm and appear transparent as the reflection has moved into the near-IR region, confirming that the LH chiral nematic order of the chitosan nanofibrils was preserved in the swollen hydrogel structures. SEM images of the PMMA/chitosan hydrogel (Fig. 11d and e) reveal a repeating layered structure with nanofibrils that rotate in a counter-clockwise direction. These features resemble those of the photonic CNC-templated amphiphilic polymer composite hydrogels,139 confirming that the chiral nematic order of the template is retained in the PMMA/chitosan hydrogels. The PMMA/chitosan composite exhibits a significant decrease in tensile strength from 53 MPa to 16 MPa and fracture elongation from 2.5% to 1.6% upon swelling in acidic media from dryness, which are considerably higher than those of the pristine chitosan membrane.
Polysaccharide-based hydrogels are used extensively as wound dressings or as substrates for tissue engineering applications.145,146 Beyond these, there are a plethora of potential applications in which the fabrication of sophisticated hydrogels may make a significant difference. These potential niches emerge from the development of new functional hierarchical structures inspired by nature. Our experiments are the first examples of making photonic hydrogels with long-range twisted organization from the endocuticles and shells of crustaceans. These hydrogels undergo a large volume expansion in solvent that is responsible for their tunable photonic properties. Moreover, color changes reported for the photonic hydrogels are reversible; they could be immersed/dried/reswollen for multiple cycles with no changes in their optical properties. Therefore, the fine-tuning of the optical behavior in these sustainable materials may open new market niches that include responsive optical sensing and drug-screening.
7. Photonic functional nanohybrids
Taking advantage of the photonic properties of periodically ordered structures demonstrated over fifty years ago, many nanohybrids based on renewable nanomaterials have been developed for optical applications. Embedding the photonic properties of chiral nematic structures within different reinforcing phases provides novel functionalities with potential in sensing, catalysis and high-performance applications.147,148 Examples using CNCs include the development of CNC/silver nanowire composites with tunable chiral plasmonic properties,149 chiral nematic CNC/GeO2 composite films with tunable photonic properties obtained after a controlled assembly of germanium(IV) alkoxides with the lyotropic liquid-crystalline CNCs,150 Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) achieved through a hard-templating method starting from chiral nematic CNC films,151 chiral nematic assemblies of Ag nanoparticles in mesoporous silica films,152 photonic cellulose films with visible upconversion properties of near-IR (NIR) through the co-assembly of CNCs with NaYF4:Yb,Er hexagonal nanorods,153 or luminescent nanostructured CNC/carbon dot films for chemosensing.114
Despite the great efforts made using CNCs, there has been almost no work to combine stimuli-responsive materials with chiral nematic chitin or chitosan films. The efforts to develop chitin-based nanohybrids with ordered architectures have been mostly focused towards the fabrication composite materials that mimic the structure of biological materials. Notable attempts were made to study biominerals such as bones,154 nacre,155 and teeth,156 as model environmentally-friendly materials with additional functionalities. These inorganic/organic hybrids display unique physical properties thanks to their ordered assembled structures, which are achieved through a process known as biomineralization.157 During mineralization, different bioorganic molecules are secreted into the “mineralization area”, which further grow with different size, morphology and orientations. An example material is nacre, which is composed of aragonite platelets and organic interlayers assembled in a brick-mortar fashion. Similarly, the exoskeletons of crustaceans are composed of CaCO3, chitin and proteins, which present a helically ordered structure analogous to the well-known cholesteric LC order of CNCs.97 Both biominerals combine flexibility, toughness and hardness, the exoskeleton of crustaceans being more flexible than nacre because of its lower CaCO3 content. As will be discussed, these two materials have inspired works focused to mimic their hierarchical hybrid structure with the use of naturally available resources. For instance, Shi et al. patterned apatite and CaCO3 on different biomaterials, yielding spatially controlled architectures.158
Helically arranged chitin/CaCO3 nanohybrids were obtained through a biomineralization-inspired crystallization process.159 As shown in Fig. 12a, water-dispersed chitin whiskers that were prepared by hydrolysis of chitin formed cholesteric LC structures, which were subsequently “frozen” by the photopolymerization of acrylic acid and a crosslinker to yield cholesteric liquid crystalline chitin/PAA templates (Fig. 12b). CaCO3 was then introduced into the helical structure by immersing the chiral chitin/PAA template into amorphous calcium carbonate colloidal suspensions at 25 °C for 7 days. SEM observations of composite cross-sections in Fig. 12c reveal that the hybrids retain the helical structure of the chitin/PAA template after the CaCO3 crystallization process. The half-pitch of the helical order was increased from 1.4 to 2.4 μm as a result of the incorporation of inorganic moieties between the chitin whiskers. Interestingly, the chitin/CaCO3 films were still transparent after mineralization.
 Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication process of CaCO3/chitin hybrid materials using chitin whiskers as the helically-ordered template. (b) POM image and (c) SEM image of chiral nematic CaCO3/chitin hybrid materials. Adapted from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
8. Other promising materials and applications
Chitin-based materials have been used for the development of products as varied as glucosamine supplements, wound dressings, tissue engineering, cosmetic gels, and bioplastics.103 Nevertheless, new materials and structures are needed to extend the use of these biopolymers to advanced applications. Recent developments in the hierarchical organization of chitin into photonic chiral nematic structures may pave the way towards the fabrication of next-generation devices based on chitin. In addition to the application areas already reported, many other application niches are waiting to be discovered.
A possible application for materials having a chiral nematic structure is the chromatographic separation of chiral molecules. Chiral molecules can exist as pairs of non-superimposable mirror images (enantiomers), and they have identical physical properties. In fact, about 95% of all pharmaceuticals are based on chiral molecules.160 While one enantiomer may have therapeutic value, the other enantiomer may not, or it may even be harmful.161 Usually, the two enantiomers are produced simultaneously and they need to be a separated prior to sale. To that end, chiral high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), which involves passing a solution of the compounds over a chiral stationary phase (CSP), has proven effective for separating enantiomers in industry. CSPs made from mesoporous, chiral nematic materials may be less expensive than current chiral HPLC media. In this context, mesoporous structures obtained using CNCs as a template are potential candidates for chiral separation because of their large internal surface area, narrow pore size and chiral structure.47,162 This approach was studied for the first time by Zhang et al.,163 who prepared CNC-templated mesoporous silica films with chiral nematic structure and used them as a CSP for high-resolution gas chromatography. Chiral nematic mesoporous silica films were milled into powders and loaded into a capillary column. The authors showed that the capillary column filled with chiral nematic mesoporous silica exhibits excellent resolving ability for many classes of compounds, including 2-amino-1-butanol derivatives, menthol, amino acid derivatives, linear alkanes, aromatic hydrocarbons, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and some isomers (Fig. 13). The chiral discrimination was attributed to the helical structure of mesoporous materials, rather than specific chiral interactions with the surface.164
 Fig. 13  Chiral nematic mesoporous silica films templated by cellulose nanocrystals for high-resolution gas chromatographic separation. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
A year later, the same group applied chiral nematic mesoporous silica as a stationary phase for HPLC.165 An improved selectivity (over commercial HPLC separators) was achieved in 10 different isomers with practical relevance to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. It is clear that chiral structures derived from CNCs, chitin, and other natural polymers hold significant promise in the area of separation.
Another promising area where chitin can be useful is to create nanostructured carbon materials. The exoskeletons of crustaceans can be used to develop porous nitrogen-doped carbon structures with good enantioselective adsorption properties.41 A chiral nematic chitin hydrogel was synthesized through a chemical etching-free approach which avoided the need for a sacrificial template or strong acids. Bulk chitin was disintegrated into chitin nanofibrils using methanol-solvated Ca2+, yielding chiral nematic hydrogels upon solvent exchange with water (Fig. 14a). After hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) and freeze-drying, nitrogen-doped chiral carbon-sheath hydrogels with a pitch of 10–30 μm and surface area of 300 m2 g−1 were obtained. HTC selectively carbonized the surface of chitin nanofibrils without negatively affecting the 3D structural assembly of the hydrogel. As represented in Fig. 14b, the prepared hydrogels showed chiral separation ability, preferentially adsorbing D-lactic over L-lactic acid (enantiomeric excess of 16.3%). Obtained enantiomeric excess was comparable to other chiral adsorptive materials (9–19% for sparteine-coated carbon,166 or 12–17% for cyclodextrin nanoparticles167), but showed an enhanced stability up to 2 months. Exploiting the large pore size and unique chiral nanoporosity, these photonic chiral nematic mesoporous materials templated from chitin nanofibrils hold a bright future.
 Fig. 14  (a) Calcium-mediated process to obtain nitrogen-doped chiral nematic carbonaceous hydrogels with no need for a template. (b) Adsorption capacity (left) and enantioselective adsorption (right) of L-lactic acid by the chiral nitrogen-doped carbon hydrogel and the resulting enantiomeric excess, ee. Adapted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Many living organisms such as plants, shrimps, and beetles, reflect LH-CP light because of their LH chiral nematic structure.27,168 In this sense, Chrysina resplendens, also known as the golden beetle, represents an exceptional case because it reflects both LH-CP and RH-CP light. This behavior has been shown to occur as a result of the three-layered structure comprising an anisotropic interlayer sandwiched between two LH chiral helical layers. Based on this insight, Wu et al. designed CNC-based nanocomposite photonic films with hyper-reflective properties, reaching reflectances exceeding 50%.169 They mimicked the shell structure of the Chrysina beetles by fabricating a sandwich structure with a uniaxially oriented polyamide-6 (PA-6) layer as a half-wave retarder layer between two CNC/polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) layers with a LH chiral nematic photonic structure. These novel photonic nanocomposite films were observed through a circular polarizer with two windows for RH-CP light and LH-CP light. While the bilayered nanocomposite film reflects only LH-CP light, the biomimetic sandwich materials could reflect both LH- and RH-CP light. This hyper-reflective effect was ascribed to the phase retardation produced by the uniaxially oriented PA-6 coating. The authors hypothesize that the oriented PA-6 interlayer converts the transmitted RH-CP light to LH-CP light, allowing it to be reflected by the back chiral nematic CNC/PEGDA layer. Then, the PA-6 interlayer converts this LH-CP light back to RH-CP light, which finally passes through the front CNC/PEGDA layer, yielding both LH- and RH-CP light. As a result, the reflectance intensity increased from 39% to 77%.
The use of fillers to upgrade the mechanical behavior of materials has been one of the most investigated areas of materials science. Lightweight high-performance biological materials such as nacre, bone, crustacean cuticles, spider silk and wood combine high stiffness, strength, and toughness.170 These outstanding mechanical properties are due to the hierarchical and precise nanoscale structuring of the biological systems. For example, crustacean cuticles present highly crystalline chitin nanofibrils embedded in a binding/energy dissipating protein shell, and are organized in a twisted plywood structure with layers of different periodicity.89,171 These natural high-performance materials inspire the fabrication of ordered nanocomposite structures that mimic their multiscale structure through the combination of hard reinforcing elements arranged in a chiral nematic structure with an energy-dissipating soft matrix. Unfortunately, the fabrication methods for mimicking these complex structures represent one of the main bottlenecks for the development of hierarchically ordered high-performance materials.
A remarkable report in this field, published by Wang and Walther, is the combination of CNCs with PVA having a cholesteric liquid-crystalline structure.172 A continuous increase in stiffness upon increasing the content of CNCs together with a decrease of strain at break (εb) was found. Most interestingly, it was shown that the crack propagation mechanism (crack deflection, layered delamination, ligament bridging, and constrained microcracking) was dependent on the structural ordering, presenting a transition from a chiral nematic to a nematic alignment. These results suggest that the inelastic deformation in chiral nematic structures requires a more collaborative and coordinated movement than in composites having merely nematic ordering because of the close and ordered packing of the CNCs. Finally, detailed SEM observations for composites submitted to extended plastic deformation at high relative humidity conditions showed that although the chiral nematic order is lost upon stretching, the lamellar periodicity remains until prolonged stretching, which eventually transforms the structure to give unidirectional nematic orientation. Alternatively, inspired by the strong load-bearing properties of arthropod exoskeletons,22 Oh et al. reproduced the chiral plywood structures using chitin nanofibers extracted from crustacean shells using calcium ions.107 It was shown that the mechanical properties of the resulting epoxy/chitin nanocomposites depend on the nanoscale conformation of the chiral nanomaterials. The toughness, measured as the amount of energy stored per unit volume (J m−3) during stretching until failure, was found to increase from ∼3.4 MJ m−3 for neat epoxy to ∼4.5 and ∼9.1 MJ m−3 for nanocomposites having nematic and chiral nematic structure. This behavior was explained by the fact that during deformation, the chiral nematic regions are able to redirect the crack direction and prevent its propagation in the composite.28 Although most of the studies have been focused on structure formation and photonic properties of chiral nematic materials rather than investigating the possibilities of mechanical strengthening, these approaches demonstrate the potential for development of high-performance bioinspired nanocomposites based on renewable chitin nanocrystals.
Chitin with twisted plywood structures evolved in nature to impart composites with impressive mechanical properties. In this regard, Weaver et al.28 studied the relationship between the structure and outstanding damage-tolerance of hypermineralized hammer-like dactyl clubs of stomatopods, a group of highly aggressive marine crustaceans. These clubs are capable of withstanding accelerations of 10400 g and speeds of 23 m s−1 from a stationary position, with direct repetitive impact forces up to 1500 N and cavitation stresses without failure. Based on the hypothesis that such mechanical behavior originates from their structure (Fig. 15a), Weaver et al. showed that Odontodactylus scyllarus has a multiphase composite structure of oriented crystalline hydroxyapatite and amorphous calcium phosphate and carbonate together with a highly expanded helicoidal organization of the fibrillar chitin organic matrix. This long-range arrangement allows the infliction of crippling impacts while simultaneously minimizing internal damage within the club. Each component within the composite structure has its own purpose, being the pitch-graded helicoidal chitin architecture responsible for dissipating the energy released by propagating micro-cracks. The combination of soft polymeric nanofibers and stiffer mineral provides a periodic modulus mismatch leading to crack deflection, which in combination with the helicoidal Bouligand architecture allows for an enhanced work of fracture due to crack twisting.23 Electron microscopy results showed that apatite crystallites remain oriented parallel to the long axis of the helicoidally arranged α-chitin fibers, imparting mechanical anisotropy to the exterior of the stomatopod dactyl club. According to finite element studies, the out-of-plane mineralized fibers in combination with the sinusoidal arrangement of helicoidal in-plane mineralized fibers provide the optimal out-of plane compressive strength and toughness necessary for transferring maximum load to its prey while resisting fracture (Fig. 15b). At the same time, the incorporation of sinusoidal interfaces in the herringbone structure may improve toughness by extending the path length for crack growth, thereby enhancing energy dissipation. Although questions still remain to completely understand these impact-resistant composite materials, this is a remarkable example highlighting the way nature forms long-range chiral nematic structures to obtain composite materials with outstanding mechanical performance.
 Fig. 15  Optical micrographs revealing the buckled rotated plywood structural motif of the impact region, the pseudo-laminations of the periodic region, and the thickened circumferential band with parallel chitin fibers in the striated region of the stomatopod dactyl club (a). Micromechanical and compositional variability in the stomatopod dactyl club with a diagrammatic backscattered electron micrograph through the dactyl club indicating the locations of the impact region and the periodic region and the corresponding optical images. An elastic modulus (E) and hardness (H) map of the dactyl club and the corresponding line scan are shown (b). Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Science. 
Cellulose and chitin can be used to template materials that are promising for industrial applications. For instance, using CNCs as template, Ivanova et al. prepared nanostructured SnO2 thin films for gas sensing.173 The porous film was obtained by mixing water-dispersed CNCs with SnCl4, depositing the mixture onto a substrate and heating the dispersion to 600 °C to decompose the template. The resulting SnO2 film had pore dimensions of 10–20 nm and surface areas of 64 m2 g−1, and could be used in a resistive gas sensor with fast, highly sensitive and linear response to carbon monoxide. Recently, the templating of mesoporous inorganic materials using chitin nanofibrils has also been reported. Nguyen and MacLachlan discovered that the snow crab shell has a double twisted photonic honeycomb structure.106 SEM results showed that the shell of the snow crab presents mineralized chitin nanofibrils of 40 nm diameter that twist over the transverse plane in a counter-clockwise fashion, forming a LH chiral nematic structure. Moreover, helical macropores with a honeycomb arrangement were also observed. As illustrated in Fig. 16, the photonic framework provided by the shell was transferred to calcite (calcining the shell to generate CaCO3 replicas), nitrogen-doped carbon (carbonizing the crab shell and subsequently etching the minerals), apatite (hydrothermally treating calcined calcite with a phosphate solution), and fluorapatite/chitin (hydrothermally phosphatizating deproteinized crab shell with (NH4)2HPO4 and subsequent fluoridation with NaF) materials with structural replication. It is thus anticipated that the solid-state transformation of snow crab exoskeletons to materials having a combination of multilevel chirality, honeycomb channels and mesoporosity will open the path to the development of complex hierarchical frameworks of functional porous materials.
 Fig. 16  Structural organization of double twisted photonic honeycomb framework inspired by nature. A cartoon of the natural complexity of the mineralized chitin nanofibrils in the exoskeletal structure of the iridescent snow crab and the biomimetic transformation of the chiral nematic photonic honeycomb framework into functional mesoporous materials. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Several advanced materials with photonic properties have been reported using chitosan. For instance, a new kind of rewritable paper that uses water as a colorful ink has been fabricated by embedding well-ordered assemblies of polystyrene colloidal crystals into the chitosan matrix.174 Water could be used to tune the band-gap of these initially transparent photonic materials to yield films that could be erased and rewritten multiple times with no significant loss in color. The visual appearance of these films could be tuned by printing with aqueous buffers having different pH values to yield colors ranging from blue to red. These materials could provide environmentally friendly information storage with potential application in anti-counterfeiting, steganography and identification marking.
In addition to the above-mentioned applications, chiral nematic materials have other potential uses. Enantioselective catalysis allows the synthesis of pure chiral molecules for the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries.175 Usually, this process is carried out through chiral induction, which presents several drawbacks from an industrial point of view.176 Kaushik et al. used CNCs as heterogeneous chiral inducers for the hydrogenation of pro-chiral ketones in water.177 Their work shows that CNCs act as support and sole chiral source, yielding an enantiomeric excess of 65% with conversions up to 100%. The chiral recognition in this work arises from the chiral surface O–H groups that interact with the incoming pro-chiral substrate, and proves the use of crystalline biopolymers for this application. In the near future, chiral nematic porous CNC and chitin materials may prove to be effective supports for asymmetric catalysis.
9. Conclusions and outlook
Chitin and cellulose are the most abundant polysaccharides in the biosphere, both widely used for conventional applications such as paper, fertilizer, and plywood. Exploitation of the structural organization of biopolymers is a powerful paradigm to fabricate new materials with unique mechanical and optical properties. As well, efforts to chemically transfer these features into solid-state materials through supramolecular assembly and templating have led to new research strategies. In this review, we have highlighted efforts to organize chitin nanocrystals and use pre-organized chitin membranes obtained from seashells to create photonic materials. This concept of hierarchical organization of chitin nanocrystals is ripe for development of new materials for catalysis, separation, drug delivery, and supercapacitor electrodes, among other applications.
Our recent work on chitin has shown that large flexible iridescent mesoporous membranes of left-handed chiral nematic chitinous nanofibrils can be extracted from crustacean shells. These materials could be exploited to prepare diverse chiroptical porous materials such as silica glasses, nitrogen-doped carbon films, and hydrogels that replicate the chiral nematic organization of chitin nanofibrils. Prof. Vignolini's recent work using extracted chitin nanocrystals to control the chiral nematic structure in films of chitin nanocrystals is exciting and promising for creating new materials.
The work covered in this review highlights the many different ways to create photonic materials using chitin. Yet there are many interesting scientific questions that remain: How did crustaceans evolve the chiral nematic chitin structure? Why does the coloration enhancement occur upon deacetylation and what is the mechanism? How does the crystallinity of chitin influence the optical properties of the chiral nematic structure derived from them? How can new responsive, photonic materials be developed from chitin nanocrystals?
It is clear that chitin and cellulose are remarkable platforms for developing photonic materials. It will be exciting to see the ways in which the Bouligand structure of arthropods and the chiral nematic phase of CNCs can be used to construct novel materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to NSERC for generous funding of this work.
References
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C.-A. Fustin, A. del Campo and U. Jonas, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6265–6311 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Braun, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 277–286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, K. C.-W. Wu and T. Kimura, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6918–6928 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Martin-Martinez, K. Jin, D. López Barreiro and M. J. Buehler, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and J. Y. Ying, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2681–2691 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Revol, H. Bradford, J. Giasson, R. H. Marchessault and D. G. Gray, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1992, 14, 170–172 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. P. Kane-Maguire and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2545–2576 RSC .
K. J. De France, T. Hoare and E. D. Cranston, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4609–4631 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Stupp and L. C. Palmer, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. Duan, Q. Zhang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2231–2234 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Chung, J.-W. Oh, K. Kwak, B. Y. Lee, J. Meyer, E. Wang, A. Hexemer and S.-W. Lee, Nature, 2011, 478, 364–368 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, H. Arribart and M. M. Giraud Guille, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 277–288 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato, N. Mizoshita and K. Kishimoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 38–68 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen, J. Li, E. Lizundia, M. Niederberger, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904639 CrossRef .
O. Kose, A. Tran, L. Lewis, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ifuku and H. Saimoto, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3308–3318 RSC .
M. M. Sadat Ebrahimi and H. Schönherr, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7842–7850 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, X. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Lu, X. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Xia and L. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9126–9135 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Launey, M. J. Buehler and R. O. Ritchie, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 25–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Giraud, J. Castanet, F. J. Meunier and Y. Bouligand, Tissue Cell, 1978, 10, 671–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bouligand, Tissue Cell, 1972, 4, 189–217 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Zimmermann, B. Gludovatz, E. Schaible, N. K. N. Dave, W. Yang, M. A. Meyers and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2634 CrossRef .
N. A. Yaraghi, N. Guarín-Zapata, L. K. Grunenfelder, E. Hintsala, S. Bhowmick, J. M. Hiller, M. Betts, E. L. Principe, J.-Y. Jung, L. Sheppard, R. Wuhrer, J. McKittrick, P. D. Zavattieri and D. Kisailus, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6835–6844 CrossRef CAS .
B. Natarajan and J. W. Gilman, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2018, 376, 20170050 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Gu, C. Zhu and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3297–3317 RSC .
P. Vukusic, Science, 2009, 325, 398–399 CrossRef .
V. Sharma, M. Crne, J. O. Park and M. Srinivasarao, Science, 2009, 325, 449–451 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Weaver, G. W. Milliron, A. Miserez, K. Evans-Lutterodt, S. Herrera, I. Gallana, W. J. Mershon, B. Swanson, P. Zavattieri, E. DiMasi and D. Kisailus, Science, 2012, 336, 1275–1280 CrossRef CAS .
F. Castles, F. V. Day, S. M. Morris, D.-H. Ko, D. J. Gardiner, M. M. Qasim, S. Nosheen, P. J. W. Hands, S. S. Choi, R. H. Friend and H. J. Coles, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Edgar and D. G. Gray, Cellulose, 2001, 8, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Siddique, S. Vignolini, C. Bartels, I. Wacker and H. Hölscher, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36204 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jacucci, O. D. Onelli, A. De Luca, J. Bertolotti, R. Sapienza and S. Vignolini, Interface Focus, 2019, 9, 20180050 CrossRef .
B. D. Wilts, X. Sheng, M. Holler, A. Diaz, M. Guizar-Sicairos, J. Raabe, R. Hoppe, S.-H. Liu, R. Langford, O. D. Onelli, D. Chen, S. Torquato, U. Steiner, C. G. Schroer, S. Vignolini and A. Sepe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702057 CrossRef .
F. Utel, L. Cortese, L. Pattelli, M. Burresi, S. Vignolini and D. Wiersma, Proc. SPIE, 2017, 10367, 1036709 Search PubMed .
K. D. Feller, D. Wilby, G. Jacucci, S. Vignolini, J. Mantell, T. J. Wardill, T. W. Cronin and N. W. Roberts, Curr. Biol., 2019, 29, 3101–3108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schertel and S. Vignolini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 87–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, D. Ding, X. Yang, K. Hou, X. Miao, D. Wang, B. Kou, L. Huang and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7783–7787 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1031–1037 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thi Thanh Dang, T.-D. Nguyen, E. Lizundia, T. Quoc Le and M. J. MacLachlan, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 8207–8217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Liu, X. Yao, S. Gao, J. Xie, H. Xu and N. Lin, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 3861–3871 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Nguyen, S. Ju, L. T. Hao, T. H. Tran, H. G. Cha, Y. J. Cha, J. Park, S. Y. Hwang, D. K. Yoon, D. S. Hwang and D. X. Oh, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3236–3242 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lizundia, T.-D. Nguyen, J. L. Vilas, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19184–19194 RSC .
Y.-T. Xu, Y. Dai, T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3805–3812 RSC .
V. Hynninen, S. Hietala, J. R. McKee, L. Murtomäki, O. J. Rojas, O. Ikkala and Nonappa, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2795–2804 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Revol and R. H. Marchessault, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1993, 15, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lizundia, D. Puglia, T.-D. Nguyen and I. Armentano, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 112, 100668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 763–766 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, R. Liu, W. Liu, J. Tan, W. Liu, H. Kang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 5567–5573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Giese and M. Spengler, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 29–48 RSC .
J. A. Kelly, M. Giese, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1088–1096 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen, K. E. Shopsowitz and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 15148–15154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kadokawa, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 12736–12746 RSC .
W. Suginta, P. Khunkaewla and A. Schulte, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5458–5479 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiong, J. Luan, S. Kang, C. Ye, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 983–1031 RSC .
T.-D. Nguyen, K. E. Shopsowitz and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5915–5921 RSC .
A. M. Salaberria, R. H. Diaz, M. A. Andrés, S. C. M. Fernandes and J. Labidi, Materials, 2017, 10, 546 CrossRef .
N. E. Mushi, N. Butchosa, M. Salajkova, Q. Zhou and L. A. Berglund, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 112, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen, B. U. Peres, R. M. Carvalho and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2875–2881 CrossRef CAS .
A. Narkevicius, L. M. Steiner, R. M. Parker, Y. Ogawa, B. Frka-Petesic and S. Vignolini, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2830–2838 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Liu, S. Yang, B. Luo and C. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 325–336 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. F. Wan Nawawi, K.-Y. Lee, E. Kontturi, R. J. Murphy and A. Bismarck, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6492–6496 CrossRef .
N. Lin, S. Zhao, L. Gan, P. R. Chang, T. Xia and J. Huang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 173, 610–618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, N. Morioka, Y. Teramoto and Y. Nishio, Polym. J., 2014, 46, 559–567 CrossRef CAS .
U. Goikuria, A. Larrañaga, J. L. Vilas and E. Lizundia, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 171, 193–201 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mittal, F. Ansari, K. V. Gowda, C. Brouzet, P. Chen, P. T. Larsson, S. V. Roth, F. Lundell, L. Wågberg, N. A. Kotov and L. D. Söderberg, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6378–6388 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Plappert, F. W. Liebner, J. Konnerth and J.-M. Nedelec, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 226, 115306 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Vasconcelos, J. P. A. Feitosa, F. M. P. da Gama, J. P. S. Morais, F. K. Andrade, M. de S. M. de Souza Filho and M. de F. Rosa, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 155, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Andrade, J. P. S. Morais, C. R. Muniz, J. H. O. Nascimento, R. S. Vieira, F. M. P. Gama and M. F. Rosa, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 5851–5864 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Hsieh, H. Yano, M. Nogi and S. J. Eichhorn, Cellulose, 2008, 15, 507–513 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mezzenga, J. M. Seddon, C. J. Drummond, B. J. Boyd, G. E. Schröder-Turk and L. Sagalowicz, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900818 CrossRef .
C. G. Goltner and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, V. Pavan Kumar, C. Zhu, M. J. MacLachlan, K. J. Smith and M. O. Wolf, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 477–487 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Khan, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2323–2328 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Broer, J. Lub and G. N. Mol, Nature, 1995, 378, 467–469 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dhar, S. S. Gaur, A. Kumar and V. Katiyar, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3886 CrossRef .
T. H. Zhao, R. M. Parker, C. A. Williams, K. T. P. Lim, B. Frka-Petesic and S. Vignolini, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804531 CrossRef .
J. Li, J.-F. Revol, E. Naranjo and R. H. Marchessault, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1996, 18, 177–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Murray and A. C. Neville, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1998, 22, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Murray and A. C. Neville, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1997, 20, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
E. Belamie, P. Davidson and M. M. Giraud-Guille, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14991–15000 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. C. João, C. Echeverria, A. Velhinho, J. C. Silva, M. H. Godinho and J. P. Borges, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 155, 372–381 CrossRef .
J. Araki and M. Kurihara, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 379–388 CrossRef CAS .
C. Honorato-Rios, C. Lehr, C. Schütz, R. Sanctuary, M. A. Osipov, J. Baller and J. P. F. Lagerwall, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alonso and E. Belamie, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8201–8204 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nekvapil, S. C. Pinzaru, L. Barbu-Tudoran, M. Suciu, B. Glamuzina, T. Tamaş and V. Chiş, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 3019 CrossRef CAS .
N. Suksangpanya, N. A. Yaraghi, D. Kisailus and P. Zavattieri, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2017, 76, 38–57 CrossRef .
K. Yu, T. Fan, S. Lou and D. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 825–873 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su, T. Fan and D. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19767–19780 RSC .
P.-Y. Chen, A. Y.-M. Lin, J. McKittrick and M. A. Meyers, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4, 587–596 CrossRef .
S. Ling, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, K. Ye, Z. Liu, B. Wang, C. Yan, Z. Wang, C.-T. Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44700–44707 CrossRef CAS .
I. Capasso, B. Liguori, L. Verdolotti, D. Caputo, M. Lavorgna and E. Tervoort, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 612 CrossRef CAS .
J. Majoinen, E. Kontturi, O. Ikkala and D. G. Gray, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1599–1605 CrossRef CAS .
B. Frka-Petesic, G. Kamita, G. Guidetti and S. Vignolini, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 45601 CrossRef CAS .
M. Giese, L. K. Blusch, M. K. Khan, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8880–8884 CrossRef CAS .
J. Araki, Y. Yamanaka and K. Ohkawa, Polym. J., 2012, 44, 713–717 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Grunenfelder, S. Herrera and D. Kisailus, Small, 2014, 10, 3207–3232 CrossRef CAS .
H. El Knidri, R. Belaabed, A. Addaou, A. Laajeb and A. Lahsini, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 120, 1181–1189 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Duong, T. T. L. Chau, N. T. T. Dang, F. Vanterpool, M. Salmerón-Sánchez, E. Lizundia, H. T. Tran, L. V. Nguyen and T.-D. Nguyen, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jana, D. Parbat, B. Mondal, S. Das and U. Manna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9120–9129 RSC .
A. G. Dumanli and T. Savin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6698–6724 RSC .
M. R. Kasaai, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2009, 57, 1667–1676 CrossRef .
M. Rinaudo, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2006, 31, 603–632 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Spiegel, U. Kafkafi and E. Pressman, J. Hortic. Sci., 1988, 63, 621–627 CrossRef .
I. Hamed, F. Özogul and J. M. Regenstein, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 48, 40–50 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801275 CrossRef .
D. X. Oh, Y. J. Cha, H.-L. Nguyen, H. H. Je, Y. S. Jho, D. S. Hwang and D. K. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23245 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Cao, Z. Huang, Y. Duan and S. Che, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 479–497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yeom, B. Yeom, H. Chan, K. W. Smith, S. Dominguez-Medina, J. H. Bahng, G. Zhao, W.-S. Chang, S.-J. Chang, A. Chuvilin, D. Melnikau, A. L. Rogach, P. Zhang, S. Link, P. Král and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xing and Y. Zhao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2324–2334 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Kitao and T. Uemura, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shang, I. Song, G. Y. Jung, W. Choi, H. Ohtsu, J. H. Lee, J. Y. Koo, B. Liu, J. Ahn, M. Kawano, S. K. Kwak and J. H. Oh, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3933 CrossRef .
K. E. Shopsowitz, H. Qi, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nature, 2010, 468, 422–425 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lizundia, T.-D. Nguyen, J. L. Vilas, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 979–987 RSC .
T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2581–2588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S. Zhu, D. Zhang and Z. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2745–2747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Niu, R. Zhou, C. Cheng, G. Zhang, Y. Hu, B. Huang, S. Zhang, X. Shang, M. Xia and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 598–608 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Fan, J. Gu, J. Ding, H. Wang, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 33–40 CrossRef .
I. Zada, W. Zhang, Y. Li, P. Sun, N. Cai, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su and D. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 153701 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Fan, J. Ding, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 840–844 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Fan, J. Ding, J. Gu, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2006, 1, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, W. Zhang, J. Gu, T. Deng and D. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, S. Zhu, W. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Gu, X. Hu, D. Zhang and Z. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2072–2080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, C. Feng, Y. Shen, F. Yao, D. Zhang, W.-J. Moon and D.-M. Song, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 131, 706–713 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nath, D. Mohanta, G. A. Ahmed and A. Choudhury, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2011, 3, 458–462 CrossRef .
J. W. Galusha, L. R. Richey, M. R. Jorgensen, J. S. Gardner and M. H. Bartl, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1277–1284 RSC .
R. A. Guerrero and E. B. Aranas, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2010, 30, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Dragan and M. V. Dinu, React. Funct. Polym., 2020, 146, 104372 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cascone and G. Lamberti, Int. J. Pharm., 2020, 573, 118803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou and M. J. Webber, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9931–9934 RSC .
J. Xu, X. Liu, X. Ren and G. Gao, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 100, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Yoon and R. C. Hayward, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Stumpel, D. J. Broer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15839–15848 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Bao, X. Yang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1499–1504 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagl, Eng. Life Sci., 2018, 18, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, S. He, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3856–3863 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, Y. Tan, Z. Lv, J. Gu and D. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, S. Zhu, W. Peng, C. Yin, W. Wang, J. Gu, W. Zhang, J. Ma, T. Deng, C. Feng and D. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4911–4918 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kelly, A. M. Shukaliak, C. C. Y. Cheung, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8912–8916 CrossRef CAS .
U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ling, K. Wang, W. Liu, W. Tang and Q. Yong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8493–8501 RSC .
C. C. Ryan, J. A. M. Delezuk, A. Pavinatto, O. N. Oliveira, H. Fudouzi, M. E. Pemble and M. Bardosova, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 5388–5396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoshioka and S. Kinoshita, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 2691–2701 CrossRef .
X. Xu, A. V. Goponenko and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3113–3119 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Op’t Veld, X. F. Walboomers, J. A. Jansen and F. A. D. T. G. Wagener, Tissue Eng., Part B, 2020, 26, 230–248 CrossRef .
T. Zhu, J. Mao, Y. Cheng, H. Liu, L. Lv, M. Ge, S. Li, J. Huang, Z. Chen, H. Li, L. Yang and Y. Lai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900761 CrossRef .
H. Kang, S. Jung, S. Jeong, G. Kim and K. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6503 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Liang, J.-W. Liu, H.-S. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1450–1461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chu, X. Wang, T. Chen, J. Gao, F. Gai, Y. Wang and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11863–11870 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, T.-D. Nguyen, K. Xie, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13215–13223 RSC .
P.-X. Wang, V. M. Zamarion, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 14724–14731 RSC .
H. Qi, K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3728–3731 CrossRef CAS .
T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600514 CrossRef .
N. K. Wittig, J. Palle, M. Østergaard, S. Frølich, M. E. Birkbak, K. M. Spiers, J. Garrevoet and H. Birkedal, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12949–12956 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Spiesz, D. T. Schmieden, A. M. Grande, K. Liang, J. Schwiedrzik, F. Natalio, J. Michler, S. J. Garcia, M.-E. Aubin-Tam and A. S. Meyer, Small, 2019, 15, 1805312 CrossRef .
H.-J. Ensikat, T. Geisler and M. Weigend, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26073 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Kim, R. Darkins, A. Broad, A. N. Kulak, M. A. Holden, O. Nahi, S. P. Armes, C. C. Tang, R. F. Thompson, F. Marin, D. M. Duffy and F. C. Meldrum, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5682 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, N. M. Alves and J. F. Mano, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3312–3318 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsumura, S. Kajiyama, T. Nishimura and T. Kato, Small, 2015, 11, 5127–5133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, S. Wu, H. Zhou, H. Huang, J. Zhao, Y. Deng, H. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Yang and L. Luo, Environ. Int., 2018, 121, 523–537 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Nguyen, H. He and C. Pham-Huy, Int. J. Biomed. Sci., 2006, 2, 85–100 CAS .
E. Dujardin, M. Blaseby and S. Mann, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 696–699 RSC .
J.-H. Zhang, S.-M. Xie, M. Zhang, M. Zi, P.-G. He and L.-M. Yuan, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9595–9602 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai and Y. Okamoto, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6077–6101 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Zhang, M. Zhang, S.-M. Xie, P.-G. He and L.-M. Yuan, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 3448–3453 RSC .
G. Vulugundam, S. K. Misra, F. Ostadhossein, A. S. Schwartz-Duval, E. A. Daza and D. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7513–7516 RSC .
J. Liang, C. Song and J. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19041–19049 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Wilts, H. M. Whitney, B. J. Glover, U. Steiner and S. Vignolini, Mater. Today: Proc., 2014, 1, 177–185 Search PubMed .
T. Wu, J. Li, J. Li, S. Ye, J. Wei and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9687–9696 RSC .
P. Fratzl and R. Weinkamer, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1263–1334 CrossRef CAS .
H.-O. Fabritius, C. Sachs, P. R. Triguero and D. Raabe, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang and A. Walther, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10637–10646 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ivanova, B. Frka-Petesic, A. Paul, T. Wagner, A. N. Jumabekov, Y. Vilk, J. Weber, J. Schmedt auf der Günne, S. Vignolini, M. Tiemann, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing and T. Bein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12639–12647 CrossRef CAS .
M. Isik, T. Lonjaret, H. Sardon, R. Marcilla, T. Herve, G. G. Malliaras, E. Ismailova and D. Mecerreyes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8942–8948 RSC .
S. Kuwano, Y. Hosaka and T. Arai, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2019, 17, 4475–4482 RSC .
C.-H. Pélisson, A. Denicourt-Nowicki, C. Meriadec, J.-M. Greneche and A. Roucoux, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 309–315 CrossRef .
M. Kaushik, K. Basu, C. Benoit, C. M. Cirtiu, H. Vali and A. Moores, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6124–6127 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Erlantz Lizundia
	Erlantz Lizundia is Associate Professor at the Faculty of Engineering in Bilbao, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU). He received his PhD in Advanced Materials Engineering in 2011 at the UPV/EHU. He joined the University of British Columbia (Canada) and ETH Zurich (Switzerland) in 2016 and 2018 as a visiting scientist. His work aims to develop novel multifunctional materials using renewable materials as a platform source for optical, sensing, energy storage, environmental remediation, and actuator applications. Erlantz also works on the ecodesign of novel materials and technologies through life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology.

Thanh-Dinh Nguyen
	Thanh-Dinh Nguyen received his PhD in chemical engineering from Laval University in 2011. He later joined the MacLachlan group at the University of British Columbia as a Postdoctoral researcher, where he was awarded a NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship. In 2016, he was appointed Research Associate at the same University. His research spans the area of materials chemistry including inorganic materials and biopolymer materials. His research interests focus on the inspiration of new structures from the supramolecular self-assembly, biomimicry, and cluster evolution to develop hierarchical materials at micro- and nanoscales for applications. He has published over 60 research and review articles and book chapters in the fields of chemistry and materials science.
	Rebecca Winnick earned her Master's degree in Chemistry from UBC in 2017, where she worked on chitin-containing materials with Prof. MacLachlan. She has had an eclectic career, working as a research chemist, wetland restoration specialist, fish biologist, forklift driver, touring musician, square dance caller, and festival organizer. She is currently living in Virginia and studying to become a massage therapist, specializing in Myofascial Release.

Mark J. MacLachlan
	Mark MacLachlan is Professor of Chemistry at the University of British Columbia. He started at UBC in 2001, was promoted to Associate Professor in 2007, and has been Professor since 2011. His research interests span from supramolecular chemistry and macrocycles to nanomaterials and photonic structures. In particular, his group has been focused on the development of new materials from cellulose and chitin nanocrystals. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and holds the Canada Research Chair in Supramolecular Materials.

 	Fig. 1  Structural coloration of arthropods in nature. Photographs of (a) jewel beetle,27 (b) butterfly, (c) peacock mantis shrimp,28 and the corresponding SEM images (below) of the chitin-containing structures in their exoskeletons. (d) Origin of the photonic properties arising from the selective reflection of circularly polarized light by a chiral nematic structure. The rods depict the average orientation of the director, which rotates through the film thickness. The relationship of helical pitch P with circularly reflected light is governed by λmax = navgPsinθ. Adapted from ref. 27 and 28 with permission from Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optically active helicoidal structures of chitin nanofibril assemblies. Anisotropic chitin nanocomponents naturally self-organize into a chiral nematic phase in the cuticles inside crustacean shells and chemically self-assemble into a liquid crystal mesophase. Adapted from ref. 38 and 51 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 


Chitin nanofibrils38,51,55–57	Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of king crab endocuticles or lobster exoskeletons	∅: 10–18 nm	∼90%	+43 mV	N.R.	N.R.	Yes

	L: 300–500 nm	
	
	
	
	

Chitin nanofibrils58,59	Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of shrimp shells	∅: 10–50 nm	∼90%	+40 to +60 mV	∼300 °C	
E
axial: 60 GPa	Yes

	L: 50–300 nm	
	
	
	
	

Chitin nanofibrils60	Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of raw chitin	∅: 50 nm	N.R.	+37 mV	>300 °C	
σ = 7.5 GPa	Yes

	L: 200–1000 nm	
	
	
	
	

Chitin nanofibrils61,62	Mild mechanical agitation from mushrooms	∅: 10 nm	From 44 to 56%	+33 mV	230–280 °C	N.R.	N.R.

	L: 143 nm	79% (HCl-hydrolysis)	
	
	
	

Chitosan nanofibrils58,63	Hot alkali treatment of purified shrimp shells	N.R.	N.R. (low crystallinity)	N.R.	N.R.	N.R.	Yes


Cellulose nanocrystals46,64	Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellulose	∅: 3–10 nm	>85%	−40 to −30 mV	∼180 °C	
E
axial: 110–220 GPa	Yes

	L: 150–2000 nm	
	
	
	
σ = 7.5–7.7 GPa	

Cellulose nanofibers65,66	TEMPO-assisted mechanical destructuring	∅: 5–30 nm	From 40 to 80%	−60 to −40 mV	∼250 °C	
E
axial: 86 GPa	N.R.

	L: 1000–5000 nm	
	
	
	
σ = 1.57 GPa	

Bacterial cellulose67–69	Synthesized via bottom-up approach by bacteria	∅: up to 100 nm	From 60 to 80%	−30 to −20 mV	∼320 °C	
E
axial: 114 GPa	N.R.

	L: up to 100 μm	
	
	
	
	


 	Fig. 3  Photographs (middle) and POM images (right) of (a) lyotropic LCs of chitin nanorods prepared from acid hydrolysis,45 and (b) chitin nanorods prepared from sequential deacetylation and hydrolysis.45,55 Adapted from ref. 45 and 55 with permission from Elsevier and the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Controlling the self-assembly behavior of liquid-dispersed chitin nanocrystals. (a) POM image of a chitin nanocrystal dispersion in an oil phase exhibiting hierarchical cholesteric architectures.60 (b) Cross-section SEM image of a chiral nematic chitin nanocrystal solid film showing its Bouligand structure and pitch. (c) The chiral nematic pitch in suspension and solid state (100 wt% concentration) can be easily tuned by varying the HCl and NaCl concentration. Adapted from ref. 59 and 60 with permission from ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 5  Chiral nematic mesoporous chitin membranes from crab endocuticles. Photographs of king crab leg (a) before and (b) after sequential chemical purification and delamination to obtain iridescent chitin cuticles,58 (c) POM image of chitin cuticle membranes, (d) SEM image viewed along edge of chitin membranes, (e) CD spectra of chitin (red) and dried chitin (blue) membranes and UV-Vis spectrum of wet chitin membranes (orange). (f) Nitrogen sorption isotherms of chitin membranes after supercritical drying with CO2. Adapted from ref. 38 and 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photonic chiral nematic mesoporous chitosan nanostructured membranes. (a) Photograph of iridescent chitosan membranes from shrimp shells.58 (b) Photographs of chitosan membrane taken through LH (left) and RH (right) CP filters. (c) UV-Vis and CD spectra of iridescent chitosan membrane. (d) Schematic of LH chiral nematic ordered structure of chitosan nanofibrils in photonic mesoporous membrane. (e and f) Different magnified SEM cross-sectional images of chitosan membranes. Adapted from ref. 38 and 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 7  Biomimetic templating of photonic chiral nematic mesoporous silica by chitin nanofibrils. Photographs of (a) chiral nematic silica/chitin composites and (b) chiral nematic mesoporous silica films, (c) UV-Vis spectrum of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (blue); CD spectra of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (blue) and water-soaked chiral nematic mesoporous silica (black). (d) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of chiral nematic mesoporous silica (black: adsorption, red: desorption); inset: BJH pore size distribution calculated from the adsorption branch of the isotherm. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electron microscopy images of chiral nematic mesoporous silica templated by chitin. SEM images viewed along cross sections (a,c) and edges (b), and TEM image (d) of chiral nematic mesoporous silica films. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Reflectance changes of pH-sensitive chitosan/PVA IPN in basic environments. Adapted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Hierarchical structures of pH-responsive PCs from Morpho butterfly wings after PMMA synthesis on treated butterfly wings to transform their surface from chitin to chitosan. (c) Representative spectral responses of a PC to different pH values; (d) reversibility of the diffraction resonance after multiple pH cyclings. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from ACS Publications. (e) Transmission spectra of a CNC/PAAm hydrogel soaked in varying concentrations of aqueous ethanol. Adapted from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 10  Responsive photonic chiral nematic deacetylated chitin membranes (DCMs). (a) Photographs of tunable iridescence of DCMs in water during drying of water. (b) SEM image of a DCM. (c) UV-Vis and CD spectra of wet (red) and dried (blue) DCM. (d) Tunable helical pitch of the swollen membranes. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photonic chiral nematic hydrogels based on chitosan. (a) Photograph of swollen acetylated PMMA/chitosan hydrogels, (b) POM image of swollen PMMA/chitosan hydrogels, (c) CD and UV-Vis spectra of PMMA/chitosan hydrogels swollen at pH ∼ 1.4. (d and e) SEM cross-sectional images of dried PMMA/chitosan hydrogels. Adapted from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fabrication process of CaCO3/chitin hybrid materials using chitin whiskers as the helically-ordered template. (b) POM image and (c) SEM image of chiral nematic CaCO3/chitin hybrid materials. Adapted from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chiral nematic mesoporous silica films templated by cellulose nanocrystals for high-resolution gas chromatographic separation. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Calcium-mediated process to obtain nitrogen-doped chiral nematic carbonaceous hydrogels with no need for a template. (b) Adsorption capacity (left) and enantioselective adsorption (right) of L-lactic acid by the chiral nitrogen-doped carbon hydrogel and the resulting enantiomeric excess, ee. Adapted from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 15  Optical micrographs revealing the buckled rotated plywood structural motif of the impact region, the pseudo-laminations of the periodic region, and the thickened circumferential band with parallel chitin fibers in the striated region of the stomatopod dactyl club (a). Micromechanical and compositional variability in the stomatopod dactyl club with a diagrammatic backscattered electron micrograph through the dactyl club indicating the locations of the impact region and the periodic region and the corresponding optical images. An elastic modulus (E) and hardness (H) map of the dactyl club and the corresponding line scan are shown (b). Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structural organization of double twisted photonic honeycomb framework inspired by nature. A cartoon of the natural complexity of the mineralized chitin nanofibrils in the exoskeletal structure of the iridescent snow crab and the biomimetic transformation of the chiral nematic photonic honeycomb framework into functional mesoporous materials. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
