Constructing nanorod – nanoparticles hierarchical structure at low temperature as photoanodes for dye -sensitized solar cells: combining relatively fa ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM14191K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM14191K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19389-19394Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsConstructing nanorod–nanoparticles hierarchical structure at low temperature as photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells: combining relatively fast electron transport and high dye-loading together†

        
          
            Haopeng 
            Dong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liduo 
            Wang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Gao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Beibei 
            Ma
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Qiu
          
        
      
Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      26th August 2011
    , Accepted 24th September 2011First published on 1st November 2011Abstract
        ZnO
        nanorod–nanoparticles (NR–NPs) hierarchical structure was prepared via a two-step hydrothermal process at 70 °C. In the hierarchical structure, ZnO nanorods prepared at step one served as the backbone for direct electron transport while ZnO nanoparticles synthesized at step two offered large surface area for dye-loading. Both reaction temperature and reaction time at step two had a significant influence on the morphology of the product. At a higher temperature, microspheres appeared above the nanorod film instead of nanoparticles surrounding the nanorods. Prolonging the reaction time to 24 h, the NR–NPs structure would transform to nanorod–nanoplants. Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy results showed that the photoanode composed of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure had an electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) much higher than that of the nanoparticles. The dye desorption results showed that the dye adsorption amount for the NR–NPs structure was as much as 250% of that for the nanorods. Compared with dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) based on nanorods, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the DSCs based on NR–NPs hierarchical structure improved remarkably. Under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), the power conversion efficiency of DSCs based on photoanodes composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure exhibited a significant improvement (more than 120%) compared with that of ZnO nanorods.
1. Introduction

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are regarded as one competitive alternative to conventional inorganic photovoltaic cells due to their simple manufacturing process, low production cost and high power conversion efficiency.1,2 Up to now, conversion efficiencies of up to 12% have been achieved.3 As a usual photoanode material for DSCs, ZnO has a similar bandgap but higher electron mobility compared with TiO2, and is much easier to crystallize.4–7 So far, a wide variety of ZnO nanostructures have been reported for the fabrication of photoanodes for DSCs, for example, nanoparticles,8nanowires,9,10nanorods,11nanosheets,12 nanoflowers,13,14 spherical aggregates15,16 and so on.17–20 Among the various morphologies, 1-D structures such as nanowires and nanorods have attracted more interest because they can provide direct conduction paths for the electrons. Under this conception, charge recombination, which causes serious loss of photocurrent, can be suppressed.
However, DSCs based on 1-D structures have not reached a high conversion efficiency as expected, for example, efficiency of 1.5% was achieved for ZnO nanowires and 2.4% for nanorods.9,11 This may due to the fact that the 1-D structures have a much smaller surface area for dye adsorption compared with nanoparticles. Constructing hierarchical morphologies based on 1-D structures and nanoparticles turns out to be an effective way of developing photoanodes with both high electron mobility and large surface area, since nanoparticles can improve the surface area significantly.21–25 Cao et al. made nanoparticle and nanowire array hybrid photoanodes by spin-coating the colloidal dispersion of ZnO nanoparticles on top of ZnO nanowire arrays.21 Wu et al. reported three-dimensional ZnO nanodendrite–nanoparticle composite solar cells, and an efficiency of 3.74% was obtained.22
Despite a remarkable improvement in the conversion efficiency of DSCs based on structures composed of 1-D structures and nanoparticles, hierarchical structures for ZnO photoanodes are still suffering from a series of problems. A major problem is how to disperse a large amount of nanoparticles homogeneously among 1-D structures during the photoanode manufacture process.21
Here, using a two-step low temperature hydrothermal process, we prepared ZnO nanorod–nanoparticles (NR–NPs) hierarchical structure successfully. In the NR–NPs hierarchical structure, the ZnO nanorods prepared at step one serve as the backbone for direct electron transport while the ZnO nanoparticles synthesized at step two offer large surface area for dye-loading. The low temperature hydrothermal process possessed the following advantages: firstly, the synthesis temperature was very low (nearly 70 °C), which may save the energy use and fabrication cost of DSCs. Secondly, the solution-phase approach made sure that the nanoparticles are distributed homogeneously among the nanorods, even at the bottom of the photoanode. And finally, due to the strong chelate effect of trisodium citrate, the synthesized nanoparticles were very small and uniform, enabling high dye adsorption on the photoanode. Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) results showed that the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) of NR–NPs hierarchical structure decreased a little compared to that of nanorods, but was still much higher than that of nanoparticles. The dye desorption results showed that the dye adsorption amount for the NR–NPs structure was as much as 250% of that for the nanorods. Photovoltaic performance of DSCs based on nanorods and the NR–NPs hierarchical structure was studied. The power conversion efficiency of DSCs based on photoanodes composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure (2.60%) exhibited a significant improvement (more than 120%) compared with that of ZnO nanorods (1.16%). What is worth mentioning is that the electrolyte we used here was quasi-solid PEO electrolyte (see supporting information, Figure S1†), which was more stable than liquid electrolyte.
2. Experimental
Synthesis of ZnO nanorod film on FTO glass
All chemicals were used as received without further purification. FTO glass cleaned three times by sonication in distilled water was employed as the substrate. To synthesize nanorod films, a usual low temperature hydrothermal process was used. In a typical experimental procedure, FTO glass was put into a 100 mL glass bottle containing 0.015 mol L−1zinc nitrate hyxahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 99%, Alfa Aesar) and 0.015 mol L−1hexamethylenetetramine (HMT, 99+%, Alfa Aesar) aqueous solution, and hydrothermal reaction was carried out at 75 °C for 6 h. Then the FTO glass covered by nanorod film was taken out carefully and dried at room temperature.
Synthesis of ZnO NR–NPs structure
To get a photoanode film with both high electron transport and high dye-loading, NR–NPs hierarchical structure was synthesized by a two-step hydrothermal process. Step one was the same as the synthesis of the ZnO nanorod film. For step two, FTO glass covered by nanorod film was transferred into a 100 mL glass bottle containing 0.01 mol L−1Zn(NO3)2, 0.01 mol L−1 HMT and 0.001 mol L−1trisodium citrate (C6H5Na3·2H2O, A.R. Beijing Chemical Works) aqueous solution, and hydrothermal reaction was carried out at 70 °C for 6 h. Controlled experiments, varying conditions such as the reaction temperature and reaction time, were performed via a similar process. At last, films composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure were obtained.
Fabrication of DSCs
Before sensitizing, the FTO glass covered by nanorod film or NR–NPs film was sintered at 360 °C for 30 min to increase the contact of nanorods and nanoparticles. Then the photoanodes were sensitized in 0.3 mmol L−1 N719 absolute ethanol solution for 15 min, followed by cleaning with absolute ethanol to remove the redundant dyes. A chemically platinized conductive glass was used as the counter electrode. The composition of the polymer gel electrolyte: 0.1 mol L−1LiI, 0.1 mol L−1 I2, 0.6 mol L−11,2-dimethyl-3-propyl imidazolium iodide, 0.45 mol L−1N-methyl-benzimidazole, and the solvent was 3-methoxypropionitrile, PEO (Mw = 2 × 106) weight ratio (vs. liquid electrolyte) was 10%.26 When assembling DSCs, the polymer gel electrolyte was sandwiched by a sensitized ZnO electrode and a counter electrode with two clips, the space between the two electrodes was controlled by an adhesive tape with a thickness of 30μm and the DSCs were not sealed. Finally, the DSCs were baked at 80 °C for 15 min to ensure the polymer gel electrolyte had penetrated the nanoporous electrode.
Characterization of the samples
The morphologies of the ZnO nanorod films and NR–NPs films were characterized by SEM (JSM 7401). The current–voltage measurements and IMPS/IMVS were investigated using a ZAHNER CIMPS electrochemical workstation. The incident light intensity was calibrated with a standard crystalline silicon solar cell. The total active area of the DSCs was 0.25 cm2.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the experimental process. At both steps, HMT acted as a pH buffer and provided a slow and controlled supply of OH−. It has been proposed that HMT reacts with water to produce ammonia, which in turn reacts with water to generate OH−.20,23,27–29 At step one, Zn2+ reacted with the OH− generated by HMT to form nanorods. At step two, a certain concentration of trisodium citrate, which had a strong chelate effect with Zn2+, was employed. In the presence of trisodium citrate, only nanoparticles with uniform size could be produced. These nanoparticles surrounded the nanorods which were synthesized at step one to form the NR–NPs hierarchical structure.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the experimental process for making photoanodes composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure. 
3.1 Morphology study
The morphology and size of the samples were firstly examined by SEM. Fig. 2.(a) and (b) show the low- and high-magnification SEM images of the nanorods synthesized at step one. It was clear that the nanorods' length was more than 5 μm and the diameter was nearly 300 nm. Some of the nanorods fused together to form flower-like structures. These nanorods stacked in a random way to form the film, so continuous and large pores were formed in the photoanode. As ZnO photoanodes for DSCs, this was very significant. Large pores could shorten the sensitizing time and consequently repress the reaction between dye’s carboxyl group (–COOH) and ZnO. Besides, large pores were beneficial for the electrolyte to penetrate into the photoanode, so photoanodes with big pores were more suitable to fabricate quasi-solid and even all-liquid state DSCs.
 Fig. 2  (a,b) low- and high-magnification SEM images of the nanorods; (c,d) low- and high-magnification SEM images of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure. 

Fig. 2 (c) and (d) show the low- and high-magnification SEM images of the NR–NPs hierarchical nanostructure. In Fig. 2 (c), it is easy to observe that the smooth surfaces of the nanorods were surrounded by nanoparticles, forming a rough “shell”. The diameter of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure increased obviously compared with that of the nanorods, indicating that the shell formed by nanoparticles was very thick. This ensured that the surface area of photoanode increased significantly. In the high-magnification SEM image (Fig. 2(d)), one can see that the surrounding particles were very small, with a diameter of nearly 5 nm. Particles with such a small size have a very large surface to adsorb dye molecules, but are not beneficial for electron transport. So they could not be used to fabricate thick photoanode films directly. For the NR–NPs hierarchical structure, electrons could transport directly in the nanorod, so this problem was solved successfully. Another interesting thing that should be mentioned is that these nanoparticles did not surround the nanorod in a compact way. It seems that these nanoparticles undergo an oriented attachment sideways to form nanosheets perpendicular to the nanorod's surface.
3.2 Effects of reaction temperature and reaction time
There are four different parameters, kinetic energy barrier, temperature, time, and capping molecules that might influence the growth pattern of nanocrystals under nonequilibrium kinetic growth conditions in the solution-based approach.30 Here, the influences of reaction temperature and reaction time at step two were studied. Results show that the NR–NPs hierarchical structure could only be achieved with suitable reaction temperature and reaction time.
To examine the effect of reaction temperature in the synthesis process of NR–NPs hierarchical structure, two control experiments with a lower temperature (50 °C) and a higher temperature (90 °C) for step two were studied. Fig. 3 shows the low- and high-magnification images of samples synthesized at different temperatures. At 50 °C, it seemed that it was very hard for HMT to react with water. Even after 6 h, the solution still remained clear, indicating that no ZnO grains were formed. Fig. 3 (a,b) show that no obvious ZnO nanoparticles were generated on the surface of nanorods, in accord with the experimental phenomena observed. At 90 °C, as shown in Fig. 3 (e), many ZnO microspheres were generated. High-magnification image of a microsphere is shown in Fig. 3 (f). It was found that the microsphere was assembled by ultrathin nanosheets, which is consistent with earlier reports.31,32 Wang et al. studied this structure in detail and found that the hierarchical microspheres were also composed of nanoparticles whose diameters were around 2–6nm, similar to the nanoparticles synthesized at 70 °C.31 So we thought similar process had happened during the formation of NR–NPs hierarchical structure and these microspheres. The difference was that at a high temperature (90 °C), large numbers of nanoparticles were formed quickly in the solution and then attached together to form microspheres; but at a low temperature (70 °C), the nanoparticles had not attached together but had grown on the surfaces of nanorod out of phase. As the microspheres generated at 90 °C were deposited above the nanorod film, this was not beneficial for electron transport compared with the NR–NPs hierarchical structure synthesized at 70 °C.
 Fig. 3  Low- and high-magnification SEM images of samples synthesized with different reaction temperatures for step two: (a,b) 50 °C; (c,d) 70 °C; (e,f) 90 °C. 

Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the ZnO compound structure with different reaction times for step two (the reaction temperature was kept at 70 °C). At the very beginning, the nanorods had a very smooth surface. After the solution was heated for one hour, it became milky white. At that time, a small amount of nanoparticles could be found sticking to the nanorods and the surfaces became coarse, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). After six hours, the solution became clear again and it can be seen from Fig. 4 (c) that large amount of nanoparticles were generated surrounding the nanorods, forming a NR–NPs hierarchical structure. Continuing the reaction to a longer time, up to 24 h, an interesting morphology transformation was found: nanoparticles converted to thick and irregular nanoplants. The similar morphology transformation had been reported previously.32,33 Huang et al. found that in the presence of trisodium citrate, microspheres mentioned above could slowly change to plant-like structure after 24 h of reaction.32 According to the previous reports, we thought this transformation might also go through a dissolution–recrystallization process. Though ZnO was very stable at room temperature and in neutral solution, the dissolution–recrystallization process could occur at a high temperature and in basic solution. As a result, the ZnO nanoparticles changed to a more stable morphology. The detailed transformation process still needed to be studied afterwards. Compared with nanoparticles, the surface of thick nanoplants was smaller, so not beneficial for dye-loading.
 Fig. 4  
            SEM images of samples synthesized with different reaction times for step two (the reaction temperature was kept at 70 °C): (a) 0 h. (b) 1 h. (c) 6 h. (d) 24 h. 
3.3 Electron transporting and dye adsorbing abilities
To verify the advantages of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure, we investigated the electron transport in the photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure by the intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). Fig. 5 shows the diffusion coefficient (Dn) and effective electron lifetime (τn) of photon-introduced-electrons in photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs as a function of light intensity. Compared with nanorods, the Dn of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure decreased a little. That was because before being transported directly in the nanorods, electrons in the NR–NPs structure had to transport through the surrounding nanoparticles. Despite all this, the Dn of NR–NPs hierarchical structure was still nearly 5 × 10−4 cm2s−1, much larger than that of nanoparticles (nearly 10−5 cm2s−1),14,34 because in the NR–NPs hierarchical structure nanorods were still the main transport path for electrons. From the IMVS results, the τn of NR–NPs hierarchical structure increased compared to that of nanorods. That means the recombination of photo introduced electrons in the NR–NPs was retarded. We attributed this to the introduction of surrounding nanoparticles, by which a “shell” was formed. The thick shell retarded the recombination of electrons when they were tranported through the nanorods. Though introduction of nanoparticles also created a new chance for the recombination of electrons, it seemed that the shell's protection for nanorods played a major role, which led to the increase of τn.
 Fig. 5  (a) Electron diffusion coefficients (Dn) and (b) effective electron lifetime (τn) of the sensitized photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure as a function of light intensity. 
In addition to the electron transport ability, dye loading ability is also a significant factor for photoanodes of DSCs. Generally, a large dye absorption amount could make sure that the introduced photons are fully absorbed, thus resulting in a larger short circuit current and consequently improving the overall conversion efficiency. Here, we studied the dye adsorption amount of photoanodes made of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure by a desorption method. Fig. 6 shows the optical absorbance of solutions containing dyes desorbed from sensitized photoanode films composed of nanorods and NR–NPs. The amount of dye loading in the ZnO NR–NPs hierarchical structure was found to be 5.1 × 10−8 mol cm−2, which was as much as 250% of that of the nanorods (1.8 × 10−8 mol cm−2), just as we had expected.
 Fig. 6  Optical absorbance of solutions containing dyes desorbed from the sensitized photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure. 
3.4 Photovoltaic properties
The as-prepared ZnO films based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure were used as photoanodes for the fabrication of quasi-solid DSCs. Fig. 7 shows the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the DSCs as a function of the monochromatic irradiation wavelength. It can be seen that, compared with DSCs based on nanorods, the IPCE of the DSCs based on NR–NPs hierarchical structure improved remarkably from 400 nm to 750 nm. According to the discussion above, this should mostly be attributed to the enhancement of the dye adsorption amount. Fig. 8 shows the overall photovoltaic performance of the DSCs measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The detailed results are listed in Table 1. As shown in Fig. 8 and Table 1, the short circuit current (JSC) of the DSC based on NR–NPs hierarchical structure improved significantly in contrast to that of the nanorods. This agreed with the results for dye-loading and IPCE. At the same time, the Voc of the DSC based on NR–NPs hierarchical structure also increased, which was consistent with the IMVS results. DSCs based on photoanodes composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure achieved an efficiency of 2.60%, which was an improvement of more than 120% compared with DSCs based on nanorods (1.16%). What is worth mentioning is that the electrolyte we used here was quasi-solid PEO electrolyte, which was more stable than liquid electrolyte.
 Fig. 7  Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the DSCs based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure. 
 Fig. 8  Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of DSCs based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance of DSCs based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure (JSC: short circuit current; VOC: open circuit volage; FF: fill factor; η: photoelectric conversion efficiency)




sample

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V

FF


η (%)





nanorods

3.49
0.56
0.59
1.16



                    NR–NPs
6.63
0.64
0.61
2.60




4. Conclusions
In summary, NR–NPs hierarchical structure was synthesized successfully through a two-step hydrothermal process at low temperature. Both reaction temperature and reaction time at step two had a significant influence on the morphology of the product. Only under proper reaction conditions, the NR–NPs could be achieved. At a higher temperature, microspheres instead of nanoparticles surrounding the nanorod appeared. Prolonging the reaction time to 24 h, the NR–NPs structure transformed to a nanorod–nanoplants morphology. IMPS results showed that the NR–NPs structure had a very high electron diffusion coefficient and the dye desorption results showed that the NR–NPs had a dye-loading amount nearly 2.5 times that of the nanorods. Owing to the fast electron transport and high dye-loading, the IPCE of the DSCs based on the NR–NPs hierarchical structure increased remarkably. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of quasi-solid DSCs based on the NR–NPs hierarchical structure exhibited a significant improvement (more than 120%) compared with that of ZnO nanorods.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.50873055 and the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.2009CB930602.
References
B. O'regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Gratzel, International Symposium on Solar cells and Solar Fuels, Dalian, China,  Dec, 10–12, 2008 Search PubMed .
G. Redmond, D. Fitzmaurize and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 686 CrossRef CAS .
M. Quintana, T. Edvinsson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1035 CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6769 RSC .
K. Keis, C. Bauer, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, K. Westermark, H. Rensmo and H. Siegbahn, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Xu, J. M. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, P. Diao, X. D. Wang and S. M. Cai, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 3210 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, T. Kimura and H. Imai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 272, 391 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo, D. L. Kwong and J. X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263501 CrossRef .
C. Cheng, Y. T. Shi, C. Zhu, W. Li, L. Wang, K. K. Fung and N. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10631 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1654 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Shi, C. Z, L. D. Wang, B. B. Ma, R. Gao, Y. F. Zhu and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Shi, H. P. Dong, L. D. Wang, C. Zhan, R. Gao and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3183 RSC .
Q. P. Luo, B. X. Lei, X. Y. Yu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8709 RSC .
S. Yodyingyong, Q. F. Zhang, K. Park, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou, D. Triampo and G. Z. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 73115 CrossRef .
C. T. Wu, W. P. Liao and J. J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2871 RSC .
Y. F. Zhu, G. H. Zhou, H. Y. Ding, A. H. Liu, Y. B. Lin and N. L. Li, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2010, 45, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, R. Zhu, X. Z. Liu, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 043304 CrossRef .
Y. T. Shi, C. Zhan, L. D. Wang, B. B. Ma, R. Gao, Y. F. Zhu and Y. Qiu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4230 RSC .
H. H. Wang, S. Baek, J. Song, J. Lee and S. Lim, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 075607 CrossRef .
W. Q. Peng, S. C. Qu, G. W. Cong and Z. G. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1518 CAS .
X. D. Gao, X. M. Li and W. D. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1155 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, S. N. Cho and J. W. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 441 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Lu, S. M. Wang, L. Zhao, J. C. Li, B. H. Dong and Z. X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4228 RSC .
C. L. Kuo, T. J. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20115 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Hu, Y. Masuda, T. Ohji and K. Kato, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 881 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Xu, R. Z. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, D. Shi, J. Guo, Z. H. Yi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19770 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Image of the quasi-solid PEO electrolyte; Cross-section view SEM image of the nanorod film. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14191kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the experimental process for making photoanodes composed of NR–NPs hierarchical structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a,b) low- and high-magnification SEM images of the nanorods; (c,d) low- and high-magnification SEM images of the NR–NPs hierarchical structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Low- and high-magnification SEM images of samples synthesized with different reaction temperatures for step two: (a,b) 50 °C; (c,d) 70 °C; (e,f) 90 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  
            SEM images of samples synthesized with different reaction times for step two (the reaction temperature was kept at 70 °C): (a) 0 h. (b) 1 h. (c) 6 h. (d) 24 h.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Electron diffusion coefficients (Dn) and (b) effective electron lifetime (τn) of the sensitized photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure as a function of light intensity.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical absorbance of solutions containing dyes desorbed from the sensitized photoanodes composed of nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure.	 

 	Fig. 7  Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the DSCs based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of DSCs based on nanorods and NR–NPs hierarchical structure measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).	 


nanorods
	3.49	0.56	0.59	1.16

                    NR–NPs	6.63	0.64	0.61	2.60
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Image of the quasi-solid PEO electrolyte; Cross-section view SEM image of the nanorod film. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14191k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
