Environmentally safe, substrate-independent and repairable nanoporous coatings: large-scale preparation, high transparency and antifouling properties  ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05112C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05112C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20277-20288Environmentally safe, substrate-independent and repairable nanoporous coatings: large-scale preparation, high transparency and antifouling properties†

        
          
            Yong 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhaozhu 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mengke 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuehu 
            Men
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Qunji 
            Xue
          
        
      a
aState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianshui Road 18th, Lanzhou 730000, PR China. E-mail: zzzhang@licp.cas.cn;   Tel: +86 0931 4968098
bUniversity of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, PR China
cSchool of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000, P. R. China. E-mail: menxh@lzu.edu.cn
Received 
      12th June 2017
    , Accepted 1st September 2017First published on 1st September 2017AbstractSuperhydrophobic self-cleaning coatings have attracted significant attention from the scientific community and the industrial world. However, their real-world applications are still restricted by their low transparency that will destroy the intrinsic properties of substrates, poor durability, expensive toxic reagents and complex preparation processes. In this context, we developed a versatile and efficient method to fabricate environmentally safe and self-cleaning coatings based on the self-assembly of modified porous chain-like SiO2 nanoparticles. The properties of the coating layer were tunable by changing the coating conditions including the concentration of ingredients and thickness of the film. The optimal coatings display a fractal-like nanoporous structure and high transmittance. The low surface roughness and porous structure contribute to their high transparency via reducing the light scattering and suppressing the reflection of surfaces. Importantly, the versatile transparent coatings can be applied on any solid substrate with great waterproof ability, self-cleaning effect and antifouling performance, over a large area without destroying their intrinsic properties. Moreover, the coated substrates also exhibit excellent thermal stability (400 °C) and humidity resistance. Importantly, the superhydrophobic coatings can be easily and rapidly repaired regardless of the number of cycles after damage, which provides a promising strategy to tackle low durability.
1. Introduction
Self-cleaning coatings are becoming an integral part of our daily life because of their utility in various applications such as windows, solar panels, cements, paints and textiles.1–5 For example, the urgent demand for alternative energy has driven significant advances in the development of solar cells. However, solar panels are easily contaminated by the accumulation of surrounding dust in outdoor working environments, which will block the sunlight from reaching the solar cells and then largely decrease the solar cell's performance.6 Nearly half of the overall power conversion efficiency of solar panels can be lost due to dust accumulation every year.7 Therefore, self-cleaning coatings applied to solar panels can solve the dust accumulation problem to some extent.8 Besides, self-cleaning fabrics can avoid frequent washing and hence their service life can be extended. Generally, self-cleaning materials are categorized into special wettability-induced self-cleaning materials and photocatalysis-induced self-cleaning materials.4 Thereinto, superhydrophobic surfaces inspired by the lotus leaf9 have drawn considerable attention over the past years because of their potential applications in anti-dust, water repellent, anticorrosion, anti-fogging and microfluidic devices.10–12 Low surface energy and surface structures with appropriate roughness are the two main factors for a superhydrophobic surface.13 A rough surface structure allows forming trapped air pockets which provide a barrier sheet between water droplets and the solid structure. Therefore, water droplets are highly spherical and are able to roll off easily from these superhydrophobic surfaces. The rolling droplets can carry the dirt away from the surface due to the large adhesion between water and contaminants, and then inhibit contamination.14
In addition to the superhydrophobic and dust-repellent properties, transparency becomes a fundamental characteristic for superhydrophobic surfaces.14 Preparing superhydrophobic surfaces with high transparency will be very useful for the protection of buildings, solar cells, clothes, papers, and art pieces.15 However, surface roughness and transparency are two competitive properties. The increase of surface roughness which is a prerequisite for achieving superhydrophobicity would theoretically result in a decrease of surface transparency. According to Rayleigh scattering theories depending on the roughness size, the scattering intensity increases significantly when the roughness is greater than 100 nm and Mie scattering predominates when the roughness size is comparable or larger than the wavelength of light.14,16,17 Consequently, controlling the surface roughness to reduce light scattering and fulfilling the requirement for achieving superhydrophobicity simultaneously become an interesting but challenging issue. Recently, some physical and chemical methods including etching methods,15,18 template-based methods,19,20 electrophoretic deposition techniques,21 electrospraying,22 sol–gel processes,23 chemical vapor deposition,20,24 nanoparticle assembly,25,26etc. have been developed to prepare transparent self-cleaning surfaces.
Although self-cleaning and transparent properties are achieved, most of the reported preparation techniques involve a tedious and time-consuming process, for which harsh conditions or special reagents and equipment are required. For example, expensive toxic polyfluorinated compounds (PFCs) are often used because of their low surface free energy; however, they have a documented ability to bioaccumulation and potential adverse effects on human offspring.27 Taking environmental issues into consideration, fluorine-free superhydrophobic materials are preferable because of their low-cost, nontoxicity, and environmental friendliness.28 In addition, some other methods are only applicable to small flat surfaces or substrates of specific materials.29 For instance, methods that operate at high temperatures cannot be applied to temperature-sensitive materials. The extreme goal of research is to serve our daily life; hence an efficient and versatile strategy to fabricate superhydrophobic surfaces is highly desirable, that is (1) the strategy should be applied to substrates regardless of their type or shape; (2) transparency is required after being applied to substrates without destroying their intrinsic properties; (3) the strategy should be economical, efficient, and environmentally safe and allow the fabrication of self-cleaning surfaces on large-scale substrates; and (4) the obtained self-cleaning surfaces should have long-term durability. Low durability is the major issue for superhydrophobic self-cleaning materials that hampers their practical applications.30 Enhancing the attachment between substrates and low surface energy compounds (e.g., forming covalent bonds) and introducing self-healing capability based on the release of hydrophobic molecules have been developed to improve the durability of superhydrophobic materials.2,31–33 However, the repair is limited to chemical functionality, and repairing surface features remains out of reach.30,34 Moreover, some methods that can improve the mechanical resistance may destroy the intrinsic appearance of substrates and the damaged surfaces are incapable of being repaired. Actually, mimicking nature's self-repairing capability in materials remains extremely challenging.35 Superhydrophobic surfaces will eventually become damaged by extreme or repeated mechanical abrasion regardless of how durable they are.36 Considering the requirements of large-scale production, low-cost materials and easy techniques for real-life applications, repairable materials whose superhydrophobic properties can be easily repaired by the deposition of new materials via a simple and prompt method are promising candidates to tackle the low durability problem.37
In this study, environmentally safe, substrate-independent and self-cleaning porous coatings with high transparency are fabricated via a sol–gel method and a spray coating technique at low temperature. Porous fumed SiO2 whose spheres form three-dimensional chain-like aggregates was modified with diethoxydimethylsilane (DEDMS) to obtain the spray-coating solution. The prepared coatings display a fractal-like nanoporous structure and high transmittance (above 84.6% under visible light for coated glass slides). The low surface roughness and porous structure of superhydrophobic coatings result in their high transparency. Importantly, the versatile transparent coatings can be applied to various substrates regardless of their type or shape, including glass, paper, plastics, walls, metals, shoes and fabrics, over a large area without destroying their surface properties. Moreover, the coated substrates exhibit excellent self-cleaning and anti-fouling performances towards dust, muddy water, coffee and orange juice. Notably, the coatings also demonstrate thermal stability (400 °C) and humidity resistance. Even when the coatings are seriously damaged, they can still be easily and rapidly repaired.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials
Diethoxydimethylsilane (DEDMS, 97%) and fumed silica (chain-like aggregate size 200–300 nm, 10 to 30 spheres in length) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36–38%), isopropanol (99.7%) and anhydrous ethanol (99.7%) were supplied by Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd. (China). All reagents were used as received.
2.2. Spray coating of transparent self-cleaning coatings
Chain-like fumed silica was ultrasonically dispersed in mixed anhydrous ethanol and isopropanol (1:1, v/v) with a concentration of 7 mg mL−1 at room temperature for 15 min. Then, DEDMS and HCl (mass ratio: mDEDMS/mSiO2/mHCl = 3.5:1:0.6) were slowly added under stirring. Finally, the mixture was stirred for 24 h to obtain the acid-catalyzed silica/sol solution for spray-coating. Before spray-coating, the solution was ultrasonicated for 3 min and then continuously sprayed on clean substrates in a line-to-line fashion using a spray gun with a moving speed of 2–4 cm s−1. The spraying pressure of the spray gun was 0.2 MPa and the distance between the spray gun and substrates was 15–20 cm. After spray-coating, the samples were dried in air to remove the residual solvent or heated by using a hair dryer for 3–5 min.
2.3. Sample characterization
A KrüssDSA100 (Krüss Company, Ltd., Germany) apparatus was used to measure the contact angle (CA, 5 μL) and roll-off angle (RA, 15 μL) at ambient temperature. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were collected on a Bruker IFS66 V/S spectrometer. A transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM-1200EX) was used to visually observe the particle size. The BET surface area, pore volume and pore diameter distribution were determined by N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms at 77 K using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 HD88 surface area and porosity analyzer. The samples were degassed at 110 °C for 8 h. The total specific surface area was calculated according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) model while the pore diameter distribution was calculated by applying the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method to the N2 desorption data. The morphology of the coating was observed using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6701F FESEM). Surface roughness analysis was conducted on an atomic force microscope (AFM, AIST-NT, Smart SPM, USA). The thickness of the films was measured using a Gaertner Ellipsometer (L116). An X-ray energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attached to a scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-7100F) was used for the examination of the chemical composition. The elastic modulus and hardness of the coating were measured via an in situ nanomechanical test system (TI950, Hysitron). The transmittance and reflection spectra of the coating on glass slides under visible light were performed using an integrating-sphere attachment on a Varian Cary 400 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. The high temperature and humidity test was carried out in an alternating temperature and humidity test chamber (Wuxi Jinhua Testing Equipment Co., Ltd., China). The optical images were captured by using a digital camera (Canon).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. The preparation of transparent self-cleaning coatings
The synthesis of silica/sol solution and its spray-coating process are illustrated in Fig. 1. Fumed silica with branched three-dimensional chain-like aggregates composed of small spheres (10–15 nm) (Fig. 2a) was selected since the refractive index of silica is similar to those of air and transparent substrates, which can reduce Mie scattering as well.38 DEDMS which can form linear polydimethylsiloxane after hydrolysis and condensation reactions was used to functionalize fumed silica. Thus chain-like aggregated silica can be linked together by covalent bonds due to the presence of hydroxyl groups on the silica surface and enhance particle-to-particle bond strength. As shown in Fig. 2c, more uniform chain-like aggregated silica with a net-like porous structure was observed than that of original silica. Besides, nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms reveal that both the original fumed silica and modified silica exhibit hysteresis at relatively high P/P0, which can be classified as Type IV according to the IUPAC nomenclature (Fig. 2b and d). The hysteresis loop is associated with the capillary condensation and evaporation in the mesopores and the step at P/P0 > 0.98 indicates the filling of macropores.39 Moreover, the pore size distribution of the samples estimated from desorption branches of the isotherms also reveals that both samples have a hierarchically porous structure mainly ranging from 10–100 nm. The BET surface area decreases from 164.4 to 125.3 m2 g−1 after modification, whereas both the average pore size (from 13.86 to 23.47 nm) and pore volume (from 0.54 to 0.88 cm3 g−1) increase. These results may be attributed to that some small pore interior to the secondary particles is blocked and more net-like large pores form after modification.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrates the fabrication of environmentally safe and transparent superhydrophobic coatings on various substrates via the nanoparticle self-assembly method. 
 Fig. 2  TEM images of original chain-like fumed silica (a) and decorated fumed silica (c). N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distribution of (b) original chain-like fumed silica and (d) decorated fumed silica. 
FTIR spectra were also employed to study the chemical bonds of modified silica. As shown in Fig. S1,† the absorption bands at about 2964 and 1270 cm−1 are attributed to the asymmetric stretching of the C–H and symmetric deformation of Si–CH3. The strong peak at 1100 cm−1 is representative of the asymmetric stretching of Si–O–Si. The existence of Si–CH3 reveals that silica has been successfully grafted in situ by polydimethylsiloxane. The obtained silica/sol was then used for preparing transparent self-cleaning coatings via spray-coating which offers benefits of rapid assembly over a very large area and can potentially be applied to any substrate directly.40,41 As most solvent within the spray mist evaporated, the curing process was accelerated during spraying. Moreover, the soft linear polydimethylsiloxane can easily relocate towards the surface which enriched the coating with hydrophobic groups. Compared with other hydrophobilized precursors such as commercial PDMS (Sylgard 184), a promising advantage is that curing agents or further thermal treatments at high temperature are unnecessary to obtain superhydrophobic coatings.23,42 Therefore, this environmentally safe, substrate-independent, low-cost, and scalable transparent superhydrophobic coating is supposed to have great potential in practical applications.
3.2. The wettability of the transparent coating on various substrates
The properties of the coating layer were tunable by changing the coating conditions including the concentration of ingredients and thickness of the film. Therefore, the surface morphologies of the polydimethylsiloxane–SiO2 coating were firstly studied by tuning the concentration of SiO2. A flat glass slide was used to eliminate the impact of substrates and the spraying is done 20 times. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the incomplete coverage of the polydimethylsiloxane–SiO2 coating was observed when the concentration of SiO2 was less than 7 mg mL−1. The less coverage of the coating material leads to low surface roughness and low hydrophobicity for the obtained coatings (Fig. S2a†). When the concentration of SiO2 was 7 mg mL−1, a uniform and crack-free film with a 3D fractal-like structure on the flat glass slide was revealed (Fig. 3c and f). Irregular papillomas with several hundreds of nanometers in size and a large number of nanopores are also observed from the sprayed film (Fig. 3f). The obtained coating shows superhydrophobicity with a CA of 155.6° and an RA of 6° because of the uniform and complete surface coverage of hydrophobic materials. Further increasing the concentration of SiO2, numerous irregular papillomas with micrometers in size are formed by the agglomeration of modified SiO2 particles (Fig. 3d and e). The CA of the prepared coating gradually increases with the increased concentration of SiO2 (2, 4, 7, 10 and 15 mg mL−1); however, the corresponding transmittance of the prepared coating under visible light decreases due to the existence of the large rough structure. Therefore, 7 mg mL−1 SiO2 was selected to prepare both superhydrophobic and transparent coatings. Furthermore, to determine the optimal thickness of the coating for superhydrophobicity and transparency, coatings with different thickness were prepared by tuning the number of spraying cycles. As shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1,† the optimal thickness of the coating is 1.5 ± 0.2 μm with 20 spraying cycles. The detailed discussion is shown in the ESI.† In summary, the concentrations of SiO2 and DEDMS are 7 mg mL−1 and 24.5 mg mL−1, respectively. The optimal thickness of the coating is 1.5 ± 0.2 μm with 20 spraying cycles.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the prepared coating on glass slides sprayed at different concentrations of SiO2 (a) 2 mg mL−1, (b) 4 mg mL−1, (c) 7 mg mL−1, (d) 10 mg mL−1, and (e) 15 mg mL−1. The concentration of DEDMS is 24.5 mg mL−1. (f) High magnification SEM images of the coated glass when the concentration of SiO2 is 7 mg mL−1. 
Furthermore, the topographical images and surface roughness of the optimal coatings were also evaluated by AFM (scan area: 10 ×10 μm2). The AFM image reveals the roughness of the coating with a fractal-like structure (Fig. 4a). The average roughness (Ra) and root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the coating were 118.6 ± 20 nm and 150.4 ± 24 nm, respectively. The formation of rough porous features can be explained by considering the fast solvent evaporation in spray-coating.44 The concentration of particles within droplets increases due to solvent evaporation during flight, and thus these particles are likely to aggregate and adhere together via further reactions of –OH groups between the particles. The linkages between particles through chemical bonding are desirable to enhance the durability.35 Thus, a rough porous coating with a 3D fractal-like structure is obtained.
 Fig. 4  (a) The 3D-AFM image of optimal coatings. (b) SEM images of the prepared coating on the glass slide using only ethanol as the solvent and its corresponding 3D-AFM image (c). (d) An obviously shiny layer at the interface between water and the coating surface under water was observed. (e) The super liquid repellency towards muddy water, coffee and orange juice of the transparent superhydrophobic coating. (f) Remarkable buoyancy-increasing phenomenon of the glass slide after spray-coating. 
The choice of solvent plays an important role in constructing rough surfaces for spray-coating. In this study, isopropanol with a higher viscosity and boiling point than ethanol was selected as a co-solvent with ethanol. The viscosity of the obtained silica/sol (2.027 mm2 s−1, 25 °C) is higher than that of silica/sol using ethanol as a solvent (1.842 mm2 s−1, 25 °C). High viscosity can suppress the excess aggregates due to poor fluidity during spray-coating. Whereas, using ethanol as a solvent, the fast evaporation and low viscosity result in large aggregates increasing the roughness asperity as well as mechanical vulnerability. As shown in Fig. 4b, loose microstructures due to serious particle aggregation and some cavities can be observed from the sprayed film using ethanol as the solvent. The AFM image also reveals a much rougher coating with an Ra of 144.3 ± 12 nm and an RMS roughness of 188.4 ± 19 nm (Fig. 4c) than the coating using the mixed solvent. The increased roughness will decrease the transparency of the coating (Fig. 7a and S4†). Moreover, the performance of the coating in terms of hardness and modulus was improved using the mixed solvent. The elastic modulus and hardness of the coating using the mixed solvent are 217.6 MP and 22.0 MP, respectively (Fig. S5a†). In contrast, the coating using ethanol as the solvent is vulnerable with an elastic modulus of 154.5 MP and a hardness of 19.0 MP (Fig. S5b†). The prepared coating using the mixed solvent shows higher transparency and mechanical strength than those of the coating prepared using only ethanol as the solvent. Therefore, the mixed isopropanol/ethanol was chosen to prepare transparent and self-cleaning coatings, which not only suppress the excess particle aggregates but also can counteract the ‘coffee stain’ effect and produce a uniform coating.43,44
EDS analysis of the prepared coating is shown in Fig. S6.† C, O and Si were detected. The content of the C element is the highest among them, which can decrease the surface free energy of the prepared coating. The rough surface structure and low surface energy due to the existence of CH3 groups lead to a superhydrophobic coating with a CA of 155.6° and an RA of 6°. Polydimethylsiloxane possesses a low surface free energy and a CA of 100° on its flat surface.15 Based on the Cassie–Baxter model,45 the surface is considered as solid and air composite surfaces, which has a Cassie–Baxter contact angle (θc). cosθc = f(cosθ0 + 1) − 1 where f is the fraction of the liquid–solid contact and θ0 is the Young's contact angle. The rough porous structure of the coated glass surface can decrease the liquid–solid contact area because of the presence of air pockets between liquid and solid surfaces. According to the above equation, only 11% of the superhydrophobic coating is in contact with water and 89% with air. A shiny layer at the interface between water and the coating under water was observed owing to the total light reflection, which confirms the existence of air pockets in the rough porous structure (Fig. 4d). A water jet could perfectly bounce off the coating surface without any water residual (Fig. S7 and Movie S1†). Moreover, muddy water, coffee and orange juice can stand free on the coating surface in a spherical shape, which suggests excellent liquid repellency towards common liquids in daily life (Fig. 4e). A remarkable buoyancy-increasing phenomenon of the glass slide is also detected after spray-coating. As shown in Fig. 4f, the decorated glass with the superhydrophobic coating floats on the water surface and attaches to the air–water interface compared with the sinkable original glass. For a superhydrophobic glass (2.54 cm × 7.62 cm × 0.3 cm), the maximum loading was 9.1 g including its own weight. Surface tension force related to the upper perimeter of the superhydrophobic coating makes great contributions to the buoyancy force.46
Besides the hard and smooth glass slides, soft and rough paper made from plant cellulose fibers was also selected to investigate the versatile applications of the spray-coating solution. As shown in Fig. S8,† a superhydrophobic typing paper with a large area (21 cm × 29.7 cm) was prepared via spray-coating and no further curing was required. The coated paper is superhydrophobic with a high CA of 160° and a low RA of 4° and exhibits excellent liquid repellency towards muddy water, coffee and orange juice (Fig. S8†). Moreover, a water droplet at the syringe tip can be squeezed to contact the coating and picked up to leave the surface several times (Fig. 5e). There is no water residual on the superhydrophobic paper surface, which suggests the low adhesive force of the prepared coating. Importantly, the letters on the paper show good readability, which illuminates the high transparency of the coating (Fig. 5f).
 Fig. 5  SEM images of (a and b) the original typing paper and (c and d) superhydrophobic typing paper. (e) The whole process of the low adhesive force test of superhydrophobic paper. (f) The letters on paper show good readability after spray-coating, which illuminates the high transparency of the coating. 
Subsequently, the surface morphologies and chemical compositions were examined. As shown in Fig. 5c and d, a uniform coating with a 3D fractal-like structure was observed on the superhydrophobic paper surface, which provided a much rougher surface compared with the smooth fiber surface of the original paper (Fig. 5a and b). Compared with the coating of smooth glass, the size of the agglomerate of modified SiO2 particles is a little bigger. The EDS analysis was also performed to investigate the chemical composition of the superhydrophobic paper. As shown in Fig. 6b, the peaks of C, O and Si were detected on superhydrophobic paper, whereas only C and O were detected for pristine paper (Fig. S9†). Furthermore, the SEM-EDS elemental mapping of C, O and Si suggests that all elements are evenly distributed on the superhydrophobic paper surface (Fig. 6a), indicating the uniform coverage of the polydimethylsiloxane–SiO2 coating. However, only C and O are distributed on the pristine paper surface (Fig. 6c). Similar to the superhydrophobic mechanism investigated in the foregoing section, only 7.3% of the coated paper is in contact with water, in contrast the fraction of air is 92.7%, resulting in excellent superhydrophobic surfaces with small RA and high CA. The inherent micro-scale roughness of paper and the uniformly covered porous hydrophobic coating make great contributions to a low fraction of liquid–solid contact. Therefore, the spray-coating solution was versatile, and it can be applied to various substrates regardless of their being soft or hard, flat or rough over a large area. Other substrates including plastics, walls, metals, wood, wallpapers and fabrics also exhibit excellent superhydrophobic properties and high transparency after spray-coating (Fig. S10 and Movie S2†). Water droplets stand free as spheres on the coated surface and water jets bound off from the coated surface immediately without any water residual (Movie S2†). Moreover, the applied coatings will not destroy the intrinsic appearance of substrates, which is essential for display panels, windows, ornaments, and optical equipment. The morphological changes of the coating layer depending on the type of substrates are also investigated in the ESI.† Flexible applications of the superhydrophobic coating are also realized. For example, the coated copper mesh can be used for oil–water separation just by the gravity-driven function which is one of the most important practical applications for superhydrophobic surfaces.47 The process of oil–water separation is shown in Fig. S12.†
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image and C, O and Si are evenly distributed on the superhydrophobic typing paper surface. (b) EDS analysis of superhydrophobic typing paper. (c) SEM image and only C and O are evenly distributed on the original typing paper surface. 
3.3. The high transparency of superhydrophobic self-cleaning coatings
Optical transparency, along with superhydrophobic and self-cleaning properties is often a fundamental characteristic for many applications. Therefore, the quantitative analysis of transparency and the corresponding mechanism of transparency were studied in detail. As evidenced by UV/vis transmittance spectra (Fig. 7a), the superhydrophobic glass shows more than 84.6% transmittance for wavelengths above 400 nm and has a maximum transmittance of 88.3% at a wavelength of 580 nm. Compared with the pristine glass, the transmittance of the superhydrophobic glass is reduced only by 3% for wavelengths above 550 nm. When the glass slide is removed, the transmittance of the superhydrophobic coating is higher than 98% for wavelengths above 678 nm (Fig. S4†). Moreover, the high transparency of the coated glass could also be proved directly by showing the clarity of letters beneath it (Fig. 4e). These results indicate that the coated glass not only exhibits excellent superhydrophobicity but also high transparency under visible light.
 Fig. 7  (a) Transmission spectra of the coated glass substrate compared to the bare glass substrate. (b) Reflection spectra of the coated glass substrate (mixed solvent) compared to the bare glass substrate. (c–e) The self-cleaning experiment of the coated glass slide with an inclination of ∼8° and its antifouling test to resist muddy water impact (f). 
In general, superhydrophobicity and transparency are in a trade-off relationship. The superhydrophobic coating using ethanol as the solvent shows lower transmittance (above 80.1% under visible light and an RMS roughness of 188.4 ± 19 nm) than that of the coating using the mixed solvent (above 84.6% under visible light and an RMS roughness of 150.4 ± 24 nm) due to the increased roughness. Consequently, an appropriate roughness is necessary to realize both transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces. In this study, the superhydrophobic coating shows a surface roughness much smaller than the wavelengths of visible light, which can reduce the light scattering.48 Furthermore, porous silica with a small particle size (10–15 nm) was chosen to prepare a porous nanoparticle network coating. The inter-particle porosity and highly porous nanostructure are beneficial to the reduction of the apparent refractive index of the coating according to the effective medium theory.49 The reflectivity of the coated surface is given by the Fresnel equation:50  where nc, n1, and n2 are the refractive indices of the coating, medium, and substrate, respectively. According to the Fresnel equation, the reduced apparent refractive index of the coating can suppress light reflection and increase light transmission. As shown in Fig. 7b, the reflection spectra show that the superhydrophobic glass has obvious broadband antireflection properties as compared to the bare glass substrate. Therefore, the highly transparent coating results from reducing light scattering and suppressing light reflection. The small decrease in the transmittance of the superhydrophobic glass compared with the smooth glass slide results from inevitably light scattering owing to the rough structure required by superhydrophobic properties.
3.4. The self-cleaning effect of transparent superhydrophobic coatings
In practical applications, protective coatings should be exposed in a dirty environment facing pollutants like dust, foul water, and other agents.51 The coatings may be contaminated by the accumulation of surrounding dust in outdoor working environments and then worsen their performance. Especially for transparent materials, labor intensive and costly cleaning is in demand to maintain high transparency. Therefore, transparent self-cleaning coatings are highly desired to prevent the surfaces from contamination.14,52 A small quantity of dust was sprinkled on the coated glass surface with an inclination of about 8°, and water droplets were applied subsequently. As shown in Fig. 7c–e and Movie S1,† water can roll off and take the dust away from the coated glass surface. After that, the surface of the coated glass recovers its clean and transparent state. The letters below the transparent superhydrophobic glass can be clearly viewed again (Fig. 7e). A similar self-cleaning effect on the superhydrophobic typing paper was also detected (Fig. S13 and Movie S3†). In addition, owing to the low surface free energy and rough surface structure of the transparent superhydrophobic coating, the adhesion between dust and coatings is small.18 Thus, under the blowing of wind, the dust can also be taken away leaving a clean surface (Fig. S14†). These results suggest that the transparent superhydrophobic coatings show an excellent self-cleaning effect with the assistance of raindrops or wind in a timely fashion.
The performance of the transparent self-cleaning coating towards common liquid contaminants including muddy water, coffee and juice was further tested. As shown in Fig. 7f and Movie S1,† muddy water rolls off and flows away from the tilted superhydrophobic glass surface without residue after being poured on its surface directly, in contrast, the bare glass is completely polluted. Besides, the superhydrophobic paper also shows excellent liquid repellency as proved by easily rolling muddy water, coffee and orange juice on its surface. When the muddy water, coffee or orange juice was poured on the superhydrophobic paper surface, all of them can flow away successfully without any contaminants left (Fig. 8a–c and Movie S3†). The super anti-fouling ability is beneficial to document protection. To further test the finer antifouling ability of the superhydrophobic coatings for real-world applications, self-cleaning cotton fabrics and shoes were prepared without changing their appearance. As shown in Fig. 8d–f and Movie S4,† the superhydrophobic fabric shows good antifouling ability towards muddy water, coffee and orange juice compared with the seriously polluted original fabric. Similar antifouling performance was also detected for the coated shoes (Fig. 8g–i and Movie S5†). These self-cleaning and antifouling performances to dust and common liquids illustrate the great practicability of the transparent superhydrophobic coating, which can satisfy the requirements of real-life applications.
 Fig. 8  Three common liquid contaminants including muddy water, coffee and orange juice are poured on prepared superhydrophobic paper, fabric and shoe surfaces respectively to test the antifouling ability of the superhydrophobic coating. 
3.5. The robust and repairable transparent superhydrophobic coating
Coatings are exposed to elevated temperatures,20 and thus the transparent coatings were kept in a tube furnace for 2 h at temperatures ranging from 100 to 400 °C to investigate their thermal stability. As shown in Fig. 9a, the transparent coating was found to be thermally stable up to 400 °C with a CA of 154.0° and a RA of 7°. The SEM image reveals that the annealed coating at 400 °C still has uniform and crack-free rough features similar to the original coating (inset in Fig. 9a). Annealing at higher temperature will destroy the superhydrophobicity of the transparent coating. In a humid environment, the coating will generally adsorb moisture and the adsorbed water molecules would corrode the coating at elevated temperatures.53 Therefore, the prepared transparent coatings were tested at high temperature and humidity (65 °C, 80% RH) to examine the water vapor effects on the transparent coating. The surface morphologies of the transparent coating were investigated after treatment for 80 h. The SEM image shows that a few cracks were detected compared with the original superhydrophobic transparent coating (inset in Fig. 9b). However, owing to the existence of 3D fractal-like structure, water droplets still exhibit high CA and can roll off easily. Therefore, the prepared transparent superhydrophobic coatings exhibit thermal stability as well as humidity resistance. In addition, the changes in the wettability and morphology of the coating layer with time are shown in Fig. S15.† The SEM image reveals that the coated glass still has uniform and crack-free rough features similar to the original coating after being stored at room temperature for 10 days. The superhydrophobicity of the stored coating was almost unchanged. Moreover, water jets still bound off from the coated wall immediately without any water residual even after three months (Fig. S16†), which also indicates that the prepared coating exhibits high stability.
 Fig. 9  (a) Variation of water contact angles of the coated glass slide after being thermally treated for 2 h at different temperatures (inset shows the SEM image of the coated glass after being treated at 400 °C). (b) Variation of water contact angles of the coated glass slide under exposure to a high temperature (65 °C) and an 80% relative humidity (RH) environment for 0–80 h (inset shows the SEM image of the coated glass after being treated for 80 h). (c) The completely damaged superhydrophobic coating can be easily and rapidly repaired without changing its original appearance. 
Generally, superhydrophobic coatings have low mechanical resistance due to the required surface texture, which remains the main hurdle to applications.54 In our previous work, multifunctional superhydrophobic bulk materials were prepared to achieve mechanical resistance.55 However, bulk materials are not suitable to obtain transparency. Actually, even the most durable superhydrophobic surfaces will eventually become damaged by extreme or repeated mechanical abrasion, which damages their low surface energy and/or texture.36 Repairable materials whose superhydrophobic properties can be easily repaired by deposition of new materials via a simple and prompt method are promising candidates to tackle the low durability problem.37 The sandpaper abrasion test was performed to test the mechanical resistance of the coated fabric. The coated fabric was moved a distance of 12 cm in one direction on an 800 Cw sandpaper surface with 5 kPa load. After eight cycles, water droplets still stand on the scratch fabric surface in a spherical shape (Fig. S17a†). Nevertheless after twenty cycles, the superhydrophobicity of the coated fabric was seriously damaged (Fig. S17b†). Thanks to the simple and prompt method, the damaged coating is rendered with superhydrophobicity again after repeating spray-coating (Fig. S17c†). Moreover, the damaged superhydrophobic glass can also restore its superhydrophobicity without the sacrifice of high transparency (Fig. 9c). This repair is not limited to chemical functionality but also can repair surface features regardless of the number of cycles. Therefore, the prepared transparent superhydrophobic coating shows a limited mechanical resistance, but the rapidly repairable ability is expected to provide a promising strategy to deal with inevitable mechanical damage of superhydrophobic materials for real-life applications.
4. Conclusions
In summary, self-cleaning and substrate-independent porous coatings with high transparency were fabricated via the nanoparticle self-assembly process under mild conditions. The concrete preparation process is environmentally safe without using expensive toxic reagents and high temperature curing processes. The prepared superhydrophobic transparent coatings display a fractal-like nanoporous structure and their surface features are tunable by changing the concentration of SiO2 and solvents. Moreover, the high transmittance of the superhydrophobic coatings (above 84.6% under visible light for coated glass) is attributed to their low surface roughness and porous structure which can reduce the light scattering and suppress the reflection of surfaces. Notably, the transparent coatings are economical and efficient to apply on various substrates, including glass, paper, plastics, walls, metals, shoes and fabrics, over a large area without destroying their intrinsic properties. Furthermore, the coated substrates exhibit a self-cleaning effect with the assistance of raindrops or wind and antifouling performance towards muddy water, coffee and orange juice. Most importantly, the coatings also demonstrate thermal stability (400 °C) and humidity resistance. Even when the coatings are seriously damaged, they can still be easily and rapidly repaired regardless of the number of cycles. Large-scale fabrication on various substrates, high transparency without changing the surface properties and rapidly repairable ability are three key advantages, which make the transparent self-cleaning coatings have a vast potential application market.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51335010) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (lzujbky-2016-113).
References
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. Song, C. R. Crick, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. Q. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6129–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. Parkin and R. G. Palgrave, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1689–1695 RSC .
P. Ragesh, V. A. Ganesh, S. V. Nair and A. S. Nair, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14773–14797 CAS .
Y. Li, B. Ge, X. H. Men, Z. Z. Zhang and Q. J. Xue, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 125, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
H. Khonkar, A. Alyahya, M. Aljuwaied, M. Halawani, A. Al Saferan, F. Al-Khaldi, F. Alhadlaq and B. A. Wacaser, Sol. Energy, 2014, 110, 268–275 CrossRef .
H. K. Elminir, A. E. Ghitas, R. H. Hamid, F. El-Hussainy, M. M. Beheary and K. M. Abdel-Moneim, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 3192–3203 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Verma, M. Sakhuja, J. Son, A. J. Danner, H. Yang, H. C. Zeng and C. S. Bhatia, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 2489–2493 CrossRef CAS .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, Y. C. Lin, M. X. Zhang, W. W. Shi and Y. M. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10681–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Su, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1727–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16319–16359 CAS .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rahmawan, L. B. Xu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2955–2969 CAS .
D. W. Gong, J. Y. Long, D. F. Jiang, P. X. Fan, H. J. Zhang, L. Li and M. L. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17511–17518 CAS .
K. L. Cho, I. I. Liaw, A. H. F. Wu and R. N. Lamb, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11228–11233 CAS .
L. Yao and J. H. He, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 61, 94–143 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, Q. Zhao, X. F. Zhu, L. Cheng, S. Bai, Z. H. Wang, L. X. Meng and Y. Qin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17747–17751 RSC .
L. Y. Xu, D. D. Zhu, X. M. Lu and Q. H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3801–3807 CAS .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Lai, Y. X. Tang, J. J. Gong, D. G. Gong, L. F. Chi, C. J. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420–7426 RSC .
H. Yoon, H. Kim, S. S. Latthe, M. W. Kim, S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11403–11410 CAS .
Y. Li, X. H. Men, X. T. Zhu, B. Ge, F. J. Chu and Z. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 2411–2419 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Wong, G. Liu, N. Nasiri, C. Hao, Z. Wang and A. Tricoli, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 587–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ling, I. Y. Phang, G. J. Vancso, J. Huskens and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3260–3263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Karunakaran, C. H. Lu, Z. H. Zhang and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4594–4602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Lindstrom, M. J. Strynar and E. L. Libelo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7954–7961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Mates, R. Ibrahim, A. Vera, S. Guggenheim, J. Qin, D. Calewarts, D. E. Waldroup and C. M. Megaridis, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2185–2192 RSC .
P. A. Levkin, F. Svec and J. M. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Xue and J. Z. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4146–4161 CAS .
A. C. C. Esteves, Y. Luo, M. W. van de Put, C. C. M. Carcouët and G. de With, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 986–992 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ionov and A. Synytska, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10497–10502 RSC .
J. Li, L. Li, X. Du, W. Feng, A. Welle, O. Trapp, M. Grunze, M. Hirtz and P. A. Levkin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 675–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Verho, C. Bower, P. Andrew, S. Franssila, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 673–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Dyett, A. H. Wu and R. N. Lamb, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18380–18394 CAS .
K. Golovin, M. Boban, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11212–11223 CAS .
X. T. Zhu, Z. Z. Zhang, X. H. Men, J. Yang, K. Wang, X. H. Xu, X. Y. Zhou and Q. J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15793–15797 RSC .
E. J. Park, J. K. Sim, M. G. Jeong, H. O. Seo and Y. D. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12571–12576 RSC .
S. A. Saba, M. P. Mousavi, P. Bühlmann and M. A. Hillmyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8896–8899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ogihara, J. Xie, J. Okagaki and T. Saji, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4605–4608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ge, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Rahmawan and S. Yang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Zhang, B. B. Xia, H. P. Ye, Y. L. Zhang, B. Xiao, L. H. Yan, H. B. Lv and B. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13132–13140 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Hu, Q. Ye, T. Gao, F. Zhou and Q. J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9624–9631 RSC .
C. T. Hsieh and W. Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 612–619 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. W. Tang, X. G. Wang and T. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 6736–6742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, M. K. Wang, X. H. Men and Q. J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5077–5087 CAS .
S. S. Latthe, C. Terashima, K. Nakata, M. Sakai and A. Fujishima, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5548–5553 CAS .
L. Xu, Z. Geng, J. He and G. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9029–9035 CAS .
Y. Du, L. E. Luna, W. S. Tan, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4308–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Zhi, Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, I. P. Parkin and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10622–10631 CAS .
M. Kuang, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6833–6854 RSC .
T. Li and J. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5342–5348 RSC .
M. Wu, B. Ma, T. Pan, S. Chen and J. Q. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, B. Ge, X. H. Men and Q. J. Xue, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5266–5272 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05112cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrates the fabrication of environmentally safe and transparent superhydrophobic coatings on various substrates via the nanoparticle self-assembly method.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of original chain-like fumed silica (a) and decorated fumed silica (c). N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distribution of (b) original chain-like fumed silica and (d) decorated fumed silica.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the prepared coating on glass slides sprayed at different concentrations of SiO2 (a) 2 mg mL−1, (b) 4 mg mL−1, (c) 7 mg mL−1, (d) 10 mg mL−1, and (e) 15 mg mL−1. The concentration of DEDMS is 24.5 mg mL−1. (f) High magnification SEM images of the coated glass when the concentration of SiO2 is 7 mg mL−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The 3D-AFM image of optimal coatings. (b) SEM images of the prepared coating on the glass slide using only ethanol as the solvent and its corresponding 3D-AFM image (c). (d) An obviously shiny layer at the interface between water and the coating surface under water was observed. (e) The super liquid repellency towards muddy water, coffee and orange juice of the transparent superhydrophobic coating. (f) Remarkable buoyancy-increasing phenomenon of the glass slide after spray-coating.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of (a and b) the original typing paper and (c and d) superhydrophobic typing paper. (e) The whole process of the low adhesive force test of superhydrophobic paper. (f) The letters on paper show good readability after spray-coating, which illuminates the high transparency of the coating.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image and C, O and Si are evenly distributed on the superhydrophobic typing paper surface. (b) EDS analysis of superhydrophobic typing paper. (c) SEM image and only C and O are evenly distributed on the original typing paper surface.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Transmission spectra of the coated glass substrate compared to the bare glass substrate. (b) Reflection spectra of the coated glass substrate (mixed solvent) compared to the bare glass substrate. (c–e) The self-cleaning experiment of the coated glass slide with an inclination of ∼8° and its antifouling test to resist muddy water impact (f).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Three common liquid contaminants including muddy water, coffee and orange juice are poured on prepared superhydrophobic paper, fabric and shoe surfaces respectively to test the antifouling ability of the superhydrophobic coating.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Variation of water contact angles of the coated glass slide after being thermally treated for 2 h at different temperatures (inset shows the SEM image of the coated glass after being treated at 400 °C). (b) Variation of water contact angles of the coated glass slide under exposure to a high temperature (65 °C) and an 80% relative humidity (RH) environment for 0–80 h (inset shows the SEM image of the coated glass after being treated for 80 h). (c) The completely damaged superhydrophobic coating can be easily and rapidly repaired without changing its original appearance.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05112c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
