Inorganic nanostructures for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic water splitting   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35266D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35266D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294-2320Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInorganic nanostructures for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic water splitting†

        
          
            Frank E. 
            Osterloh
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. E-mail: fosterloh@ucdavis.edu;  Fax: +1 530 752 8995;   Tel: +1 530 754 6242
Received 
      16th July 2012
    First published on 16th October 2012AbstractThe increasing human need for clean and renewable energy has stimulated research in artificial photosynthesis, and in particular water photoelectrolysis as a pathway to hydrogen fuel. Nanostructured devices are widely regarded as an opportunity to improve efficiency and lower costs, but as a detailed analysis shows, they also have considerably disadvantages. This article reviews the current state of research on nanoscale-enhanced photoelectrodes and photocatalysts for the water splitting reaction. The focus is on transition metal oxides with special emphasis of Fe2O3, but nitrides and chalcogenides, and main group element compounds, including carbon nitride and silicon, are also covered. The effects of nanostructuring on carrier generation and collection, multiple exciton generation, and quantum confinement are also discussed, as well as implications of particle size on surface recombination, on the size of space charge layers and on the possibility of controlling nanostructure energetics via potential determining ions. After a summary of electrocatalytic and plasmonic nanostructures, the review concludes with an outlook on the challenges in solar fuel generation with nanoscale inorganic materials.
Frank E. Osterloh
Frank Osterloh is an inorganic chemist working on nanostructured solar energy conversion devices. He received MA and PhD degrees in chemistry in 1994 and 1997 from the Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg, Germany, after working under the guidance of the late Prof. Siegfried Pohl. He then completed postdoctoral training at Harvard University with Prof. Richard H. Holm, after which he joined the faculty at the Chemistry Department at the University of California, Davis, in 2000. Frank Osterloh's current research interests are centered on the chemical and physical properties of inorganic nanomaterials, and on their electro- and photocatalytic functions.
Introduction
The goal of keeping global temperature increases below 2 °C compared to pre-industrial times requires the rapid deployment of carbon free energy technology that can compete with the price of fossil fuels. Access to clean energy is also expected to be a key factor in sustaining population growth. The solar energy received on the Earth's surface meets current and future human energy demand.1,2 It can be converted into electricity with up to 43.5% efficiency using photovoltaic cells that are available today. But these cells are more expensive than virtually ‘free’ coal, and electricity is difficult to store and to distribute over long distances. Such problems are solved by converting the photochemical energy directly into fuel. The simplest scheme employs the photoelectrolysis reaction according to eqn (1) to produce hydrogen from water. H2O → ½O2(g) + H2(g); ΔG = +237 kJ mol−1(1)
This hydrogen could become the central energy carrier of a hydrogen-based economy.2 Alternatively it could be used as an energy-rich reagent for the exothermic formation of methane, methanol, or even hydrocarbons using atmospheric CO2 as a carbon feedstock. Thus, it could generate conventional fuels for transportation, which currently accounts for ∼30% of all human energy consumption. Among several ways to facilitate reaction (1) (photovoltaic cell plus electrolyzer, thermochemical methods), the most economical ones employ photoelectrosynthetic cells (PECs) and suspended photocatalysts.3 Here a semiconductor is brought into contact with water and photochemical charge carriers created under illumination electrolyze the water. The best performing photoelectrochemical devices known today are Tandem cells (Fig. 1), in which the necessary potential for water electrolysis is produced by a combination of two or more semiconductors connected in series. The advantage of this ‘Tandem’ configuration is that semiconductors with smaller bandgaps can be used, which absorb a greater fraction of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 1  Basic photoanode–cathode (Schottky-type) and photoanode/photocathode configurations (Tandem or Z-scheme type) for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Efficiencies between 12.4% (p-/n-GaAs photoanode and a GaInP2 photocathode)5 and over 18% (for a multijunction cell),6 have been achieved, i.e. about half of the theoretical efficiency limit for these devices (24.4% for a Tandem7,8 and 30% for a multijunction device6). But the performance cannot be sustained because the photoelectrode materials are not stable under operating conditions and undergo photocorrosion. Similar stability problems exist for most other visible light absorbing II–VI, III–V, and group 14 element semiconductors. Currently, there are three main strategies to develop better devices that are efficient, stable, and inexpensive. One is to coat conventional photovoltaic cells with cocatalysts for water splitting or with protecting layers to inhibit photocorrosion. This has lead to the champion water splitting devices mentioned above.5,6 It also produced to the artificial leaf, a triple junction amorphous silicon cell, capable of photoelectrolysing water with a solar energy efficiency of up to 4.7%.9,10 Another strategy involves the development of new metal oxide materials that combine suitable properties (visible bandgap, chemical stability, high carrier mobilities, long carrier lifetimes) for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Such materials can be made by directed synthesis, sometimes guided by theory,11 or they can be made by combinatorial approaches, as described by Bruce Parkinson,12–14 Eric McFarland,15 and Nathan Lewis.16 The third strategy is to exploit scaling laws and specific effects at the nanoscale to enhance the efficiency of existing semiconductors and metal oxides. This nanostructuring strategy has gained significant interest in the last 20 years, and is the focus of this review article.
Brief history of nanoscale photoelectrochemistry and photocatalysis
As a research area, nanoscale photoelectrochemistry represents a fusion of photoelectrochemistry and nanoscience. Modern nanoscience is only about 40 years old, and began in 1974 with Dingle's discovery of quantum size effects in thin films,17 and Arnim Henglein18,19 and Louis Brus'20 work on semiconductor particles (quantum dots). Photoelectrochemistry started in 1955 with Brattain's electrochemical studies on germanium electrolyte junctions,21 and then grew significantly through the works of Gerischer,22 Pleskov,23 Marcus,24 and others. The discovery of water photoelectrolysis at illuminated TiO2 electrodes in 1971 by Fujishima and Honda,25,26 established the use of photoelectrochemical cells for ‘artificial photosynthesis’. After Bard's demonstration of the photocatalytic effects of suspended semiconductor particles,27 Arthur Nozik formulated the concept of ‘photochemical diodes’.28 He assumed that the basic functions of a photoelectrosynthetic cell (light absorption, charge separation, water electrolysis) could be copied in suspended micro- or nanoscale particles that would split water under illumination. Initially, two basic device configurations were proposed (additional ones are described in the recent review by Walter et al.4). One consists of a Schottky type device, in which a photoanode material is fused to a cathode material (Fig. 1), and the other configuration is a Tandem or Z-scheme device, with a photoanode coupled to a photocathode material. The underlying physical principles of these devices are not covered here, but have been subject of several reviews.4,28–31 The earliest experimental attempts to achieve such photodiodes date back to the early eighties, when Grätzel's group published a series of papers on water splitting with colloidal structures, such as the one shown in Fig. 2. Even though these catalysts worked reasonably well in the presence of a chemical bias (using sacrificial electron donors and acceptors), overall water splitting with them was not achieved.30,32 Likely, these catalysts are not able to generate a sufficient photoelectrochemical potential difference for water electrolysis.
 Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical Diode after Duonghong. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 1981, American Chemical Society. 
With microscale particles, the situation is slightly better, and many inorganic composites are known today that can catalyze water photoelectrolysis when suspensions of them are exposed to ultraviolet light.34–40 Finally, during the last two years, even four nanoscale ‘photochemical diodes’ that function without a chemical bias have been reported in the literature (Fig. 3). All of them are Schottky type devices, all require ultraviolet light for operation, but only one of them has reasonable efficiency.41 One system was developed by Akihiko Kudo's group, and consists of LiNbO3 nanowires (70 nm × 10 μm) with a bandgap of 4.0 eV.42 After modification with 1% (mass) RuO2 cocatalyst, the nanocomposite can split water with 0.7% quantum efficiency at 254 nm (O2 was evolved in slight excess). In a second example, Yan et al. reported overall water splitting with 3% (mass) RuO2-modified Zn2GeO4 nanorods (100 × 150 nm) under UV light from a 400 W Hg UV lamp to excite the large bandgap (>4.5 eV) of the material. Here, the H2 evolution rate was 17.4 μmol h−1 (stoichiometric O2) with 100 mg of the catalyst.43 Last year, Kazunari Domen's group reported overall water splitting with aggregates of NiOx-loaded NaTaO3 nanocrystals (20 and 40 nm diameter).41 The catalytic rate of this system was very high (2.0 mmol h−1 of H2 with stoichiometric O2), but it likely requires photons with very high energy, due to the 4.0 eV band gap of bulk-NaTaO3.44 The last known nanoscale water splitting system consists of 30 nm SrTiO3 nanocrystals with a 3.3 eV indirect bandgap.45 After modification with a NiOx cocatalyst, this system produces 19.4 μmol H2 g−1 h−1 (with stoichiometric O2) from pure water and under >3.2 eV illumination (26.3 mW cm−2).
 Fig. 3  The only four known nanoscale photocatalysts for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41–43 and 45. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
While bias-free photocatalytic water splitting with nanostructure catalysts remains a significant challenge, a lot of progress has been made, especially over the past 10 years, in the area of electrically-biased nanostructured photoelectrodes. The most prominent examples are based on nanostructured Fe2O3, which in combination with a nanoscale IrO2 co-catalyst, supports photocurrents of up to 3.0 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 solar illumination and with a 1.23 V applied bias.46 This exceeds the photocurrent of Fe2O3 single crystal electrodes by over two orders of magnitude.47 Nanostructure performance enhancements have also been observed with WO3, MnO2, BiVO4, and carbon nitride (see below), and with many cocatalyst materials, including MoS2 and with several noble metals. These devices owe their improved efficiency to an increase in surface area by the nanostructured materials, and to a shortening of charge transport pathways between the material interior and the surface. These advantages of nanomaterials for solar energy conversion were first demonstrated with Grätzel's nanostructured dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell.48 In addition, that device also showed that nanomaterials can be used to interface molecular and bulk components,49,50 allowing to bridge the gap between the different length scales. Unfortunately, the Grätzel cell design requires considerable adjustment and optimization before it can be applied to photoelectrochemical water splitting. The main issue is that the water splitting reaction is significantly more endergonic, mechanistically complex, kinetically slower, and chemically more corrosive than the electron transfer-‘only’ processes in regenerative photoelectrochemical cells. This places exceptional demands on the stability of the components and on their performance. The addition of two catalysis functions (for water reduction and oxidation) to the photovoltaic one (light absorption, charge separation, charge transport), also increases device complexity. Most of these functions are connected, and jointly depend on the electrical, chemical, and optical properties of the components. Adjusting the nanoscale morphology of the photoelectrode can improve some of these electrode functions, but at the same it diminishes others. Therefore, a systematic optimization of photoelectrodes requires a whole system approach that considers both positive and negative effects of nanoscaling. These advantages and disadvantages are discussed in the following.
Pros and cons of nanostructured photoelectrodes and photocatalysts

1. Shortened carrier collection pathways. Photoexcitation produces charge carriers with finite mobility and lifetime, depending on the material, the carrier type, and the light intensity. To drive water redox reactions, these carriers need to reach the materials interfaces at the electrolyte and at the back contact. In the absence of an external field, charge carriers move by diffusion and their range is defined by the mean free diffusion length L. The parameter L depends on the carrier diffusion constant D and the carrier lifetime τ (eqn (2)), and a dimensionality factor (q = 2,4,6 for one-, two-, or three-dimensional diffusion). (2)
For intrinsic semiconductors, usually Le > Lh because of the larger diffusion constant D of the electrons compared to holes. For example, Si has De = 49 cm2 s−1 and Dh = 13 cm2 s−1 (calculated from mobilities, μe = 1900 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μh = 500 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 298 K using Einstein–Smoluchowski relation).51 Assuming τe = τh = 10−6 s, Le = 98 μm and Lh = 51 μm for one-dimensional diffusion (q = 2). Upon doping, the concentration of the majority carriers increases, and with it their τ and L values. On the other hand, the lifetime and diffusion length of the minority carriers decrease. For optimum collection of both carrier types at the back contact, the semiconductor film thickness d has to be in the same range as Le and Lh (Fig. 4). To improve minority carrier collection at the sc–electrolyte interface, the surface roughness of the film can be increased, as shown in shown in Fig. 4b. This surface nanostructuring approach is particularly useful for 1st row transition metal oxides (MnO2, Fe2O3), which suffer from low hole mobility and lifetimes.52,53 Ideal electron/hole collection is possible with suspended nanoparticles, if their particle size d < Le, Lp. Although in this situation, both carrier types need to be extracted at the sc–electrolyte interface. Thus there is a need for selective redox agents. This has been referred to by Helmut Tributsch as kinetic rectification.54
 Fig. 4  Charge Collection in flat and nanostructured films and in particle suspensions. d: film or particle thickness; Le: electron diffusion length; Lh: hole diffusion length. Suspended particles require both electrons and holes to be collected at the sc–electrolyte interface. 

2. Improved light distribution. The ability of a material to absorb light is determined by the Lambert Beer law and the wavelength-dependent absorption coefficient α. The light penetration depth α−1 refers to the distance after which the light intensity is reduced to 1/e of the original value. For example, for Fe2O3, α−1 = 118 nm at λ = 550 nm,7 for CdTe, α−1 = 106 nm (550 nm),55 and for Si, α−1 = 680 nm (510 nm).55 To ensure >90% absorption of the incident light, the film thickness must be >2.3 times the value of α−1 (Fig. 5). Surface-structuring on the micro- or nanoscale can increase the degree of horizontal light distribution via light scattering (Fig. 5 and 26). This ‘trapped’ light would otherwise be lost by direct reflection from a flat surface. Light scattering is maximal in particle suspensions, because it can occur at both the front and back sides of the particles. The effect of light management on the energy conversion efficiency of photovoltaic cells has recently been discussed by Polman and Atwater,56 see also Fig. 26.
 Fig. 5  Light distribution in flat and nanostructured films, and in particle suspensions. d: film or particle thickness; α−1: optical penetration depth. Short arrows signify scattered or reflected light. 

3. Quantum size confinement. The dependence of semiconductor energetics on particle size has been established in the mid 80's.57 The quantum size effect depends also on the material and the nanocrystal shape. With increasing the band gap, the conduction band edge shifts to more reducing and the valence band to more oxidizing potentials. From Marcus–Gerischer theory it is expected that this increase in thermodynamic driving force increases the rates for interfacial charge transfer and water electrolysis (Fig. 6).24,58,59 Indeed, this can be experimentally observed for charge transfer across solid–solid interfaces.60,61 A logarithmic dependence of the photocatalytic proton reduction rate on the bandgap has also been verified with CdSe quantum dots.62 These effects will likely be used more often in advanced solar water splitting devices.
 Fig. 6  Quantum size effect in nanocrystals. After Holmes et al.62 

4. Potential determining ions (PDI). The effect of potential determining ions on the interfacial energetics is well known.63,64 For example, the flatband potential of TiO2 is a linear function of the solution pH.65 Due to the small thickness of nanostructures, external electric fields can reach into the nanomaterial interior and modify the local energetic structure. Thus, the band edge potentials of nanomaterials, and resulting functions, incl. interfacial charge transfer can be controlled with PDIs (Fig. 7). Examples are the band shift caused by hydrosulfide on nano-Bi2S3 in TiO2 nanocrystal films,66 and the effect of pH on interfacial charge transfer.67
 Fig. 7  Effect of PDIs on nanocrystal energetics. 

5. Surface area-enhanced charge transfer. The larger specific surface area of nanomaterials promotes charge transfer across the material interfaces (solid–solid and solid–liquid), allowing water redox reactions to occur at relatively low current densities and, correspondingly, low overpotentials. In other words, the increase of surface area allows to better match the photocurrents with the slow kinetics of the water redox reactions. In particular water oxidation is known to require milliseconds to seconds to proceed at Fe2O3 and TiO2, according to recent transient absorption measurements.68,69 Thus, increases of surface area reduce the need for highly active, and often expensive cocatalysts, based on Ir, Rh or Pt.

6. Multiple exciton generation. The altered electronic structure of strongly size-confined nanocrystals gives rise to multiple exciton generation (MEG), i.e. the formation of several (n) electron–hole pairs after absorption of one photon with an energy n times of the band gap of the dot (Fig. 8). The MEG effect is responsible for the abnormally high efficiency of PbSe QD-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrochemical cells (Parkinson),70 and PbSe photovoltaic cells (Nozik).71 The effect has not yet been applied to water photoelectrolysis. Future MEG-enhanced water splitting devices will likely be Tandem or multi-junction devices, because the individual quantum dots cannot produce a sufficient potential for overall water splitting. This is because for efficient solar energy conversion, the band gaps of the relevant dots need to be a fraction of the energy of visible light photons (E = 1.55–3.1 eV).
 Fig. 8  Enhanced photovoltaic efficiency in QD solar cells by impact ionization (inverse Auger effect). This is promoted in QDs due to the lower rates of carrier relaxation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science Ltd. 
While nanostructuring can improve the light harvesting, charge transport, kinetic, and energetic parameters of photoelectrosynthetic cells, it also has significant disadvantages that can lead to reduced power conversion efficiency and lower durability of devices. Some disadvantages originate from the inherent properties of nanoparticles, e.g. decreased thermodynamic stability tied to increased surface energy. Others are specifically tied to photochemical energy conversion. These will be discussed in the following.

1. Increased surface recombination. Electron–hole recombination is the major loss mechanism in excitonic solar cells and in photocatalysts. Photogenerated charge carriers recombine through radiative or nonradiative processes in the bulk phase of the semiconductor, in the depletion region, or at defects at the surface (Fig. 9). These processes diminish the steady state concentrations of usable charge carriers and reduce the rates of water electrolysis and carrier extraction (thick black arrows in the figure). In nanostructured semiconductors, surface and interfacial recombination rates are enhanced due to their larger specific interfacial areas. It might be possible to control these losses by reducing surface defects through surface treatments. For example, for macroscopic silicon films, treatment with HF can suppress surface recombination.73 Analogous treatments will have to be developed for nanomaterials.
 Fig. 9  Recombination pathways for photoexcited carriers in a semiconductor PEC.4,74 The arrows signify bulk recombination (Jbr), depletion-region recombination (Jdr), and surface recombination (Jss). Additional loss mechanisms due to undesired charge transfer are also shown. Electron tunneling through and over the barrier produce the current densities (Jt) and (Jet). Electron collection by the back contact and hole collection by the redox couple (e.g., oxidation of water to O2) are desired processes shown by thick black arrows. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 

2. Reduced space charge layer thickness. In nanomaterials, carrier separation (thick arrows in Fig. 9) is more difficult than in the bulk, because at average doping concentrations (n0 = 1017 cm−3) space charge layers are not effective on the nanoscale.31,75–77I.e., for spherical nanoparticles, the space charge layer thickness cannot exceed the radius of the particle (Fig. 10), which restrains the possible barrier height at the interface. For example, for 16 nm TiO2 nanocrystals (ε = 160) with a charge carrier concentration of n0 = 1017 cm−3, O'Regan calculated a barrier height of 0.3 meV under maximum depletion.78 This means that in the absence of a strong applied bias, the bands in a nanoparticle are essentially flat, as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Space charge layers in large and small particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 1994, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg. 
In the absence of interior electrical forces, the relative electron/hole injection rates into the electrolyte are governed by the kinetics of interfacial charge transfer alone.75 This leads to an increase of undesirable processes (current densities Jt and Jet in Fig. 9) that essentially short-circuit the device. The absence of an internal mechanism for charge separation also increases e/h recombination, as discussed above. This is the reason why efficient collection of majority carriers in nanocrystalline TiO2 films depends on the presence of iodide as an easily oxidizable electron donor.78,79 Without iodide, only 4% of electrons can be harvested at the back contact due to recombination with holes on the Ru dye (this corresponds to Jet and Jt in Fig. 9). Furthermore, in nanostructures with quantum size effects (e.g. in many metal chalcogenides), the e/h pairs are confined to a space smaller than the Bohr exciton radius. Thus, additional energy is necessary to separate the charges. This is analogous to organic photovoltaic cells, where a higher exciton binding energy results from the lower dielectric constant of organic polymers.80

3. Lower absorbed photon flux. A second consequence of the increased junction area in nanostructured photoelectrochemical cells is lower absorbed flux (if light scattering is neglected). This is shown in Fig. 11 for a flat semiconductor liquid junction and for a semiconductor wire array. The latter has a larger roughness, and thus receives a lower flux per unit area of exposed semiconductor. According to the Shockley diode equation (see below)81 the open circuit voltage of a solar cell is a logarithmic function of the absorbed flux Jphot and of the reverse saturation current J0 of the diode. Since Jphot ⋙ J0, the voltage decreases by 0.059 V for every decadic decrease of JPhot (i.e. decadic increase of surface roughness). This reduces the thermodynamic driving force available for water electrolysis. (3)J0, reverse saturation current of diode; Jphot, photocurrent = photon flux times x irradiated area; VOC, open circuit voltage.
 Fig. 11  Increased surface roughness leads to reduced absorbed flux. This reduces the open circuit voltage, and the thermodynamic driving force for water electrolysis. 

4. Slow interparticle charge transport. In nanocrystalline films, charge carriers move by diffusion instead of drift.77,82–84 As a result, charge transport is much slower than in the bulk, increasing the chances for recombination and back reactions.85 If the nanoparticles are not fused together, additional barriers arise from interparticle charge transport, which occurs by thermally activated hopping and by electron tunneling (Fig. 12). It depends on the interparticle distance and the electrostatic charging energy of the donor acceptor nanocrystal couple.86,87 Since nanostructured films can be several hundred nanometers thick, the resistance losses from charge transport are a significant factor.
 Fig. 12  Electron hopping in nanostructured films. Reproduced from ref. 86 by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals). 
The problem of charge transport over macroscopic distance can be entirely avoided with nanoscale suspended catalysts. In such catalysts all three metric dimensions are on the nanometer scale, and good charge transfer is possible due to the proximity of photoanode and cathode. However, the performance in these photoelectrochemical diodes is limited by ineffective charge separation, as discussed above.
Equivalent circuit diagram
An useful way to illustrate the effects of nanostructuring on photoelectrosynthetic devices is by using equivalent circuit diagrams (Fig. 13) of the type commonly employed for photovoltaic cells. In the diagram the light-absorbing component corresponds to a photon-driven current source, and the rectifying component is shown as a diode in parallel (shunt) to it. In addition, there are parallel and serial resistances RSH and RS. For a photovoltaic cell, the load is an electrical device, and for a fuel-producing cell, the load is due to water electrolysis.81
 Fig. 13  Equivalent circuit diagram for a photovoltaic cell. RSH: Shunt resistance, RS: serial resistance, ISH: leakage current, IL: generation current. 
In the circuit, ISH, RS, and RSH are dependent upon the physical size of the solar cell. For two otherwise identical cells, a cell with twice the surface area of another is expected to have half the shunt resistance and double leakage current I0 because it has twice the junction area across which current can leak. It will also have half the series resistance RS because it has twice the cross-sectional area through which current can flow. For a nanostructured photoelectrochemical cell, the decrease in RSH corresponds to the leakage currents Jet and JT in Fig. 9. If this current exceeds the generation current IL, water electrolysis will come to a stop. The decrease of RS due to the reduction in electron–hole transport resistances can lead to improved performance of a nanostructured device. However, this benefit will only apply to devices that are nanoscale in all three dimensions, e.g. suspended nanocatalysts, which do not have a macroscopic thickness, and thus do not suffer from large serial resistance. Lastly, as the semiconductor particles approach the nanoscale, the reduction of the space charge layer effectiveness diminishes the rectifying properties. This also corresponds to reduction of RSH.
The discussion shows that there are both benefits and problems associated with nanostructuring photoelectrodes, and that optimization of nanostructured PEC devices will require a careful balance between the opposing effects. This balance of course depends not only on the morphology and size of the device, but also on the electrode materials themselves, including their energetics, optical absorption, charge transport properties, and water redox kinetics. Thus it makes sense to organize the following presentation on nanostructured photoelectrodes by material type. Metal oxides with closed shells are discussed at the beginning, followed by metal oxides with partially filled d-orbitals. Then nitrides and sulfides are presented and main group element compounds. Sections on nanostructured cocatalysts and plasmonic nanostructures are given at the end. The review concludes with a brief outlook and a discussion of the specific challenges of nanoscale-enhanced photoelectrochemical devices and catalysts. Selected aspects of nanoscale photoelectrochemical cells and catalysts have been reviewed elsewhere.77,88–96
Metal oxides – closed shell systems
TiO2 and titanates
The discovery of photoanodic water oxidation with TiO225,26 prompted investigations on nanostructured TiO2 photoelectrodes, which due to their higher surface area were expected to have higher activity. Fig. 14 summarizes four morphologies that have been studied. They include particulate films of the type employed in the Grätzel dye sensitized cell,97 nanorod arrays,98,99 branched nanorods,100 and nanotube arrays.101
 Fig. 14  Types of Nanostructured TiO2 photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, 100 and 106. Copyright 1995, 2008, and 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Direct comparison shows that that under equal experimental conditions, the photocurrent density from water oxidation increases in going from particles to rods and to branched rods, mainly due to improved electron transport to the back-contact and improved hole transport to the solid–liquid interface.100 For example, TiO2 nanotube arrays have been shown to produce O2 with >90% photon conversion efficiency (17.5 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 1 M KOH).102 But the band gap of TiO2 precludes visible light absorption. Due to their large surface area, TiO2 nanowire arrays can be N-doped with ammonia at relatively low temperature (500 °C), to increase the visible light response to IPCE values of up to 4% at 450 nm (+1.23 V RHE), and 18%, after attachment of a Co-cocatalyst.103 The positive effect of N doping is enhanced if H2 reduction precedes ammonolysis.104 This is thought to produce Ti3+ in addition to the substitutional N defects. Recently, a TiO2 nanotube array was integrated with a CuTiO nanotube array to achieve overall water photoelectrolysis with an energy efficiency of 0.30% and a photocurrent of up to 0.25 mA cm−2 (AM 1.5 illumination).105 The performance of nanoparticulate films is lower because electron transport has to occur by hopping and tunneling between individual particles. Annealing of the film improves transport, and the mean electron free diffusion length can reach 10 μm (at an applied bias between −0.15 and 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 3 M KCl and pH 2).107 For TiO2 nanotubes, LD,e increases to 100 μm due to the continuity of the lattice.106 And for TiO2 nanorods, the electron diffusion coefficient is 200 times higher than in nanoparticulate films.98
Electron transport in nanostructured TiO2 also is very sensitive to the electron lifetime. For example, oxygen generated during water electrolysis can remove electrons by direct chemical reaction.85 And in dye-sensitized solar cells, high electron lifetimes (2 × 10−2 s) generally require iodide to remove photoholes.79 Augustynski found that TiO2 nanocrystals undergo self-doping under illumination which increases the conductivity of the film.97 Surface modifications of TiO2 with phosphate were also found to increase e/h separation and photoelectrochemical water oxidation activity.108 This was mainly attributed to the electrical field effect of the negatively charged anion, which helped e/h separation. A similar improvement was observed when SrTiO3 was added to TiO2 nanotubes, a possible result of formation of a heterojunction.109 Enhanced charge transport and photocurrents were also observed with TiO2 nanocrystals on single walled carbon nanotubes as a high surface area conductive support.110
Closely connected to slow charge transport and recombination are the slow water oxidation kinetics of TiO2. On the basis of transient absorption spectroscopy, Durrant reported a millisecond to second timescale for water oxidation in TiO2.68,69 In flux dependent measurements, the maximum activity occurred when four photoholes were present per nanoparticle, in agreement with the stoichiometry of the water oxidation reaction.69 Interestingly, the water oxidation kinetics were independent of temperature in TiO2 (but not in Fe2O3 photoelectrodes), which was attributed to the strongly oxidizing valence band edge in TiO2.111 The kinetics can be improved through the addition of cocatalysts, as shown in the early examples of TiO2-based ‘photochemical diodes’.112 Here, TiO2 was employed with or without Ru bipy sensitization,33,113,114 and RuO2 and Pt were used as cocatalysts for water oxidation and reduction respectively (Fig. 2, above). This configuration was designed to promote electron injection into platinum, the site for water reduction, and hole injection into IrO2, where water oxidation was expected to occur. While hydrogen formation from sacrificial donors was clearly possible with these systems, the initial findings of stoichiometric oxygen evolution in water were not reproducible.30,32 Initially this problem was attributed to the back reaction of photoexcited TiO2 with the generated O2, leading to the formation of superoxide and peroxide species.115,116 But later it was found that the peroxides form by incomplete oxidation of water,117 and that oxygen formation could not proceed in the absence of sacrificial electron acceptors. From today's standpoint, the inability of these systems to photolyze water must be attributed to the lack of a suitable thermodynamic driving force. Water electrolysis requires a potential of 1.6 V (1.23 V plus about 0.4 V in overpotentials), which a nanoscale catalyst cannot produce without a mechanism for efficient e/h separation. A similar situation is encountered in nanoscale TiO2 derivatives, such as H2Ti4O9 nanosheets.118 These 1 nm thin nanocrystals evolve H2 and O2 only in the presence of sacrificial agents, and oxygen evolution is slow (3.5 μmol h−1/100 mg of catalyst) even in the presence of silver nitrate as electron acceptor. Electrochemical measurements reveal that the system is limited by large overpotentials (0.4–0.85 V at 0.5 mA cm−2) for the water redox reactions, and by a conduction band edge (−0.53 V vs. NHE at pH = 7) that is barely reducing enough for proton reduction. In very recent work, Mao's group reported the formation of ‘black’ TiO2 by hydrogenation of ∼7 nm rutile TiO2 nanocrystals at 200 °C under 20 bar of H2 in a steel autoclave.119 After attachment of a Pt cocatalyst, 20 mg of this material supported high rates of H2 evolution (0.2 mmol h−1) from a 1:1 (vol) methanol–water mixture exposed to natural sunlight. The findings were attributed to bandgap narrowing resulting from the introduction of H defects and disorder into the TiO2 lattice. However, as recent results on TiO2 nanotubes suggest, it is possible that metal impurities, in particular Cr from the steel autoclave may play a role as well.120
ZnO
As a photoelectrode material ZnO is limited by a large bandgap that prevents visible light absorption, and by chemical instability under both anodic and cathodic bias. Kyoung Shin Choi's group demonstrated recently that the cobalt oxide-phosphate cocatalyst can be photodeposited into ZnO rod arrays (Fig. 15) and that this improves the photocurrent onset potential by 0.23 V.121
 Fig. 15  ZnO nanorod array after electrodeposition of CoPi catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Photodeposition was advantageous over electrodeposition, as it deposits the cocatalyst at locations with high photohole concentrations. Sun et al. demonstrated improved cathode photocurrents from n-type ZnO nanowire arrays on p-Si wafers. The increased photocurrent was attributed to enhanced e/h separation at the n-ZnO/p-Si interface, and due to reduced light scattering from the nanorods.122 Previously, Jin Zhang's group had demonstrated that non-sensitized nanoparticulate ZnO photoanodes supported photocurrents up to 175 μA cm−2 at 1.6 V (NHE) applied potential at pH = 7.4 and AM 1.5 illumination.123
Niobates
While Nb2O5 is not an active photocatalyst for water splitting,124 many niobates do split water upon UV irradiation. One of the best studied materials, K4Nb6O17, owes its high activity to its layered structure featuring Nb6O174− anionic slabs with interlayers that become accessible to water after exchange of the potassium ions with protons.124 Chemical exfoliation of this material and the similarly structured Dion Jacobsen phase KCa2Nb3O10 produces 1 nm thin single-crystalline nanosheets or scrolls (Fig. 16) that can be dispersed in water. Due to their homogenous structure and morphology, these nanocrystals and their Pt and IrO2-modified derivatives are an excellent system for systematic studies on water photoelectrolysis.125–127 For example it was shown that in pure water, the catalytic ability of the nanosheets is limited by peroxide formation on the surface. The peroxides form in 1:1 mole ratio with hydrogen.128 This behavior is reminiscent of TiO2 (see above) and shows that the nanocrystal-Pt composited are not capable of produce a sufficient photovoltage for complete water photoelectrolysis.
 Fig. 16  Single crystal niobate nanosheet and nanoscroll photocatalysts.126,127,129 
One reason is the very high water oxidation overpotential, that is not lowered much even after attachment of IrO2 nanoparticles cocatalyst. Another reason is the lack of a charge separation pathway in the material. According to a photolabeling study, electrons and holes are accessible over the entire nanosheet surface and the edges.130 As a result, charge carriers in nano-niobates decay on nanosecond timescale.129,131 In the presence of methanol, the nanosheets become very active photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution under UV light, especially in the presence of Pt cocatalysts, which reduce the proton reduction overpotential.108–110,125 Under these conditions it is found that the nanoscale sheets are about 16 times as active as the non-exfoliated parent material. That can be understood in terms of the reduced transport limitation for electrons and holes, which in the case of the sheets are generated near the surface.132 This enhancement persists in HCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets after restacking with KOH or NaOH. The specific surface area of this composite is ten times greater than in the condensed phase.133 For restacked nanosheets of HCa2Nb3O10, HSr2Nb3O10 and HLaNb2O7 it was found, that the activity of the triple-layered nanosheet (HSr2Nb3O10) is an order of magnitude higher than that of the double-layered HLaNb2O7, but the reason for that was not clear.134 A major limitation for solar energy conversion with HCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets is the 3.5 eV bandgap that restricts absorbed wavelength to <350 nm. Interestingly, while doping of rhodium into the lattice does move the absorption edge to about 600 nm, Rh-doped HCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets, gain virtually no activity for visible light driven H2 evolution.135 That demonstrates that charge carriers produced by excitation of rhodium-based states are not available for the water redox reaction, even though the Rh-dopants are located directly at the nanosheet water interface. A more effective way to achieve visible light driven photocatalysis is by sensitization of niobate, titanate, titanoniobate nanosheets and nanoscrolls with Ru bipy dyes, as shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Visible light driven H2 evolution from Ru bipy-modified nanosheets and scrolls in the presence of EDTA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Photogenerated electrons at the Ru bpy complex are quickly injected into the conduction band and delivered to the Pt cocatalyst where they reduce water. The holes are quenched by the sacrificial agents, EDTA, or iodide.89,136–139 Restacking of the nanosheets does not significantly reduce activity, because the large surface area is preserved.140 The quantum yield for sensitized H2 production is primarily governed by the electron injection efficiency from the excited-state sensitizer into the nanosheet. Because of the quasi-molecular properties of the nanosheets, it is easy integrate them into films on flat and curved substrates.50,141,142 When electrostatically attached to SiO2 microspheres, niobate nanosheets continue to catalyze hydrogen formation from aqueous methanol, with negligible loss of activity.141 This demonstrates the possibility of supported photocatalysts for large scale energy conversion. In the presence of the sensitizers, such supported systems produce H2 with apparent quantum yields of up to 20–25% at λ > 420 nm.50,142 The dependence of the hydrogen evolution rate on Pt loading suggests that the scavenging of conduction band electrons by Pt is substantially faster than charge recombination or EDTA reduction of the oxidized sensitizer. For shell-type assemblies of alpha-ZrP or HTiNbO5 sheets, quantum yields of 47–61% were achieved.50 Because they integrate light absorbing, charge relaying, and redox active components, these assemblies are termed ‘artificial leaves’.
WO3
The use of WO3 for photoelectrochemical water oxidation was first reported in 1976 by Hodes.143 Compared to TiO2, the photocurrent density with WO3 is small (usually <3 mA cm−2),144 prompting attempts to increase its surface area by nanoscaling. Augustynski reported that during photoelectrochemical methanol oxidation, nanostructured WO3 electrodes posses enhanced visible light absorption and current.145,146 The group also observed that after a threshold potential of about 0.5 V, the current became independent of the applied potential, in contrast to a bulk-WO3, indicating the absence of a continuous space charge layer in the nanostructured film. Photoanodic water oxidation with photocurrents of up to 2.7 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 and 1.0 V applied bias can be achieved with such electrodes in the presence of methylsulfonic acid (CH3SO3H) as supporting electrolyte.147 In aqueous H2SO4 and HClO4, the nanoparticle WO3 photoanode degrades over time and persulfates and hydrogen peroxide are formed as products. The performance also strongly depended on the electrolyte concentration. The incorporation of metal ions (Mo5+, Si4+, Sn4+, Ru3+, Li+) into the WO3 nanocrystals generally reduces the photocurrent to values below the non-doped film (2.53 mA cm−2, AM 1.5, 1 M H2SO4, EApp = 1.0 V vs. NHE). This was attributed to the introduction of defects and lower crystallinity of the film.148
Enhanced photocurrents (26%) for isopropanol oxidation were also observed with mesoporous WO3, due to the increased specific surface area.150 Relatively high photocurrents (∼2.0 mA cm−2, AM 1.5, 1.0 V vs. NHE, 0.1 M Na2SO4) during water oxidation were observed for films of hydrothermally grown WO3 crystal plates of 50–200 nm thickness.151 Ohtani's group compared the performance of flat and vertically aligned WO3 nanoplates. The vertical ones supported higher photocurrents of up to 1.8 mA cm−2 (1.2 V vs. NHE, 0.1 M Na2SO4), due to improved charge transport to the back contact.152
An increase of the photocurrent by up to 60% (to 2.1 mA cm−2, 1.5 V vs. NHE, 1 M H2SO4, AM 1.5) was observed after plasmon enhancement with silver nanoparticles (see below).153 Sunkara and coworkers prepared WO3 nanowire electrodes by thermal deposition onto FTO electrodes (Fig. 18).149 These gave water oxidation photocurrents of ∼1 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. NHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 (AM 1.5). Tungsten nitride nanowires (WN2) could be prepared similarly by treatment of WO3 nanowires with NH3.149 The photocurrents from these were slightly higher, but the material undergoes anodic photocorrosion.
 Fig. 18  Types of nanostructured WO3 films. (A) Particles, (B) nanowires, (C) plates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 and 149. Copyright 2009, International Association of Hydrogen Energy, and 2011, Elsevier Science Ltd. 
The performance of WO3 is also limited by the slow kinetics of water oxidation, which occurs on the millisecond to second timescale.154 Cocatalysts are expected to lessen this problem by reducing the kinetic barrier. Interestingly, while photodeposited Co-phosphate oxide (Co-Pi) on WO3 improves the photocurrent, this does not appear to be a result of improved redox reactions, but due to improved e/h separation.155 Also, it was found that the Co-Pi layer reduces photocorrosion of WO3. Suspended powders of WO3 can photocatalyze water oxidation in the presence of a chemical bias.156 This reactivity is preserved in single crystalline 0.75 nm thin nanosheets of WO3 obtained by chemical exfoliation of the layered Bi2W2O7. The nanosheets have an increased band gap from quantum confinement and they are prone to photocorrosion in neutral solution, similar to the bulk material.157
Cu2O
As a p-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.0 eV, Cu2O functions as photocathode for water reduction. Only a few applications of nanoscale Cu2O to water photoelectrochemistry are known today, because the material undergoes oxidative decomposition in air and anodic or cathodic photocorrosion (formation of CuO or Cu). Grätzel and coworkers recently demonstrated that a combination of 4 nm Al2O3 and of a 11 nm TiO2 overlayer can reduce photocorrosion (Fig. 19). After deposition of Pt nanoparticles, water reduction proceeded at EApp = 0 V vs. NHE with photocurrents of up to −7.6 mA cm−2 (AM 1.5) in 1.0 M Na2SO4 solution.158
 Fig. 19  Surface-protected Cu2O photocathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
By controlling electrochemical deposition parameters, Choi and coworkers synthesized dendritic Cu2O films that produce anodic currents of ∼0.25 mA cm−2 in 0.2 M K2SO4 (100 mW, λ > 400 nm), that are likely affected by photocorrosion, and not necessarily due to water oxidation.159 Turner and coworkers synthesized CuO/Cu2O nanowires by electrochemical deposition. Even though the composition be well controlled, the nanowires only supported small photocurrents (10 μA cm−2).160
BiVO4
As a ternary compound, BiVO4 had only recently been discovered as a photoanode material for water oxidation.161 Due to the positive potential of the conduction band edge it requires an electrical or chemical bias. A microporous Mo-doped BiVO4 electrode was prepared using a surfactant assisted metal–organic decomposition technique at 500 °C.162 A stable photocurrrent density of 1.0 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl was achieved under standard AM 1.5 illumination using 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution in phosphate buffer at pH 7. Nearly double photocurrent density was observed at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for a Co-Pi/BiV0.98Mo0.02O4 composite photoelectrode.163 Similar enhancement due to the presence of Co-Pi was observed in mesostructured SiO2–BiVO4 composites.163 Here SiO2 increases the optical transparency of the electrode and possibly improves hydroxyl adsorption. Photodeposited Co-Pi gave higher photocurrents at less positive applied potentials than electrodeposited Co-Pi, likely due to better proximity to the BiVO4 photoactive sites. Mullin's group prepared nanostructured BiVO4 films by co-evaporation (reactive ballistic deposition) of bismuth and vanadium in an oxygen atmosphere.103 Films deposited with excess vanadium (V/Bi = 2) showed the highest initial photocurrents with IPCE values above 21% for light wavelengths of 340–460 nm (in 0.5 M Na2SO4 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl), but leached vanadium into the electrolyte. Stoichiometric films were stable, but their photocurrents were limited by surface reaction kinetics. The addition of cobalt as an electrocatalyst increased the photocurrent three times. In very recent work, Choi and coworkers improved the water oxidation kinetics of BiVO4 by photodepositing a nanostructured 100 nm thick layer of FeOOH. This optimum layer thickness was identified by monitoring the water oxidation photocurrent during deposition.164 To date, the largest photocurrent density with BiVO4 of 1.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V applied potential (vs. RHE), was observed by Roel van de Krol's group for a BiVO4 film modified with 30 nm of Co-Pi.165 The performance was attributed to good charge separation and low recombination rates. At high illumination intensity, the efficiency was limited by transport of the majority carriers.
dx systems
Metal oxides with partially filled d-shells typically exhibit low e/h lifetimes. In addition, the first row transition metal oxides also suffer from low e/h mobility – they are classified as Mott insulators.52 In theory, both problems can be addressed through nanoscaling, and so dx systems have been intensively studied as photoelectrodes. The best known metal oxide here is Fe2O3, but reports on improved photocatalytic properties with nano-MnO2 and nano-IrO2 have appeared as well.
Fe2O3
The early results on photoelectrochemical water oxidation with Fe2O3 date back to experiments by Allen Bard in 1976,166 Karl Frese in 1978,167 and Andrew Hamnett in 1983.47 This work established the electrochemical stability of Fe2O3 under anodic conditions, but also showed that the material produced low photocurrents. It is now clear that these are due to a combination of short exciton lifetime (∼10 ps),4,5 poor charge carrier mobility,6 medium light penetration depth (α−1 = 118 nm at λ = 550 nm),7 and slow water oxidation kinetics. For higher performance, nanostructuring is employed as a means to increase the surface area, doping to improve charge transport, and surface modifications to improve e/h separation and water oxidation kinetics. This multidimensional strategy has been proven successful for Fe2O3 and can serve as a template for the optimization of other materials.
Syntheses
In 1984 Bockris and coworkers introduced spray pyrolysis for the synthesis of nanostructured Fe2O3 electrodes.168 This technique was further developed by Shahed Khan's group169,170 and by Jan Augustynski.171,172 Fe2O3 gained popularity after Michael Grätzel's group modified the spray pyrolysis method in 2005 to obtain Fe2O3 films with fractal morphologies,173–175 partially due to incorporation of silicon impurities.176 Other nano-morphologies were obtained by surface deposition and oxidation of preformed Fe3O4 nanocrystals,177 by depositing Fe2O3 inside of a SiO2 porous template,178 and by coating FTO electrodes with beta-FeOOH colloidal rods followed by calcination (Fig. 20).179 Active Fe2O3 nanowire arrays can be obtained by solution growth on ITO,180 or plasma oxidation of iron metal, followed by removal of an amorphous FeO overlayer with HF.181 Columnar nanoscale structures are accessible by reactive ballistic deposition in which iron metal is evaporatively deposited on a cold substrate in an oxygen atmosphere.182 Among these morphologies, the fractal Fe2O3 shape can achieve photocurrents of up to 2.2 mA cm−2 in 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6) under AM 1.5 illumination and 1.23 V applied bias versus relative hydrogen electrode (+0.43 V on the NHE scale). For sintered Fe2O3 spheres, the photocurrent under similar conditions is 0.6 mA cm−2,183 but only after annealing at 800 °C, which is accompanied by Sn4+ doping of the Fe2O3 film. Nanorods have given up to 0.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE in 1 M KOH,181 and with nano-Fe2O3 on high surface TiS2 substrates, Wang and coworkers were able to achieve 1.6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V RHE and AM 1.5 in 1 M NaOH (Fig. 21).184
 Fig. 20  Nanostructured Fe2O3 films made from ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (left),174 by air-sintering of Fe3O4 colloids (middle),183 or by calcination of beta-FeOOH colloidal rods.179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, 179 and 183. Copyright 2006, 2010, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2005, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 21  Fe2O3 nanowire arrays from plasma oxidation of iron181 and nanostructured Fe2O3 on TiS2 nano-net.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 and 184. Copyright 2012, IOP Science. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
The enhanced performance of fractal-Fe2O3 is due to a combination of large surface area for effective hole transport and large film thickness for improved light absorption.174 The performance can be improved further through a combination of different methods. One is to improve electron–hole separation in the material and slow down e/h recombination. Another one is to improve the water oxidation kinetics with cocatalysts. A third one uses dopants to improve electron transport in Fe2O3 to the back electrode. And a last method seeks to modify the Fe2O3 energetics for enhanced charge transfer. Plasmonic nanostructures to enhance light absorption have not been effective so far (see section at end).
Electron–hole separation
At large applied potentials, the performance of Fe2O3 is no longer limited by the kinetics of water oxidation but more by bulk recombination.185 Therefore, attempts were made to increase electron–hole separation in the material. Based on intensity-modulated photocurrent spectra, Laurence Peter's group concluded that the improved performance of Cobalt(II) nitrate treated Fe2O3 photoanodes was not due to enhanced kinetics, but due to improved e/h separation at the surface and reduced e/h recombination.186 Choi and coworkers treated Fe2O3 with Zn and Al nitrates to generate thin ZnFe2O4, ZnFe2−xAlxO4 or Fe2−xAlxO3 overlayers. On the basis of Mott–Schottky plots, the improved performance was not due to changes in kinetics or energetics, which supported a hypothesis of improved electron–hole separation.187,188 Kevin Sivula's group investigated the effect of a 2 nm Nb2O5 underlayer on the performance of Fe2O3 films. The layer seemed to improve e/h separation at the Fe2O3–FTO interface, thereby raising the photocurrent.189 When a 0.1–2.0 nm thin Al2O3 overlayer was coated on top of the Fe2O3, the photocurrent onset shifted to less positive potentials, which was attributed to the passivation of hole trap sites on the Fe2O3 surface.190 A similar effect was found for Ga2O3 overlayers.191 Based on electrochemical impedance studies, Cesar et al. discussed the possibility that Si dopants in the Fe2O3 lattice increased the carrier density from 1017 cm−3 to 1020 cm−3. Theoretically, the concominant reduction of the space charge layer width could allow field-assisted electron/hole separation in even small Fe2O3 grains. Alternatively, the observed enhancement could have been due to improved hole transfer related to the increase in surface area.76 While a thin layer of the Co-Pi catalyst on Fe2O3 improves the water oxidation kinetics (see below) it was also found to increase the hole lifetime, indicating that it helped in separating e/h pairs.192
Water oxidation kinetics
It is well established that slow water oxidation kinetics limit the performance of Fe2O3,47,166 especially at low applied potentials.185 This was recently confirmed with electrochemical impedance measurements193,194 in Thomas Hamann's group, by comparing electrode kinetics of Fe2O3 in water and with iron hexacyanide complexes.195 Recent transient absorption measurements show that water oxidation on Fe2O3 occurs on the 10−3 to 1 second timescale.196,197 In contrast to TiO2, the water oxidation rate on Fe2O3 is also found to depend on temperature.111 The overpotential for water oxidation can be lowered by adding cocatalysts. IrO2 is among the most active water oxidation electrocatalysts, and indeed, electrophoretic modification of Fe2O3 with 2 nm IrO2 nanoparticles allowed photocurrents of 3.0 mA cm−2 at an applied potential of 1.23 V (vs. RHE).46 This is the highest performance of any Fe2O3 photoelectrode today. A smaller increase of the photocurrent was also observed by Gamelin and coworkers, after electrodeposition of the Co-Pi catalyst onto Fe2O3 (Fig. 22). In this case, the cocatalyst also shifted the photoonset potential to less positive potentials by about 0.3 V.198 When the Co-Pi deposition was photoassisted, a more uniform coating was obtained, and photocurrents comparable to that of IrO2 (2.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE) were possible.199 Remarkably, simple dipping of the Fe2O3 into cobalt nitrate solution also led to substantial increases of the photocurrent and cathodic shifts of the current onset potential. The increasing effectiveness in going from Co2+ dipping to Co-Pi electro- and photodeposition was confirmed in independent work in Kyoung Chin Choi's group.200 Surface adsorption of Co2+ ions was also effective in improving the performance of Zn and Al modified Fe2O3 photoanodes.187,190
 Fig. 22  Fe2O3 film before and after photodeposition of Co-Pi catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
While it is tempting to attribute the benefit of Co2+ surface treatment to improved water oxidation kinetics, intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) by Peter's group show that Co2+ surface ions suppress e/h surface recombination.194 However, a similar lowering of the e/h recombination rate by three orders of magnitude, presumable by aiding e/h separation, was also observed for the established water oxidation catalyst Co-Pi on Fe2O3, based on transient absorption spectroscopy data.192 Lastly, work on porous Fe2O3 reveal that residual SiO2 from a porous structure template can retard the water oxidation kinetics, and move the onset potential to more positive values.178
Charge transport
As a Mott insulator, Fe2O3 suffers from to slow electron and especially hole transport.193,201 Hole transport to the surface is usually improved through nanoscaling the material, but electrons still need to travel to the back-contacts of the Fe2O3 film. Thus, research has focused on improving electron transport by using dopants. Work in Augustynski's group showed that dopants, incl. Ni2+, Al3+, Ti4+, Ta5+, In3+, Pt4+ have a strong influence on the photoanode performance of Fe2O3.172 Most of these ions reduce the photocurrent, but a beneficial effect was noted for either Al3+ (1%) or Zn2+ (4%) in combination with Ti4+ (5%). These modifications lead to a favorable shift of the photocurrent onset potential, which the authors attributed to an increase of the hole diffusion length. An additional correlation exists between the crystallinity of the films, monitored by Raman spectroscopy, and their photoactivity. The photoactivity of iron oxide was improved by co-deposition with Mo or Cr. Because there were no electrocatalytic effects of these ions, the observed increase of photocurrent was attributed to better charge transport.202 Similar observations were made with Pt4+-doped Fe2O3203 and with Sn4+-doped Fe2O3.183 Here, the Sn4+ ions either diffused into the Fe2O3 film the FTO substrate during annealing at 800 °C, or were intentionally added as SnCl4. Grimes and Mallouk used Mott–Schottky technique to quantify carrier concentrations in Sn-doped Fe2O3 nanowire arrays (800 and 2500 nm long). Increasing temperature lead to increased concentrations from 7 × 1019 to 2.45 × 10 20 cm−3 and higher photocurrents of up to 0.7 mA cm−2 at 0.43 V vs. NHE (=1.23 RHE) in 1.0 M NaOH and AM 1.5.204 Yat Li's group used a similar analysis to measure 1.89 × 1019 cm−3 for the electron concentration in Sn-doped Fe2O3 films obtained by treatment with SnCl4 and annealing at 650 °C.205 Turner and coworkers prepared Ti-doped Fe2O3 films by co-sputtering of the corresponding oxides. Based on Mott Schottky plots, the carrier densities (1.81 × 1014−2.43 × 1014 cm−3) increased with Ti content, but surprisingly, were lower than in undoped Fe2O3. The dopants also raised the photocurrent, which was attributed to improved carrier transport and a reduced bandgap of Ti:Fe2O3.206 The same group found a similar effect for Mg–Ti co-doped Fe2O3. Here, the optimum performance was seen at 1:1 dopant ratio, which was attributed to reduced charge defects, due to the compensating influence of the +2 and +4 dopant charges.207 Titanium-doped Fe2O3 films prepared from tetrabutoxy-titanium and iron chloride, showed higher photocurrents, due to enhanced charge transport resulting from higher majority carrier concentrations (1.36 × 1019 cm−3), one hundred times above that of non-doped Fe2O3.208 A similar effect and photocurrents of up to 2.4 mA cm−2 (1.0 M NaOH at 1.23 V NHE, 1.5 AM illumination) were observed upon doping Cd(2+) ions into the Fe2O3 films.209 An improvement of the visible light response and the water oxidation kinetics were also noted.
Energetics and density of states
The energetics of a semiconductor are central to its function as a photoelectrode. For Ti/F co-doped Fe2O3 films made by electrochemical codeposition of FeCl3 and Ti(O–iPr)4 in the presence of KF, followed by annealing, McFarland's group observed a −0.2 V photoonset shift to −0.6 V (NHE, in 1 M NaOH), after surface treatment with CoF3.210 This was attributed to a shift of the Fe2O3 flatband potential due to fluoride incorporation as Ti–F into the film. No change of the flatband potential was observed in the absence of Ti. Using Resonant Inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS), Vayssieres recently observed a widening of the eg–t2g gap of Fe3+ in films of Fe2O3 nanorods (10 nm diameter). This was interpreted as a result of a one-dimensional quantum size effect.179
Suspended nanostructures
The majority of work on nano-Fe2O3 involves thin films, but a few papers on water photoelectrolysis with suspended nanoparticles have also appeared in the literature. In 1987, Grätzel's group reported the formation of hydrogen from irradiated colloidal Fe2O3 in pure water.211 Similar observations were made by Gondal's group, under Laser excitation.212 As the conduction band of Fe2O3 is not negative enough to allow proton reduction, the formed hydrogen was likely due to radical processes following the photoreduction of O2, and involving carbon impurities in these system.211 In 2012, our laboratory reported oxygen formation from Fe2O3 nanocrystal dispersions in water and 0.1 M AgNO3 as sacrificial electron acceptor. Even though the performance of the system was limited by silver deposition on the Fe2O3 nanocrystals (Fig. 23) a systematic increase of O2 production rates could be seen with decreasing particle size. This was attributed to improved hole extraction in the smaller nanocrystals.213
 Fig. 23  Left: silver nanoparticles formed on nano-Fe2O3 after irradiation in aqueous AgNO3. Right: correlation between Fe2O3 particle size and O2 evolution rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
IrO2
Because IrO2 has a very low electrochemical overpotential for water oxidation,214–219 it is widely used in commercial water electrolyzers and as a cocatalyst in combination with a photoelectrode (see below). In 2011, Osterloh and coworkers described visible and UV-light induced photocatalytic oxygen evolution from IrO2 sols in the presence of silver nitrate or sodium persulfate as sacrificial acceptors.220 The photocatalytic activity is unusual, considering the short lifetime of photogenerated holes in metallic materials, incl. IrO2. In the present case, photohole extraction was possible due to the small size of the particles (2 nm).
MnO2
In bulk form, MnO2 is not active for photoelectrochemical water oxidation,218 although it does function as electrocatalyst.221,222 Recently, several reports suggest that nanostructuring activates birnessite-MnO2 for photocatalytic water oxidation. In 2005, Sakai and coworkers reported small photocurrents for a film of 0.5 nm thin nanosheets of MnO2 on FTO in acetonitrile with LiClO4 as electrolyte and a Pt counter electrode. The origin of the current was not clear, although the nanosheets remained stable.223 Small photocurrents were also observed for this material on gold, in the presence of methanol.224 Later, Leone Spiccia's group reported photoelectrochemical water oxidation (3 μA cm−2 for electrodes at 1.20 V vs. NHE in 0.1 M Na2SO4) on Nafion/glassy carbon membranes with embedded manganese oxide clusters.225 These clusters were later found to convert into birnessite-MnO2 nanocrystals (Fig. 24).226 The conversion of tri-azacyclononane- and terpyrididyl-stabilized Mn4O5 and Mn4O6 clusters into MnO2 nanoparticles was demonstrated independently in Gary Brudvig's group.227 When embedded inside of a Nafion membrane, or coated onto FTO, these nanoparticles supported visible light (500 mW cm−2) driven water oxidation with photocurrents of up to 16 μA cm−2 at applied potentials of 1.2 V vs. NHE. Thomas Jaramillo's group showed that Na-birnessite-type MnO2 thin films made via electrodeposition could support photoelectrochemical water oxidation at large applied potentials (>1.45 V vs. RHE, 0.1 M NaOH) but the photocurrents were very small (<50 μA cm−2).228
 Fig. 24  Nafion film showing presence of manganese-oxide nanoparticles formed after electro-oxidation of [Mn4O4L6]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
VO2
Nano-VO2 has been studied extensively due to its metal insulator transition at 67 °C, and as a potential battery material. There is one report on photoelectrochemical water reduction with VO2 nanorod arrays on silicon, under UV irradiation. As the conduction band edge of VO2 would be expected to be to low for proton reduction, it is likely that H2 evolution in this system is not from VO2 but from photocorrosion of the silicon wafer.229
Metal nitrides
Because the electronegativity of nitrogen is lower than that of oxygen, metal nitrides are prone to anodic photocorrosion. However, they have considerable potential as photocathodes. Indeed, W2N nanowire arrays formed by nitridation of WO3 are found to support anodic photocurrents of 0.2 mA cm−2, but performance rapidly decays due to formation of the oxides. Improved stability was found for the mixed phase W2N–WO3.149 Recently, Yuliati et al. reported the synthesis of Ta3N5 nanocrystals by nitridation of Ta2O5 using C3N4 as a structure template. After attachment of Pt cocatalyst particles, the Ta3N5 was active for photocatalytic hydrogen formation from aqueous methanol under visible light irradiation. The activity was higher than that of bulk Ta3N5.230 In another study, Ta3N5 nanowire arrays were prepared by ammonolysis of Ta2O5 nanowire arrays at 800 °C.231 At 450 nm and an applied bias of 0.5 V these electrodes supported IPCE values of 5.3% in 1 M KOH solution. The performance improved by a factor of ∼4 after addition of IrO2, Co3O4 or Co-Pi nanoparticle cocatalysts.
Metal chalcogenides
Because they show quantum confinement effects, metal chalcogenides, especially those of the group 12 metals, have received much attention in the nanoscience community. However, photocorrosion makes these materials unsuitable for water oxidation, and so metal chalcogenide nanocrystals are mainly used for visible light sensitization of metal oxide photoelectrochemical cells,232 and for basic science studies on photocatalytic water reduction, interfacial charge transport and233 and quantum confinement.62,234 Countless papers have focused on CdS nanoparticles and nanocomposites as visible light driven photocatalysts for proton reduction in the presence of sacrificial agents, including EDTA, sodium hydrosulfide, and methanol.235 However, because the intrinsic photocatalytic proton reduction activity of bulk CdS is already very high (quantum efficiencies of 25–34%),236–238 nanostructuring is not effective for increasing performance. The situation is similar for bulk ZnS, where a H2 evolution quantum efficiency of 90% was measured by Reber, Meyer and Rusek in 1984.236 Among group 12 chalcogenides, cadmium selenide, on the other hand, is interesting because its bulk form does not catalyze hydrogen evolution from water without an applied bias, due to a high proton reduction overpotential and a non-favorable conduction band edge.239 The energetics of this material can be improved significantly through nanoscaling, taking advantage of the quantum size effect. Nanoribbons of CdSe become active proton reduction photocatalysts in the presence of Na2SO3/Na2S as sacrificial agents.240,241 For CdSe quantum dots, Holmes et al. recently described an exponential dependence of the hydrogen evolution quantum efficiency (from sodium sulfite solution) on the band gap of the dots (Fig. 25).62 This dependence is expected from Marcus–Gerischer theory, which correlates the proton reduction rate with the thermodynamic driving force, given by the difference between the CdSe flatband potential and the proton reduction potential. Size and shape dependent electron injection from CdSe dots into metal oxides has also been observed by Prashant Kamat's group, using transient absorption spectroscopy and emission quenching experiments.61,234,242,243 By changing the CdSe particle diameter from 7.5 to 2.4 nm, the electron transfer rate increases by three orders of magnitude.61
 Fig. 25  Quantum size effect enhanced water reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Koenenkamp used photoconductance measurements to analyze quantum size modulated electron injection from nano PbS into TiO2. No injection occurred when the particle diameter was above the critical value of 2.5 nm, due to unfavorable energetics.244 Parkinson's group recently measured increased quantum efficiencies for PbSe nanocrystal-sensitized TiO2 electrodes. These were attributed to multiple exciton generation (MEG) in the quantum dots.70 For nano-Bi2S3 on TiO2, Peter and coworkers shows that injection of photogenerated electrons into the metal oxide was greatly enhanced in the presence of hydrosulfide.66 This was attributed to a lifting of the conduction band edge of Bi2S3 by the potential determining effect of this ion. Hoffmann's group observed photocatalytic H2 evolution from CdS nanocrystal-sensitized Ni/NiO-loaded KNbO3 crystals of up to 150 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light from aqueous isopropanol. In contrast, the free dots only had very low H2 evolution activity (5 μmol h−1 g−1). The higher rate of the composite was attributed to the presence of the NiO/Ni cocatalyst.245 Using electrostatic force microscopy, Alivisatos' group measured the built-in potential of nano-Cu2S–CdS heterostructures. This potential forms when the electrons in the two phases reach electrochemical equilibrium – it is equivalent to the barrier height of the space charge layer in semiconductor–electrolyte junctions.246
Recently, Kanatzidis and coworkers reported photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from a Sn2S4–Fe4S4 gel after sensitization with a ruthenium tris bipyridyl complex.247 Even though the hydrogen evolution rate was very low, it is unprecedented for this class of compounds.
Main group elements and compounds
Due to its suitable bandgap and high conduction band edge, silicon is considered an attractive photocathode material for water reduction. Microstructured silicon films are pursued in an attempt to replace the ultrapure photovoltaic silicon with less expensive material. To compensate for the lower minority carrier diffusion length of reagent grade silicon, the electrode surface area needs to be increased accordingly. This also allows for the possibility of less expensive water reduction cocatalyst with lower per atom activity. Nate Lewis' Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis fabricated silicon microwire arrays as photocathodes for H2 production.248,249 The 40–60 μm long microrods consisted of p-type Si grown by vapor liquid solid process (SiCl4 and BCl3 as dopant) on p-Si wavers. A copper growth catalyst is preferred over gold, because the latter contaminates the silicon with impurities of 1.7 × 1016 cm−3 causing enhanced recombination and lower photovoltage.250 To increase e/h separation at the silicon–electrolyte interface, a n+p junction was added, and Pt nanoparticles were chemically deposited at the Si tips to reduce the kinetic barrier for proton reduction. In 0.5 M H2SO4 and at an applied potential of +0.3 V vs. NHE such photocathodes reach 15 mA cm−2 (AM 1.5), five times the value of the best Fe2O3 photoanodes. However, the photocurrent is only half of that of planar n+p junction Si electrodes (27.5 mA cm−2), due increased carrier recombination at the higher microrod surface area. While the high aspect ratio of the microrod photoelectrode enhances minority carrier transport to the semiconductor–liquid interface, optimum majority carrier extraction through the back contact requires precise control of Si doping.251 Also, it was found that the spacing of the rods and their 2D arrangement is critical for reducing light losses that arise from scattering and reflection. While ordered arrangements did allow higher rod packing density and better optical absorption, they also made the absorption profiles anisotropic, leading to ‘dead spots’ in a device (Fig. 26).252
 Fig. 26  Fabrication, morphology, and light scattering properties of Si radial microwire array photocathodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 and 252. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. 
Another advantage of the microwire arrays is that, after coating with a polymer, it can be peeled off the silicon waver and used as a flexible photoelectrode module.253 This potentially allows the construction of milliscale Tandem devices.
Systematic studies on the benefit of adding nanoparticle cocatalysts are described in the separate section below.254 Peidong Yang's group demonstrated that the cathodic photocurrent of Si microrod arrays is enhanced 5 times after extension with InGaN nanowire branches.255 Solution-grown GaP nanowires were also active for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution (Fig. 27).256
 Fig. 27  Solution-grown GaP nanowires before (B) and after (D) removal of Ga cocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
After deposition onto FTO electrodes, the illuminated nanowire films gave a photovoltage of up to 150 mV, and were able to photoreduce water in the presence of methanol as sacrificial electron donor. Nanowire membranes could be fabricated by deposition of the nanowires onto poly(vinylidene fluoride) filters.
Carbon nitride
Even though the compound C3N4 has been known as ‘melon’ for over hundred years, its photocatalytic properties were only recently discovered in Markus Antonietti's group.257 The structure of the material consists of graphite-like layers in which some of the carbon atoms are replaced by nitrogen atoms (Fig. 28). The bandgap and photocatalytic water splitting properties can be adjusted by copolymerization with barbituric acid, aminoborane, sulfur, or other heteroatom sources.258–260 Based on surface photovoltage measurements,261 and photoelectrochemistry,260 g-C3N4 is an n-type semiconductor that functions as a weak photoanode material. The low photocurrents suggest fast e/h recombination and slow charge transport. Therefore, nanostructuring can be useful for increasing the specific surface of the compound and its activity.258,262 For example, while under visible light, platinum-modified bulk g-C3N4 produces hydrogen from aqueous ethanolamine solution at rates of only 8 μmol h−1 g−1, mesostructured g-C3N4 reaches rates of up to 149 μmol h−1 g−1.262 After integration of Co3O4 nanoparticle cocatalysts, photocatalytic water oxidation with 1.1% QE at 420 nm can be achieved using silver nitrate as sacrificial electron acceptor.263 While these results are encouraging, prolonged water oxidation is expected to cause significant photocorrosion. Lastly, microporous C3N4 was also used as a structure template/nitriding agent for the synthesis of Ta3N5 nanocrystals from TaCl5 and ammonia.230 The resulting nanocrystals exhibited 10 times higher activity for photocatalytic proton reduction than Ta3N5 (under visible light and after loading of Pt nanoparticle cocatalyst). This was attributed to a lower defect concentration in the template nanocrystals.
 Fig. 28  TEM images of porous (A) and bulk C3N4 (B). A photograph and the schematic structure of the tri(s)triazine units are also shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Nanoparticles as cocatalysts
The systematic study of metal nanoparticles and their potential as ‘metal microelectrodes’ goes back to work by Henglein in the 70's.264 Platinum and IrO2 have particularly high activity for electrocatalytic water oxidation and reduction,265,266 and thus they were initially employed by Grätzel and Lehn as water splitting cocatalysts.267–270 In recent years attention has shifted towards more abundant and less expensive elements that are more suitable for large scale operation. In addition to lowering the activation barrier for water redox reactions, the role of cocatalysts is to assist in e/h separation at the cocatalyst–semiconductor interfaces. Electron injection from excited TiO2 into gold and silver nanoparticles271,272 and hole injection into IrO2 can be observed directly with transient absorption spectroscopy.273 Metal–semiconductor interfaces can form Schottky junctions with rectifying properties, but at the nanoscale the electrical fields resulting from such junctions are greatly diminished. A problem of cocatalyst–semiconductor interfaces is that they generate recombination sites for charge carries, thereby deteriorating photoelectrochemical performance. However, this negative effect is generally overcompensated by improved water redox kinetics.
Pt/Pd/Rh/Ru
Some of the first nanoscale photocatalytic systems employed a combination of RuO2 colloids for water oxidation, and of Pt or Ru colloids for water reduction. Ruthenium dyes served as optical sensitizers, and the methylviologen +/2+ redox couple as an electron relay between Pt and the dye.274,275 Either oxygen or hydrogen formation could observed in the presence of Ce(SO4)2 or and EDTA as sacrificial agents.276
Platinum nanoparticles are most common cocatalysts for water reduction.39 In 1981, Mills showed that Pt nanoparticles could be photodeposited onto TiO2 during band gap excitation in the presence of a solution of chloroplatinic acid and formaldehyde. Here, the photogenerated electrons reduce the metal salt, favoring deposition at the electron-rich sites.277 Alternatively, Pt nanoparticles could be added by ‘salting out’ citrate stabilized Pt nanoparticles in the presence of the semiconductor powder. Photocatalysts prepared by the latter procedure were more active for hydrogen evolution in the presence of aqueous EDTA solution, but the higher activity could have been due to the presence of residual citrate. More recent studies by Stefan Bernhard's group have demonstrated photocatalytic water reduction with ruthenium or iridium dye-sensitized platinum or palladium colloids in the presence of sacrificial agents.278–280 Platinum cocatalysts are sub-optimal for use in photocatalysts because Pt also catalyzes water formation from H2 and O2 (the water splitting backreaction). At high H2/O2 concentrations, the backreaction rate becomes equal to the rate of the forward reaction, and net gas formation ceases. While Au nanoparticles do not catalyze water formation from H2 and O2, they can photoreduce O2, and their activity for proton reduction is about 10 times lower than that of Pt.281 A better way to stop the back reaction consists in adding a 2 nm Cr2O3 coating onto the proton reduction cocatalyst, as shown by Kazunari Domen's group (Fig. 29).282,283 The coating is applied to either Rh, Ir, or Pt cocatalysts, which accept photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor (in this case GaN:ZnO). Electrons migrate through the Cr2O3 layer and catalyze proton reduction, but not oxygen reduction at its surface. The Cr2O3 shell also acts as oxygen barrier and prevents direct reduction of oxygen at the metallic nanoparticle core.
 Fig. 29  HR-TEM images of Rh-loaded GaN:ZnO before and after photodeposition of the Cr2O3 shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons. 
An interesting new strategy to obtain active water oxidation catalysts is to embed highly active metal oxides into soluble polyoxometallates. This was recently demonstrated by Sartorel et al.284 and separately by Craig Hill's group.285 The decaanion [Ru4(μ-O)4(μ-OH)2(H2O)4(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− contains a Ru4 cluster core sandwiched between two [γ-SiW10O36]8− units. In the presence of Ce4+ it generates oxygen with turnover frequencies of up to 450 s−1.284
The related complex [Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10− is comprised of a Co4O4 unit sandwiched between two (PW9O34)9− halfs.284 In the presence of the [Ru(bpy)3]3+ as a sacrificial acceptor, oxygen can be generated at turnover frequencies up to 0.9 s−1.
IrO2
In 1991, Andrew Mills published an activity ranking of microcrystalline particles for catalytic water oxidation using cerium(IV) ammonium nitrate as oxidant. The study identified Ru, RuO2 and IrO2 as most active catalysts.218 The activity of Pt, Ru, or Os doped IrO2·xH2O colloids is even higher.219 Due to their superior water oxidation ability, IrO2 nanoparticles have been extensively used in photoelectrocatalysts and in photoelectrochemical cells. Nanostructured IrO2 films have been shown to oxidize water with overpotentials as little as 0.2 V.287,288 The IrO2 particles are also often sensitized with Ru dyes89,244,289 or immobilized in Nafion membranes290 or linked to semiconductor nanoparticles.136,291,292 The charge transfer dynamics involving IrO2, Ru dyes and TiO2 have been studied separately by Kamat and Mallouk. Hole injection from a Ru dye into IrO2 particles proceeds on the 2 ms timescale.293 From TiO2 the hole transfer is considerably faster and occurs with a rate constant of 6 × 10−5 s−1.273
3d metal oxides
Limited availability and high prices prevent the large scale application of noble metals for water electrolysis. This problem is avoided with cocatalysts based on abundant elements. The hope is to compensate for the lower per-atom activities of these catalysts with the larger specific surface area of nanostructured photoelectrodes. Nickel is one of the earliest abundant nanoparticle cocatalysts employed for water splitting, especially in combination with large band gap semiconductor catalysts, such as the tantalates, niobates, and titanates.37,44,294–300 The metal is usually applied by soaking the semiconductor with nickel nitrate solution, followed by hydrogen treatment at elevated temperature, and a subsequent oxygen treatment at 130 °C. The oxidation step converts some of the Ni metal into NiO, which is necessary to achieve complete water photoelectrolysis. High resolution electron microscopy established that the NiO forms a shell around the Ni particles,301 which is believed to function as an oxygen barrier, in analogy to the Cr2O3 shell in the Rh/Cr2O3 system discussed above. The oxidation step can be omitted if the Ni is used as a photocathode material in a cell. According to recent work by Lewis' group electroplated Ni–Mo alloy particles on silicon photocathodes are nearly as active for the hydrogen evolution reaction as e-beam deposited platinum.254 The performance also depends strongly on the nanomaterial amount and deposition method (Fig. 30). Among water oxidation catalysts, nano-Mn2O3 has recently emerged as a promising but cheap catalyst. After electrodeposition onto a polished glassy carbon electrode, Mn2O3 is active for both the oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), with overpotentials of only 130 mV higher than those for Ir, Rh, and Pt electrodes.302 The superior function of the film may stem from its chemical relationship to the oxygen evolving CaMn4Ox cluster in photosystem II. A different manganese oxide, Mn3O4, also proved to be effective for water oxidation. When nanocrystals of it were integrated into a Rh/Cr2O3–GaN:ZnO photocatalyst, an increase of the overall water splitting activity was observed.282
 Fig. 30  Silicon microwires with cocatalysts deposited on top (A, C) and base (B, D) for the indicated times: (A, B) Ni 5s; (C, D) Ni 1s. Right: electrochemical polarization curves during proton reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Heinz Frei's group recently reported that nanocrystals of MnO2 inside of a mesoporous SiO2 matrix catalyzed O2 evolution after sensitization with a Ru bipyridyl complex and in the presence of sodium persulfate.222 A similar reactivity was observed for Co3O4 and with IrO2 nanocrystals,303 after sensitization with a single Cr center.304 Lastly, we mention the recent observation of photocatalytic properties for nanocrystals of MnO2 (see above).
Co-Pi and Co-oxides
One of the most popular water oxidation catalysts is the Co-Pi catalyst, invented by Dan Nocera's group in 2008.305 The amorphous material contains Co(III) ions, oxide and phosphate, and films of it can electroxidize water in neutral phosphate buffer solution at 0.41 V overpotential (measured at 1 mA cm−2). In connection with a triple junction amorphous silicon photovoltaic cell, and a NiMoZn water reduction catalyst, Co-Pi films accomplish visible light driven overall water splitting with up to 4.7% energy efficiency. The device is known as the ‘artificial leaf’.10 In the last three years, films of the Co-Pi catalyst have been used to enhance the performance of Fe2O3 and ZnO photoelectrodes (for details see respective sections above). But other cobalt oxides also have shown reasonable activity for water oxidation.265 Don Tilley's group recently reported on the use of Co, CoO, and Co3O4 nanoparticle catalysts for electrochemical water oxidation.306 Styring's group demonstrated photocatalytic water oxidation with Ru dye sensitized Co oxide nanoparticles in sodium persulfate solution.307 Mullin's group showed that the photocurrent of N-doped TiO2 nanorod arrays increased significantly upon addition of a cobalt oxide layer.103
Metal sulfides
Molybdenum sulfide, MoS2, has recently emerged as an active HER catalyst.308 Thin films of the material on Au support proton reduction current densities of 0.3 mA cm−3 at −0.17 V overpotential. As the active sites of the catalyst are located at the edge sites of the MoS2 sheets, the activity increases upon nanostructuring the material. The catalytic properties are preserved in nano-WS2 and can be enhanced by addition of cobalt ions which bind to the cluster edge sites.309 When MoS2 nanocrystals obtained by chemical exfoliation are combined with CdSe nanoribbons, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate increases by up to 3.7 times.241 Ib Chorkendorff's group recently employed the cuboidal Mo3S4 cluster anion as a HER cocatalyst on p-Si pillar photocathode.310 Under red-light illumination (λ > 620 nm, 28.3 mW cm−2) this configuration supported photocurrents of up to 14 mA cm−2, at −0.3 V applied potential (in 1.0 M aqueous HClO4). The cocatalyst reduced the proton reduction overpotential by 0.7 V.
Nanoparticles for plasmonic effects
A rather novel application of nanoparticles concerns their surface plasmon resonance to boost visible light absorption of photoelectrodes.311 The enhancement is thought to arise from increased electrical field strength near the particle, and due to enhanced light scattering throughout the photoelectrode. In 2010, Augustynski's group reported 60% enhanced photocurrents from WO3 film electrodes that contained a silver nanoparticle underlayer. The effect was attributed to improved light absorption by WO3 caused by a combination of optical (nonresonant light scattering and light reflection) and plasmonic (resonant light scattering and electromagnetic field enhancement) effects from the silver nanoparticles.153 Recent results by Norskov's group on TiO2 films on FTO, with a Au nanoparticle layer in between, show that increased photocurrents can at least in part be due to increased electronic contact resulting from the higher surface area of the gold nanoparticle layer.312 To test plasmonic enhancement in Fe2O3 photoanodes, Peidong Yang's group fabricated a thin Fe2O3 film on top of gold nanopillar arrays (Fig. 31).313 The pillar electrodes gave 40% increased photocurrents (at 1.5 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH) compared to films on a flat gold substrate. Weak traces of the plasmon resonance in the IPCE curves indicated that the enhancement involved both surface plasmon resonances and photonic-mode light trapping in the nanostructured films. The effect of improved charge transport resulting from the increase in Fe2O3–Au and Fe2O3–electrolyte interface was assumed as small.
 Fig. 31  SEM images of Fe2O3 film on gold nanopillar array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In contrast, Grätzel's group reported that 50 nm Au particles embedded into a Fe2O3 photoanode film had no impact on the photocurrent. Reduced photocurrent was observed for a Fe2O3 film with 50 nm Au particles on top of the film. This was attributed to higher e/h recombination.314 However, after subtracting this effect from the photocurrent spectrum, a small enhancement in the 400–600 nm region could be seen, that was interpreted as a result of gold surface plasmon resonance. Overall, these findings suggest that surface plasmon resonances can impact light absorption and photocurrent generation by photoelectrodes, but that insulating coatings need to be employed to suppress enhanced charge trapping, transfer, and recombination at the metal–semiconductor interface.
Conclusion and outlook
The last decade has seen an increase in research activity on nanostructured photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic systems for solar water splitting. The nanoscaling approach has been shown to particularly improve the performance of metal oxide photoanode materials with low carrier mobility and with short excited state lifetimes. For electrocatalysts, nanoscaling has increased the electroactive surface area and allowed for more efficient materials use. For selected metal chalcogenides, the quantum size effect has been useful for controlling interfacial charge transport, and in promoting photocatalytic proton reduction. These examples clearly show the benefits of nanoscaling and highlight its potential for the development of improved photoelectrode materials.
At the same time it is apparent that the performance of a material is ultimately defined by the intrinsic materials parameters, i.e. by its chemical composition and structure. For many metal oxides, low electrical conductivity, high defect concentrations, and short excited state lifetimes are important problems that cannot be solved through nanoscaling alone. New materials with ternary and quaternary compositions are required here, to avoid these shortcomings. Even though inexpensive nanomaterials with low proton reduction overpotentials are now available (e.g. NiMo alloy), there is still a need for more active water oxidation catalysts, based on earth abundant elements. Here, nanostructuring can be a significant asset in increasing the electroactive area, or in preventing back reactions, as in the case of Cr2O3-coated Rh nanoparticles. Also, due to the corrosive nature of water electrolysis, material stability is a limiting issue that affects all non-oxide materials. Nanostructured coatings with inert materials have been shown to reduce corrosion, but not to eliminate it fully. Corrosion must be considered as an important parameter in devising new photocatalysts for water splitting. This particularly applies to assemblies that utilize non-oxide materials, or molecular components as linkers, modifiers, or catalysts.
Some drawbacks of these materials, e.g. low electrical conductivity, may be circumvented with suspended photocatalysts, which are nanoscale in all three dimensions, and combine photoanode and cathode materials in close proximity. Such integrated ‘photochemical diodes’ might have the additional advantage over photoelectrochemical cells, that they would be easier to manufacture on a large scale, and be less costly in their operation.3 However, the key limitation of these systems is insufficient rectification. Since space charge layers are not effective at the nanoscale, new ways of separating charge are needed. One possibility are charge-selective interfaces that could support ‘kinetic rectification’ – a concept that was formulated by Helmut Tributsch in 2008,54 in analogy to natural photosynthesis (Fig. 32). Alternatively, it might be feasible to increase the doping levels of nanocrystals, to improve the effectiveness of space charge layers on the nanoscale, although that again might come at the expense of increased recombination. These highly integrated systems would also require higher precision in their synthesis/assembly, especially if several components are involved. This includes better control of interfaces, so that the energy loss processes arising from the increased interfacial areas can be minimized. The development of surface treatment techniques, e.g. the use of chemical modifiers (Ga, Zn, Al ions), to reduce defects and improve carrier lifetimes will be essential for this purpose.
 Fig. 32  Chemical potential (A) versus kinetic (B) rectification. Adapted from ref. 54. Copyright 2008, International Association of Hydrogen Energy. 
Based on the desired function, it is unlikely that an efficient solar energy driven photocatalytic water splitting system will exceed the complexity of a microprocessor. It is just that the methods for making and integrating the microscale components at the necessary precision level are not available yet. To make them available in the near future should be one of the goals of scientists today. This will require not only more systematic efforts in materials preparation, but also in characterization and testing. For example, measurements of the photoelectrochemical/photocatalytic performance should follow established standards.315 This challenge is particularly significant for nanomaterials, which show large property variations based on their morphology, surface termination, and surface charge. Such factors must be considered in the analysis.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under CHE – 1152250 and CBET – 1133099). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. The author thanks Research Corporation for Science Advancement for a Scialog award, and Michael A. Holmes and Erwin M. Sabio for artwork.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .

          N. S. Lewis, G. Crabtree, A. J. Nozik, M. R. Wasielewski and A. P. Alivisatos, Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization, Department of Energy,  2005 Search PubMed .
D. T. Inc., 2009.
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248–3252 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CAS .
O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Joshi, A. Palasyuk, D. Arney and P. A. Maggard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2719–2726 Search PubMed .
M. Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2495–2502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woodhouse, G. S. Herman and B. A. Parkinson, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4318–4324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 197–210 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, S. H. Baeck, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, K. S. Choi, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, J. Comb. Chem., 2005, 7, 264–271 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Katz, T. R. Gingrich, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 103–112 RSC .
R. Dingle, W. Wiegmann and C. H. Henry, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1974, 33, 827–830 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsen–Ges., 1982, 86, 301–305 CAS .
A. Fojtik, H. Weller, U. Koch and A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsen–Ges., 1984, 88, 969–977 CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566–5571 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Brattain and C. G. B. Garrett, Bell Syst. Tech. J., 1955, 34, 129–176 Search PubMed .
H. Gerischer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1966, 113, 1174–1182 Search PubMed .

          Y. V. Pleskov and Y. Y. Gurevich, Semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, Consultants Bureau, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .
R. A. Marcus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1964, 15, 155–196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1971, 44, 1148–1150 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills and S. LeHunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Memming, in Electron Transfer I, ed. J. Mattay,  1994, vol. 169, pp. 105–181 Search PubMed .
A. Mills and G. Porter, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1982, 78, 3659–3669 RSC .
D. Duonghong, E. Borgarello and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4685–4690 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 765–787 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokoi, J. Sakuma, K. Maeda, K. Domen, T. Tatsumi and J. N. Kondo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2563–2570 RSC .
K. Saito, K. Koga and A. Kudo, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3909–3913 RSC .
S. C. Yan, L. J. Wan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5632–5634 RSC .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Townsend, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7420–7426 Search PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday. Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Keller, S. A. Johnson, E. S. Brigham, E. H. Yonemoto and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12879–12880 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kaschak, J. T. Lean, C. C. Waraksa, G. B. Saupe, H. Usami and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3435–3445 CrossRef CAS .

          L. I. Berger, in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC Press/Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 88 (Internet Version 2008),  2008 Search PubMed .
M. N. Huda, M. M. Al-Jassim and J. A. Turner, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2011, 3, 053101 Search PubMed .

          P. A. Cox, Transition metal oxides: an introduction to their electronic structure and properties, Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. Tributsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5911–5930 CrossRef CAS .

          L. I. Berger, in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC Press/Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 88 (Internet Version 2008),  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174–177 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1–208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6128–6141 Search PubMed .
H. Gerischer, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1677–1699 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Sant and P. V. Kamat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 198–203 RSC .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 2007, 129, 4136–4137 CrossRef .
M. A. Holmes, T. K. Townsend and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 371–373 RSC .
M. A. Butler and D. S. Ginley, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 228–232 CAS .
P. Singh, R. Singh, R. Gale, K. Rajeshwar and J. Dubow, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 6286–6291 Search PubMed .
L. Kavan, M. Gratzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha, D. J. Riley and J. P. Waggett, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8378–8381 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chakrapani, K. Tvrdy and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1228–1229 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cowan, J. W. Tang, W. H. Leng, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4208–4214 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. B. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Physica E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, D. L. Allara, C. C. Chang, T. Gmitter and T. B. Bright, Phy. Rev. Lett., 1986, 57, 249–252 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6900–6911 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3136–3140 CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
B. Oregan, J. Moser, M. Anderson and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8720–8726 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dloczik, O. Ileperuma, I. Lauermann, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Redmond, N. J. Shaw and I. Uhlendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10281–10289 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Giebink, G. P. Wiederrecht, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195326 CrossRef .

          P. Würfel, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2005, p. 142.
S. Sodergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552–5556 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, U. Bjorksten and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energ. Mater. Sol. Cells, 1992, 27, 293–304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and V. S. Vikhrenko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2313–2322 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, H. Lindstrom, S. Sodergren and S. E. Lindquist, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 381, 39–46 CrossRef .
B. Abeles, P. Sheng, M. D. Coutts and Y. Arie, Adv. Phys., 1975, 24, 407–461 CAS .
R. H. Terrill, T. A. Postlethwaite, C. H. Chen, C. D. Poon, A. Terzis, A. D. Chen, J. E. Hutchison, M. R. Clark, G. Wignall, J. D. Londono, R. Superfine, M. Falvo, C. S. Johnson, E. T. Samulski and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12537–12548 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Vayssieres, On solar hydrogen & nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons (Asia), Singapore, Hoboken, NJ,  2009 Search PubMed .
P. G. Hoertz and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6828–6840 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Zhu and M. Zach, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat and N. M. Dimitrijevic, Sol. Energy, 1990, 44, 83–98 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Foley, M. J. Price, J. I. Feldblyum and S. Maldonado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5203–5220 RSC .
W. Jaegermann and H. Tributsch, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1988, 29, 1–167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wahl and J. Augustynski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7820–7828 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, K. Zhu, A. J. Frank, C. A. Grimes and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2727–2730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoang, S. W. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. B. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. L. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, J. I. Basham, N. K. Allam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, X. J. Feng, M. Paulose, J. A. Seabold, K. S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6327–6359 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, D. W. Flaherty, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3794–3802 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoang, S. P. Berglund, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, R. H. T. Wilke, S. Sharma, K. Shankar, T. J. Latempa, K. S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, A. Ghicov, L. M. Peter, P. Schmuki and A. B. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13364–13372 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Leng, P. R. F. Barnes, M. Juozapavicius, B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 967–972 Search PubMed .
L. Q. Jing, J. Zhou, J. R. Durrant, J. W. Tang, D. N. Liu and H. G. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6552–6558 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. H. Bang, C. C. Tang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 387–395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, R. M. Dominguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cowan, C. J. Barnett, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10134–10140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Durr, S. Bossmann and A. Beuerlein, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 73, 233–245 CrossRef .
J. Kiwi, E. Borgarello, E. Pelizzetti, M. Visca and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1980, 19, 646–648 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 376–384 CrossRef .
D. Duonghong and M. Gratzel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 1597–1599 RSC .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gu, J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, New J. Chem., 1985, 9, 539–543 Search PubMed .
M. R. Allen, A. Thibert, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning, D. S. Larsen and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1220–1228 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
A. Danon, K. Bhattacharyya, B. K. Vijayan, J. L. Lu, D. J. Sauter, K. A. Gray, P. C. Stair and E. Weitz, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 45–49 Search PubMed .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K. S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, K. Madsen, P. Andersen, W. N. Bao, Z. L. Sun and D. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 194013 Search PubMed .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. P. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1849–1856 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, M. Shibata, A. Tanaka, K. Maruya and T. Onishi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1706–1707 RSC .
O. C. Compton, C. H. Mullet, S. Chiang and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6202–6208 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Townsend, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 185–190 CAS .
M. C. Sarahan, E. C. Carroll, M. Allen, D. S. Larsen, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1681–1686 Search PubMed .
O. C. Compton and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton, E. C. Carroll, J. Y. Kim, D. S. Larsen and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14589–14592 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sabio, M. Chi, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7254–7261 Search PubMed .
E. C. Carroll, O. C. Compton, D. Madsen, D. S. Larsen and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2394–2403 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sabio, R. L. Chamousis, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3161–3170 CAS ; 
          J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19051.
Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki, M. Harada and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4390–4395 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4813–4818 RSC .
Y. Okamoto, S. Ida, J. Hyodo, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18034–18037 Search PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kim, S. Salim, M. J. Huq and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 9561–9563 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kim, S. J. Atherton, E. S. Brigham and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11802–11810 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6770–6778 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3611–3617 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, E. M. Sabio, T. K. Townsend, T. Fan, D. Zhang and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3362–3368 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi, S. H. A. Lee, W. J. Youngblood, H. Hata and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7962–7969 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, D. Cahen and J. Manassen, Nature, 1976, 260, 312–313 CAS .
B. Marsen, E. L. Miller, D. Paluselli and R. E. Rocheleau, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3110–3115 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santato, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 511–514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santato, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 936–940 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solarska, R. Jurczakowski and J. Augustynski, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1553–1556 RSC .
R. Solarska, B. D. Alexander, A. Braun, R. Jurczakowski, G. Fortunato, M. Stiefel, T. Graule and J. Augustynski, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7780–7787 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chakrapani, J. Thangala and M. K. Sunkara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9050–9059 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Baeck, K. S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Qin, C. L. Tao, S. A. Friesen, T. H. Wang, O. K. Varghese, N. Z. Bao, Z. Y. Yang, T. E. Mallouk and C. A. Grimes, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 729–731 RSC .
F. Amano, D. Li and B. Ohtani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, K42–K46 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solarska, A. Krolikowska and J. Augustynski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7980–7983 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Pesci, A. J. Cowan, B. D. Alexander, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1900–1903 Search PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Darwent and A. Mills, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday. Trans. 2, 1982, 78, 359–367 RSC .
M. Waller, T. K. Townsend, J. Zhao, E. M. Sabio, R. L. Chamousis, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 698–704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. McShane and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2561–2569 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. Shet, H. W. Tang, H. L. Wang, T. Deutsch, Y. F. Yan, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6962–6967 RSC .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 RSC .
S. K. Pilli, T. G. Deutsch, T. E. Furtak, J. A. Turner, L. D. Brown and A. M. Herring, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7032–7039 RSC .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186–2192 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398–9404 CAS .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024–1026 CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CAS .
K. Itoh and J. O. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1266–1271 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Majumder and S. U. M. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1994, 19, 881–887 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184–7189 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Sartoretti, M. Ulmann, B. D. Alexander, J. Augustynski and A. Weidenkaff, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 194–200 CrossRef .
C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, W. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685–13692 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duret and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. G. Martinez and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Goncalves, B. H. R. Lima and E. R. Leite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6012–6019 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J. H. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Chernomordik, H. B. Russell, U. Cvelbar, J. B. Jasinski, V. Kumar, T. Deutsch and M. K. Sunkara, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 194009 Search PubMed .
N. T. Hahn, H. C. Ye, D. W. Flaherty, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1977–1986 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 RSC .
C. Y. Cummings, F. Marken, L. M. Peter, A. A. Tahir and K. G. U. Wijayantha, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2027–2029 RSC .
K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4863–4869 Search PubMed .
R. L. Spray, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3497–3506 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, H. Dotan, M. Stefik, K. Sivula, A. Rothschild, M. Gratzel and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2699–2702 Search PubMed .
F. Le Formal, N. Tetreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
C. E. Kendrick, H. P. Yoon, Y. A. Yuwen, G. D. Barber, H. T. Shen, T. E. Mallouk, E. C. Dickey, T. S. Mayer and J. M. Redwing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143108 CrossRef .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CAS .
C. Y. Cummings, F. Marken, L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309–322 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7626–7636 RSC .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. W. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. H. Ye, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug, J. W. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 RSC .
D. K. Zhong, J. W. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 RSC .
K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1686–1693 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 063508 Search PubMed .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. S. Hu, A. J. Forman, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15900–15907 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, D. Hazen, J. N. Park and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3803–3805 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Qin, C. L. Tao, S. I. In, Z. Y. Yang, T. E. Mallouk, N. Z. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 5257–5263 .
Y. C. Ling, G. M. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Tang, M. A. Matin, H. L. Wang, T. Deutsch, M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. F. Yan, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 123511 Search PubMed .
H. W. Tang, W. J. Yin, M. A. Matin, H. L. Wang, T. Deutsch, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. A. Turner and Y. F. Yan, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 073502 Search PubMed .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bak, W. Choi and H. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 207–215 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652–2654 RSC .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday. Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 1101–1108 RSC .
M. A. Gondal, A. Hameed, Z. H. Yamani and A. Suwaiyan, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 268, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Townsend, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4270–4275 RSC .
M. Yagi, E. Tomita and T. Kuwabara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 579, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hackwood, L. M. Schiavone, W. C. Dautremontsmith and G. Beni, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2569–2573 CAS .
T. Nakagawa, C. A. Beasley and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12958–12961 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, J. M. Thomas and G. R. Millward, New J. Chem., 1987, 11, 757 CAS .
A. Mills and T. Russell, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 1245–1250 RSC .
N. D. Morris and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11114–11121 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Frame, T. K. Townsend, R. L. Chamousis, E. M. Sabio, T. Dittrich, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7264–7267 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Maruska and A. K. Ghosh, Sol. Energy, 1978, 20, 443–458 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2920–2922 RSC .
N. Sakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9651–9655 CrossRef CAS .
K. Izawa, T. Yamada, U. Unal, S. Ida, O. Altuntasoglu, M. Koinuma and Y. Matsumoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4645–4650 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L. Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CAS .
K. J. Young, Y. L. Gao and G. W. Brudvig, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 1219–1226 Search PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, Z. B. Chen, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11830–11838 CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, Z. J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Z. C. Li, R. Vajtai, L. J. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1492–1496 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuliati, J. H. Yang, X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4295–4298 RSC .
Y. Q. Cong, H. S. Park, S. J. Wang, H. X. Dang, F. R. F. Fan, C. B. Mullins and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14541–14550 Search PubMed .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183–3188 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, N. Ashkenasy, M. Leibovitch, E. Fefer, S. Yoram, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1748–1755 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Reber and K. Meier, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5903–5913 CrossRef CAS .
N. Buhler, K. Meier and J. F. Reber, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 3261–3268 CrossRef .
J. F. Reber and M. Rusek, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 824–834 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kambe, M. Fujii, T. Kawai, S. Kawai and F. Nakahara, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 109, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Frame, E. C. Carroll, D. S. Larsen, M. S. Sarahan, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2206–2208 RSC .
F. A. Frame and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10628–10633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hoyer and R. Konenkamp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 349–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, S. Y. Ryu, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2371–2378 RSC .
A. M. Zaniewski, M. Loster, B. Sadtler, A. P. Alivisatos and A. Zettl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 155311 Search PubMed .
B. D. Yuhas, A. L. Smeigh, A. P. S. Samuel, Y. Shim, S. Bag, A. P. Douvalis, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7252–7255 Search PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302 CrossRef .
E. A. Santori, J. R. Maiolo, M. J. Bierman, N. C. Strandwitz, M. D. Kelzenberg, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6867–6871 RSC .
K. Hagedorn, C. Forgacs, S. Collins and S. Maldonado, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12010–12017 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CAS .
J. M. Spurgeon, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277–3281 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573–3583 RSC .
Y. J. Hwang, C. H. Wu, C. Hahn, H. E. Jeong and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1678–1682 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Sun, C. Liu and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19306–19309 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 RSC .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhang, X. F. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CAS .
T. Dittrich, S. Fiechter and A. Thomas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 084105 Search PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, X. F. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. D. Hou, X. Z. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhang, M. Grzelczak, Y. D. Hou, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 443–446 RSC .
A. Henglein, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1861–1873 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1980, 111, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1979, 18, 701–702 CrossRef .
J. M. Lehn, J. P. Sauvage and R. Ziessel, New J. Chem., 1979, 3, 423–427 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lehn, J. P. Sauvage and R. Ziessel, New J. Chem., 1980, 4, 623–627 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lehn, J. P. Sauvage, R. Ziessel and L. Hilaire, Isr. J. Chem., 1982, 22, 168–172 CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takai and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7369–7376 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2304–2310 Search PubMed .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 7214–7217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1979, 281, 657–658 CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1979, 18, 624–626 CrossRef .
A. Mills, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1982, 367–368 RSC .
L. L. Tinker, N. D. McDaniel, P. N. Curtin, C. K. Smith, M. J. Ireland and S. Bernhard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8726–8732 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. DiSalle and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11819–11821 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Curtin, L. L. Tinker, C. M. Burgess, E. D. Cline and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10498–10506 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Catal. Lett., 2006, 108, 6–9 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda, A. K. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. L. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096–4099 CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7554–7560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhao, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan and T. E. Mallouk, Small, 2011, 7, 2087–2093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhao, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, J. L. Dysart and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 402–406 Search PubMed .
M. Hara, C. C. Waraksa, J. T. Lean, B. A. Lewis and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5275–5280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1903–1904 RSC .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hata, Y. Kobayashi, V. Bojan, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 794–799 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. A. Lee, Y. X. Zhao, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, L. Blasdel, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 165–176 RSC .
K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 543–544 RSC .
K. Domen, S. Naito, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 3657–3661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, Y. Furumi, K. Shinohara, A. Tanaka, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1063–1064 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo, K. Domen, H. Takahashi, T. Okubo and M. Kakihana, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, A. Tanaka, K. Domen, K. Maruya, K. Aika and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1988, 111, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, H. Kato and S. Nakagawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, A. Tanaka, K. Domen, K. Maruya and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1990, 124, 541–547 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, A. Kudo and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1986, 102, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841–1844 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10668–10669 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Chou, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1566–1569 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shevchenko, M. F. Anderlund, A. Thapper and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1284–1287 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 140, 219–231 Search PubMed .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. r. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. r. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valdes, J. Brillet, M. Gratzel, H. Gudmundsdottir, H. A. Hansen, H. Jonsson, P. Klupfel, G. J. Kroes, F. Le Formal, I. C. Man, R. S. Martins, J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, K. Sivula, A. Vojvodic and M. Zach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 49–70 RSC .
H. W. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. D. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thimsen, F. Le Formal, M. Gratzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Frank E. Osterloh
	Frank Osterloh is an inorganic chemist working on nanostructured solar energy conversion devices. He received MA and PhD degrees in chemistry in 1994 and 1997 from the Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg, Germany, after working under the guidance of the late Prof. Siegfried Pohl. He then completed postdoctoral training at Harvard University with Prof. Richard H. Holm, after which he joined the faculty at the Chemistry Department at the University of California, Davis, in 2000. Frank Osterloh's current research interests are centered on the chemical and physical properties of inorganic nanomaterials, and on their electro- and photocatalytic functions.
H2O → ½O2(g) + H2(g); ΔG = +237 kJ mol−1	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Basic photoanode–cathode (Schottky-type) and photoanode/photocathode configurations (Tandem or Z-scheme type) for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical Diode after Duonghong. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 1981, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The only four known nanoscale photocatalysts for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41–43 and 45. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Charge Collection in flat and nanostructured films and in particle suspensions. d: film or particle thickness; Le: electron diffusion length; Lh: hole diffusion length. Suspended particles require both electrons and holes to be collected at the sc–electrolyte interface.	 

 	Fig. 5  Light distribution in flat and nanostructured films, and in particle suspensions. d: film or particle thickness; α−1: optical penetration depth. Short arrows signify scattered or reflected light.	 

 	Fig. 6  Quantum size effect in nanocrystals. After Holmes et al.62	 

 	Fig. 7  Effect of PDIs on nanocrystal energetics.	 

 	Fig. 8  Enhanced photovoltaic efficiency in QD solar cells by impact ionization (inverse Auger effect). This is promoted in QDs due to the lower rates of carrier relaxation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  Recombination pathways for photoexcited carriers in a semiconductor PEC.4,74 The arrows signify bulk recombination (Jbr), depletion-region recombination (Jdr), and surface recombination (Jss). Additional loss mechanisms due to undesired charge transfer are also shown. Electron tunneling through and over the barrier produce the current densities (Jt) and (Jet). Electron collection by the back contact and hole collection by the redox couple (e.g., oxidation of water to O2) are desired processes shown by thick black arrows. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Space charge layers in large and small particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 1994, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 11  Increased surface roughness leads to reduced absorbed flux. This reduces the open circuit voltage, and the thermodynamic driving force for water electrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electron hopping in nanostructured films. Reproduced from ref. 86 by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals).	 

 	Fig. 13  Equivalent circuit diagram for a photovoltaic cell. RSH: Shunt resistance, RS: serial resistance, ISH: leakage current, IL: generation current.	 

 	Fig. 14  Types of Nanostructured TiO2 photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, 100 and 106. Copyright 1995, 2008, and 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  ZnO nanorod array after electrodeposition of CoPi catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 16  Single crystal niobate nanosheet and nanoscroll photocatalysts.126,127,129	 

 	Fig. 17  Visible light driven H2 evolution from Ru bipy-modified nanosheets and scrolls in the presence of EDTA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Types of nanostructured WO3 films. (A) Particles, (B) nanowires, (C) plates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 and 149. Copyright 2009, International Association of Hydrogen Energy, and 2011, Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 19  Surface-protected Cu2O photocathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Nanostructured Fe2O3 films made from ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (left),174 by air-sintering of Fe3O4 colloids (middle),183 or by calcination of beta-FeOOH colloidal rods.179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, 179 and 183. Copyright 2006, 2010, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2005, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  Fe2O3 nanowire arrays from plasma oxidation of iron181 and nanostructured Fe2O3 on TiS2 nano-net.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 and 184. Copyright 2012, IOP Science. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Fe2O3 film before and after photodeposition of Co-Pi catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Left: silver nanoparticles formed on nano-Fe2O3 after irradiation in aqueous AgNO3. Right: correlation between Fe2O3 particle size and O2 evolution rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Nafion film showing presence of manganese-oxide nanoparticles formed after electro-oxidation of [Mn4O4L6]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  Quantum size effect enhanced water reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  Fabrication, morphology, and light scattering properties of Si radial microwire array photocathodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 and 252. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 27  Solution-grown GaP nanowires before (B) and after (D) removal of Ga cocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  TEM images of porous (A) and bulk C3N4 (B). A photograph and the schematic structure of the tri(s)triazine units are also shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  HR-TEM images of Rh-loaded GaN:ZnO before and after photodeposition of the Cr2O3 shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  Silicon microwires with cocatalysts deposited on top (A, C) and base (B, D) for the indicated times: (A, B) Ni 5s; (C, D) Ni 1s. Right: electrochemical polarization curves during proton reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of Fe2O3 film on gold nanopillar array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Chemical potential (A) versus kinetic (B) rectification. Adapted from ref. 54. Copyright 2008, International Association of Hydrogen Energy.	 
Footnote
† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
