Effect of the LHCII pigment–protein complex aggregation on photovoltaic properties of sensitized TiO 2 solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP03112A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03112A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20856-20865Effect of the LHCII pigment–protein complex aggregation on photovoltaic properties of sensitized TiO2 solar cells†

        
          
            Yiqun 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ryszard 
            Jankowiak
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Krzysztof 
            Pawlak
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Reus
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alfred R. 
            Holzwarth
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. E-mail: junli@ksu.edu; ryszard@ksu.edu
bMax-Planck-Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion (MPI-CEC), D-45470 Mülheim a.d. Ruhr, Germany
Received 
      15th July 2014
    , Accepted 21st August 2014First published on 22nd August 2014AbstractA modified dye-sensitized solar cell consisting of a thin TiO2 barrier layer sensitized with natural trimeric light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) from spinach was used as a biomimetic model to study the effects of LHCII aggregation on the photovoltaic properties. The aggregation of individual trimers induced molecular reorganization, which dramatically increased the photocurrent. The morphology of small- and large-size LHCII aggregates deposited on a surface was confirmed by atomic force microscopy. Enhanced LHCII immobilization was accomplished via electrostatic interaction with amine-functionalized photoanodes. The photocurrent responses of the assembled solar cells under illumination at three characteristic wavelength bands in the UV-Vis absorption spectra of LHCII solutions confirmed that a significant photocurrent was generated by LHCII photosensitizers. The enhanced photocurrent by large aggregated LHCII is shown to correlate with the quenching in the far-red fluorescence deriving from chlorophyll–chlorophyll charge transfer states that are effectively coupled with the TiO2 surface and thus inject electrons into the TiO2 conduction band. The large aggregated LHCII with more chlorophyll–chlorophyll charge transfer states is a much better sensitizer since it injects electrons more efficiently into the conduction band of TiO2 than the small aggregated LHCII mostly consisting of unquenched chlorophyll excited state. The assembled solar cells demonstrated remarkable stability in both aqueous buffer and acetonitrile electrolytes over 30 days.
Introduction
Photosynthesis involves delicate systems that are designed by nature to convert solar energy into chemical energy. These systems are large supercomplexes consisting of smaller pigment–protein complexes, including membrane-associated light-harvesting antenna complexes (LHCs) for photon capture and energy transfer, as well as reaction center (RC) complexes for charge separation (CS) and photosynthetic reactions. The fundamental understanding of the light harvesting and energy-conversion processes in photosystems provides great inspiration for building low-cost high-efficiency artificial devices.1–3 It is known that the photon energy absorbed by LHCs is transferred by ultrafast energy transfer processes to the RCs where a series of charge transfer (CT) steps take place. The redox equivalents created, together with ATP, are then converted in a series of dark reactions into chemical energy.
Light harvesting complex II (LHCII) is the most abundant chlorophyll–protein complex in nature and the major antenna complex in photosystem II (PSII). The largest PSII supercomplex, C2S2M2, consists of a dimeric core complex (C2) containing RCs, 4 monomeric minor antenna complexes, 4 strongly attached LHCII trimers (S2 and M2), and 3 to 4 loosely attached LHCII trimers.4Fig. 1A shows the top and side views of the crystal structure5 of an isolated LHCII trimer and its physical dimensions. The LHCII trimer consists of three monomers each of which comprises a polypeptide of about 232 amino-acid residues, 8 Chl a and 6 Chl b molecules, 3–4 carotenoids and one phospholipid.5 LHCII not only has a primary role in light harvesting and transferring the excitation energy to the RC, but is also critical in photosynthesis regulation through photoprotective mechanisms called non-photochemical quenching (NPQ).4,6–11 LHCII protein aggregation was proposed to be one of the mechanistic factors controlling the dissipation of excess photo-excited state energy of chlorophylls during NPQ (see e.g.ref. 12 as a review and references therein).
 Fig. 1  (A) Top and side view of the LHCII trimer consisting of Chl a and b (green); carotenoids (orange); and polypeptides (grey helices). (B) Schematic model of a LHCII sensitized solar cell assembled by attaching LHCII aggregates to a thin APTES–TiO2 compact layer on a FTO-coated glass. 
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) as a mimic of natural photosynthesis, first proposed by O'Regan and Grätzel,13 have emerged as a credible alternative to conventional solar cells. A wide bandgap semiconductor layer (typically a mesoporous film made of sintered TiO2 nanoparticles) sensitized with a visible light absorbing organic dye forms the core of the DSSC. In contrast to conventional photovoltaic devices, the CS takes place by injecting electrons from the excited dye molecules into the semiconductor layer followed by electron diffusion in the TiO2 network. Over the past two decades, extensive research on DSSCs has been carried out by exploring various individual components and novel device architectures.14–18 A power conversion efficiency of up to ∼12% was achieved with a porphyrin-sensitized solar cell using a cobalt(II/III)-based redox electrolyte.19 A novel organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite dye CH3NH3PbI3 was reported to promote the DSSC efficiency to ∼15% by means of sequential deposition.20 As effective photon-to-electron conversion systems, DSSCs could be model devices to supplement spectroscopic techniques for the study of fundamental photon capture and CT properties of different photosynthetic pigment–protein complexes.
Studies have been carried out to utilize the CT processes by a direct anchoring of RCs,21,22 LHCI-RC core complexes,23 or whole photosystems (PSI or PSII)21,24 on gold electrodes. In a different approach, natural pigments or extracted LHCs have been used as photosensitizers to interface with a ∼10 μm-thick mesoporous TiO2 film or ZnO nanowires in fabricating DSSCs.25–28 In such systems, the CS occurs at the sensitizer/TiO2 interface to generate photocurrents in analogue to the function of RCs. Photocurrent enhancement was observed in LHCII incorporated DSSCs, which demonstrated the feasibility of LHCII as a photosensitizer.26,27 However, little is known about the effects of LHCII aggregation on the photovoltaic and sensitization characteristics. In contrast to isolated LHCII trimers, the Chl excited states in the aggregates are strongly quenched by the formation of chlorophyll–chlorophyll charge transfer (Chl–Chl CT) states whose presence in aggregated LHCII was independently studied recently via high-resolution hole-burning (HB) spectroscopy.29 If the Chl–Chl CT states in the LHCII can be coupled with the TiO2 surface, it would enhance electron injection into the TiO2 conduction band. In this study, we compare the effects of different sizes of LHCII aggregates to illustrate the contribution of aggregation induced CT states to the photovoltaic performance using a model nanoscale thin-film TiO2 DSSC (schematically shown in Fig. 1B), and aim to reveal if there is any correlation between the surface coverage/sizes of aggregates and the photovoltaic performance.
Experimental section
Preparation of LHCII aggregates
The LHCII trimers were extracted from spinach thylakoids as described in the literature30 and were dispersed in 5 mM tricine buffer (pH = 7.5) with detergent (0.1 M sucrose and 0.06% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside [β-DM]). Large aggregated LHCII complexes (called “large aggregates” throughout this paper) were formed upon removal of the detergent by several treatments with Biobeads SM-2 (Bio-Rad). For a comparison, smaller less quenched and more homogenous LHCII aggregates (called “small aggregates”) were prepared by partial disaggregation of large aggregates in the buffer with low concentration of detergent (0.008% β-DM) after sonication.
The LHCII concentration shown in units of equivalent Chls, was measured according to the procedure described in ref. 31. Chls (Chl a and Chl b) in LHCII complexes were extracted with buffered aqueous acetone (80% aqueous acetone containing 2.5 mM phosphate buffer with pH = 7.8) and centrifuged with 7800 rpm to remove the insoluble protein residue. All the operations were handled quickly under dim light and 4 °C to avoid breakdown of the Chls. By measuring the UV-Vis absorption of the supernatant, the Chl content was calculated using the absorbance at 646.6 nm and 663.6 nm based on the equation shown in Table III of the ref. 31, i.e. Chls (a + b) = 17.6A646.6 + 7.34A663.6. Thus, the derived Chl contents of the small and large aggregate solutions were 16.2 μg Chl per mL and 17.1 μg Chl per mL, respectively.
Absorption and emission spectroscopic measurements
Absorption spectra were recorded using a Beckman DU640 at room temperature. Room-temperature fluorescence emission spectra of LHCII solutions were first measured with a 1 m McPherson monochromator (model 2601, slit width 100 μm) with 150 mm−1 grating and a Princeton Instruments back-illuminated N2-cooled CCD camera. The excitation source for the fluorescence experiments was a Coherent UV argon-ion laser operating at 496.5 nm. Further fluorescence emission spectra was collected by a home-build set up from LHCIIs deposited on TiO2 photoanodes and LHCII solutions (for direct comparison). The excitation source was synchronously pumped dye laser (Spectra-Physics) equipped with cavity-dumper (Spectra-Physics) with the repetition rate of 4 MHz. The DCM (4-dicyanomethylene-2-methyl-6-4-dimethylaminostyryl-4H-pyran) was used as a dye to provide the excitation wavelength at 663 nm. A micro-channel-plate photomultiplier (Hamamatsu) and a Jobin Yvon monochromator with 2 nm slit were used as the detection system.
Treatment of photoanodes
Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates (TEC8, Dyesol, Queanbeyan NSW, Australia) were covered with a thin TiO2 layer (150–300 nm) by treatment with 40 mM aqueous solution of TiCl4 at 75 °C for 20 minutes and sintered at 500 °C for 30 minutes, after rinsing with deionized water and ethanol. The obtained TiO2–FTO and clean FTO substrates (for control experiments) were soaked in 10 wt% 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES, 99% Sigma-Aldrich) in redistilled toluene, refluxed for 4 hours, followed by baking at 120 °C overnight. The APTES modified substrates were used as the photoanodes for LHCII-sensitized solar cells.
Fluorescence microscopic characterization of LHCII attachment
APTES–FTO substrate masked with a TEM grid (1GC200, PELCO, hole width 90 μm; bar width 37 μm) was exposed to UV light (8 W UV lamp, 254 nm, Cole-Parmer) to create amino patterns. The amine groups under the exposed area were converted to –OH groups. After incubation in small-sized LHCII aggregate solution in dark at 4 °C for 12 hours followed by rinsing, fluorescence images were recorded with an Azioskop 2 FS Plus Microscope (Carl Zeiss) with a filter set of 480 ± 20 nm excitation band and 540 ± 25 nm emission band to examine the selective attachment of LHCII to amine-terminated surface.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements
Clean Si wafers were soaked in the mixture of water, 30% ammonium hydroxide, 30% hydrogen peroxide (5:1:1 v/v ratio) at 75 °C for 15 min to make the wafers more hydrophilic, and then stored in an ultrapure water, dried by nitrogen blowing immediately before use. The pretreated Si wafer was dipped into LHCII solutions to immobilize some LHCII complexes and then rinsed with ultrapure water to remove the surfactant and other buffer residues. AFM was carried out in tapping mode on a BioScope (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbara, CA) with a scan speed at 1.5 Hz using silicon cantilevers with a resonance frequency between 65 and 80 kHz. The obtained images are processed with the software “Nanoscope III”. For the line profiles, the software defines the mean height of the line as zero. The height of LHCII aggregate is represented by the difference between the peak and valley values in the line profiles.
Assembly of LHCII or chlorophyll sensitized solar cells
For LHCII-sensitized solar cells, an APTES–TiO2–FTO or APTES–FTO substrate was used as a photoanode and the Pt-coated FTO/glass as the counter electrode. A 1 × 1 cm window was cut precisely into a 60 μm thick hot melt spacer (Solaronix, SX 1170-60PF) and was sealed at 110 °C for 5 min. The LHCII solutions were filled in the cell, which was stored in dark at 4 °C for 12 hours and then washed by successively injections of tricine buffer, water and ethanol. The electrolyte (Iodolyte AN-50, Solaronix) containing 50 mM iodide/tri-iodide in acetonitrile was finally injected into the cell to complete the solar cell fabrication. To avoid LHCII degradation, the Iodolyte electrolyte was replaced with related tricine buffer after each photovoltaic measurement, and the solar cells were stored at 4 °C. A similar solar cell using physisorbed Chls from spinach (≥90.0%, Sigma-Aldrich) (at 8:6 Chl a to Chl b molar ratio similar to LHCII) as alternative sensitizers was fabricated and used as a control. About 120 μg Chl per mL in dry diethyl ether was used as the loading solution to sensitize TiO2-covered FTO anode. The Iodolyte electrolyte was replaced with dry diethyl ether each time after photovoltaic measurements, and the Chl sensitized solar cell was stored at 4 °C before the next photovoltaic measurement.
Solar cell tests
Photovoltaic I–V curve of the solar cells was measured under the irradiation of 1 Sun power (100 mW cm−2) using a 300 W Xeon lamp with an AM1.5G filter. Three different bandpass interference filters (Edmund Optics, 50 nm FWHM, OD > 4.0, Stock No. 84782, 86952, and 86954) were added to select light only in the wavelength range of 450 ± 25 nm, 575 ± 25 nm, and 675 ± 25 nm, respectively, and photocurrent response curves were collected with chronoamperometry measurements using a potentiostat (CHI 440A Electrochemical Analyzer) while the shutter was turned on and off.
Results and discussion
The absorption and fluorescence emission spectra of the small- and large-size LHCII aggregates are shown in the top and bottom frames of Fig. 2A, respectively. Free Chl pigments in diethyl ether were reported to show strong absorption peaks in the Soret region (at 430 nm for Chl a and 452 nm for Chl b) and in the Qy region (at 661 nm for Chl a and 645 nm for Chl b).27 For the small-size LHCII aggregates in this study, these absorption peaks were red-shifted to 436/469 nm and 673/651 nm, respectively, similar to those observed in isolated LHCII trimers.27 However, the room-temperature (0,0)-band emission was red-shifted by about 2–3 nm to 682–683 nm in contrast to isolated LHCII trimers with a maximum near 680 nm. The absorption of large-size aggregates shows larger red-shifts to 438/473 nm and 679/653 nm and a characteristic red tailing, suggesting the formation of CT states. The fluorescence of large LHCII aggregates is significantly quenched, displaying a tenth of the intensity in comparison to the small aggregates.
 Fig. 2  (A) Absorption and fluorescence emission spectra (λex = 496.5 nm) of small- and large-size LHCII aggregates in tricine buffer with the concentration (in unit of total Chl content) of 16.2 μg Chl per mL and 17.1 μg Chl per mL, respectively. The colored shades indicate the bandwidth of the three bandpass interference filters used in photovoltaic measurements. (B) Normalized steady-state fluorescence emission spectra (λex = 663 nm) of small- and large-size LHCII aggregates in solutions and deposited on the APTES–TiO2–FTO photoanode surface. Note that the fluorescence of large aggregates on the TiO2 surface is extremely weak. Each spectrum was normalized to its highest peak intensity for better view of the detailed spectroscopic features. (C) Schematic illustration of the CT states formed in small and large aggregates. 
The raw spectra showed largely varied fluorescence intensity among LHCII samples with different degree of aggregation. For better view and comparison of their spectroscopic features, each spectrum was normalized to its highest peak intensity. Fig. 2B compares the normalized fluorescence emission spectra of LHCII in various aggregation states in solutions and after being deposited on the TiO2–FTO photoanode as sensitizers. The fluorescence origin band shifts to about 687 nm in the large aggregates in solution (as compared to LHCII trimers which are not quenched) and a very strong far-red emission band (from 690 to 750 nm) appears. The far-red emission has been shown to derive from Chl–Chl CT states,11,32 in agreement with the recent findings by Magdaong et al.12 Formation of the CT states (characterized by a very strong electron–phonon (el–ph) coupling) was revealed recently via resonant HB spectroscopy.29 In this case, resonant holes were burned in the low-energy absorption wing of aggregated LHCII complexes.29 Thus the extent of the red-shift observed in room temperature fluorescence spectra and in particular the relative intensity of the far-red (from 690 to 750 nm) emission peak to the shorter-wavelength emission peak of aggregated LHCII complexes reflects the size of the aggregates and the quenching efficiency. This suggests that the large-size LHCII aggregates form CT states are at much higher yield than the small-size aggregates.
Most interestingly, the CT state (far-red band) emission completely disappears when the aggregates are deposited as sensitizers on the surface of APTES–TiO2–FTO substrates (to be used as photoanodes in solar cells) (Fig. 2B). Only very weak fluorescence remains. For small LHCII aggregates, the differences between the fluorescence emission spectra on APTES–TiO2–FTO surface (curve b) and in solution (curve a) are much smaller. The shape of the fluorescence spectrum of small LHCII aggregates on TiO2 is more similar to that of LHCII trimers in solution (but with largely different intensity, data not shown), while the fluorescence spectrum of large aggregates on APTES–TiO2–FTO surface is more red-shifted and differs pronouncedly (on top of the large difference in intensity).
The size of aggregates in the above two samples was further confirmed by measuring the morphology of LHCIIs deposited on a flat surface with AFM, as shown in Fig. 3. Compared to the smooth surface of bare silicon wafer (Fig. 3A), brighter dots are clearly observed on the silicon wafer treated with the solution of small-size aggregates (Fig. 3B). Two kinds of dots can be observed. The smaller (ca. 6–10 nm) and relative blurred ones are considered as intact LHCII trimers, while the larger (ca. 22–50 nm) and brighter ones would be small aggregates consisting of two or three trimers. Since the average height from the line profile in Fig. 3B is only ∼4 nm, LHCII in this sample likely only formed two dimensional aggregates. In contrast, the AFM images of the large-size LHCII aggregates (formed by intentionally removing the detergent) revealed much larger islands with a diameter of 50 to 100 nm, as illustrated in Fig. 3C. The line profile in Fig. 3C shows a large height of ∼10 nm, indicating the likely formation of three dimensional aggregates. These AFM images are consistent with the spectroscopic characteristics revealing the structural difference between the small- and large-size aggregates.
 Fig. 3  AFM images and line profiles of (A) a clean silicon wafer and a silicon wafer deposited with (B) the small-size LHCII aggregates and (C) the large-size LHCII aggregates. Measurements were carried out in tapping mode under a nitrogen atmosphere. 
The physisorption of LHCII on the TiO2 surface was found to be very weak and unstable, as indicated by the long incubation time (96 hours) required to reach saturated adsorption in literature.27 We also found that only small amount of LHCII was anchored to the thin TiO2 layer via physisorption, which significantly limited the photocurrent enhancement by LHCII sensitizers (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). It was recently reported that strong LHCII attachment can be obtained on a 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) functionalized FTO substrate via electrostatic interaction between the anionic residues on the stromal side with cationic –NH3+ groups.26 This approach was adopted in this study. Fig. 4A shows the fluorescence microscopic image of the small-size LHCII aggregates adsorbed on a patterned APTES–FTO substrate. The pattern correlates well with the shape of the optical mask (Fig. 4B). The APTES–FTO surface was subjected to an UV exposure except in the cross-shaped area where the solid grid frame (ca. 37 μm in width) blocked the UV light. UV radiation is known to effectively cleave the amine group of APTES and to convert the surface back to normal –OH groups.26 The fluorescence contrast between the exposed and blocked areas clearly confirmed that the electrostatic interaction facilitated by the APTES-functionalized surface provides much stronger LHCII adsorption. Hence, in this work, all the photoanode substrates for DSSCs were treated with APTES before LHCII attachment. The strong surface adsorption is particularly important in controlling sub-monolayer LHCII coverage on the APTES–TiO2 surface. However, though selective attachment of LHCII complexes was believed to occur between the anionic LHCII polypeptide at the stromal side and the cationic APTES surface,26 it is likely that both stromal and luminal surfaces may work since they both contain negative charges in the LHCII proteins.
 Fig. 4  (A) A fluorescence image of small-size LHCII aggregates attached on a patterned APTES–FTO substrate. (B) An optical microscopy image of the corresponding mask in which the UV light was blocked by the solid grid frame (the dark area) and can only pass through the open squares (light areas). The scale bar is 50 μm. 
In fabricating LHCII sensitized solar cells, a 1 × 1 cm2 window was cut in a 60 μm thick hot melt spacer sandwiched between the sensitized photoanode and a Pt/FTO/glass cathode. The total volume in the solar cell sealed with this spacer is ca. 6.0 μL. An isolated LHCII trimer has a cross-sectional area of 2618 to 3333 Å2, corresponding to a radius of ∼3 nm.33 Assuming that all LHCIIs in solution are adsorbed onto the photoanode surface, it requires filling a LHCII solution with a concentration of 33.6 μg Chl per mL (in unit of equivalent Chl content) to form a hexagonal close-packed monolayer on 1 cm2 TiO2 surface, defined as Cmonolayer. In order to study the effect of the aggregation-dependent CT states on the photovoltaic properties, more diluted samples were used to control the LHCII adsorption less than a fully covered monolayer. The actual concentration of LHCII solutions (CLHCII) used in the experiments were calculated from the optical absorbance of extracted chlorophylls (as described in the experimental section), giving 16.2 μg Chl per mL for small-size aggregates and 17.1 μg Chl per mL for large-size aggregates, both lower than that required concentration for forming a close-packed monolayer, i.e. Cmonolayer = 33.6 μg Chl per mL. Thus, it only forms a sub-monolayer if we fill the LHCII solution into the solar cell only one time. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 2C, at such sub-monolayer stage, the adsorbed small- and large-size aggregates are isolated and not in contact with neighboring aggregates. The CT between the neighboring trimers/aggregates should be minimal.
To precisely determine the efficiency of LHCII adsorption onto the APTES–TiO2 photoanode, we compared the extracted Chl concentration of the LHCII solution before and after incubation in solar cells (see Fig. S2, ESI†). The attachment efficiency (ηattach) was determined to be about 95%, which confirmed the strong electrostatic interaction between LHCII and APTES. As will be demonstrated later, such strong interaction also facilitates the high stability of the LHCII-sensitized solar cells. Thus the effective surface coverage (ESC, see Table 1) of LHCII on the photoanode of each solar cell can be estimated based on the following equation: (1)
Table 1 The characteristic values of the TiO2 solar cells sensitized with LHCII aggregates at different ESCs (in percentage)




 
ESC%

J
SC (μA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
ΔJSC%




Bare APTES–TiO2 #1
0
0.575
0.427
N.A.


Small aggregate-1
45.8
0.640
0.432
11.3


Small aggregate-2
100
0.907
0.444
57.7






Bare APTES–TiO2 #2
0
0.915
0.340
N.A.


Large aggregate-1
48.3
1.203
0.394
31.5






Bare APTES–TiO2 #3
0
0.876
0.398
N.A.


Large aggregate-2
100
1.386
0.424
58.2




A full monolayer coverage (i.e., 100% of ESC) was attained by repeating 5 times the procedure including filling a fresh LHCII aggregate solution to the solar cell cavity, incubating for 4 hours for LHCII adsorption, and then rinsing off weakly bonded LHCII top layers with blank tricine buffer.
The emission spectra and AFM images discussed above clearly show that the two LHCII samples formed different extent of aggregates. We have shown recently that, in the case of large-size aggregates (prepared in absence of detergent), more Chl–Chl CT states can be formed between the surface Chls as revealed by the very strong el–ph coupling.29 The most relevant pigments involved in the formation of CT states are likely Chls 610, 611, and 612 (using nomenclature of Z. Liu et al.5) because they are close to the surface, have the lowest site-energies, and strongly contribute to the lowest energy exciton band.34 Thus electron transfer from the CT states to the TiO2 layer facilitates generation of the observed photocurrent by aggregated LHCII.
If our interpretation is correct, we expect that the deposition of highly quenched large LHCII aggregates as a sensitizer and the functioning of this sensitizer as electron donor from the Chl–Chl CT states into the TiO2 conduction band would concomitantly quench the far-red emission (from 690 to 750 nm) in the aggregates resulting from the Chl–Chl CT states. This is indeed the case as is seen in Fig. 2B. The far-red CT emission band is absent from the LHCII aggregates when deposited on TiO2 and only a broad long-wave tail remains in the large aggregates.

Fig. 1B schematically depicts the structure of the LHCII sensitized solar cell. One notable difference from the previous reported LHCII solar cells26,27 is that a very thin (150–300 nm) compact TiO2 layer is used here to replace the 10 to 12 μm thick mesoporous TiO2 film formed by sintering ∼20 nm diameter TiO2 nanoparticles. This is necessary for two reasons. First, it minimizes the photocurrent generated by UV photons absorbed by the TiO2 framework. As shown in Fig. S3A (ESI†), a solar cell fabricated with a bare 10 μm mesoporous TiO2 can generate by itself a strong photovoltaic effect with a short-circuit photocurrent (JSC) from ∼0.14 to ∼0.6 mA cm−2 under 1 sun illumination. This makes it difficult to extract the photocurrent generated explicitly by LHCII sensitizers. Second, the internal pores of the typical mesoporous TiO2 films are tortuous and poorly defined, with the size of only ∼8 nm or less. As a result, it was reported that even the isolated LHCII trimers, which have a comparable size to the pore, only formed a layer at the outer surface of the mesoporous TiO2 film.27 Both of these factors may obscure the details of LHCII contribution, particularly at the sub-monolayer coverage and in the I–V curve under the irradiation of the full solar spectrum.
On the other hand, a thin compact TiO2 layer is required as a barrier to prevent electron backflow from the FTO anode to the electrolyte. Fig. S3B (ESI†) shows that the DSSC with LHCII directly attached to the APTES–FTO anode only gives very low values for both JSC and open-circuit voltage (VOC). In a previous report,35 we have demonstrated that a TiO2 film of 150 to 300 nm thickness formed by treatment of the FTO electrode with 40 mM TiCl4 solution for 20 minutes serves well as an effective barrier layer. This method was adopted in this study. In addition, to avoid protein denaturation by the volatile organic solvent (such as acetonitrile) that was used in typical Grätzel cells, we previously used an ionic liquid electrolyte. However, we found that, though clear photovoltaic effects were observed, the performance of the ionic liquid electrolyte is far inferior to the volatile electrolyte (see Fig. S4 in the ESI†). Hence the typical Iodolyte in acetonitrile, which was recently reported to be compatible with LHCII complexes,27 was used in this study.

Fig. 5 shows the electron transfer and energy level scheme of the prepared solar cell based on aggregated LHCII complexes as the sensitizer. Potentials are relative to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). The VOC (maximum voltage) corresponds to the difference between the redox potential of the Iodolyte mediator and the Fermi level of the FTO film. To be noted, the CT states in aggregated LHCII mixed with the excited state of chlorophylls have lower oxidation potential due to their more reddish absorption and red tail in UV spectra (see Fig. 2 and the related description). The CT states couple with the TiO2 conduction band more effectively and lead to a more efficient electron injection accompanied with fluorescence emission quench (as shown in Fig. 2B).
 Fig. 5  Electron transfer and energy level scheme of a photovoltaic device based on aggregated LHCII complexes. 

Fig. 6 shows I–V curves of the TiO2 solar cells sensitized with the two LHCII samples with different degrees of aggregation and at two different ESCs, one submonolayer and one full monolayer. These data confirmed that the photovoltaic effects were enhanced after the APTES–TiO2 surface was sensitized with both small- and large-size LHCII aggregates. Both JSC and VOC consistently increased as the ESC of LHCII aggregates was raised. Modifying the surface of the TiO2 thin film with APTES suppressed the photocurrent generated by UV photon absorption in TiO2, with JSC dropping from ∼8 μA cm−2 (see Fig. S1, ESI†) to ∼0.6 to 0.9 μA cm−2, possibly due to electron trapping and recombination at the positively charged –NH3+ group at the TiO2 surface. However, as it is shown later, the –NH3+ group did not block the CT from LHCII to the photoanode since illumination the solar cell with the selected light band that can only be absorbed by LHCII was able to produce substantial photocurrent. APTES modification was necessary to enable the strong adsorption of LHCII on the TiO2 surface and thus made it possible to observe the differences between two LHCII aggregates. The values of VOC are comparable in all these solar cells, at about 0.40 to 0.45 V.
 Fig. 6  
I–V curves of LHCII sensitized TiO2 solar cells. (A) Solar cells made of a bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #1, dot) and after being first sensitized with 45.8%-coverage small-size LHCII aggregates (small aggregate-1, dashed line) and then further sensitized with 100%-coverage small-size LHCII aggregates (small aggregate-2, solid). (B) Solar cells made of the 2nd bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #2, dot) and this electrode after being sensitized with 48.3%-coverage large-size LHCII aggregates (large-size aggregate-1, dash), the 3rd bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #3, dash–dot–dot) and this electrode after being sensitized with high-coverage large-size LHCII aggregates (large-size aggregate-2, solid). All measurements were carried out under 1 sun illumination with an AM1.5G filter. 

Table 1 summarizes the characteristic values of the I–V measurements shown in Fig. 6. The percentage increase in JSC (i.e., ΔJSC%) from the bare APTES–TiO2 cell was used to compare the results so that the difference caused by the variation in thickness and roughness of the TiO2 barrier layer can be normalized. By filling LHCII solution into the cell only once, the LHCII adsorption was defined by eqn (1), giving an ESC of 45.8% for small-size aggregates (in the cell labeled as “small aggregate-1”) and 48.3% for large-size aggregates (in the cell labeled as “large aggregate-1”). Though the ESCs are similar, the ΔJSC% value with the large-size aggregate is almost 3 times that of the small-size aggregate (31.5% vs. 11.3%). The larger enhancement is likely related to the higher extent of CT states formed in large-size aggregates and the resulted more efficient electron injection from CT states to the TiO2.
Interestingly, at the full monolayer coverage (i.e., 100% ESC), the solar cells sensitized with both small- and large-size LHCII aggregates (i.e., “small aggregate-2” and “large aggregate-2”) showed almost the same ΔJSC% values (57.7% vs. 58.2%). Since the packing density of the LHCII trimer on the TiO2 surface is nearly the same, no matter if they are originally from small- or large-size aggregates, the CT states at this condition are about the same as well. It is noteworthy that the power conversion efficiency is increased by ∼58% from the bare APTES–TiO2 cell after being sensitized with a full monolayer of LHCII aggregates, which is higher than the 35% increase using LHCII trimers as a sensitizer on the 10 μm thick mesoporous TiO2 film.27
To identify the origin of the photocurrent generation, the synchronous response of JSC to the illumination of the full solar spectrum and in selected wavelength bands were recorded and illustrated in Fig. 7. The current density is normalized to the photocurrent of the solar cell with bare APTES–TiO2 photoanodes in order to correct the variation of TiO2 photoanode (see Fig. S5 in the ESI† for normalization processing). All photocurrents were highly reproducible as the illumination was turned on and off for four cycles. Only a very slow drift was observed during the illumination on, indicating that LHCII complexes were stable under the experimental conditions and were effectively regenerated by iodide/tri-iodide redox electrolyte. Under 1 sun illumination with the full solar spectrum (Fig. 7A), all curves showed higher photocurrent after LHCII sensitization, fully consistent with the I–V measurements in Fig. 6. The cell “large aggregate-1” (ESC = 48.3%) gave significantly higher normalized current density than “small aggregate-1” (ESC = 45.8%), though both of them had similar level of LHCII coverage. The curves for the cells with the full LHCII monolayer coverage, i.e., “small aggregate-2” and “large aggregate-2”, are essentially overlapped with each other.
 Fig. 7  Synchronous photocurrent response of the TiO2 solar cells sensitized with different ESC% of small- and large-sized LHCII aggregates under 1 sun illumination with the full solar spectrum (A) and passing through bandpass interference filters at 450 ± 25 nm (B); 675 ± 25 nm (C); and 575 ± 25 nm (D). The photocurrents were normalized as described in the ESI† (see Fig. S5). “On” and “Off” refer to illuminated and dark conditions, respectively. 
In addition to the full solar spectrum, three bandpass interference filters were applied to limit the illumination to three narrow wavelength regions. The chosen illumination ranges are 450 ± 25 nm (Soret region of Chls), 675 ± 25 nm (Qy region of Chls), and 575 ± 25 nm (region with minimum absorbance), in accordance with the shaded areas in the LHCII absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 7B and C clearly demonstrated that the photocurrent response can be attributed to the absorbance of LHCII proteins. The correlation of the photocurrent magnitude and the LHCII coverage, as well as the degree of aggregation, agreed well with that of the full solar spectrum. The illumination in the 575 ± 25 nm region, which has minimum photon absorption by LHCII, however, did not generate any photocurrent (Fig. 7D).
Proteins are normally unstable and tend to denature in organic solvents such as acetonitrile. However, we found that LHCIIs were extremely robust (regarding photocurrent generation) after they were attached to the APTES–TiO2 surface, which was critical for LHCII-sensitized solar cell to work well in acetonitrile based Iodolyte. That is, a possible denaturation (that cannot be fully excluded) did not affect the performance of our photovoltaic devices. Fig. 8 illustrates the characteristic photovoltaic properties of the solar cell “Small aggregate-1” (i.e., 45.8% ESC of small-size LHCII aggregates) over 30 days after assembly. In fact, not only did the cell display an outstanding stability, but the overall cell performance improved with time as demonstrated by the increase in JSC, fill-factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η). Only VOC slightly decreased. In these experiments, the only effort to avoid cell degradation was to replace Iodolyte with tricine buffer after each photovoltaic measurement and store them at 4 °C before refilling Iodolyte for the next measurement. Continued reorganization of LHCII complexes could occur during this period, allowing more CT states formation or a better contact to the TiO2 surface, leading to an improved cell performance.
 Fig. 8  The performance characteristics of LHCII-sensitized TiO2 solar cells measured over 30 days after assembly. All parameters were normalized to the value obtained with the cell immediately after it was assembled. 
To further understand the effects of LHCII reorganization, a TiO2 solar cell sensitized with isolated chlorophyll pigments was also prepared and tested by the same procedure as a control. Since Chl a and Chl b are the two major light-harvesting pigments in LHCII complex (with a molar ratio of 8:6), the bare TiO2 solar cell was thus sensitized in a dry diethyl ether solution with a total Chl concentration of 120 μg Chl per mL at 8:6 molar ratio of Chl a and Chl b. As shown in Fig. S6 of the ESI,† although Chls did enhance the photocurrent of the solar cell at the beginning, the current kept decreasing in the following 5 days (120 hours). The current response curves illustrated that the contribution of Chls to photocurrent almost became negligible after 72 h. It should be noted that Chls attached onto the TiO2 layer only through weak physisorption tend to desorb over time and are easily oxidized in atmosphere. Compared with the LHCII-sensitized solar cells discussed above, the stability of the Chl-sensitized solar cell was very poor, which illustrated the necessity of using photosynthetic protein complexes instead of Chl pigments alone.
Conclusions
LHCII complexes with different degrees of aggregation were applied onto a model thin film TiO2 solar cell. The results not only illustrated that LHCII can serve as a remarkably stable photosensitizer for DSSCs, but also revealed that the photovoltaic properties of this system, represented by the photocurrent enhancement, can be directly correlated to the aggregation induced charge transfer (CT) states. The existence of the CT states must have improved the electron injection into TiO2, since the photocurrent generated by large-size LHCII aggregates was significantly higher than the same amount of small-size LHCII aggregates. We emphasize that formation of Chl–Chl CT states in aggregated LHCII complexes is consistent with the observed strong electron–phonon coupling and much weaker (red-shifted) fluorescence emission observed in aggregated LHCII complexes at low temperatures.29 More Chl–Chl CT states formed by a possible LHCII reorganization or a better contact to the photoanode are likely responsible for the high stability and continuously increased performance of the solar cell after assembling. Our LHCII sensitized solar cell adopted a thin film design to reduce the background current from the traditional mesoporous TiO2 layer and amplify the contribution from sensitizing protein complexes. This design should be also applicable to other photosynthetic protein complexes, which provides a new platform to tap into the early biophysical processes of photosystems, i.e., the photon capture and energy/charge transfer.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSF EPSCoR Award EPS-0903806 (including the matching support from the State of Kansas through Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation) to J.L. and R.J. We thank Adam Kell (KSU) and Yichen Zheng (KSU) for insightful discussion and comments. A.R.H. acknowledges the Eurocores EUROSOLARFUELS programme, the EU Training and Research Network “Harvest” and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG HO-924/3-1) for grants.
References
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 1993, 26, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sykora, K. A. Maxwell, J. M. DeSimone and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 7687–7691 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6802–6827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caffarri, R. Kouřil, S. Kereïche, E. J. Boekema and R. Croce, EMBO J., 2009, 28, 3052–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Yan, K. Wang, T. Kuang, J. Zhang, L. Gui, X. An and W. Chang, Nature, 2004, 428, 287–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Johnson, T. K. Goral, C. D. P. Duffy, A. P. R. Brain, C. W. Mullineaux and A. V. Ruban, Plant Cell, 2011, 23, 1468–1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Holzwarth, Y. Miloslavina, M. Nilkens and P. Jahns, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 483, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Belgio, C. D. P. Duffy and A. V. Ruban, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12253–12261 RSC .
A. V. Ruban, R. Berera, C. Ilioaia, I. H. M. van Stokkum, J. T. M. Kennis, A. A. Pascal, H. van Amerongen, B. Robert, P. Horton and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2007, 450, 575–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. R. Holzwarth and P. Jahns, NPQ mechanisms in intact organisms as derived from ultrafast fluorescence kinetics studies, Advances in Photosynthesis and Respiration, Springer Science,  2014 Search PubMed .
Y. Miloslavina, A. Wehner, P. H. Lambrev, E. Wientjes, M. Reus, G. Garab, R. Croce and A. R. Holzwarth, FEBS Lett., 2008, 582, 3625–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Magdaong, M. Enriquez, A. LaFountain, L. Rafka and H. Frank, Photosynth. Res., 2013, 118, 259–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
V.-D. Dao, S.-H. Kim, H.-S. Choi, J.-H. Kim, H.-O. Park and J.-K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25529–25534 CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 6, 215–218 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Saha, S. Sarkar, S. Pal and P. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15890–15900 CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Das, P. J. Kiley, M. Segal, J. Norville, A. A. Yu, L. Wang, S. A. Trammell, L. E. Reddick, R. Kumar, F. Stellacci, N. Lebedev, J. Schnur, B. D. Bruce, S. Zhang and M. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1079–1083 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. den Hollander, J. G. Magis, P. Fuchsenberger, T. J. Aartsma, M. R. Jones and R. N. Frese, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10282–10294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sumino, T. Dewa, N. Sasaki, M. Kondo and M. Nango, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gerster, J. Reichert, H. Bi, J. V. Barth, S. M. Kaniber, A. W. Holleitner, I. Visoly-Fisher, S. Sergani and I. Carmeli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Narayan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 208–215 CAS .
M. Nagata, M. Amano, T. Joke, K. Fujii, A. Okuda, M. Kondo, S. Ishigure, T. Dewa, K. Iida, F. Secundo, Y. Amao, H. Hashimoto and M. Nango, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 296–299 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, G. Zhu, S. Liu, B. Ge and F. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 16740–16748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mershin, K. Matsumoto, L. Kaiser, D. Yu, M. Vaughn, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. D. Bruce, M. Graetzel and S. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. Kell, X. Feng, C. Lin, Y. Yang, J. Li, M. Reus, A. R. Holzwarth and R. Jankowiak, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 6086–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Lambrev, Z. Várkonyi, S. Krumova, L. Kovács, Y. Miloslavina, A. R. Holzwarth and G. Garab, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2007, 1767, 847–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Porra, W. A. Thompson and P. E. Kriedemann, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1989, 975, 384–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Müller, P. Lambrev, M. Reus, E. Wientjes, R. Croce and A. R. Holzwarth, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1289–1296 CrossRef PubMed .
W. a. I. Gruszecki, E. Janik, R. Luchowski, P. Kernen, W. Grudzinski, I. Gryczynski and Z. Gryczynski, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9384–9391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Renger, M. E. Madjet, A. Knorr and F. Müh, J. Plant Physiol., 2011, 168, 1497–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Klankowski, Y. Yang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10679–10686 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supporting information includes (1) photovoltaic I–V curves of physisorbed LHCII large aggregates on bare thin-film TiO2/FTO anodes, (2) UV-vis absorption spectra of acetone extracted Chls from the solution before and after filling into the solar cells, (3) photovoltaic I–V curves of control solar cells with various photoanodes including a bare 10 μm thick TiO2 nanoparticle film, APTES modified FTO photoanodes with and without LHCII sensitization, (4) photovoltaic I–V curves and synchronous photocurrent response during light on/off with LHCII-sensitized solar cells in ionic liquid electrolyte, (5) synchronous photocurrent response curves of an APTES–TiO2 solar cell before and after being sensitized with small-size LHCII aggregates, and (6) stability tests of solar cells sensitized with physisorbed isolated Chls. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03112aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Top and side view of the LHCII trimer consisting of Chl a and b (green); carotenoids (orange); and polypeptides (grey helices). (B) Schematic model of a LHCII sensitized solar cell assembled by attaching LHCII aggregates to a thin APTES–TiO2 compact layer on a FTO-coated glass.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Absorption and fluorescence emission spectra (λex = 496.5 nm) of small- and large-size LHCII aggregates in tricine buffer with the concentration (in unit of total Chl content) of 16.2 μg Chl per mL and 17.1 μg Chl per mL, respectively. The colored shades indicate the bandwidth of the three bandpass interference filters used in photovoltaic measurements. (B) Normalized steady-state fluorescence emission spectra (λex = 663 nm) of small- and large-size LHCII aggregates in solutions and deposited on the APTES–TiO2–FTO photoanode surface. Note that the fluorescence of large aggregates on the TiO2 surface is extremely weak. Each spectrum was normalized to its highest peak intensity for better view of the detailed spectroscopic features. (C) Schematic illustration of the CT states formed in small and large aggregates.	 

 	Fig. 3  AFM images and line profiles of (A) a clean silicon wafer and a silicon wafer deposited with (B) the small-size LHCII aggregates and (C) the large-size LHCII aggregates. Measurements were carried out in tapping mode under a nitrogen atmosphere.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) A fluorescence image of small-size LHCII aggregates attached on a patterned APTES–FTO substrate. (B) An optical microscopy image of the corresponding mask in which the UV light was blocked by the solid grid frame (the dark area) and can only pass through the open squares (light areas). The scale bar is 50 μm.	 
	(1)

Bare APTES–TiO2 #1	0	0.575	0.427	N.A.
Small aggregate-1	45.8	0.640	0.432	11.3
Small aggregate-2	100	0.907	0.444	57.7


Bare APTES–TiO2 #2	0	0.915	0.340	N.A.
Large aggregate-1	48.3	1.203	0.394	31.5


Bare APTES–TiO2 #3	0	0.876	0.398	N.A.
Large aggregate-2	100	1.386	0.424	58.2

 	Fig. 5  Electron transfer and energy level scheme of a photovoltaic device based on aggregated LHCII complexes.	 

 	Fig. 6  
I–V curves of LHCII sensitized TiO2 solar cells. (A) Solar cells made of a bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #1, dot) and after being first sensitized with 45.8%-coverage small-size LHCII aggregates (small aggregate-1, dashed line) and then further sensitized with 100%-coverage small-size LHCII aggregates (small aggregate-2, solid). (B) Solar cells made of the 2nd bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #2, dot) and this electrode after being sensitized with 48.3%-coverage large-size LHCII aggregates (large-size aggregate-1, dash), the 3rd bare APTES–TiO2 photoanode (bare APTES–TiO2 #3, dash–dot–dot) and this electrode after being sensitized with high-coverage large-size LHCII aggregates (large-size aggregate-2, solid). All measurements were carried out under 1 sun illumination with an AM1.5G filter.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synchronous photocurrent response of the TiO2 solar cells sensitized with different ESC% of small- and large-sized LHCII aggregates under 1 sun illumination with the full solar spectrum (A) and passing through bandpass interference filters at 450 ± 25 nm (B); 675 ± 25 nm (C); and 575 ± 25 nm (D). The photocurrents were normalized as described in the ESI† (see Fig. S5). “On” and “Off” refer to illuminated and dark conditions, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  The performance characteristics of LHCII-sensitized TiO2 solar cells measured over 30 days after assembly. All parameters were normalized to the value obtained with the cell immediately after it was assembled.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supporting information includes (1) photovoltaic I–V curves of physisorbed LHCII large aggregates on bare thin-film TiO2/FTO anodes, (2) UV-vis absorption spectra of acetone extracted Chls from the solution before and after filling into the solar cells, (3) photovoltaic I–V curves of control solar cells with various photoanodes including a bare 10 μm thick TiO2 nanoparticle film, APTES modified FTO photoanodes with and without LHCII sensitization, (4) photovoltaic I–V curves and synchronous photocurrent response during light on/off with LHCII-sensitized solar cells in ionic liquid electrolyte, (5) synchronous photocurrent response curves of an APTES–TiO2 solar cell before and after being sensitized with small-size LHCII aggregates, and (6) stability tests of solar cells sensitized with physisorbed isolated Chls. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03112a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
