Use of colloidal upconversion nanocrystals for energy relay solar cell light harvesting in the near-infrared region   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM16127C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16127C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16709-16713Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUse of colloidal upconversion nanocrystals for energy relay solar cell light harvesting in the near-infrared region†

        
          
            Chunze 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanying 
            Chen
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Paras N. 
            Prasad
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tymish Y. 
            Ohulchanskyy
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhijun 
            Ning
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Haining 
            Tian
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Hans 
            Ågren
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Theoretical Chemistry, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), SE-10691, Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: ningzj82@theochem.kth.se; guanying@buffalo.edu; agren@theochem.kth.se;  Fax: +46 8 55378416;   Tel: +46 8 55378590
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 15000, People's Republic of China
cInstitute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, The State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA
dCenter of Molecular Devices, Department of Chemistry, School of Chemical Science and Engineering, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), 10044, Stockholm, Sweden
Received 
      24th November 2011
    , Accepted 8th June 2012First published on 4th July 2012AbstractColloidal upconversion (UC) nanocrystals were explored as energy relay materials for dye-sensitized solar cells for the first time. The utilization of colloidal UC nanocrystals was found to significantly enhance the upconversion efficiency and improve the photocurrent of the cells for low infrared irradiation intensity. In addition, it was found that UC nanocrystals of small size favor infiltration into a TiO2 film and bring higher relay efficiency. Finally, we found that UC nanocrystals can serve as a scattering material to increase the light absorption capability of the cells and increase the overall photocurrent of the cells under simulated sunlight irradiation.
Due to their relatively high efficiency and low cost, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are regarded as promising solar energy converters.1 Much effort is now devoted to further increase the energy conversion efficiency of DSSCs by addressing a number of factors that are critical for their performance.2,3 One such factor refers to the lack of efficient sensitizing elements in the near-infrared (NIR) region, which collect almost half of the energy of the sun's radiation. Efforts to develop panchromatic sensitizers for DSSCs have been hampered by poor electron injection efficiency and competing charge recombination when the absorption spectrum of the sensitizer is extended to the NIR region, adversely affecting the efficiency.4 There are three main reasons contributing to this problem: (1) the intrinsic requirement that the bandgap of the sensitizer, viz., LUMO level, should be higher than the conduction band (CB) of the substrate (TiO2), and the HOMO level be lower than the energy level of the redox couple, sets a limit for the absorption spectrum of the sensitizer; (2) the strategy to extend the absorption spectrum of the sensitizer and down-shift the CB of TiO2 or up-lift the energy level of the redox couple leads to a decrease in the photovoltage and an increase in the energy loss via heat;5 (3) as the intrinsic exciton recombination rate for a NIR absorbing dye is significantly higher, the charge extraction efficiency of the dye is subsequently reduced.6 In addition, the photostability of a near-IR absorbing dye is known to be very poor.
Recently, McGehee, Grätzel and co-workers introduced a strategy to extend the energy conversion spectra of DSSCs to the shorter wavelength range via the addition of an energy relay dye in the electrolyte, which effectively enhanced the light harvesting and efficiency of the cells.7 The reported energy relay mechanism is based on a regular Stokes-shifted process via absorbing light in the shorter wavelength range and emitting light in the longer wavelength range that matches the absorption of the sensitizing dye. However, this restricts the use of energy relay dyes to only enhance the light harvesting in the shorter ultraviolet or visible wavelength region, leaving the NIR region still unexplored. To extend the use of the energy relay process for harvesting light in the NIR region, one possible way is to absorb NIR light and radiate visible upconverted emission, the energy of which can then be radiatively or nonradiatively transferred to the dye sensitizer. For this purpose, an upconversion (UC) material is needed. Upconversion refers to a nonlinear optical process characterized by the successive absorption of two or more photons followed by the emission of radiation at a shorter wavelength than the excitation wavelength.8 Thus the UC process converts two or more low-energy photons into one high-energy photon. Although the amount of photons decreases after the UC process, the energy is actually maintained due to the high energy of the emitted photons. UC materials have been used to enhance the response of silicon solar cells in the near-IR region by adhering the UC material on the rear of a bifacial buried-contact silicon solar cell.9 However, the relatively long distance between the upconversion material and the sensitizer limited the energy transfer efficiency.7 Recently, Demopoulos et al. reported the use of UC materials doped in a TiO2 film to enhance the light harvesting of DSSCs in the near-IR region.10 The doping of the UC materials in a TiO2 mesoporous film effectively reduced the distance between the UC material and sensitizers, which is important for the energy transfer from upconversion nanoparticles to dyes.7 However, the luminescence efficiency of upconversion nanoparticles in TiO2 was quite low and the reported photocurrent of the cells under NIR irradiation was extremely small. In recent years, colloidal UC nanocrystals have received great interest because of their significantly increased UC luminescence quantum yields and tunable size.11,12 Prasad et al. developed a synthesis strategy to develop small colloidal nanoparticles with high upconversion efficiency.11b The small size and colloidal nature of the nanocrystals allow them to be infiltrated into a mesoporous TiO2 film, similarly to the energy relay dyes, as discussed above. The short distance between the upconversion nanoparticles and the dye sensitizer can ensure an efficient energy relay from upconversion nanoparticles to dye. It can be expected that the combination of high upconversion and energy relay efficiency of small UC nanoparticles can further improve the conversion efficiency of DSSCs in the infrared region. We note that the highest upconversion efficiency reached so far for UC materials is 5%.13a Considering that nearly half of the energy is located in the infrared region, the utilization of UC materials has potential to improve the overall efficiency of DSSCs to 15%, enabling UC solar cells comparable with the conventional silicon solar cells. Herein, we report the use of colloidal UC nanocrystals as an energy relay material for DSSCs to enhance the light harvesting efficiency of the DSSCs in the near-IR region and the significant enhancement of photocurrent of the UC nanocrystal-doped DSSCs under irradiation with NIR light.

Fig. 1 shows transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of synthesized NaYF4:Er3+ 2%/Yb3+ 20% nanocrystals NEY-1 (large size). As one can see, the resulting NaYF4:Er3+ 2%/Yb3+ 20% nanoparticles appear spherical in shape and monodispersed, having average diameters of about 20 nm (NEY-1). To confirm the crystal structure of NEY-1 nanoparticles, a selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern was also obtained and is shown in Fig. 1b. As displayed in this figure, the diffraction patterns can be indexed to the corresponding (hkl) planes of the standard hexagonal JCPDS 28-1192 NaYF4 structure, demonstrating the formation of the hexagonal phase. However, the average size of the pores of the TiO2 film is 10 nm, which may limit the infiltration of NEY-1. Therefore, nanoparticles NEY-2 with a diameter of 7 nm of cubic structure were synthesized and explored. The synthesis procedure is similar to that which we recently reported.11b The upconversion quantum yields of NEY-1 and NEY-2 are around 0.1% and 0.001%, respectively.13b The surface areas of NEY-1 and NEY-2 are determined, considering the nanoparticles to be spherical, to be about 1257 and 154 nm2, respectively. It is well known that the luminescence quantum yield of the UC nanoparticles of hexagonal structure is much higher than that of cubic structure.14 However, up to now, it is still hard to synthesize hexagonal structural UC nanoparticles with a diameter smaller than 10 nm using oleic acid as ligand.
 Fig. 1  TEM images of upconversion NaYF4:Er3+ 2%/Yb3+ 20% nanocrystals NEY-1 (A) and NEY-2 (C). Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of NEY-1 (B). 
The absorption spectrum of the colloidal dispersion of NEY-1 nanocrystals is shown in Fig. S1.† As one can see in the figure, the absorption peak at a wavelength of about 980 nm was clearly observed, which corresponds to the 2F7/2 → 2F5/2 transition of the Yb3+ ions. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of the NEY-1 nanocrystals under excitation at 980 nm is shown in Fig. 2. Two upconversion PL emission bands are observed; a green one in the range of ∼510 to 565 nm with the peak at ∼540 nm (green emission peak A), and a red one in the range of ∼640 to 680 nm and peak at ∼660 nm. Fig. S2† shows the dependence of the UCPL intensity from nanoparticles NEY-1 on the power of excitation. In general, the number of photons which are required to populate the upper emitting state under unsaturated conditions can be obtained by the relation IPL ∝ Pn(1)where IPL is the photoluminescence intensity, P is the pump laser power, and n is the number of laser photons required. As can be seen in Fig. S2,† slope values of 1.9 and 2.0 were observed for the upconversion emissions at 540 and 650 nm, illustrating a two-photon process was involved in their generation. The upconversion pathways to generate emissions from the nanoparticles are illustrated in Fig. S3.†
 Fig. 2  The fluorescence spectra of the nanocrystals NEY-1 (0.5 wt% toluene solution) with increasing concentration of Z907 dye. 
To test the energy transfer between the UC nanocrystals and the sensitizing Z907 dye, the PL spectra of a mixture of nanocrystals NEY-1 and Z907 dye in chloroform were obtained, as shown in Fig. 2. As the concentration of the dye increases, the upconversion photoluminescence (UCPL) intensity of peak A and B decreases significantly, which may suggest that energy transfer from the UC nanoparticles to the dye occurs. Such an energy transfer is also illustrated by the difference in the decreased intensity of the different emission bands. This is caused by the difference in the absorbance of the dye in these spectral regions. The absorption spectrum of the Z907 dye is shown in Fig. S4.† It can be seen that the absorption band with the peak at ∼543 nm corresponds well with the UCPL band A. For peak A, the emission intensity decreased 15 times after the addition of the 0.16 mM Z907 dye, while for peak B, only a 4.4 times decrease is observed, indicating that the energy transfer from peak A is much more efficient than from peak B. On the other hand for peak C, no decrease in the PL intensity is observed. It should be noted that peak A is the main PL peak of the UC nanocrystals used herein, which is crucial for enhancing the energy transfer efficiency.
The I–V curves of a device based on the NEY-1 nanocrystals under different infrared irradiation intensities are shown in Fig. 3a. No photocurrent was observed without irradiation, while as the irradiation intensity increased, the photocurrent increased correspondingly, indicating that the photocurrent derives from the irradiation of the near-IR light. On the other hand, a control cell based on UC nanoparticles only without the usage of the Z907 dye shows no photocurrent under infrared light (Fig. 3c). To further confirm that the photocurrent derives from the energy relay of the UC nanoparticles, a control cell without the addition of UC nanocrystals was examined. As can be seen in Fig. 3b, the photocurrent of the control sample is much smaller than that of the cells with the usage of UC nanoparticles, indicating that the photocurrent predominately derives from the energy relay of UC nanocrystals. Generally, for dye Z907, no absorbance can be observed above 800 nm,15 as can be seen in Fig. S4.† The small photocurrent of the cells without UC nanoparticles might be caused by two-photon absorption of the dye, or for other reasons, which will be further investigated in the future.16 The energy transfer mechanism between the UC nanocrystals and dye sensitizer is, as shown in Scheme 1, ascribed to two possible processes: (1) a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process where the excited energy of the upconversion nanocrystals is directly transferred to the Z907 dye and (2) a luminescence-mediated energy transfer process where the luminescence of the upconversion nanoparticles is absorbed by the Z907 dye. Through the energy transfer processes from the UC nanocrystals to the dye, the DSSC will be able to harvest or respond to NIR light irradiation.
 Fig. 3  (a) I–V characteristics of DSSCs with the addition of NEY-1 UC nanoparticles under illumination of a 980 nm laser. (b) I–V curves of normal DSSCs without the addition of UC nanoparticles. (c) I–V curves of cells with the addition of NEY-2 nanoparticles, and control sample without the addition of the Z907 dye. 
 Scheme 1  Energy level diagram of the UC nanocrystal-doped DSSCs shows the energy transfer from UC nanocrystal to the Z907 dye by the processes of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and luminescence-mediated energy transfer (LET) under irradiation with NIR light. 
Under an irradiation intensity of 2 W (power density of 8 W cm−2), the photocurrent, photovoltage and the fill factor (FF) of the cell with the addition of NEY-1 nanocrystals are 0.87 mA cm−2, 0.29 V, and 0.60, respectively (6 μm thick TiO2 film). From a comparison of the performance of the cells under different irradiation intensities, it was found that the efficiency of the cells increased with an increase in the irradiation intensity, consistent with a known increase in the upconversion efficiency of the UC nanocrystals.11 This result also indicates that the upconversion efficiency of the UC nanocrystals is important for the near-IR light harvesting efficiency. It should be noted that solar irradiation intensity in the near-IR region is much lower than the power that we used herein; hence it is important to increase the upconversion efficiency of the cells under low irradiation intensity. Although the photovoltage is slightly lower, the photocurrent of the cells using colloidal UC nanocrystals is about 10 times higher than that of the device having UC material doped in the TiO2 electrode, under low irradiation intensity.10 The reason might be due to a much higher upconversion luminescence quantum yield of the colloidal hexagonal NaYF4:Yb/Er UC nanocrystals than the LaF3:Yb/Er nanocrystals previously doped in the TiO2 electrode under weak irradiation, as hexagonal NaYF4 nanocrystals are known so far to have the highest UC efficiency.14
The I–V curve of the cell based on NEY-2 and the Z907 dye is shown in Fig. 3c. The short circuit photocurrent under 2 W irradiation intensity is 0.39 mA cm−2. The photocurrent of the NEY-2-based cells is close to half of the value of those based on NEY-1, considering the photocurrent to be caused by the direct absorption of the Z907 dye. Although the upconversion emission efficiency of NEY-2 is significantly lower than of NEY-1, as discussed above, the photocurrent is comparable to the value for NEY-1. It can be speculated that as the size of NEY-2 is smaller than the TiO2 film pore size, it allows the efficient infiltration of the UC nanoparticles and energy relay from UC nanoparticles to dye sensitizer.7 It should be noted that we selected hydrophobic dye Z907 molecules with two long alkyl groups as sensitizer that adsorb on TiO2, which, similarly to UC nanocrystals, can effectuate infiltration into the TiO2 film. Much worse dye infiltration was found for the hydrophilic dye N719, which can be attributed to the presence of four carboxyl groups and lack of alkyl chains. On the other hand, we would like to point out that hexagonal UC nanocrystals of around 10 nm have been reported by Yi et al. using oleylamine17 as ligand and by Shan et al. using TOPO as ligand.14 Due to the close contact of the UC nanocrystals and the dye in the TiO2 film, and as the performance of the dye generally is sensitive to the local environment (such as charges, functional groups), it is important to use UC nanoparticles with the same ligand to investigate the size effect on the performance of the solar cell. Hence, we preferred to use 7 nm sized UC nanocrystals with the same ligand as 20 nm sized UC nanocrystals, i.e., oleic acid, to investigate the size effect on the performance of the solar cell, instead of using hexagonal UC nanoparticles capped by different ligands like oleylamine and TOPO.
In addition to an increase in the light harvesting efficiency in the near-IR region, it is also important to maintain the overall performance of the cells under simulated solar irradiation. To study the effect of the UC nanocrystals on the overall performance of the cells, the I–V curves of two cells, with and without the addition of UC nanocrystals, were tested, as shown in Fig. 4a. The photocurrent of the cell (4 μm thick TiO2 film) after the addition of NEY-1 nanocrystals amounted to as much as 12.5 mA cm−2, obviously higher than that of the device without the UC nanocrystals (11.4 mA cm−2). For these two kinds of cells with and without UC nanocrystals, five samples of each kind were prepared and tested, and the median value was chosen as the final value, which is close to the value averaged from five tests. The remarkable enhancement of the photocurrent might be partly caused by the enhancement of the absorption in the near-IR region due to the presence of the UC nanocrystals. However, the increased photocurrent is larger than the current achieved under 980 nm laser irradiation. On the other hand, as can be seen in the incident photon to current (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 4b), the photon-to-current conversion efficiency obviously increases in the visible region, indicating that there might be other reasons responsible for the current increase. It can be speculated that the increase of the photon-to-current efficiency might be caused by a scattering effect of the UC material.18 It is widely reported that the addition of a scattering layer can enhance the absorbance of cells based on transparent TiO2 films, thus enhancing the conversion efficiency of DSSCs.19 In addition, the suspended UC nanoparticles can also be regarded as scattering centers that increase the light absorbance of the film. However, it should be noted that the FF value of the cells decreased, which might be caused by blocking of the pores of the TiO2 film by the UC nanocrystals. The overall conversion efficiency of the cells including UC nanocrystals is 2.8%; only slightly higher than the 2.7% of the cell without the UC nanocrystals.
 Fig. 4  The I–V (a) (under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation) and IPCE (b) curves of the cells with and without the use of colloidal UC nanocrystals. 
In summary, in this report, we explored the use of colloidal UC nanocrystals as an energy relay material for photovoltaic devices. They were found to effectively enhance the light harvesting efficiency of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) in the near-IR region. Under 980 nm laser irradiation of 2 W, a photocurrent of 0.87 mA cm−2 was achieved, which might be the highest reported value of DSSCs under such long-wavelength irradiation. Compared with the method of doping the UC material in the TiO2 film, the utilization of colloidal UC nanocrystals is found to significantly enhance the upconversion efficiency and improve the photocurrent of the cells for low infrared irradiation intensity (close to ten times). On the other hand, we found that UC nanocrystals of small size favor infiltration into the TiO2 film and produce higher energy relay efficiency. Finally, we observed that the utilization of the UC nanocrystals leads to an increase in the overall photocurrent of the cells under simulated sunlight irradiation. It is suggested that, apart from acting as an upconversion material to harvest the near-IR light, the UC nanocrystals can serve as a scattering material to enhance the absorbance of the cells. This report paves the way for the development of panchromatic DSSCs with the use of colloidal UC nanocrystals. Through optimization of the cells and improvement of the quality of the UC nanocrystals including UCPL quantum yield, size distribution and shapes, we can foresee considerable enhancement of the efficiency of DSSCs through the utilization of colloidal UC nanocrystals as energy relay materials.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Swedish Energy Agency (contract 32076-1) and from Wenner Gren scholarship is gratefully acknowledged.
References

  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef ; 
  (c) N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1012 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. E. Lee, M. A. Gomez, S. Elouatik and G. P. Demopoulos, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9575–9583 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Ning and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5483 RSC .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1170 CAS .

  (a) A. Reynal, A. Forneli, E. Martinez-Ferrero, A. Sánchez-Díaz, A. Vidal-Ferran, B. C. O'Regan and E. Palomares, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13558 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. N. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 674 RSC .
Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, W. Wu and H. Tian, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2705 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. I. Basham, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 4, 1253 CAS ; 
  (c) B. E. Hardin, J. Yum, E. T. Hoke, Y. Jun, P. Péchy, T. Torres, M. L. Brongersma, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3077 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Yum, B. E. Hardin, S. Moon, E. Baranoff, F. Nüesch, M. D. McGehee, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9277 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976 RSC .

  (a) H. Wang, M. Batentschuk, A. Osvet, L. Pinna and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2675 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Shalav, R. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W. Krämer and H. U. Güdel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. S. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835 RSC .
G. Shan and G. P. Demopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4373 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. K. Chatterjee, M. K. Gnanasammandhan and Y. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 2781 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. Kumar, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3163 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Nyk, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3834 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, A. Kachynski, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4981 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Chen, H. Chen, H. Hu, M. Yu, F. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Zhou, T. Yi and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3023 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. van de Rijke, H. Zijlmans, S. Li, T. Vail, A. K. Raap, R. S. Niedbala and H. J. Tanke, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 273 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            M. P. Hehlen, M. L. F. Phillips, N. J. Cockroft and H. U. Güdel, Upconversion Phosphors, Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, Pergamon/Elsevier, Oxford,  2001, 10, p. 9458 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-C. Boyer and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1417 RSC .

  (a) J. Shan and Y. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 275603 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. Shan, X. Qin, N. Yao and Y. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 445607 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J. Shan, M. Uddi, N. Yan and Y. Ju, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3530 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) O. Rubio-Pons, Y. Luo and H. Ågren, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 094310 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Q. Zhang, Y. Tu, H. Tian and H. Ågren, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 014501 CrossRef .
G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2324–2329 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, H. Lee, K. Lee, S. Han and I. Singh, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hore, C. Vetter, R. Kern, H. Smitc and A. Hinsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1176 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16127cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of upconversion NaYF4:Er3+ 2%/Yb3+ 20% nanocrystals NEY-1 (A) and NEY-2 (C). Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of NEY-1 (B).	 
IPL ∝ Pn	(1)

 	Fig. 2  The fluorescence spectra of the nanocrystals NEY-1 (0.5 wt% toluene solution) with increasing concentration of Z907 dye.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) I–V characteristics of DSSCs with the addition of NEY-1 UC nanoparticles under illumination of a 980 nm laser. (b) I–V curves of normal DSSCs without the addition of UC nanoparticles. (c) I–V curves of cells with the addition of NEY-2 nanoparticles, and control sample without the addition of the Z907 dye.	 

 	Scheme 1  Energy level diagram of the UC nanocrystal-doped DSSCs shows the energy transfer from UC nanocrystal to the Z907 dye by the processes of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and luminescence-mediated energy transfer (LET) under irradiation with NIR light.	 

 	Fig. 4  The I–V (a) (under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation) and IPCE (b) curves of the cells with and without the use of colloidal UC nanocrystals.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16127c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
