Resistive and thermal scale effects for Cu(In, Ga)Se 2 polycrystalline thin film microcells under concentration   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01661J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01661J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4972-4977Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsResistive and thermal scale effects for Cu(In, Ga)Se2 polycrystalline thin film microcells under concentration†

        
          
            Myriam 
            Paire
          
        
      *abce, 
      
        
          
            Artabaze 
            Shams
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Laurent 
            Lombez
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Nicolas 
            Péré-Laperne
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Stéphane 
            Collin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Luc 
            Pelouard
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jean-François 
            Guillemoles
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Daniel 
            Lincot
          
        
      *abc
aEDF R&D, Institut de Recherche et Développement sur l'Energie Photovoltaïque (IRDEP), 6 quai Watier, 78401, Chatou, France
bCNRS, IRDEP, UMR 7174, 78401, Chatou, France
cChimie ParisTech, IRDEP, 75005, Paris, France. E-mail: myriam-paire@chimie-paristech.fr; jf-guillemoles@chimie-paristech.fr; daniel-lincot@chimie-paristech.fr
dCNRS, Laboratoire de Photonique et de Nanostructures (LPN), Route de Nozay, 91460, Marcoussis, France
eUPMC, 75005, Paris, France
Received 
      7th May 2011
    , Accepted 10th August 2011First published on 6th September 2011AbstractUsing solar cells under concentrated illumination is known to improve the conversion efficiency while diminishing the active area, and thus material consumption. Recent concentrator cell designs tend to go to smaller devices, in the 0.5–1mm lateral range, enabling a better thermal evacuation due to higher surface to volume ratio. If the cell size is further reduced to the micrometric range, spreading resistance losses can be made vanishingly small. This is particularly interesting for thin film technology which has been limited up to now to very low concentrations, 1–10 suns, due to excessive resistive losses of the window layer and difficult thermal management of the cells, grown on glass substrates. In order to prove that high injection regime can be implemented on polycrystalline thin film solar cells, we fabricated Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGS) thin film microcells with diameter from 7 μm to 150 μm, and characterized them under concentrated illumination. A 4% absolute efficiency increase is obtained at 120 suns, and current densities as high as 100 A cm−2 can be measured, without affecting the cell performances. The temperature increase under high fluxes is drastically reduced in microcells: less than 20 K at 1000 suns for microcells under 50 μm in diameter. These results show that the use of polycrystalline thin films under high concentration is indeed possible, with important technological consequences.

Broader context
Thin film photovoltaics have encountered a booming development in the past years, and production costs have decreased. Compared to conventional solar cell processes, thin films technologies are easier to implement and have a higher throughput. However thin films have some limitations compared to the thick crystalline silicon technologies. First, the efficiencies of the best thin film solar cells, that increased in the past years to reach more than 20% today, are still lower than that of crystalline cells. Second, the most efficient thin films solar cells, i.e. Cu(In, Ga)Se2 and CdTe, rely on materials of limited availability such as In and Te. To develop devices that are more efficient, while sustainable in the perspective of large scale development on photovoltaic, we need to come up with innovations. In this sense, we report the creation of microscale polycrystalline thin film solar cells. Microcells, which are a few micrometres wide, present drastically limited resistive losses and heating, enabling the use of middle to high concentration, while using standard low cost thin film deposition techniques. Our approach, the use of polycrystalline thin film microcells under concentration, leads to increased efficiency and we can anticipate a decrease in material consumption of at least two orders of magnitude.

Introduction
Today's concentrating modules1,2,3 use highly efficient multijunction solar cells4 that are illuminated with concentrated sunlight. In order to limit the temperature elevation of the cells, detrimental for the overall performance of the device, the trend is to design concentrator cells that are very small,5 with lateral dimensions in the millimetric range (1 mm down to 0.5 mm), connected to heat sinks. Therefore concentrating modules can work under a concentration of ×1000 with a simple passive cooling.6,7 However the important light fluxes, and thus photocurrent densities, seen in concentrator cells induce detrimental resistive losses. A front contact collecting grid is therefore used that has to be optimized to reduce the ohmic losses while limiting shadowing effects. For thin films, spreading resistances are such that high current densities cannot be implemented with similar designs. Indeed, previous experiments of concentration on standard thin film solar cells8,9 were limited to very low concentration ratios. Up to now, the record efficiency of a CIGS solar cell under concentration is 21.5% under ×14 suns.
Going to microscale devices enables the drastic diminution of spreading resistances, with peripheral contacts10 alone being well adapted to microcells up to ultrahigh concentrations (>×1000), and a highly efficient thermal management. In the absence of a front contact collecting grid, the shadowing losses are removed, leading to higher photocurrent generation and lower dark current losses. With such advantages, the microcell design could be applied even to polycrystalline thin film materials. For the chalcogenide in particular, which depend on In or Te, of limited availability,11–13 the potential of material saving of two or three orders of magnitude, enabled by concentration, is of prime importance. Moreover, thin films give a unique flexibility in both the module design and the choice of deposition techniques. In this paper, we focus on the CIGS technology, which is to date the most efficient thin film technology,14 with Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) solar cell15 of 20.3% efficiency. For a proof of concept, we have prepared prototype microscale solar cells with a diameter down to 7 μm, probably the smallest solar cells ever made. We here show, starting from an industrial CIGS layer, that thin film CIGS microcells reach a maximum efficiency at a concentration ratio over one hundred, with a 4% absolute increase in efficiency compared to one sun experiment. Temperature rise on the microcell can be limited to less than 20 K over the ambient at concentration up to ×1000. Record current densities for polycrystalline thin film solar cells, exceeding 100 A cm−2, are measured. High injection operation of polycrystalline thin film solar cell is also studied for the first time.
The fabrication of microscale CIGS solar cells and their experimental characterization are presented. A discussion of their performances and the perspectives opened by this study will conclude our paper.
Experimental details
Microcell fabrication
In order to assess the performance of thin film microcells, prototype Cu(In, Ga)Se2 thin film microcells were fabricated.

Fig. 1 illustrates the steps of thin film microcell fabrication. Our prototypes are designed using a large scale industrial quality coevaporated CIGS absorber. The process begins with the deposition of a Mo layer on soda-lime glass (a) and the co-evaporation of a 2.5 μm thick CIGS absorber layer (b), by Würth Solar. A CdS layer is then deposited in our laboratory by chemical bath deposition, and an intrinsic ZnO layer by RF sputtering (c). The thickness of these layers is ∼50 nm each. The microcells are defined through a photolithographic process: a resist layer (AZ2070 resist, AZ Electronics Materials) is spin-coated at 4000 rpm (Karl Süss CT62) and exposed through a patterned mask (365 nm–435 nm light, through Karl Süss MJB mask aligner). After the development step (developer MF 26A), an array of cylindrical blocks (d) protects the sample during the deposition of a ∼400 nm thick SiO2 insulating layer (e) (Plassys MEB 400), and a 20 nm/300 nm thick Ti/Au conductive bilayer (f) (Plassys MEB 550 SL), which plays the role of peripheral contact. The resist is removed in acetone (g), and the ZnO:Al front contact is deposited by sputtering (h). The microcells are connected in parallel as they share the same back and front contacts. In order to test these prototype cells individually, we etch selectively both the ZnO:Al and Au layers on strips around each microcell (i) (IonSys 500, Roth&Rau). The microcells have therefore the same back contact but individual front contacts. Microcells of diameters ranging from 7 to 500 μm and reference cells of 0.1 cm2 are thus created. Fig. 2j shows a SEM image of a microcell, where the CIGS roughness is clearly visible. This process is not directly of industrial relevance, but is designed to offer a proof of concept. The microcell design has several advantages. First the cell has a peripheral contact that minimizes resistance and suppresses shading effects10 as discussed above. Second, the small surface coverage of the microcells leaves room for the deposition of contacts and interconnects, which can also play the role of heat sinks. Third, although in the prototypes presented in this paper the absorber layer is deposited on the whole surface, important material saving can be anticipated for a more industrial process, where the absorber would be selectively deposited, by means of electrodeposition16 or printing. With the use of an appropriate optical system, the operation of microcells under concentrated illumination can lead to important material saving.
 Fig. 1  (a)–(i) Microcell fabrication process, (k) SEM image of a 25 μm-in-diameter microcell. 
 Fig. 2  Measured short circuit current density vs. incident laser power density on a 25 μm diameter microcell (dots). Line is a guide for the eye. Calculated short-circuit current density is also displayed for information. 
Solar cell testing
In order to assess the performances of the cells, current voltage characteristics are measured under standard AM1.5 illumination, (Spectra Nova class A solar simulator), using a Keithley 2635A sourcemeter in the four point probe configuration. 0.1 cm2 reference cells as well as microcells were tested.
External quantum efficiency (EQE) is measured on reference cells, on a homemade setup. The external quantum efficiency is of particular importance as it gives the ratio of photogenerated carriers collected to the incident photon flux, at a particular wavelength (with a resolution of 10 nm). Therefore knowing the EQE of a cell enables us to predict from monochromatic laser testing the behavior of the device, especially the photocurrent, under polychromatic solar illumination.
Laser testing
Laser is an intense source of light that can be easily focalized on a microscale solar cell. We use a 532 nm Opus Laser Quantum laser source, in order to study the behavior of microcells under concentrated illumination. The laser light is guided in an optical fiber before being focused through lenses on the microcell. A camera images the sample's surface. A beamsplitter enables the in situ recording of the laser power. Current–voltage characteristics are measured with a Keithley sourcemeter in two point probe configuration, with a gold probe on the gold peripheral contact, and electric wires welded on Mo back contact with an In/Sn alloy.
Results and discussion
Cu(In, Ga)Se2 microcells under AM1.5 illumination
0.1 cm2 reference cells yield 13.2 ± 0.4% efficiency, ratio of the maximum output power of the cell and the incident light power, with a Jsc (short circuit current density) of 28.1 ± 0.2 mA cm−2 and a Voc (open circuit voltage) of 631.3 ± 0.6 mV. The fill factor, which is the ratio of the maximum power by the product of Jsc and Voc, is 73.9 ± 0.7 %. This efficiency is representative of the standard large area industrial CIGS layers, from which our samples come from. The microcells were also tested under AM1.5 illumination: a good homogeneity in the short-circuit current densities is found, even for the smallest microcells. The quantum efficiency measurement indicates that our reference cell has an 84% quantum efficiency at 532nm.
Efficiency of microcells under concentrated illumination
Microcells are also tested at 532 nm under laser illumination. Photocurrent is found to be linear with incident laser power, as shown in Fig. 2. Linearity stays valid up to 2.106 W m−2, and short-circuit current density, Jsc, can be calculated from incident light power density Plight as: Jsc = Plight × EQE(532) × q/hν, where EQE(532) is the external quantum efficiency at 532 nm, q the elementary charge and hν the energy of the incident photons. Linearity was also found to be valid for the full solar spectrum up to ∼105 W m−2; we can therefore define the light concentration ratio as the ratio between the experimental and the reference AM1.5 short circuit current densities.
The efficiency of a microcell is evaluated as the ratio between the maximum output power and the incident power, product of concentration factor by 100 mW cm−2.

Fig. 3a shows the efficiency of three microcells as a function of short-circuit current density or incident laser power density. At low concentrations, the microcell efficiencies are increasing with the concentration. Indeed photocurrent density increases with the light flux, while dark current remains constant, leading to an increase of Voc (Fig. 3b), and thus an increase in efficiency. At higher light fluxes, the efficiency decreases with concentration indicating the presence of resistances. The efficiencies at 1 sun are around 13% and reach a maximum between 16% and 17% at a concentration around ×120, before the Voc does. This corresponds to a 4% absolute efficiency increase, or more than 30% relative. The maximum in efficiency corresponds to the balance between increased resistive losses and improved Voc. The optimum concentration ratio is one order of magnitude higher than what was previously done on thin films solar cells,8 confirming the decrease of resistive losses associated with the microcell structure. The fact that the impact of window sheet resistance for microcells is negligible10 at the concentration ratios we have used here is confirmed by our experimental results. Indeed the maximum efficiency occurs at the same concentration ratio (See Fig. 3a) for microcells of different sizes, indicating that the resistances present are not size dependent.17 The values of optimum concentration ratios are comparable to the record epitaxial single junction GaAs concentrator cell14 (maximum efficiency reached at ×117 suns).
 Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency vs. short circuit current density for three different microcells; the points are experimental data, the line is a guide for the eye. (b) Vocvs. short circuit current density for four microcells. The points are experimental data, the line corresponds to the fit described in eqn (2). The legend indicates the diameter (in μm) of the microcells. 
Analysis of temperature elevation under high light fluxes


V
oc–Jsc analysis. 
For a concentrator cell to work well, temperature elevation under concentrated fluxes has to be kept to a minimum. In Fig. 3b, Voc is increasing linearly with the logarithm of short-circuit current density up to a certain concentration, where it reaches a maximum, over 850 mV for the smaller cells, before decreasing at higher concentration. On a 7 μm diameter microcell, we measured a maximum Voc of 877 mV. The deviation from linearity at high concentration is due to an increase of temperature that can be evaluated by fitting Jsc–Voc curve.
We suppose that the temperature of the cell, T, is varying linearly with the incident light flux, or equivalently with the short-circuit current density: T = T0 + κJsc, where T0 is the temperature of the cell in the dark, or the ambient temperature, and κ is a proportionality factor. This linear dependence of the temperature with the light flux is suggested in the literature,18 and is verified by the photoluminescence (PL) experiment described below. The dark current of the solar cell is modelized with a classic two-diode model: Idark(T) = I01(T)×exp(qV/kT) + I02(T) × exp(qV/2kT), where I01 and I02 are saturation currents corresponding respectively to an ideality factor of 1 and 2. The saturation currents are functions of the temperature; we assume their dependence to be:19 I01 = I001exp(−Eg/kT) and I02 = I002exp(−Eg/2kT)(1)where I001 and I002 are the saturation current prefactors that are considered independent from temperature, Eg = 1.22 eV is the band gap energy of the absorber determined by EQE measurements. Eg corresponds to the activation energy of the dark current as confirmed by a Voc(T) experiment under AM1.5. This experiment consists of heating a solar cell illuminated by a solar simulator and recording simultaneously Voc and temperature. The extrapolation of the Voc(T) curve at 0 K gives the activation energy of the dark current. We assumed that shunt resistances are high enough to neglect shunt currents, which is a reasonable assumption in the view of our device characteristics. The Voc can therefore be expressed as a function of the short-circuit current: (2)where q is the elementary charge, and T0 the temperature of the cell in the dark. Therefore fitting the experimental Voc–Jsc curve of a solar cell enables us to extract the parameters κ, I001 and I002.
The value of parameter κ as a function of the cell size is indicated in Fig. 4. Supposing an ambient temperature of 300 K, this figure also indicates the value of the temperature of the device at a concentration ratio ×1000, comprised between 307 K for the 15 μm device to 345 K for the 150 μm microcell. It is interesting to note that κ is proportional to r0.8, where r is the radius of the device, which is very close to the theoretical model18 predicting a linear dependency to r. The discrepancy between our experimental results and theoretical model arises from the fact that our sample is composed of different thin films on a glass substrate instead of a homogeneous bulk material. It is very interesting to note that on the smallest devices the temperature increases are less than 20 K, even at concentrations as high as ×1000 on an insulating glass substrate.
 Fig. 4  Proportionality factor κ as a function of microcell area: blue triangles are experimental points, the blue line is a least square regression fit; temperature at a concentration of ×1000 as a function of microcell area: green dots are experimental values, the green dotted line is a least square fit. 

Photoluminescence (PL) experiment
We conducted PL experiments to complete our study of microcell temperature under concentration. A detector is placed on the concentration setup after the beamsplitter to record the emission of our sample, under the 532 nm laser excitation. Fig. 5 shows the temperature of a 25 μm device as a function of the concentration; the inset displays the measured PL spectra. Temperature is extracted from PL spectra by normalizing each spectrum with a reference spectrum, measured at a given incident power. Thus the normalized PL intensity in the high energy domain is proportional to an energy-dependent term as20: (3)where PL(E) and PLref(E) are respectively the studied and reference PL spectra, E the energy of emitted photons, T the temperature of the carriers, and Tref a reference temperature. We assume that the carrier temperature is the same as the lattice temperature. Normalizing PL spectra is done as we do not precisely know the variations of the absorption with wavelength. As a consequence these PL measurements will not give absolute temperatures but relative increase in temperature with the reference. The temperature increase is extracted by fitting the normalized PL curves at high energy, between 1.15 and 1.22 eV. Linearity of the temperature with incident power is verified, and the reference temperature is chosen so that the temperature in the dark is 300 K. The proportionality factor κPL linking the temperature increase to the short-circuit current density is found to be 3.3 10−1 K cm2A−1, which is very close to the value extracted from the Voc–Jsc curve (κ = 3.7 10−1 K cm2A−1). The PL experiment thus confirms the conclusion of the Voc–Jsc analysis: microcell temperature stays close to the ambient temperature even under highly concentrated fluxes.
 Fig. 5  Temperature of a 25 μm diameter microcell as a function of concentration measured from PL (green dots). The line is a least square fit. The corresponding PL spectra are shown in the inset. 
Conclusions
Strongly scaling down thin film solar cells is proven to be of particular interest for use under concentrated illumination. The microcell structure, which is characterized by lateral dimensions in the micrometre range, makes spreading resistances vanishingly small. Polycrystalline thin film microcells on glass were fabricated by standard microelectronic techniques. They showed a 4% absolute improvement in efficiency at a concentration ratio of ×120, and an improvement in Voc up to ×1000. The microcells show an extremely good thermal evacuation, leading to temperature at ×1000 that can be less that 20 K above the ambient. This was confirmed by studying both the Voc–Jsc curve and by PL measurements. Growing microcells by selective deposition methods, such as electrodeposition or printing, could lead to important material saving in the near future, as those techniques already exist for thin film solar cells. This point is especially important as In or Te, used in CIGS or CdTe solar cells, are of limited availability. Appropriate optical systems to concentrate light on microcells arrays already exist,21,22 and have the potential to be low-cost systems, due to low material cost and large scale production.23,24 They have yet to be adapted to thin film polycrystalline microcells, that are up to two orders of magnitude smaller than existing monocrystalline microcells. These results open new perspectives from both fundamental as well as technological points of view.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Christophe Dupuis, Xavier Lafosse, Stéphane Guilet, Gilles Renou, Marie Jubault, Frédérique Donsanti, Negar Naghavi and Valérie Bockelee for their help in the microcell fabrication. Würth Solar is also acknowledged for providing us with coevaporated CIGS absorbers.
Notes and references

          A. Bett and H. Lerchenmüller, in Concentrator Photovoltaics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2007, vol. 130, p. 301–319 Search PubMed .

          V. Garboushian, K. W. Stone and A. Slade, in Concentrator Photovoltaics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2007, vol. 130, p. 253–277 Search PubMed .

          I. Anton and G. Sala, in Concentrator Photovoltaics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2007, vol. 130, p. 279–299 Search PubMed .
W. Guter, J. Schone, S. P. Philipps, M. Steiner, G. Siefer, A. Wekkeli, E. Welser, E. Oliva, A. W. Bett and F. Dimroth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223504 CrossRef .

          C. Algora, I. Rey-Stolle, B. Galiana, J. Gonzalez, M. Baudrit and I. Garcia, in Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, vol. 1 and 2, Ieee, New York,  2006, p. 741-744 Search PubMed .
A. Royne, C. J. Dey and D. R. Mills, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 86, 451–483 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Furman, E. Menard, A. Gray, M. Meitl, S. Bonafede, D. Kneeburg, K. Ghosal, R. Bukovnik, W. Wagner, J. Gabriel, S. Seel and S. Burroughs, in Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2010 35th IEEE,  2010, p. 000475–000480 Search PubMed .
J. Ward, K. Ramanathan, F. Hasoon, T. Coutts, J. Keane, M. Contreras, T. Moriarty and R. Noufi, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2002, 10, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Tuttle, Material Research Society Proceedings,  1996, 426 Search PubMed .
M. Paire, L. Lombez, J. Guillemoles and D. Lincot, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 034907 CrossRef .
K. Zweibel, Science, 2010, 328, 699–701 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Science, 1999, 285, 692–698 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fthenakis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2746–2750 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 346–352 CrossRef .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011 DOI:10.1002/pip.1078 .
J. Guillemoles, J. Connolly, O. Ramdani, O. Roussel, D. Guimard, V. Bermudez, N. Naghavi, P. Grand, L. Parissi, J. Kurdi, J. Kessler, O. Kerrec and D. Lincot, J. Nano Res., 2009, 4, 79–89 Search PubMed .
M. Paire, L. Lombez, N. Pere-Laperne, S. Collin, J. Pelouard, D. Lincot and J. Guillemoles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 264102 CrossRef .
M. Lax, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 3919–3924 CrossRef CAS .

          Luque Antonio and Hegedus Steven, in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester,  2003, p. 61-112 Search PubMed .
P. Wurfel, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 3967 CrossRef .
V. P. Gupta, J. L. Cruz-Campa, M. Okandan and G. Nielson, Future Photovoltaics, 2010, 1, 28–36 Search PubMed .
J. Yoon, A. Baca, S. Park, P. Elvikis, J. Geddes, L. Li, R. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T. Kim, M. Motala, B. Ahn, E. Duoss, J. Lewis, R. Nuzzo, P. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907–915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cruz-Campa, M. Okandan, M. Busse and G. Nielson, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 2376–2381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunnavakkam, F. Houlihan, M. Schlax, J. Liddle, P. Kolodner, O. Nalamasu and J. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1152–1154 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting research from the Advanced inorganic materials and concepts for photovoltaics symposium, at the 2011 E-MRS Bilateral Energy Conference.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Thin film photovoltaics have encountered a booming development in the past years, and production costs have decreased. Compared to conventional solar cell processes, thin films technologies are easier to implement and have a higher throughput. However thin films have some limitations compared to the thick crystalline silicon technologies. First, the efficiencies of the best thin film solar cells, that increased in the past years to reach more than 20% today, are still lower than that of crystalline cells. Second, the most efficient thin films solar cells, i.e. Cu(In, Ga)Se2 and CdTe, rely on materials of limited availability such as In and Te. To develop devices that are more efficient, while sustainable in the perspective of large scale development on photovoltaic, we need to come up with innovations. In this sense, we report the creation of microscale polycrystalline thin film solar cells. Microcells, which are a few micrometres wide, present drastically limited resistive losses and heating, enabling the use of middle to high concentration, while using standard low cost thin film deposition techniques. Our approach, the use of polycrystalline thin film microcells under concentration, leads to increased efficiency and we can anticipate a decrease in material consumption of at least two orders of magnitude.


 	Fig. 1  (a)–(i) Microcell fabrication process, (k) SEM image of a 25 μm-in-diameter microcell.	 

 	Fig. 2  Measured short circuit current density vs. incident laser power density on a 25 μm diameter microcell (dots). Line is a guide for the eye. Calculated short-circuit current density is also displayed for information.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency vs. short circuit current density for three different microcells; the points are experimental data, the line is a guide for the eye. (b) Vocvs. short circuit current density for four microcells. The points are experimental data, the line corresponds to the fit described in eqn (2). The legend indicates the diameter (in μm) of the microcells.	 
I01 = I001exp(−Eg/kT) and I02 = I002exp(−Eg/2kT)	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Proportionality factor κ as a function of microcell area: blue triangles are experimental points, the blue line is a least square regression fit; temperature at a concentration of ×1000 as a function of microcell area: green dots are experimental values, the green dotted line is a least square fit.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Temperature of a 25 μm diameter microcell as a function of concentration measured from PL (green dots). The line is a least square fit. The corresponding PL spectra are shown in the inset.	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting research from the Advanced inorganic materials and concepts for photovoltaics symposium, at the 2011 E-MRS Bilateral Energy Conference.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
