Dehydration of molybdenum oxide hole extraction layers via microwave annealing for the improvement of efficiency and lifetime in organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC02259F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC02259F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7683-7694Dehydration of molybdenum oxide hole extraction layers via microwave annealing for the improvement of efficiency and lifetime in organic solar cells†

        
          
            Anastasia 
            Soultati
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Ioannis 
            Kostis
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Panagiotis 
            Argitis
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dimitra 
            Dimotikali
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Stella 
            Kennou
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Spyros 
            Gardelis
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Thanassis 
            Speliotis
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Athanassios G. 
            Kontos
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dimitris 
            Davazoglou
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Maria 
            Vasilopoulou
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (INN), National Centre for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, 15310, Aghia Paraskevi Attikis, Athens, Greece. E-mail: a.soultati@inn.demokritos.gr; m.vasilopoulou@inn.demokritos.gr
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 15780 Athens, Greece
cDepartment of Electronics, Technological Educational Institute (TEI) of Piraeus, 12244 Aegaleo, Greece
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece
eDepartment of Solid State Physics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, University Campus, Zografos, Athens 157 84, Greece
Received 
      1st June 2016
    , Accepted 24th July 2016First published on 25th July 2016AbstractA significant contribution to the improvement of efficiency and lifetime of organic solar cells is due to the successful engineering of the metal contact/organic interface by introducing appropriate interlayers. In the current work we show that a short microwave post-annealing treatment in air of an under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide (MoOx) hole transport layer significantly enhanced the performance and lifetime of an organic solar cell based on a poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC71BM) blend. The enhanced performance is mainly driven by improvement in the short circuit current (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF), caused by, except for an increase of the anode work function, reduced series resistance, and increased shunt resistance and also higher charge generation efficiency, reduced recombination losses and improved hole transport towards the anode contact. In addition, the lifetime of the devices with microwave annealed MoOx interlayers was also significantly improved compared to those with as-deposited MoOx and, especially, those with the PEDOT-PSS interlayer. The above were attributed to effective dehydration which was also followed by structural transformation and crystallization of the MoOx layer during microwave annealing. The removal of absorbed water molecules led to alterations of the structure and microstructure of the MoOx films, visible in the X-ray diffraction patterns, infrared and Raman spectra and atomic force microscopy images recorded on their surface without influencing the oxide's chemical composition as evidenced by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. During microwave annealing the substrate remains practically at room temperature, so the method is applicable for films deposited on plastics or other temperature-sensitive substrates.
1. Introduction
During the last few decades there has been a pressing need to develop alternative energy sources and this can explain the increasing amount of research being devoted to new types of solar energy harvesting devices such as organic solar cells (OSCs).1–4 These devices have attracted enormous attention because of their unique advantages, including low-cost and large-area fabrication in combination with solution processability and mechanical flexibility. To date, bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells consisting of a blend of a polymeric donor and a fullerene acceptor, which form a nanoscale interpenetrating hole and electron transporting network, show power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 10%.5,6 In the simplest structure, the BHJ layer is in direct contact with the electrodes resulting in a high energy barrier for charge injection/extraction and therefore severe degradation of the device performance is observed. In order to facilitate the charge extraction and overcome the device performance degradation problem appropriate interlayers are inserted between the BHJ layer and the metal contacts.7 Interlayers can influence the energy level alignment at the organic/electrode interface thus controlling the energy barrier for charge extraction, and they may improve the overall quality of the contacts while they also improve the device stability and protract its lifetime. Transition metal oxides (TMOs) such as molybdenum (MoO3),8–14 tungsten (WO3),15–17 and vanadium (V2O5)18–20 oxides have been used as hole injection/extraction interlayers due to their high work functions and their ability to exchange charges with several organic semiconductors, which requires the energy-level alignment of the materials.21 Recently, under-stoichiometric MoOx22–26 and WOx,27,28 deposited using either vacuum or solution methods29–37 have been successfully used as hole transport layers (HTLs) in OSCs since it was demonstrated that they could facilitate charge transfer from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of an organic molecule towards the anode in a more effective manner relative to their stoichiometric counterparts. This was attributed to the formation of gap states near the Fermi level of the metal oxide which increased conductivity and facilitated charge transport. However, the formation of vacuum deposited under-stoichiometric oxides requires deposition under reducing ambient conditions e.g. containing hydrogen, while the solution-based deposition of metal oxides requires processing from aqueous/alcoholic solutions. As a result free or coordinated water molecules are usually incorporated within the metal oxide structure. In addition, irrespective of the deposition method, adsorption of water molecules onto the metal oxide's surface from ambient air usually occurs. Exposure to water causes severe oxidation of the electrodes and also of the organic semiconductors resulting in a fast degradation of the power conversion efficiency and of the device lifetime. Therefore, the presence of water within the lattice or the surface of a metal oxide greatly impedes the performance of organic solar cells.38,39 Consequently, effective dehydration of such metal oxide interlayers without altering the material composition poses a great challenge in order to achieve improved performance in organic optoelectronics.
Here, under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide films are used as hole transport interlayers in OSCs after being subjected to a short microwave post-deposition annealing in air. Although thermal annealing is a conventional method used in semiconductor processing, annealing conditions such as high temperature and large duration can be problematic. To overcome the appreciable thermal budgets of conventional annealing, post-deposition microwave (MW) annealing was performed in ambient air to vibrate (and therefore heat) the O–H bonds only, without heating the rest of the lattice and the substrate. Some first results of such MW post-deposition treatment of metal oxides were previously shown by our group.40 In particular, we previously demonstrated that a short exposure to MW irradiation of under-stoichiometric molybdenum and tungsten oxides led to a shift of their work function (WF) towards higher values resulting in an improvement of the device performance. In the present work we show that during MW-annealing effective dehydration followed by atomic re-arrangement and crystallization take place in MoOx films as shown by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) and Raman measurements. The morphology of films, studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM), also presented substantial changes related to the enhancement of crystallization. However, the surface chemical composition of the oxide films did not change with annealing as determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As a result, both significantly improved performance and lifetime were observed in OSCs using the MW-annealed MoOx films as hole transport interlayers and a photoactive layer consisting of a poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC71BM) blend. A short microwave annealing of MoOx in air significantly improved the Jsc and FF, arising from increased charge generation efficiency, reduced recombination losses and enhanced charge transport,41,42 leading to a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of 5.0% representing a 25% improvement relative to the control device with the as-deposited MoOx interlayer.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Influence of microwave annealing on the structural and chemical composition of MoOx
Microwave annealed under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide films were prepared by heating the as-deposited ones at 600 W for one minute. A power of 600 W was selected since we obtained the best device performance, as will be discussed below. First, we verified that the substrates remained nearly at room temperature during microwave annealing. We then investigated the influence of microwave annealing of the MoOx films on their structure, morphology and chemical composition. In Fig. 1a and b FTIR spectra recorded on MoOx films as-deposited and after MW-annealing are shown. In the spectrum of the as-deposited sample the bending of water and O–H groups is observed at 1620 cm−1 while the water/O–H stretching appears as a broad band centered at 3370 cm−1.43,44 From the intensity of those peaks it is evident that large amounts of water molecules are incorporated within the structure of the as-deposited oxide, therefore, the as-deposited samples (termed hereafter as MoOx) are considered hydrated (MoOx·nH2O). However, the above peaks nearly disappear in the spectrum of the MW-annealed sample (termed hereafter as MW-MoOx) indicating the effective removal of water molecules from the oxide's lattice. In the spectrum of the as-deposited sample, a peak at 724 cm−1 and a shoulder near 812–850 cm−1 are observed corresponding to the vibrations of Mo–O–Mo chains and another peak is observed at 978 cm−1, which corresponds to MoO bonds.45,46 Microwave annealing at 600 W has caused a blue shift of the peak at 724 cm−1 to 583 cm−1, and two new peaks, at 812 and 850 cm−1 appeared in the spectrum. The magnitude of the shifts indicates that a significant atomic rearrangement has taken place. Moreover, the sharpness of the various peaks observed in the spectrum of the MW annealed sample is in good agreement with their crystallization also seen by XRD measurements (shown below). The peak at 978 cm−1 is visible in the spectrum after MW annealing indicating that MoO bonds still exist in samples, which is expected in view of the layered microstructure of the MoOx film.
 Fig. 1  FTIR transmittance spectra of (a) the as-deposited and (b) the microwave annealed sample. (c and d) Raman spectra of the same samples. 
Next, Raman spectroscopy was employed to reveal the possible changes in the oxide structure via MW-annealing. The spectrum of the as-grown MoOx film deposited on silicon (Fig. 1c) presents characteristic broad bands of the amorphous MoOx phase superimposed upon the signals of the crystalline Si substrate. In the region above 600 cm−1 three very broad peaks are observed at 710, 836 and 971 cm−1 having widths of 178, 126 and 42 cm−1, respectively. The width of the lines suggests the incorporation of water molecules intercalated between the double-layers formed by MoO6 octahedra. It was found that upon dehydration by mild heat treatment up to 120 °C the bands become even broader.47 A similar effect was observed in our spectra upon laser heating of our films at 1 mW μm−2 (data not shown). The above-mentioned peaks are attributed to the stretching modes of the triply connected bridge-oxygen (Mo3–O), the doubly-connected bridge-oxygen (Mo2–O) and the double–MoO bond of the terminal oxygen.48 In-between 200 and 500 cm−1, a set of four broad bands are observed at 227, 333, 412 and 481 cm−1 mostly related to Mo–O bending modes, while the band at 82 cm−1 is due to unresolved lattice modes.49 Upon microwave annealing, the spectrum shows the transformation of all broad bands into a set of many narrow bands, covering all three spectral ranges. All these bands easily matched with those observed from crystalline MoOx where x is equal to or slightly below 3.50 Some characteristic strong bands are observed at 83, 128, and 158 cm−1 (lattice modes); 284, 292, 337, and 379 cm−1 (bending modes); and 665, 819 and 996 cm−1 (stretching modes). Therefore, the main conclusion derived from Raman spectroscopy is that MW-annealing induces crystallization of the initially amorphous MoOx films.
In Fig. 2a and b XRD diffractograms of the MoOx samples are shown. As seen in Fig. 2a the as-deposited MoOx film is amorphous. Microwave annealing induced the appearance of numerous peaks in the XRD pattern of the MW-annealed sample, indicating an enhancement of atomic ordering and a substantial improvement in the crystallinity of the sample. Those peaks correspond to under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide compounds, as seen in Table S1 (shown in the ESI†). It is also observed in Table S1 (ESI†) that the XRD peaks correspond to different crystallographic planes, i.e., the MW annealed sample is not textured. In Fig. 2c and d 2D AFM topographies (5 × 5 μm) recorded on the surface of an as-deposited and a MW-annealed MoOx sample are shown. It is observed that while the as-deposited film is smooth and exhibits features with dimensions well below 100 nm on its surface, annealing has induced the formation of large features with dimensions of the order of 1 μm, well crystallized in view of the XRD results. The formation of such large crystalline features, which was also evidenced by the Raman measurements, is related to the removal of water molecules which were filling voids between layers in the oxide's lattice resulting in significant structural transformation and crystallization of the oxide, as discussed below.
 Fig. 2  The XRD patterns of (a) the as-deposited hydrogenated under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide and (b) the microwave annealed sample (at a heating power of 600 W for one min). (c and d) 2D AFM 5 × 5 μm topographies of the same samples. 
However, the structural transformation of MoOx after MW-annealing was not followed by changes in chemical composition. In order to investigate the influence of MW-heating on the surface chemical composition of the MoOx sample, XPS spectra were recorded on the as-deposited and the MW-annealed samples, shown in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. It is observed that the as-deposited film, apart from molybdenum ions with a valence of 6+51,52 also contain a small contribution of Mo5+ ions as expected from previous measurements,22 which justifies the use of the term under-stoichiometric and of the formula MoOx (x < 3) to describe the chemical composition of our samples. After MW-annealing, the Mo 3d peak becomes narrower and the doublet is more resolved which imply an improvement in film crystallinity. However, according to the XPS results the chemical composition of the samples is similar to that after MW-annealing which is in accordance with our argument that annealing only causes removal of water molecules while the rest of the oxide's lattice remain nearly unaffected. As a result the absorption and transmittance spectra of those films were identical (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI,† respectively). The substantial structural transformation/crystallization of MoOx after the MW-annealing induced dehydration is illustrated in Fig. 3c and can be explained as follows: molybdenum trioxide exhibits a two-dimensional structure composed of double-layers formed by MoO6 octahedra, which are connected between them by van der Waals forces. The crystal structure of the hydrate material is built up of slightly deformed layers of strongly distorted octahedra MoO5(H2O) sharing corners. These layers are stacked above each other with layers of crystallization water in-between (interlayer water molecules represented as filled circles in Fig. 3c) while they are also connected by hydrogen bonds with water molecules coordinated to an oxygen anion (open circles) of the MoO5 unit. This structure with its two kinds of differently bound water molecules indicates the formation of an amorphous material consisting of particles with small size due to the increase of the distance between subsequent double-layers. With MW-annealing the interlayer water molecules are first removed followed also by the removal of coordinated water molecules having as a net result that the distance between double-layers decreases favoring the formation of a crystalline material, as depicted in Fig. 3c. Note that the above sequence in the removal of water molecules was not concluded by our data but was proposed in accordance with the literature.43 In this way a layered film microstructure develops composed of large, layered crystallites as seen in AFM topographies.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Mo 3d XPS peaks of the as-deposited and MW-annealed MoOx samples, respectively. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystalline structure transformation of the as-deposited molybdenum oxide by the removal of interlayer (filled circles) and coordinated (empty circles) water molecules. 
2.2 MW-annealed MoOx as hole transport layers in organic solar cells
Having established that MW-annealing induces dehydration and subsequent crystallization of MoOx films we then investigated the influence of such structural transformation on the performance of an OSC device. The device structure was FTO/PEDOT-PSS (40 nm) or MoOx/MW-MoOx (20 nm)/P3HT:PC71BM (100 nm)/Al and is shown in Fig. 4a, where the structures of the organic semiconductors under study are also presented. The corresponding energy diagram of the FTO/MoOx/P3HT interfaces is shown in Fig. 4b. The energy levels of the materials used were estimated in our previous work.40 As it can be seen, an interfacial dipole which favors hole extraction via gap states is formed at the FTO/MoOx interface; the magnitude of this dipole is higher in the case of MW-annealed MoOx due to the recovery of its high work function as previously shown,40 possibly arising from the desorption of water molecules demonstrated herein. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OPV devices under air-mass 1.5 simulated irradiation using either microwave annealed or not annealed molybdenum oxides or PEDOT-PSS as the HTLs are presented in Fig. 4c. An OSC based on the PEDOT:PSS layer is used for comparison purposes. The J–V characteristic curves recorded in the dark are also shown as the inset in Fig. 4c, while Table 1 summarizes the device operational characteristics. The device with the PEDOT-PSS layer exhibits the lowest PCE of 2.9% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.72 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.62 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.53 whereas the MoOx based device exhibits a PCE of 4.0%, with a Jsc of 10.86 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.66 V and a FF of 0.56. A clear improvement of Jsc, FF and PCE is observed, when the molybdenum oxide interlayer is subjected to microwave annealing at a heating power of 600 W for one minute prior to the P3HT:PC71BM blend deposition. The selection of 600 W was made since it delivered the best device performance, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). In particular, the MW-MoOx (600 W) based device exhibited a high PCE of 5.0% (Jsc = 12.72 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.65 V and FF = 0.61), representing a 25% improvement in comparison with the device containing the as-deposited MoOx, which was already found to perform quite efficiently. In addition, a significant decrease of the series resistance, Rs, and the leakage current (inset of Fig. 4c) and a substantial increase of the shunt resistance Rsh (Table 1) of the microwave annealed molybdenum oxide based device are observed, which indicate an improved anode contact compared with the devices using PEDOT:PSS and MoOx leading to the enhancement of FF and Jsc. Next, to shed light on the mechanisms responsible for the enhanced device performance when using the MW-annealed metal oxides external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements of the corresponding devices were taken and are shown in Fig. 4d. The EQE curves follow the same trend as the performances of the different HTLs using the devices revealing an enhanced charge generation efficiency when using the MW-annealed MoOx. In particular, the highest EQE values were observed in the MW-MoOx based device (maximum EQE ≈ 77%), suggesting that the photon-to-electron conversion process is quite efficient in this case. The reference device with MoOx exhibits a lower EQE value (maximum ≈ 67%) although the shapes of the EQE curves of different devices are quite similar, also resembling those of the corresponding absorption spectra of the P3HT:PC71BM films deposited on FTO substrates (Fig. S4, ESI†). They are composed of three vibronic absorption shoulders at 512, 555 and 600 nm, which can be ascribed to the absorption of P3HT.53 The EQE of the PEDOT-PSS based device was even lower (about 60%) while it also presented a different shape when compared to the other devices. The above results indicate that the increased Jsc in the device with the MW-annealed interlayer may originate from enhanced charge generation or from reduced recombination, or a combination of both. Note that, by integrating the product of the incident photon flux density with the EQE values over the 350 to 750 nm wavelength regime the predicted short-circuit photocurrents, JEQEsc, achieved by the cells can be calculated. These values are 9.96, 11.51 and 13.52 mA cm−2 for the devices with the PEDOT-PSS, MoOx and MW-MoOx HTLs, respectively. From Table 1 it becomes evident that the measured Jsc values of the devices with the PEDOT-PSS, MoOx and MW-MoOx layers represent 87.6%, 94.4% and 94.1% of JEQEsc as estimated by EQE measurements. The close proximity of the Jsc and JEQEsc in the devices with the MoOx layers is an indication for negligible bimolecular recombination in these devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Device architecture of the OPVs based on as-deposited or microwave annealed molybdenum oxide as hole transport layers. The molecular structures of the organic semiconductors used are also shown. (b) Energy level alignment at the FTO (anode)/molybdenum oxide/P3HT interface. The energy levels of as-deposited and microwave annealed Mo oxides were taken from ref. 40. (c) J–V characteristics under AM 1.5 solar illumination of the devices presented in (a) using different Mo oxide layers. Comparison with the PEDOT:PSS-based device. The dark J–V measurements are shown as the inset. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements taken in the same devices. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic properties of organic solar cell devices with the architecture FTO/PEDOT:PSS or Mo oxide/P3HT:PC71BM/Al (mean values and standard deviations were extracted from a batch of 36 devices)




HEL

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)




PEDOT:PSS
−8.72 (±0.27)
0.62 (±0.01)
0.53 (±0.02)
2.9 (±0.20)
15.1
225


MoOx
−10.86 (±0.22)
0.66 (±0.01)
0.56 (±0.02)
4.0 (±0.20)
9.7
805


MW-MoOx
−12.72 (±0.20)
0.65 (±0.01)
0.61 (±0.02)
5.0 (±0.20)
6.1
1300




Apart from the enhanced efficiencies the better quality of the anode contact of the device using the MW-annealed MoOx also resulted in its superior lifetime (environmental stability) as compared with the reference ones with the as-deposited and, especially, with the PEDOT-PSS layers. In Fig. 5a–d the variation of PCE, Voc, Jsc, and FF of the above devices using different anode interlayers is presented as a function of storage time under ambient conditions. A fast drop in operational characteristics of the reference device with the PEDOT-PSS layer is observed, while the device with the as-deposited MoOx interlayer exhibits better stability, e.g. maintaining 75% of its original PCE value after storage in air for 600 hours. The device with MW-annealed MoOx, however, exhibits superior environmental stability since it maintains more than 95% of its original values for the same timescale. Regarding the origin of this enhancement in the device lifetime when using the MW-annealed MoOx it can be attributed to the desorption of water molecules from the oxide lattice, which was kept de-hydrated for several months as we verified by measuring FTIR spectra for a long period of time, and the overall better quality of the anode contact, as discussed above. Since one of the most challenging issues for organic solar cells is their limited lifetime these results indicate that MW-annealing of MoOx is an effective method for improving the operational stability of OSC devices.
 Fig. 5  Lifetime (stability) measurements: variation with time of (a) PCE, (b) Voc, (c) Jsc and (d) FF for the devices shown in Fig. 4a without any encapsulation (stored in N2 between measurements). 
To get a deeper insight into the influence of the MW-annealing of the MoOx interlayer on the device performance, photocurrent density versus effective voltage (Jph–Veff) characteristics are investigated for the devices with different anode interlayers under constant incident light intensity (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Jph is equal to JL–JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. In addition, Veff is equal to Vo–Vappl, where Vo is the voltage at Jph = 0 and Vappl is the applied voltage.54,55 A plot of Jphvs. Veff in a wide reverse-bias range is presented in Fig. 6a. Notably, Jph is always higher and reaches saturation at a smaller reverse voltage for the device with MW-MoOx in comparison with the device with the as-deposited oxide and, especially, with the PEDOT-PSS interlayer. The above suggests that in the former device the photogenerated carriers are dissociated into free carriers even at low reverse voltages and these carriers are collected by the electrodes with low recombination losses. This result indicates that the device with the MW-annealed interlayer has higher exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (a) Maximum carrier generation rate vs. the effective voltage of OPVs using P3HT:PC71BM as the photoactive layer and either PEDOT-PSS or Mo oxides as hole transport layers and (b) internal quantum efficiency (IQE) measurements of the same devices. (c) Mott–Schottky plots derived from C–V measurements taken in P3HT:PC71BM-based devices using PEDOT-PSS and different Mo oxide hole extraction layers. (d) J–V curves in double-logarithmic scale obtained in hole-only devices measured in the dark. 
Next, in order to further assess if the MW-annealed MoOx layer results in superior charge separation and reduced recombination losses in our devices we measured the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of each device, which is the ratio of the number of charge carriers extracted from the cell to the number of photons absorbed in the active layer. Because IQE measurements normalize the current generation efficiency using the light absorption efficiency, they separate electronic properties from optical properties and provide useful information about the electrical properties of cells that external quantum efficiency measurements alone cannot. The magnitude of the IQE is inversely related to the amount of recombination that is occurring in the cell, while the spectral shape of the curve can provide information about the efficiency of harvesting excitons in the cell or spatial dependence of charge recombination.56 IQE curves, which are presented in Fig. 6b, were derived using the EQE measurements (Fig. 4d) as well as the reflection spectra recorded for the complete devices (not shown). We used IQE measurements as a tool to investigate exciton harvesting efficiencies in our P3HT:PC71BM bulk heterojunction solar cells and found that they are considerably enhanced in the devices with the MoOx HTLs, especially in those using the MW-MoOx layer, where the exciton harvesting efficiency reaches a high value of 95% (followed by 84% in the device with the as-deposited MoOx and 73% in the reference device with PEDOT-PSS). The above results strengthen our argument of reduced recombination losses in the MoOx modified devices and, in particular, in the devices with the MW-oxide. In addition, we observe a blue shift of the IQE curves of the devices using the Mo oxide layers, which is an indication for efficient harvesting of excitons even in the fullerene phase.57
In addition, a higher built-in voltage (Vbi) was calculated for this device by using the capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics (in dark). In Fig. 6c the Mott–Schottky characteristics of the devices as derived from their C–V measurements are shown, where C−2 = (2/qεN)(Vbi − V), ε ≈ εo is the permittivity of the blend, q is the elementary charge and N being the doping concentration.58 The built-in voltage (Vbi) is defined by the intersection of the C−2 curve and the horizontal bias axis. For the devices with PEDOT-PSS and the as-deposited MoOx we obtained a Vbi of 0.45 and 0.54 V, respectively, while the use of MW-annealed MoOx delivered a progressively increased Vbi up to 0.60 V. This result indicates that the use of the MW-MoOx interlayer induces significant strengthening of the device's built-in field which in general facilitates charge separation/extraction and could also explain the higher Jph obtained in the device with the MW-annealed interlayer.
Moreover, hole mobility measurements were performed based on the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model applied to the J–V curves taken from the device structure FTO/PEDOT-PSS or MoOx/MW-MoOx/P3HT:PC71BM/MoOx/Al. Using the Mott–Gurney law the SCL current density (JSCL) is given by eqn (1), where εo is the electric permittivity of free space, εr the relative dielectric constant of the active layer (ranging between 3 and 4), μ the charge carrier mobility, L the thickness of the device and Vin the voltage drop across the sample given by eqn (2).59 (1) Vin = V − Vbi − Vrs(2)where V is the applied voltage, Vbi is the built-in voltage and Vrs is the voltage drop due to the series resistance of the contacts. In the case of a field dependent mobility, as described by the Poole–Frenkel effect, the SCL current density is given by the modified Mott–Gurney equation, eqn (3): (3)where β is the electric field-activation factor of mobility, which accounts for the degree of disorder and particularly for the energetic level distribution of the carrier hopping sites in the material, i.e., a smaller β indicates a lower degree of energetic disorder.60 As it can be seen from Fig. 6d, the device with the MW-annealed MoOx layers exhibited enhanced hole current, while the calculated hole mobility in this device was 4.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 as compared with 2.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device with the as-deposited MoOx and 3.7 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device with the PEDOT-PSS layer. Thus, more balanced charge transport for the device with the MW-annealed interlayer is achieved. This may increase the FF by restricting the build-up of space charges and hence reducing charge recombination also resulting in enhanced Jsc. Note that we have also verified that the improvement in the Jsc of the device with the MW-annealed interlayer could not be an optical effect; we measured the real and imaginary part of the refractive indices, Fig. S6 and S7 (ESI†) and carried out simulations to calculate the distribution of the normalized optical intensity of incident light (with a wavelength of 530 nm where the maximum absorption of the photoactive blend occurs) within the device for different Mo oxide films (Fig. S8, ESI†). From the obtained data it can be clearly seen that optical effects are not very significant in our devices and could not be the origin of the enhanced performance when using the MW-annealed oxide.
2.3 The influence of MW-annealing of MoOx on the nanomorphology of the photoactive blend
We next investigated the influence of microwave annealing of molybdenum oxide on P3HT:PC71BM surface morphology. Fig. 7a and b show the close similarities of the P3HT:PC71BM surfaces, when the blend is deposited on PEDOT-PSS and as-grown molybdenum oxide, respectively, which are rather smooth and homogeneous with a very low root mean square (RMS) roughness of 1.3 nm. The topography of the P3HT:PC71BM film deposited on MW-MoOx is substantially altered and an increase in phase separation occurs indicating an increase of the mean size of the crystalline domains and also in the surface roughness (Fig. 7c). It is suggested that the microwave annealing of the molybdenum oxide film affects the nanomorphology of the P3HT:PC71BM blend films deposited on top of it resulting in the enhancement of the blend's crystallinity and thus better charge transport. Subsequently, the influence of microwave exposure of molybdenum oxides on the nanomorphology and structural ordering of P3HT:PC71BM blend films was investigated using XRD measurements. In particular, P3HT:PC71BM blend films were spin coated on MoOx and MW-MoOx from solution in chloroform under identical conditions and thermally treated at 130 °C for 10 minutes in order to remove solvent residuals and lead to a certain degree of orientation of the polymer chains. Fig. 7d shows the corresponding XRD spectra of P3HT:PC71BM films deposited on PEDOT-PSS, molybdenum oxide and microwave annealed molybdenum oxide. When P3HT:PC71BM is deposited on either PEDOT-PSS or MoOx weak diffraction peaks were observed at diffraction angles 2θ = 5.3° and 2θ = 10.4° corresponding to the primary (100) and the secondary (200) peaks, respectively, indicating a low degree of polymer-P3HT film crystallinity in both cases. After MW-annealing of the MoOx underlayer the degree of crystallinity of the P3HT film is enhanced. Apart from the diffraction peaks at 2θ = 5.3° and 2θ = 10.4°, another diffraction peak appeared at the angle of 2θ = 15.7° for the tertiary (300) peak, which is evidence of edge-on orientation,17 that is the orientation of the P3HT chains is perpendicular to the substrate. In addition, a diffraction peak corresponding to the angle of 2θ = 23.2° for the (010) peak is also observed, indicating that P3HT chains in the P3HT:PC71BM film form crystallites with the conjugated chains parallel to the substrate (face-on orientation).61 Moreover, the domain size of P3HT at the (100) reflection for the MW-MoOx sample estimated by applying Scherrer's formula61,62 significantly increases after microwave exposure from 11.05 nm for the as-deposited molybdenum oxide to 19.1 nm for MW-MoOx, which leads us to the conclusion that the deposition of the P3HT:PC71BM blend on top of MW-MoOx enhances the nanomorphology/crystallinity of the P3HT chains and this enhancement induces the improvement in both charge generation efficiency and hole transport towards the anode electrode. The observed changes in the nanomorphology of the photoactive blend could be the result of the differences in both the morphology and the degree of hydrophilicity of the interlayers. After MW-annealing the metal oxide's surface becomes more hydrophilic, as evidenced by contact angle measurements shown in Fig. S5 and Table S2 (ESI†). It was previously shown by our group that possible π–H interactions between the O–H terminated surface bonds of the metal oxide and the polar groups in the backbone of the π-conjugated polymer may act as nucleation sites for interfacial crystallization.37 This could be a possible explanation for the enhancement of the nanomorphology of the blend on top of MW-MoOx with the most hydrophilic surface. Because the orientation and crystallinity of the P3HT chains could influence the carrier mobility of active layers such an alteration in the nanomorphology of the photoactive blend on top of this oxide could thus explain the difference in the hole mobilities estimated from SCLC measurements. In addition, facilitated exciton dissociation and charge transfer are expected when increasing the crystallinity of the photoactive blend. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the active layer on top of different anode interlayers (Fig. 7e) revealed significant quenching of the PL intensity in the case of the MW-MoOx layer. On the basis of these results, we anticipate that MW-annealing of the MoOx hole transport layer is an effective and easy way to remove undesired water molecules and significantly enhance the OSC device performance, not only through recovering the high WF of the oxide as demonstrated previously, but also by increasing the charge generation efficiency and exciton dissociation, balancing charge carrier mobilities and reducing recombination losses, as shown here. Taking into account our experimental results we anticipate that the ability to control the water content and structural properties via a short microwave annealing not only in MoOx but also in a wide range of metal oxides deposited in either a hydrogen containing environment or from water/alcoholic solutions will spur progress in the development of organic optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 7  2D AFM (5 × 5 μm) topographies of P3HT:PC71BM films spin-coated on (a) PEDOT-PSS, (b) as-deposited Mo oxide, and (c) Mo oxides subjected to microwave annealing after deposition. (d) XRD patterns and (e) steady-state photoluminescence of P3HT:PC71BM films spin-coated on PEDOT-PSS and different Mo oxide substrates. 
3. Conclusions
In conclusion, a short microwave annealing treatment in air was applied to an under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide film used as a hole transport layer in OSCs, and improved performance was achieved in terms of both power conversion efficiency and lifetime stability. The enhanced PCEs are due to the improvement of Jsc and FF, mainly due to the reduced series resistance and increased shunt resistance together with the increased work function of the anode electrode. In addition, the device lifetime is also significantly improved caused by the removal of adsorbed water molecules from the oxide's lattice. Enhanced charge generation efficiency, reduced recombination losses, and balanced carrier mobilities in the device with the MW-annealed oxide were also supported by our experimental data. Microwave annealing of the oxide was also beneficial to the crystallinity/morphology of the photoactive blend. These findings show that microwave annealing treatment can be used as a cost-effective technique to improve the properties of metal oxide transport layers, opening a novel and efficient route for the development of high performance OSC devices.
4. Experimental section
4.1 Metal oxide preparation
Under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide (MoOx) films were deposited using a home-made deposition system equipped with a Mo filament, as previously described.63 The samples were positioned in a stainless steel reactor 2 cm below the Mo filament which was heated by a (AC) current by using two Cu leads. The substrates were maintained at room temperature. The deposition environment contained hydrogen; the base pressure used was 80 mTorr set by the controlled flow of forming gas (FG, a mixture of 90% N2–10% H2) through the reactor. After the metal oxide deposition some of the samples were subjected to microwave irradiation using a microwave oven which generates RF radiation at a nominal frequency of 2.45 GHz and a heating power level of typically 100–900 W. The heating power was optimized at 600 W (in order to obtain better device performance) while the time of heating was one minute.
4.2 Device fabrication
Organic solar cells used in this work were fabricated on FTO anode coated glass substrates (2 × 2 cm) with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1. Substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with a standard regimen, acetone and isopropanol. Then a MoOx layer was deposited and subjected or not to MW-annealing for 1 min. In some devices a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT-PSS) layer was spin coated to serve as a hole extraction layer for comparison reasons. The photoactive layer of the devices was a P3HT:PC71BM blend (1:0.8 by volume) which was spin coated onto FTO/hole extraction layer substrates from a 10 mg mL−1 chloroform solution to form a 100 nm thick film. After deposition the film was annealed at 130 °C for 10 minutes on a hot plate. The devices were completed by depositing a 150 nm thick aluminum cathode layer using thermal evaporation. The active area of the fabricated devices was 12.56 mm2.
4.3 Measurements and instrumentation
FTIR measurements were made using a Bruker spectrometer and optical transmission spectroscopy measurements were made using a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 9 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. Micro-Raman measurements were performed on a Renishaw inVia spectrometer for all MoOx on silicon films before and after microwave treatment. Excitation was done using the 785 nm line of a diode laser and the beam was focused on a 1.1 μm spot with a ×100 lens. Initially, the result of varying the laser power density on the films was examined. A threshold of 0.5 mW μm−2 was identified in order to avoid local heating which influences the Raman spectra and a five times less power density (0.1 mW μm−2) was applied in all recorded spectra thereafter, for safety reasons. The Raman signal was filtered for the Rayleigh scattering with a dielectric rejection filter at 30 cm−1 and analyzed using a 1200 mm−1 diffraction grating. The crystallinity of MoOx samples was characterized by XRD measurements using a PHILLIPS diffractometer using CuKα with a graphite monochromator. The identification and indexing of the various peaks of patterns was made by using the PCPDFWIN version 1.31 database. The surface morphology and structure were investigated using an NT-MDT atomic force microscope (AFM) operated in tapping mode. Steady state photoluminescence (PL) was carried out using as excitation source an Ar+-ion laser operating at 457.9 nm. The signal was analysed using a Jobin-Yvon spex HR-320 spectrometer and detected by a photomultiplier tube. The signal was corrected for the system response. Absorption and transmittance measurements were taken using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 40 UV/Vis spectrophotometer. For the XPS measurements unmonochromatized Mg Kα line at 1253.6 eV (12 keV with 15 mA anode current) and an analyser (Leybold EA-11) pass energy of 100 eV, giving a full width at half maximum, FWHM, of 1.3 eV for the Au 4f7/2 peak, were used. The analysed area was approximately a 2 × 5 mm2 rectangle positioned near the geometric centre of each sample. Mott–Schottky experiments were carried out under DC potential polarization with the superposition of an AC signal at a constant frequency of 100 H. Current density–voltage characteristics of the fabricated organic solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source measure unit. For Voc and photocurrent measurements, devices were illuminated with a xenon lamp and an AM 1.5G filter to simulate solar light illumination conditions with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. External quantum efficiencies (EQEs) were measured on an Autolab PGSTAT-30 potentiostat, using a 300 W Xe lamp in combination with an Oriel 1/8 monochromator for dispersing the light in an area of 0.5 cm2. To accurately define the active area of all devices, we used aperture masks during the measurements with an area equal to those of the Al contacts (12.56 mm2).
Acknowledgements
This work was performed in the framework of the “YDISE” project within GSRT's KRIPIS action, funded by Greece and the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union under NSRF 2007–2013 and the Regional Operational Program of Attica.
References
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xie, W. C. H. Choy, C. Wang, X. Li, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai, A. Saha, C. Vijila, R. Jose, Z. Jie and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6831 RSC .
J.-H. Chang, K.-M. Chiang, H.-W. Kang, W.-J. Chi, J.-H. Chang, C.-I. Wu and H.-W. Lin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4572 RSC .
Y.-H. Chen, C.-W. Chen, Z.-Y. Huang, K.-T. Wong, L.-Y. Lin, F. Lin and H.-W. Lin, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stubhan, T. Ameri, M. Salinas, J. Krantz, F. Machui, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 253308 CrossRef .
V. Schrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
Z. Wenjin, B. Ran, Z. Hongmei and H. Wei, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 224502 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. Ruan, G. Xie, X. Kong, L. Shen, F. Meng, C. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043311 CrossRef .
S. Han, W. S. Shin, M. Seo, D. Gupta, S.-J. Moon and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 791 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, L. Li, C. Cui, Y. Ding, Q. Xu, S. Li, D. Qian and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18626 CAS .
I. Hancox, L. A. Rochford, D. Clare, P. Sullivan and T. S. Jones, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 013304 CrossRef .
C. Gong, H. B. Yang, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 7 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meyer, K. Zilberberg, T. Riedl and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 033710 CrossRef .
M. T. Greiner, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang, Z.-B. Wang, J. Qiu and Z.-H. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Jasieniak, J. Seifter, J. Jo, T. Mates and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2594 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. M. Douvas, D. G. Georgiadou, L. C. Palilis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, A. Soultati, I. Kostis, G. Papadimitropoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Sun, W.-H. Tseng, S. Lan, S.-H. Lin, P.-C. Yang, C.-I. Wu and C. F. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 178 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ryu and J. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3015 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, L. C. Palilis, D. G. Georgiadou, A. M. Douvas, P. Argitis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, G. Papadimitropoulos, I. Kostis, N. A. Stathopoulos and D. Davazoglou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1489 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ham, S. Kim, G. H. Jung, W. J. Dong and J.-L. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3076 CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. Soultati, D. G. Georgiadou, T. Stergiopoulos, L. C. Palilis, S. Kennou, N. A. Stathopoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1738 CAS .
X. Li, W. C. H. Choy, F. Xie, S. Zhang and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6614 CAS .
B. J. Tremolet de Villers, R. C. I. MacKenzie, J. J. Jasieniak, N. D. Treat and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301290,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201301290 .
S. R. Hammond, J. Meyer, N. E. Widjonarko, P. F. Ndione, A. K. Siqdel, A. Garcia, A. Miedaner, M. T. Lloyd, A. Kahn, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3249 RSC .
Y. Sun, C. J. Takacs, S. R. Cowan, J. H. Seo, X. Gong, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Murase and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Soultati, A. M. Douvas, D. G. Georgiadou, L. C. Palilis, T. Bein, J. M. Feckl, S. Gardelis, M. Fakis, S. Kennou, P. Falaras, T. Stergiopoulos, N. A. Stathopoulos, D. Davazoglou, P. Argitis and M. Vasilopoulou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300896,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300896 .
K. Zilberberg, H. Gharbi, A. Behrendt, S. Trost and T. Riedl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1164 CAS .
J. H. Youn, S. J. Baek, H. P. Kim, D. H. Nam, Y. Lee, J. G. Lee and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3250 RSC .
M. Vasilopoulou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13726 RSC .
K. T. Butler, R. Crespo-Otero, J. Buckeridge, D. O. Scanlon, E. Bovill, D. Lidzey and A. Walsh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 231605 CrossRef .
E. S. R. Bovill, J. Griffin, T. Wang, J. W. Kingsley, H. Yi, A. Iraqi, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 183303 CrossRef .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. Soultati, P. Argitis, T. Stergiopoulos and D. Davazoglou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, N. Zhou, S. J. Lou, J. Smith, D. B. Tice, J. W. Hennek, R. P. Ortiz, J. T. L. Navarrete, S. Li, J. Strzalka, L. X. Chen, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 825 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Yiu, P. M. Beaujuge, O. P. Lee, C. H. Woo, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 2180 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kuzmin and J. Purans, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2000, 12, 1959 CrossRef CAS .
L. Seguin, M. Figlarz, R. Cavagnat and J.-C. Lassègues, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1995, 51, 1323 CrossRef .
M. A. Py and K. Maschke, Physica B+C, 1981, 105, 370 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eda, J. Solid State Chem., 1991, 95, 64 CrossRef CAS .
R. Murugan, A. Ghule, C. Bhongale and H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2157 RSC .
K. Ajito, L. A. Nagahara, D. A. Tryk, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16383 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Silveira, L. L. Vieira, J. M. Filho, A. J. C. Sampaio, O. L. Alves and A. G. Souza Filho, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43, 1407 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Camacho-López, L. Escobar-Alarcón, M. Picquart, R. Arroyo, G. Córdoba and E. Haro-Poniatowski, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 480 CrossRef .
M. Greiner, L. Chai, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang and Z.-H. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4557 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gruenert, A. Y. Stakheev, R. Feldhaus, K. Anders, E. S. Shpiro and K. M. Minachev, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, Y. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 126602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke, S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tiwana, P. Docampo, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9566 CAS .

          N. F. Mott and R. W. Gurney, Electronic Processes in Ionic Crystals, Oxford University Press, London,  1940 Search PubMed .
L. C. Palilis, M. Uchida and Z. H. Kafafi, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2004, 10, 79 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hiszpanski and Y.-L. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 592 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao, J. Huanga and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3126 RSC .
I. Kostis, N. Vourdas, G. Papadimitropoulos, A. Douvas, M. Vasilopoulou, N. Boukos and D. Davazoglou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18013 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional Fig. S1–S8 and Tables S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc02259fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  FTIR transmittance spectra of (a) the as-deposited and (b) the microwave annealed sample. (c and d) Raman spectra of the same samples.	 

 	Fig. 2  The XRD patterns of (a) the as-deposited hydrogenated under-stoichiometric molybdenum oxide and (b) the microwave annealed sample (at a heating power of 600 W for one min). (c and d) 2D AFM 5 × 5 μm topographies of the same samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Mo 3d XPS peaks of the as-deposited and MW-annealed MoOx samples, respectively. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystalline structure transformation of the as-deposited molybdenum oxide by the removal of interlayer (filled circles) and coordinated (empty circles) water molecules.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Device architecture of the OPVs based on as-deposited or microwave annealed molybdenum oxide as hole transport layers. The molecular structures of the organic semiconductors used are also shown. (b) Energy level alignment at the FTO (anode)/molybdenum oxide/P3HT interface. The energy levels of as-deposited and microwave annealed Mo oxides were taken from ref. 40. (c) J–V characteristics under AM 1.5 solar illumination of the devices presented in (a) using different Mo oxide layers. Comparison with the PEDOT:PSS-based device. The dark J–V measurements are shown as the inset. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements taken in the same devices.	 

PEDOT:PSS	−8.72 (±0.27)	0.62 (±0.01)	0.53 (±0.02)	2.9 (±0.20)	15.1	225
MoOx	−10.86 (±0.22)	0.66 (±0.01)	0.56 (±0.02)	4.0 (±0.20)	9.7	805
MW-MoOx	−12.72 (±0.20)	0.65 (±0.01)	0.61 (±0.02)	5.0 (±0.20)	6.1	1300

 	Fig. 5  Lifetime (stability) measurements: variation with time of (a) PCE, (b) Voc, (c) Jsc and (d) FF for the devices shown in Fig. 4a without any encapsulation (stored in N2 between measurements).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Maximum carrier generation rate vs. the effective voltage of OPVs using P3HT:PC71BM as the photoactive layer and either PEDOT-PSS or Mo oxides as hole transport layers and (b) internal quantum efficiency (IQE) measurements of the same devices. (c) Mott–Schottky plots derived from C–V measurements taken in P3HT:PC71BM-based devices using PEDOT-PSS and different Mo oxide hole extraction layers. (d) J–V curves in double-logarithmic scale obtained in hole-only devices measured in the dark.	 
	(1)
Vin = V − Vbi − Vrs	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  2D AFM (5 × 5 μm) topographies of P3HT:PC71BM films spin-coated on (a) PEDOT-PSS, (b) as-deposited Mo oxide, and (c) Mo oxides subjected to microwave annealing after deposition. (d) XRD patterns and (e) steady-state photoluminescence of P3HT:PC71BM films spin-coated on PEDOT-PSS and different Mo oxide substrates.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional Fig. S1–S8 and Tables S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc02259f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
