Hierarchical supramolecules and organization using boronic acid building blocks   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC07712A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC07712A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2005-2020Hierarchical supramolecules and organization using boronic acid building blocks†

        
          
            Yuji 
            Kubo
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Ryuhei 
            Nishiyabu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tony D. 
            James
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Urban Environmental Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minami-ohsawa, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan. E-mail: yujik@tmu.ac.jp;  Fax: +81 42-677-3134;   Tel: +81 42-677-3134
bResearch Center for Gold Chemistry, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Japan
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK
Received 
      30th September 2014
    , Accepted 24th November 2014First published on 24th November 2014AbstractCurrent progress on hierarchical supramolecules using boronic acids has been highlighted in this feature article. Boronic acids can participate in “click reactions” with diols and their congeners with dynamic covalent functionality. By comprehensively exploring versatile sequential boronate esterification linkages between plural boronic acid-appended molecules and multiple hydroxyl counterparts, not only versatile supramolecular polymers but also structurally well-defined network nanostructures have been developed. In addition orthogonal interactions such as dative bonds of the boron center with Lewis bases have led to the formation of hierarchical nano/microstructures. Boronate systems have the potential to be used as materials for smart gels, chemosensors, active architectures for electronics, heterogeneous catalysts, chemical-stimulus responsive systems for drug delivery, etc. Here, we fully discuss the feasibility of the structure-directing ability of boronic acids from the standpoint of the generation of new smart materials.
Yuji Kubo
Yuji Kubo is a Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University. After a postdoctoral stay (1990–1991) with Prof. J. L. Sessler at the University of Texas at Austin, since 1992, he first joined Saitama University as an Associate Professor, moving to Department of Chemistry at Tokyo Metropolitan University as a Professor in 2008. He was also a researcher of PRESTO under Japan Science Technology Agency (1997–2000) and has also been a researcher at Research Center for Gold Chemistry of Tokyo Metropolitan University Since 2014. His research interests focus on molecular systems based on self-organization and materials for applications in organic electronics.
Ryuhei Nishiyabu
Ryuhei Nishiyabu is an Assistant Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University. He received his BS and then PhD in 2003 from Doshisha University under the direction of Professor Koji Kano. He worked with Professor Pavel Anzenbacher Jr. at Bowling Green State University as a postdoctoral fellow. Then he worked with Professor Nobuo Kimizuka at Kyushu University as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). He is now an Assistant Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University, working with Professor Yuji Kubo. His research interests are the design and synthesis of supramolecular materials.
Tony D. James
Tony D. James is a Professor at the University of Bath. He obtained his BSC from UEA in 1986, PhD in 1991 from the University of Victoria and worked as a PDRF in Japan from 1991–1995 with Seiji Shinkai. From 1995 to 2000 he was a Royal Society Research Fellow at the School of Chemistry at the University of Birmingham, moving to the Department of Chemistry at the University of Bath in September 2000. He has been a visiting professor at Tsukuba, Osaka and Kyushu Universities and is a guest Professor at East China University of Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Shandong Normal University and Nanjing University and is a Hai-Tian (Sea-Sky) Scholar at Dalian University of Technology. His research interests include many aspects of supramolecular chemistry, including molecular recognition, molecular self-assembly and sensor design. Within the area of molecular recognition his research has a particular focus on boronic acid based receptors for the fluorescence sensing of saccharides.
1. Introduction
Boron is a rare metal, while still being extremely important as a ubiquitous element in our lives. This originates from its electron structure as well as its position in the periodic table, being adjacent to carbon. For instance, electrophilic and trigonal planar structures of boron-containing molecules are isoelectronic analogues of carbocations.1 Their high reactivities allow additional bond formation to provide anionic tetrahedral compounds. In nature, a number of boron-containing molecules where boron covalently binds to oxygen atoms exist; boronic acids or borates participate in reactions with not only alcohols and phenols but also diols, polyols, and polysaccharides. Thus, prebiotic chemists consider that boron may have provided an essential contribution to the pre-RNA world because borate minerals2 can associate to stabilize ribose and form boronate ester-based nucleotides.3 The role of boron as a prebiotic element in the building process of the “RNA-world” inspires supramolecular chemists to build hierarchical artificial systems.
There are a myriad of boron-containing molecules, being roughly classified as either oxygen-linked boron in the form of boric acids or organoboron molecules which contain B–C covalent bonds. In the former case, boric acids and borate are similar to the living systems.4 Phenylboronic acid and its derivatives are of remarkable interest, being known as Lewis acids, the former with a pKa of 8.7.5 These compounds have a pH-dependent binding capability with 1,2-cis or 1,3-diols to form the corresponding cyclic esters. These simple yet versatile reaction modes have served as detection tools for biologically-related species such as saccharides under physiological conditions.6 Whereas organoboron molecules have been widely prepared and used in organic chemistry because of their electronic and structural properties. One of most exciting utilities is that they participate in transmetalation reactions with organopalladium compounds, a feature exemplified in the Suzuki reaction (2010 Nobel Prize in Chemistry).7 Another fascinating feature is based on their connection with π-conjugated systems;8 the vacant p-orbital of boron enables effective p–π* conjugation to provide unique electronic and optical properties. Thus, three coordinate boryl substituents can behave as π-electron acceptors. Subsequent “boryl functionalized chromophores” have been promising functional materials in the field of nonlinear optics, two-photon absorption, emissive systems, electronic devices, and chemosensors.9
Taken together, boron chemistry has spanned very wide research areas including not only organic chemistry but also materials and medical science and their applications. Our attention in this feature article is focused on the versatile reactivity of boronic acids which can serve as the connection as well as stabilisation tools for molecular organization, as inferred from the role of boron in the evaluation of the living world. Sophisticated combinations of boronate-triggered molecular organisation and boron's electronic and structural properties should lead to a more meaningful approach in the quest for new materials.
2. Scope of the article
The key strategy of boron-containing hierarchical systems involves the utilisation of the interaction of boronic acids with diols, which can be regarded as a reversible and controllable “click reaction”.10 The reversible and spontaneous reaction modes have been widely used in sensing and separation of biologically-related species under physiological conditions (vide supra). Although this topic is not covered in this article, their biocompatible features are applicable to diagnostic and proteomics applications.11 Outside of the analytical and biological fields, boronic acids have been recognized as powerful molecules in self-assembly.12 Due to recent demand for preparation of nano- and micro-architectures that can be hierarchically built up of organic molecules, namely the “bottom-up approach”,13 significant progress has been made in the synthesis and characterization of the related boronate systems where the synergistic outcomes (functionality) are vastly superior to those provided by single molecules. With this trend in mind, our feature article focuses on the pivotal engineering of boronic acid-inspired hierarchical systems, as depicted in Fig. 1, that can contribute to various fields such as electronics, sensing, catalysis, and drug delivery. These reversible reaction systems with “error-checking” characteristics allow easy thermodynamic formation of ordered nanostructures, bringing about stable covalently bound molecular networks.
 Fig. 1  Schematic overview of hierarchical systems using boronic acid building blocks. 
3. Boronic acids with versatile connection modes
Since the structure of the boronate anion was elucidated by Edwards and Lorand in 1959,14 the pH-dependent binding modes of boronic acids with diol compounds involving saccharides have been well-established in aqueous solution. In this context, an excellent review has been published wherein the general principles of interactions between boronic acids and sugars in aqueous media are fully discussed.15 Arylboronic acid derivatives are typically synthesized by the following methods; (1) the use of Grignard or lithium reagents followed by organoborates; (2) palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling between aryl halides or aryl triflates and tetraalkoxydiboron or dialkoxyhydroborane.16 In the latter case, the resultant organoboronate esters can be converted to the corresponding boronic acids by reaction with potassium hydrogen fluoride and then treatment with either an inorganic base or trimethylsilyl chloride and water.17 As for molecular organization, our attention has focused on the dynamic covalent functionality of boronic acids which not only participate in dehydration reactions with diols but also have Lewis acidity. In this context, the stability of bortonate ester linkages is an important matter. Roy et al. investigated structural effects on the relative rates of reaction of an achiral cyclic phenylboronic ester.18 Based on this study, six membered boronic esters are found to be more thermodynamically stable than their corresponding five-membered analogs. Indeed, boronate esterification with pentaerythritol is not hindered by the presence of water as a co-solvent.19 Such a property has motivated supramolecular chemists to develop boron-based hierarchical materials. In addition, a Lewis base such as pyridine can tune the reactivity through B–N dative bond formation, with an accompanying switch in geometry from a trigonal planar complex to tetrahedral boronate. The optimized structure has been investigated by Anslyn et al. using a boronate ester obtained from o-(pyrrolidinylmethyl)phenylboronic acid and catechol.20 Computer modelling of the boronate ester indicates a B–N bond length of 1.8 Å and equivalent angle of 107°. Furthermore, the B–O bond length was calculated to be 1.46 Å, being longer than that of the free acid (1.38 Å). B–N dative bond formation weakens back-donation from the oxygen atom. Note that the reactivity is not limited to that with diols or Lewis bases. Self-condensation of boronic acids leads to the formation of boroxines.21 The condensation reactions of boronic acids with silane diols or aromatic 1,2-diamines give a borasiloxane link22 or 1,3,2-benzodiazaborole,23 respectively. In the latter case, ball-milling in the solid state is sometimes beneficial to complete the reaction quantitatively. In the past decade, the chemistry of 1,3,2-diazaborole has been developed progressively.24 Some of these three-coordinate boron compounds have strong luminescence properties.25 It has also been confirmed that 1,3,2-diazaborole behaves as a π-donor substituent.26 Indeed, the introduction of an electron accepting group in the borylated benzene unit induces an emission in the visible region.27 In another intriguing example, Severin et al. have reported the reversible formation of borophosphonate by the condensation reaction of boronic acid with tert-butyl-phosphonate.28 In this manner, the versatile reaction modes of boronic acids have provided excellent connection tools for constructing pre-organised hierarchical architectures (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Boronate esterification and the related dehydrated compounds. 
4. Boronic acid-induced nano- and microarchitectures
4.1. Supramolecular polymers
Supramolecular polymers are composed of molecular units connected by reversible bonds.29 The presence of dynamic covalent bonds for “main chain” formation endows the polymers with smart properties such as chemical stimulus-responsiveness, degradability, shape-memory, self-healing, etc.30 Boronate-based systems have been recognized as one of the most promising approaches towards this end. Since they were first reported by S. Shinkai et al.,31 these related linear polymers have been widely developed.32 The current trend is to build hierarchical supramolecular polymers where multiple kinds of intermolecular interactions, both in the polymeric backbone and those oriented orthogonally, combine to form 3D aggregates.33 Using this approach, well-tailored boronic acid-based building blocks have been designed and synthesised. Höpfl et al. have investigated supramolecular systems prepared from the N-containing boronic acids 5-isoquinolineboronic acid (5-iqbaH2) and 4-pyridineboronic acid (4-pybaH2) and pentaerythritol.34 Single-crystal X-ray diffraction of these nanostructures revealed that both compounds induced molecular networks with the compositions {[5-iqba]2[C5H8]}·nEtOH and {[4-pyba]2-[C5H8]}·4nEtOH·H2O·toluene (Fig. 2). The former has a 2D layered structure while the latter system adopts a 3D network, meaning that N-containing boronates can serve as self-complementary tectons for the generation of 2D and 3D molecular networks through coordination of dative N–B bonds as secondary interactions. Their subsequent study found that replacing pentaerythritol with ethanol or simple diols led to the formation of one tetranuclear macrocyclic and four one-dimensional polymeric boronates.35
 Fig. 2  Structures of {[5-iqba]2[C5H8]}·nEtOH and {[4-pyba]2-[C5H8]}·4nEtOH·H2O·toluene repeating unit. 
Severin et al. have investigated supramolecular polymerization based on the combination of boronate esterification and N–B dative bond formation.36 Taking into account that the binding constants (Ka) between functional groups typically required to obtain polymers with significant molecular weights are equal to or more than 106 M−1, the Ka values of dioxaboles with pyridine were fully evaluated. As a result, the use of appropriate molecular components with both an electron withdrawing substituent on the dioxabole segment and an electron donating group has led to a significant improvement in the Ka values. Based on these findings, 4-(6-(methyl(pyridin-4-yl)amino)hexyl)benzene-1,2-diol (1) was synthesized (Fig. 3). Interestingly, when polymerisation was tested with different arylboronic acids (2), it was found that the degree of polymerisation was affected by the electronic and steric properties of the boronate esters. This study suggests that main-chain supramolecular polymers could be accessible through dative N–B bond interactions. This N–B binding motif has been applied to cross-linked supramolecular polymers.37
 Fig. 3  Aggregation of the heteroditopic boronate ester through dative B–N bond formation. 
As shown in Fig. 4, the condensation of benzene-1,4-diboronic acid with catechol gave 1,4-bis(benzodioxaborole)benzene, which aggregates with the N-donor tetradentate ligand, tetra(4-pyridylphenyl)ethylene through dative N–B bonds. Crystallographic analysis revealed that a 2D network polymer 3 was formed where all of the pyridyl N atoms of the tetradentate ligand were connected to the 1,4-bis(benzodioxaborole)benzene units through dative bonds. The individual layers of the network can be described as connections of large macrocyclic structures with ring sizes of 94 atoms. It represents a rare example of a crystalline network that is based on dative N–B bonds to boronate esters. Although tetra(4-pyridylphenyl)ethylene is known for aggregation-induced emission in the solid state (vide infra),38 crystalline 3 was found to be nonfluorescent when excited at 300 nm.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of dative B–N bond-induced 2D polymer 3. 
The well-tailored combination of reversible boronate esterification and N–B dative bond formation enables preparation of a chemical stimulus-triggered interconversion system between a macrocyclic boronate ester and boronate-based organo gels.39 The azulene-containing macrocycle can be spontaneously produced from diboronic acid and indacene-type bis(1,2-diol).40 As shown in Fig. 5, the addition of 1,3-diaminopropane into a turbid solution of guest-encapsulated boronate macrocycle (4) led to the formation of a boronate oligomer/polymer gel (5) cross-linked by the diamine where the guest (azulene) was released from the cyclic host. Interestingly, the released guest was recovered from the gel phase with 84% recovery when treated with acidic solution. By taking advantage of the dynamic covalent functionality of the boronate system, a new type of smart gel-based delivery system could be created.
 Fig. 5  (a) Formation of borate gel (5) from the guest-encapsulated macrocyclic boronate ester (4) along with release of the guest molecule into the gel. (b) Reconstruction of the macrocyclic boronate ester and recovery of the guest molecule from the gel. 
In materials science, conducting polymers with structurally well-defined metal centers have great promise for developing molecular sensors and catalysts.41 To create such hybrid materials, a metal-inserted cage complex as the monomer unit was synthesised by the metal-templated [3+2]-type condensation reaction of bithiophene-derived boronic acid with diphenylglyoxime.42 Electropolymerisation produces boron-containing conducting polymeric systems for the study of charge injection and transport properties (Fig. 6a). Polymer (6) has the capability to deliver electrons to its metal centers, making it suitable for exploration as a surface-bound electrocatalyst. In addition, boronic acids are effective compounds for the construction of multimetallic assemblies. In molecular electronics, such assemblies composed of bimetallic complexes are desired for the realisation of a quantum cellular automaton.43 Thus, 1′,1′′′-biferrocenediboronic acid (7) was synthesized as a useful organobimetallic building block,44 which forms 1D hydrogen-bonded networks (i.e., chains) with octaatomic rings composed of the neighbouring two molecules (Fig. 6b). An insight into the association of functional bimetallic complexes without additional metal–ligand coordination chemistry has thereby been obtained.
 Fig. 6  (a) Metal-containing boronate conducting polymers (6). (b) A 1D hydrogen network with 1′,1′′′-biferrocenediboronic acid (7). 
4.2. Boronate gels as smart materials
Polymeric hydrogels, with solid-like rheology, have been widely investigated in the field of materials science.45 Their biocompatibility makes them of potential use in the biomedical and pharmaceutical fields for drug delivery systems.46 Based on the synergistic effect of both functions of boronic acids and hydrogels, biomaterials have been proposed for glucose-sensing applications and self-controlled insulin release, etc. These aspects were nicely reviewed by Y. Guan and Y. Zhang.47 Herein, our attention is focused on poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) which serves as a functional gel matrix. It was reported a long time ago that mixing a PVA solution and a borax solution yielded a hydrogel, presently used in popular toys.48 The complexation reaction is shown in Fig. 7a.49
 Fig. 7  (a) PVA–borate complexation. (b) PVA cross-linking with DMAA–NAAPBA copolymer derivatives. 
In the search for new uses for PVA–borax materials, the related hydrogels with added organic liquids have been applied in art conservation.50 PVA is also known to be biocompatible and widely employed as a material for a variety of medical applications because of its excellent film forming and adhesive properties.51 Kitano et al. reported a polymer complex based on boronate–PVA interactions;52 this complex was designed as a glucose sensitive system directed towards the regulation of insulin release. The cross-linking effect of boronate-containing copolymers has been investigated using a N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMAA)–N-acryloyl-m-aminophenylboronic acid (NAAPBA) copolymer (Fig. 7b).53 The polymeric cross-linker enables gel formation at much lower concentrations of boron, due to the multiple interactions of the copolymer with PVA via boronate esterification. The PVA–copolymer gel exhibited much a higher relaxation time than the PVA–borate gels, indicating that boronic acid-containing copolymers are more effective cross-linkers of PVA than borates. In line with these approaches, pH-responsive hydrogels were prepared from α,ω-phenylboronic acid-terminated crosslinkers and PVA.54
The advantage of boronate-based cross-linking was demonstrated through the fabrication of film-based chemosensors for operation in water, because stable PVA–borate gels are not water soluble. Nishiyabu, Kobayashi, and Kubo prepared a new type of PVA-based hydrogel in which benzene-1,4-diboronic acid was employed as a cross-linker, being stable in water.55 The residual hydroxyl groups in the gel matrix can participate in binding sites for grafting fluorophores to produce the desired gel sensors. As a proof-of-concept study, boronate gel film (8) composed of a covalently attached dansyl indicator in a PVA–boronate matrix was fabricated (Fig. 8). As such, the film showed a highly selective copper ion-induced fluorescence response in water, with minimal interference from competitive metal ions such as Hg2+ ions. It is noteworthy that the gel was found to be a reusable and a free-standing film capable of visually detecting Cu2+, providing a simple and expedient tool for on-site Cu2+ monitoring in environmental applications such as water analysis.
 Fig. 8  (a) Photograph of the boronate hydrogel film with dansyl moieties and FE-SEM image of the xerogel; (b) proposed structure of the indicator hydrogel 8 wherein OH inserted sp3-hybridized tetrahedral boronate esters would be partly produced. (Adapted from ref. 55.) 
For systematic extension of the research, a multicoloured fluorescent hydrogel sensor (9) was successfully prepared, in which two types of fluorescent dyes with amidoquinoline and rhodamine B chromophores were incorporated (Fig. 9).56 Amidoquinoline is known to exhibit a turn-on fluorescence response toward Zn2+.57 Although the boronate hydrogel film exhibited red fluorescence under UV-light irradiation (365 nm) using a handheld UV lamp (Fig. 9a), adding incremental amounts of Zn2+ ions to the boronate gel in HEPES buffer (N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid, pH = 7.0) induced variations in the emission color: the red emission converted to white and blue-green emission at Zn2+ ion concentrations of 3.0 × 10−5 M (Fig. 9b) and 9.0 × 10−5 M (Fig. 9c), respectively. The colour change was visually detectable at the upper limit of the acceptable Zn2+ concentration (3 ppm) in drinking water indicated by the World Health Organization (WHO).58
 Fig. 9  Proposed structure of the film 9. Photographs of the boronate hydrogel films after immersion in aqueous solutions (5 mM HEPES buffer, pH = 7.0, 3.0 mL) of Zn2+ ions ([Zn2+] = (a) 0 M, (b) 3.0 × 10−5 M, and (c) 9.0 × 10−5 M) for 30 min. The photographs were taken under UV light: λex = 365 nm. (Adapted from ref. 56.) 
In this manner, PVA has been recognized as a suitable matrix for preparing hydrogels. From the standpoint of the field of bioengineering fields, the encapsulation of living cells into a hydrophilic polymer hydrogel will play an important role in tissue engineering. Such demand led chemists to prepare spherical PVA-based hydrogels with a highly monodispersed diameter.
Making use of flow-focusing microfluidic channel devices prepared by polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), spherical phospholipid polymer hydrogels were formed spontaneously from 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine polymer bearing phenyl boronic acid groups (PMBV) and PVA (Fig. 10a and b).59 It was found that the spherical hydrogel can encapsulate human promyelocytic leukemia cells (HL-60) by dispersing the cells in the polymer solution prior to injection into the microfluidic device. On the other hand, the hydrogel could be dissolved within 10 min by the addition of D-sorbitol solution to the suspension (Fig. 10c). This property would be useful for recovering cells from the hydrogels under mild conditions. For an alternate approach based on interactions between PVA and PBA, Anzai et al. have prepared layer-by-layer films composed through alternate deposition of phenylboronic acid–bearing poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PBA–PAH) and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) on the surface of a quartz slide to develop thin films that can be decomposed in response to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Such films can be used as H2O2-sensitive delivery systems.60
 Fig. 10  (a) The gelation mechanism between PMBV and PVA. (b) Optical microscope image of polymer solution flow in the PDMS microfluidic channel device with fluorine modification. (c) Dissociation of the hydrogel upon adding D-sorbitol. (Reproduced with permission of The American Chemical Society from ref. 59.) 
Recently, interest in hierarchical molecular recognition based on macroscopic assemblies has been growing since it would open up new methodologies for developing functional materials, and contribute to the understanding of the selective organisation of functional molecules in cells.61 Harada et al., have investigated various stimuli-responsive macroscopic assemblies based on polymeric hydrogels, using the idea that complementary complex formation should be more effective for the construction of multifunctional macroscopic self-assemblies.62 For example, a macroscopic regulation of gel assemblies based on boronate esterification has been achieved where a phenylboronic acid-appended gel (10) can form an assembly with a gel possessing catechol moieties (11) using boronic acid–catechol interactions (Fig. 11).63 Interestingly, the assembly and disassembly of the gels are reversibly switched by varying the pH of the medium. The adhesion strength is also tunable by competitive monosaccharide molecules in accordance with their association strength with the phenylboronic acid moieties. The adhesion strength is estimated by stress–strain measurements.
 Fig. 11  (a) Structures of phenylboronic acid-appended gel 10 and the gel possessing catechol moieties 11. (b) Chemical stimulus-controlled hierarchical molecular recognition. (Reproduced with permission of The American Chemical Society from ref. 63.) 
Low-molecular-weight-gelators (LMGs)64 are an alternative approach in the quest for functional boronate gels. As one of the earlier examples, S. Shinkai et al., synthesized phenylboronic acid-appended cholesterols with gel-forming properties arising from complexation with monosaccharides.65 As inferred from the thermo-reversibility of LMGs,66 such gels are sensitive to changes in their surrounding environment. Recent progress involves pH responsive self-healing hydrogels using dynamic boronate–catechol complexation. One of the typical examples is prepared from a 4-arm polyethylene glycol (PEG) catechol (12) and benzene-1,3-diboronic acid.67 Its self-healing capability is shown in Fig. 12. When a cube of the hydrogel (Fig. 12a) was cut into two pieces, it healed autonomously and rapidly after the two pieces were brought into contact (Fig. 12b and c). Interestingly, the healed gel was strong enough to be stretched after fusion (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  Structure of catechol PEG. Self-healing properties of the covalent polymer gel formed from 12 (15 wt%) and benzene-1,3-diboronic acid at pH 9.0. The gel (a) as a cube, (b) cut into two pieces, (c) fused together, and (d) stretched without fracture 30 s after fusion. The molar ratio of 12 to benzene-1,3-diboronic acid was 1:8. (Adapted from ref. 67.) 
4.3. Boronate-based covalent-organic frameworks as nanoporous materials
Boronic acids can participate in the construction of covalent-organic frameworks (COFs),68 which are organic analogues of metal organic frameworks (MOFs).69 In particular, much attention has recently been devoted to the related nanoporous materials with high surface areas because of their potential applications in sustainable chemistry such as gas storage and energy and luminescence devices.70 The boronate ester bonds are stable covalent bonds and reversible, which can induce homo- and heteropolymerisation accompanied by tunable porosity and nanostructures, giving an rdered structure. In a pioneering study, Yaghi et al., produced crystalline organic polymers based on self-condensation of aromatic diboronic acids or controlled condensation of aromatic diols with aromatic diboronic acids to synthesise a number of 2D and 3D COFs via B–O bond formation.71 In addition to the versatile boronic acid-appended molecular units that can induce a variety of network structures, the subtle balance between kinetic and thermodynamic control can be influenced by the conditions used for the polycondensation reaction.72 Most notably, the hetero polymerization based on the combination of boronic acids and diol components can provide versatile boronate COFs with different functionalities. This article gives an overview of an intriguing approach towards boronate-based functional COFs.
A versatile synthetic strategy is important to develop desired porous crystalline materials with a well-defined pore size. Bein et al., reported a systematic way to prepare a COF with large pores (13) having an open diameter of 4.0 nm.73 Formed by condensation of 1,3,5-benzenetris(4-phenylboronic acid) and 2,3,6,7-tetrahydroxy-9,10-dimethyl-anthracene (Fig. 13a), the reaction parameters were systematically varied using a high throughput screening approach employing a robotic dosing system. As a result, the solvent mixture was the most important parameter for this system and using a mixture of just anisole and methanol as the solvents gave the network structures. Also, by judicious choice of both boronic acid- and diol-derivatives as component precursors, a 2D COF with large 4.7 nm hexagonal pores has been synthesised.74
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis of COF 13 with 4.0 nm open diameter (b) donor–acceptor COF with C60 (14). 
Looking at their functionalisation for different materials, Dichtel et al. proposed a strategy for assembling organic semiconductors into COF networks, featuring boronate square lattices composed of phthalocyanine macrocycles.75 Broad absorption properties of the COF over the solar spectrum enable its use as an efficient charge transport material for application in photovoltaic devices. The film properties of boronate COFs containing π-conjugated components have also been investigated on single-layer graphene.76 It has been recognized that 2D COFs represent a feasible platform for the molecular design of semiconducting and photoconductive materials. In particular, exploration of synthetic strategies for the construction of COFs with electron donor and acceptor components is significant for photoinduced electron transfer and photoenergy conversion.
With this in mind, photonic COFs (14) were prepared from electron-donating Zn(II)-phthalocyanine (ZnPc) COFs with fullerene units joined through triazole linkers (Fig. 13b).77 The topological feature is the spatial confinement of the fullerene within the nanochannels via covalent anchoring on the channel walls. Investigation of the photoinduced electron transfer using time-resolved electron spin resonance (TR-ESR) spectroscopy revealed the charge dynamics of the donor–acceptor COFs in the solid state. Although the ZnPc–COF at 20 K without fullerene on the walls exhibited only a broad TR-ESR signal upon a laser flash at 680 nm, integration of electron-accepting fullerene molecules onto the channel walls drastically changed the TR-ESR patterns. Detailed investigation indicated the formation of ZnPc˙+ and C60˙− species in 14. These results clearly indicate that the light irradiation triggers photoinduced electron transfer from ZnPc to fullerene in the COF system, and then suggest the enormous potential for developing COFs for charge separation for application in photovoltaics.78 Porphyrins with 18 π electron systems are another class of interesting planar macrocyclic compound from the standpoint of conjugated nanoporous systems. Regulation of the macroscopic structures and control of the pore parameters of porphyrin-based COFs have been fully investigated.79
Bein et al., have proposed a unique strategy using host–guest interactions for fabrication of donor–acceptor heterojunction COF systems.80 An electron acceptor, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), was encapsulated within an electron-donating thienothiophene-based COF (15) synthesised by condensation of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene with thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-diyl diboronic acid. Immersion of the COF into a solution of PCBM led to incorporation of PCBM into the pore of the COF (Fig. 14). The authors examined the photovoltaic properties using 15–PCBM layers in a cell device where ITO and Al electrodes were used. Under simulated AM1.5G full sun illumination, an open-circuit voltage of 622 mV was obtained, along with a short-circuit current density of 0.213 mA cm−2, and a 40% fill factor, giving rise to a power conversion efficiency of 0.053%. It is noteworthy that these are the first studies of a COF-based photovoltaic device with an electron donor in the walls and the complementary electron acceptor in ordered periodic channels. This shows that light-induced charge-separation and collection is clearly feasible for these systems. However, taking into account practical applications of boronate–COFs, water stability should be considered because the linkage is susceptible to hydrolysis.32c
 Fig. 14  The host–guest complex of 15 and a PCBM molecule. 
Lavigne et al. investigated the stability and bulk properties of 2D boronate ester-linked COFs upon exposure to an aqueous environment (Fig. 15a). Enhanced stability could be observed for frameworks with alkylation in the pores of the COFs (16) compared to nonalkylated frameworks, indicating that the hydrolysis is retarded to maintain porosity when alkyl substituents are present in the COF pores.81
 Fig. 15  (a) Partial structures of alkylated COFs (16). (b) CTC based two-dimensional covalent organic framework (17). 
In general, planar components preferably adapt 2D frameworks, whereas tetrahedral ones give 3D COFs. Thus, the use of bowl-shaped components is an approach to provide distinctive COFs. Hexahydroxyl cyclotricatechylene (CTC) is an intriguing macrocyclic molecule with intrinsic cavity in host–guest chemistry which exhibits a unique selective binding characteristic.82 The catechol segments located with C3 symmetry in the molecule can participate in boronate esterification.83 Zheng et al., prepared an undulated two-dimensional CTC-based COF (17) which stacks in an eclipsed mode in the microcrystalline state (Fig. 15b). It was reported that 17 has a surface area of 1710 m2 g−1, with a pore width of 2.26 nm calculated by density functional theory (DFT) modelling.84 The bowl-shaped core unit led to a larger surface area than its analogue, COF-571a constructed by planar subunits. It was found that this material has higher low pressure hydrogen uptake than other 2D COFs with similar structures.
The use of triptycene as a catechol component afforded a 2D COF with a unique morphology.85 Zhao et al., investigated the condensation reaction of benzene-1,4-diboronic acid with triptycene in mesitylene/dioxane (1:1) at 85 °C under an Ar atmosphere. After stirring for 3 days, honeycomb-shaped polymers (18) were produced (Fig. 16). Interestingly, the 2D polymeric monolayers were found to further evolve into monolayered or multilayered hollow spheres through wrapping of the spherical monolayers by the newly produced layer. The phenomenon is attributed to very weak interlayer interactions between monolayers due to the lack of π–π interactions. This research has not only provided meaningful insight into the design of new hollow nano-materials for application in separations science, but also provided a plausible model system for the transformation of graphene into fullerene.
 Fig. 16  The formation of 2D polymers and hollow spheres. 
Taken together, COFs have become an emerging class of periodic porous materials composed of network polymers. Despite the intense interest in these materials, the formation mechanism is not fully understood. In 2014, Smith and Dichtel found that the boronate ester-linked 2D framework COF-5 was readily synthesised using fully homogeneous conditions on the timescale of minutes.86 The nucleation and growth process for polymerization of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene and benzene-1,4-diboronic acid monomers enabled the first rate measurements of its formation. During these mechanistic studies of 2D boronate COFs, plausible growth models were proposed (Fig. 17); the researchers favoured the scenario in which smaller oligomers stacking upon larger 2D polymers (template polymerisation) may be involved. Although an understanding of the nucleation, polymerisation and crystal growth prior to aggregation has still remained incomplete, these findings will prompt further rigorous studies of COF nucleation and growth processes to create new frameworks.
 Fig. 17  Proposed models of boronate ester COF-5 growth. 
Inspired by the pioneering work with graphene,87 there is an increasing interest in the development of 2D materials that exhibit unique mechanical88 and optical89 properties. We believe that polymeric 2D structures prepared directly from small molecular units through clickable boronate esterification will show the most promise for the fabrication of single molecule thick 2D materials.90 An excellent review article has been published on this topic.91
4.4. Three dimensional nano- and microarchitectures using boronic acid building blocks
Organic caged systems built through dynamic covalent functionality are among the most intriguing three dimensional porous materials obtainable under reversible conditions where easy access to complex structures can be thermodynamically possible.92 Hexahydroxy tribenzotriquinacene (19), a known precursor of microporous polymers,93 features a nearly rectangular orientation of the three indane moieties with respect to each other. The addition of 4 Å molecular sieves into a THF solution of catechol-functionalized 19 with benzene-1,4-diboronic acids led to the precipitation of a microcrystalline materials (20). A one-pot reaction resulting in the formation of 24 boronate esters in an [8+12] co-condensation of 20 components occurred (Fig. 18).94
 Fig. 18  Synthesis of cages 20 under water removing conditions. 
M. Mastalerz et al. reported a boronate porous cage (21) with a very high specific surface area of 3758 m2 g−1 (Fig. 19).95 The one step 48-fold condensation reaction of twelve molecules of triptycene tetraol (22) and eight molecules of triboronic acid produced the cuboctahedral [12+8] cages (21) with an outer diameter of 3.99 nm. The precise structure was determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction. The cavity is very large in comparison with other porous cage compounds, with an inner diameter of 2.4–2.6 nm between the two opposite aryl rings of the triboronate ester linkage. It was found that the molecules pack through π–π interactions along the crystallographic c axis, which is reflected in a staggered coplanar assembly of boronate ester units of adjacent molecules at a distance of 3.2–3.4 Å. Along other axes, the packing interactions are rather weak, being mainly attributable to CH–π interactions.
 Fig. 19  Synthesis of cuboctahedral [12+8] cages (21). 
Quite interestingly, when 9,10-dihexyltriptycene was used instead of 22, two cages were interlocked with each other in the crystalline state to provide a giant catenane 23 (Fig. 20). The structure itself is of an ellipsoid, the dimensions being approximately 4.6–4.7 nm in length and 4.0 nm in width. Furthermore, 23 forms a porous material with a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 1540 m2 g−1. This is the first example of a porous molecular catenane.96
 Fig. 20  Crystal structure of cage catenane 23 generated from X-ray diffraction data published in ref. 91. Alkyl chains are omitted for clarity. 
In contrast to two-component self-assemblies built through a single type of connection reaction, it is difficult to control two connection reactions in order to drive the desired self-assembled systems. Post-modification strategies have been used as a feasible way to construct discrete self-assembles for any target. Iwasawa et al. succeeded in the selective preparation of two isomeric, higher-order architectures by engineering connecting reactions of boronate esterification and [3+2] cycloaddition of nitrile oxides.97 In one approach (Fig. 21), dehydration reactions of 24 and enantiopure (−)-25 gave a cylinder-type boronate self-assembly (26). Transesterification of (27) with (−)-25 also produced the related assemblies (28) with bowl shapes. A post-connecting reaction of these two components by a [3+2] cycloaddition in the presence of a proton sponge at room temperature for 7 days afforded capsule-like trimer assemblies (29). On the other hand, a pre-connecting [3+2] cycloaddition of (30) with (27), followed by boronate esterification with (+)-25 gave the corresponding tricyclic trimer assemblies (31). BET surface area measurements indicate that the obtained trimeric architectures have intrinsic cavities. The design of an assembly protocol with an orthogonal reaction can lead to the formation of isomeric discrete nanoarchitectures having different shapes.
 Fig. 21  Procedure-dependent trimeric boronate assembles. 
To construct 3D nanosystems, the use of dendrimers, defined as highly branched, multivalent and monodisperse polymers, provides a facile scenario.98 As part of an on-going program to develop stimulus-responsive cross-linked micelles as nanocarrier systems for tumor-targeting drug delivery, a boronate cross-linked telodendrimer has been prepared and evaluated.99 Telodendrimers, composed of linear polyethylene glycol (PEG) and dendritic cholic acid (CA) block copolymers, have served as efficient anticancer drug delivery agents.100 The stability of the micelles was improved by crosslinking using boronate ester at the core–shell interface. As shown in Fig. 22, two types of telodendrimers with boronic acid (32) and catechol (33) have been synthesised. Reaction of the boronic acid with the catechol on distinct telodendrimers in aqueous solution induced self-assembly of the entities into micelles. Despite exhibiting stability in human plasma, the resultant micelles responded to changes in not only pH but also mannitol. Interestingly, when paclitaxel (PTX) was employed as a model drug, the release of PTX from the boronate crosslinked micelles was significantly slower than that from non-crosslinked micelles but can be accelerated by acidic pH values and/or mannitol. This result demonstrates that reversible boronate esterification is useful as a chemical stimulus-triggered switching of supramolecular systems in water.101
 Fig. 22  Telodendrimer pair. (Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 99.) 
Well-ordered and boronate ester-based submicrospheres were first reported In 2012,102 where pyridine-assisted sequential boronate esterification of benzene-1,4-diboronic acid and 1,2,4,5-tetrahydroxybenzene induced hierarchical self-assembly (Fig. 23). This result was unprecedented since ordinary dehydration between the components provided no nucleation in toluene/10% MeOH under reflux with a Dean–Stark apparatus. The average diameter of the submicrospheres was estimated to be (870 ± 100) nm based on the field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of 1000 particles. Spectroscopic analysis using attenuated total reflectance FTIR (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy, NMR, and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) indicated that the particles were composed of lamellar structures of sp2 trigonal planar poly(dioxaborole). Pyridine is indispensable in boronate polymerisation; the B–N interaction between boronic acid and pyridine nitrogen allows boronate esterification to occur more easily than when under amine-free conditions through B–N interaction. A plausible mechanism for particle formation is also shown in Fig. 23. Subsequent pyridine-assisted polymerisation induced a solvophobic orthogonal interaction, based on phenyl–boron–phenyl π-stacking, leading to dispersible nucleation. Upon aggregation, pyridine-coordinated boronate ester polymers are converted into planar structures via the elimination of pyridine, which is interpreted as the planar state composed of trigonal planer boronate esters being more thermodynamically favourable than the pyridine-coordinated tetrahedral structure. As a result, spherical particles composed of lamellar nanostructures were produced, and their size depends on minimisation of the interfacial free energy between the particles and solvent used.103 According to Meijer's classification, the observed hierarchical growth of boronate-based aggregates may be classified as occurring by a nucleation–elongation mechanism.29 Further work is in progress to clarify the two distinct nucleation and subsequent cooperative elongation processes.104 It was also found that the dynamic covalent functionality of boronate ester linkages in the particles induced a stimulus-responsive change in their morphology. During this study, sequential boronate esterification of benzene-1,4-diboronic acid with pentaerythritol induced hierarchical molecular self-assembly to produce mono-dispersed flower-like microparticles (BP) with an averaged diameter of 2.3 ± 0.3 μm (Fig. 24).105 Spectroscopic analysis indicates the formation of the particles consists of a zigzag-shaped packing structure of polymeric 3-benzo-2,4,8,10-tetraoxa-3,9-diboraspiro[5.5]undecane (34). In terms of functionalisation, Kubo envisaged how such microparticles might have application in the fabrication of organic–inorganic hybrid catalysts. This is because the development of new types of catalysts in fine chemical synthesis is urgently required from the viewpoint of sustainable chemistry and green organic synthesis.106 After several trials, the deposition of nano-gold onto the BP was achieved when a MeOH solution of HAuCl4 was added to a turbid solution of BP in the presence of polyethyleneimine (PEI). Au/BP maintains a distinct shape (Fig. 24a) where dispersive nano-gold particles with a mean diameter of 2.7 nm were deposited on the BP (Fig. 24b). The space fringes of the Au NPs were detected in the HR-TEM image to be d = 0.225 nm (Fig. 24c), which is consistent with the {111} facet of Au. It was confirmed that highly dispersed Au NPs (2.3 wt%) could be deposited onto the boronate surface. The catalytic activity was tested through the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) with NaBH4, this reaction being often used as a test reaction to investigate the catalytic performance of candidate catalysts because the reaction kinetics is simultaneously recorded by absorption spectra, enabling us to easily determine the quantitative activity.107 The reaction was conducted using Au(0), 4-NP, and NaBH4 in a 1:90:1250 molar ratio, and progress was monitored by observing the decrease in absorbance due to 4-NP with an increase due to 4-aminophenol (4-AP). The reaction was nearly complete within 320 s. A linear relationship was observed between this logarithm value ln(At/A0) and reaction time, the pseudo-first order rate constant (k) being estimated to be 1.6 × 10−2 s−1. The turnover frequency (TOF) of Au/BP was estimated to be 1013 h−1. Compared to conventional polymer-supported Au nanoparticles,108 the Au/BP exhibited efficient catalytic reduction activity.
 Fig. 23  Plausible mechanism for the formation of the submicroparticles. 
 Fig. 24  Formation of flower-like microparticles (BP) composed of staked structures of boronate polymers 34. (a) TEM image of Au/BP. (b) TEM image of the corresponding microparticle. (c) The HR-TEM image of the lattice structure observed for the {111} facet of the Au NP. (Adapted from ref. 105.) 
This successful result for the use of BP as a support material for inorganic/organic catalytic systems motivated the researchers to develop green catalysts based on boronate microparticles. The selective hydrogenation of α,β-unsaturated aldehydes was studied, which has been widely investigated in catalyst chemistry.109 It is known that Pd nanoparticle-based catalysts are one of the most promising systems for selective hydrogenation of the CC bond; however, there are few reports on Pd catalysts that are applicable to green solvent processes in which comparatively larger amounts of catalysts110 or higher pressures of H2 (ref. 111) are required. Considering the stable dispersion capability of boronate particles in aqueous media (vide infra), Pd-deposited boronate particles (Pd/BP) were prepared by the NaBH4 reduction of PdCl42− in MeOH, in the presence of polyethyleneimine (PEI)-coated boronate particles (BPs), 0.66 wt% of nano-palladium being deposited on the surface, which were then applied for hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde (CA) as green catalysts.112 The hydrogenation of CA over Pd/BPs was then investigated in water under ambient conditions (0.1 MPa of H2, 25 °C) (Scheme 2). The reaction over the catalysts proceeded successfully under these conditions; after 6 h, the hydrogenation over the hybrid catalyst afforded HCA in 94% yield with a reaction conversion of 100%. 3-Phenyl-1-propanol (PPL) was formed in only 6% yield with no detectable amount of cinnamyl alcohol (CAL). Taking into account the low solubility of H2 in water,113Pd/BP showed significant catalytic activity for hydrogenation to HCA with a TOF value of 33 h−1. When MeOH, an environmentally preferable solvent that is water-soluble, biodegradable, and occurs naturally in the environment, was employed as the reaction solvent, a more efficient catalytic activity could be obtained; the reaction was complete within 4 h to afford HCA in 92% yield with a TOF value of 50 h−1. It is noteworthy that further reduction to PPL from HCA was not observed under these conditions, indicating that Pd/BP is a highly selective catalyst for HCAvia hydrogenation of CA using a green process. In addition, when used in MeOH, Pd/BP could be reused at least four times without appreciable loss of its catalytic activity or selectivity.
 Scheme 2  Hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde (CA) over Pd/BP. 

BPs can be dispersed in aqueous media as microparticles, and have a negative value of zeta (ξ) potential for the BP surface. This may indicate that terminal hydroxyl groups of the component polymers may be present at the periphery of the microparticles,114 meaning that surface functionalization by grafting is possible. As such, due to interest in developing luminescent hierarchical materials, a white-light emissive chemosensor (Sen-BP) was fabricated by covalently grafting boronic acid-appended pyrene, dansyldiethylenetriamine, and rhodamine B to the surface through boronate esterification (Fig. 25).115 The diethylenetriamine segment serves as a metal ion-binding site.55 Upon adding Cu2+ in HEPES buffer at pH 7.0, the emission intensity over a wide range of the visible spectrum between 450 nm and 625 nm was efficiently decreased by adding Cu2+, which suggests that the complex formation between the dansyldiethylenetriamine moiety and Cu2+ could not only induce fluorescence quenching of the dansyl fluorophore, but also the fluorescence intensity of the rhodamine B unit due to reduced fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from dansyl to rhodamine B units. This result indicated that boronate particles serve as a promising platform for the development of hierarchical materials with sensing/recognition capability.
 Fig. 25  Preparation of water-dispersible white-light emitting boronate microparticles. (Adapted from ref. 115.) 
Interest in aggregation-induced emission (AIE) phenomena, the exact opposite of aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ), has been growing rapidly.116 In 2001, Tang et al., firstly reported a propeller-shaped molecule with an AIE effect.117 This interesting property can offer a versatile approach to the development of solid-state luminescence materials.118 Tetraphenylethylene (TPE) and its derivatives are among the most promising AIE-luminogens for applications in organic light-emitting diodes,119 stable and versatile bioprobes in medical diagnostics,120 chemosensors in molecular recognition121 and so on. Synergistic effects of AIE and boronic acid-based functions have been the subjects of significant interest.122 Toward this end, considering the availability of TPE as a building block for constructing fluorescent network polymers,123 inner functionalization of BP by incorporating an AIE luminogen has been investigated to develop luminescent hierarchical materials where, 1,1′-di(p-dihydroxyborylpheny)-2,2′-biphenyl ethylene (1,1-DB-TPB) has been synthesized for use as the component luminogen (Fig. 26a).124
 Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structures of 1,1-DB-TPE and component polymer 35. (b) A fluorescence microscopic image of BP2. (Adapted from ref. 124.) 
Dehydration of 1,1-DB-TPE and pentaerythritol produced nanoparticles BP2 in which 35 self-assembled (Fig. 26b), and displays fluorescence with a peak at 479 nm when excited by 365 nm light in water. Taking advantage of the facile dye-grafting of the surface of the boronate aggregate,115 multicolored emissive boronate nanoparticles (R-BP2) could be fabricated by tuning the amount of rhodamine B grafted on the surface, as a result of the synergistic effect of the TPE and rhodamine B units through FRET (Fig. 27a and b). When the amount of the dye grafted was 2.7 × 10−6 mol g−1, white light emissive particles R-BP2(W) were formed. It was found that R-BP2(W) represent a bright nanothermometer with a temperature sensitivity of 1.1% K−1 in water (Fig. 27c). The sensitivity is almost consistent with that of CdTe luminescence thermometry.125 Temperature-dependent ring flipping of the unsubstituted phenyl rings in the TPE segments126 plays a significant role in the thermo-responsive function, followed by changes in the emission of rhodamine B through FRET from TPE to the rhodamine B units. Such a synergistic effect of the emissive units led to a notable change in the emission color, which was easily detected by the naked eye.
 Fig. 27  (a) Photographs of the corresponding boronate nanoparticle (R-BP2) dispersion in aqueous media. λex = 365 nm. The amounts of grafted rhodamine B are A, 0.0 mol g−1; B, 8.0 × 10−7 mol g−1; C, 2.7 × 10−6 mol g−1; D, 3.9 × 10−6 mol g−1 and E, 16 × 10−6 mol g−1. (b) A plausible partial structure where FRET occurs in R-BP2. (c) Overall fluorescence spectra of R-BP2(W) (0.1 mg mL−1) in water at various temperatures. (Adapted from ref. 124.) 
5. Conclusions and future remarks
This feature article covers recent progress of self-assembled/organised systems involving boronic acid building blocks, in which boronic acids act as connection tools with dynamic covalent functionality for the development of hierarchical supramolecular systems. Here, the emphasis is that their structure-directing properties enable easy access to the formation of supramolecular architectures at the nano and microscales. These approaches are beneficial not only for constructing new network frames for applications in molecular electronics but also as support materials for heterogeneous catalysis and solid-state chemosensors. Furthermore, their biocompatibility enables applications in drug delivery. The functionality of boronic acids is not limited to connection tools for the fabrication of hierarchical nano- and micro structures. Other intriguing boron-based supramolecules have been reported. For instance, in chirality manipulation, boronic acids are useful in the analysis of the enantiomeric excess of chiral amines through the assembly process.127 Three-component chiral derivation based on boronate esterification occurs when mixing an α-chiral primary amine, o-formyl phenylboronic acid, and enantiopure 1,1′-bi-2-naphthol (BINOL), leading to characteristic 1H-NMR spectroscopic shifts for each enantiomer of the amine. In addition, a boron-based assembly protocol has been used for not only electrochemical determination of the enantiomeric excess of BINOL,128 but also for the development of a sensing array by means of circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy129 and CD-based sensors arising from guest-induced helical stacks.130 Also noteworthy is that boronic acid-appended fluorophores have been used as reaction-based chemosensors.131 A H2O2-triggered response, based on the oxidative conversion of boronates to phenols, is particularly significant, and is widely applied to noninvasive detection tools in biological systems.132 In this context, recently, from the standpoint of security purposes, trace detection of peroxide-based explosives is growing in importance.133 Towards this end, the synthesis of boronate systems with outstanding optical properties is worthwhile because of their highly sensitive visual detection of H2O2 vapor.19,134
Taken together, it is very exciting that boronic acid-based systems are widespread in many of the versatile fields of materials science. However, the sophisticated design and pre-organization methodology of the desired hierarchical systems arranged in fibrous, tubular, toroidal, and spherical nano- and micro structures is still in its infancy where the synergistic function should be controlled in parallel with morphological control. This may be because encoding molecular modules for the construction of desired nano- and microsystems is rather difficult. We believe that the use of boronic acids as building blocks will enable chemists to engineer self-organised functional materials with inherent “softness” based on the boron-based dynamic covalent functionality. Accordingly, we are confident that in the future an ever increasing number and type of boron-based hierarchical systems will be developed.
Acknowledgements
YK and TDJ thank the Daiwa Anglo-Japanese Foundation for the award of a Daiwa Adrian Prize in 2013. YK and RN thank Tokyo Metropolitan University for support. YK acknowledges financial support of a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan (Research (B), no. 24350075). RN is grateful for the financial support of a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan (Young Scientists (B), no. 26810072). TDJ thanks the University of Bath for support.
Notes and references
N. A. Petasis, Aust. J. Chem., 2007, 60, 795–798 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Grew, J. L. Bada and R. M. Hazen, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 307–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Scorei, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2012, 42, 3–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Goldbach and M. A. Wimmer, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 2007, 170, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Bosch, T. M. Fyles and T. D. James, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 11175–11190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. D. James, P. Linnane and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 1996, 281–288 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Nishiyabu, Y. Kubo, T. D. James and J. S. Fossey, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1106–1123 RSC ; 
  (c) J. S. Fossey, F. D'Hooge, J. M. H. van den Elsen, M. P. Pereira Morais, S. I. Pascu, S. D. Bull, F. Marken, A. T. A. Jenkins, Y.-B. Jiang and T. D. James, Chem. Rec., 2012, 12, 464–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. D. Bull, M. G. Davidson, J. M. H. van den Elsen, J. S. Fossey, A. T. A. Jenkins, Y.-B. Jiang, Y. Kubo, F. Marken, K. Sakurai, J. Zhao and T. D. James, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 312–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) X. Wu, Z. Li, X.-X. Chen, J. S. Fossey, T. D. James and Y.-B. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8032–8048 RSC ; 
  (f) A. R. Martin, J.-J. Vasseur and M. Smietana, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5684–5713 RSC ; 
  (g) R. Ma and L. Shi, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 1503–1518 RSC .
A. Suzuki and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 894–901 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamaguchi and A. Wakamiya, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 1413–1424 CAS .

  (a) M. Elbing and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 834–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. M. Hudson and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1584–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. J. Rowan, S. J. Cantrill, G. R. L. Cousins, J. K. M. Sanders and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 898–952 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Jin, C. Yu, R. J. Denman and W. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6634–6654 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Wilsom, G. Gasparini and S. Matile, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1948–1962 RSC .

  (a) X. Wang, N. Xia and L. Liu, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 20890–20912 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. P. Pereira Morais, D. Marshall, S. E. Flower, C. J. Caunt, T. D. James, R. J. Williams, N. R. Waterfield and J. M. H. van den Elsen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1437,  DOI:10.1038/srep01437 .

  (a) 
            H. Höpfl, in Structureand Bonding, ed. H. W. Roesky and D. A. Atwood, Springer Verlag, Berlin,  2002, vol. 103, pp. 1–56 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Fujita, S. Shinkai and T. D. James, Chem. – Asian J., 2008, 3, 1076–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Severin, Dalton Trans., 2009, 5254–5264 RSC ; 
  (d) R. Nishiyabu, Y. Kubo, T. D. James and J. S. Fossey, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1124–1150 RSC ; 
  (e) P. M. Mitrasinovic, Curr. Org. Synth., 2012, 9, 233–246 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Maggini and D. Bonifazi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 211–241 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1496–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. I. Stupp and L. C. Palmer, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Lorand and J. O. Edwards, J. Org. Chem., 1959, 24, 769–774 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Peters, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 268, 1–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Collibee and J. Yu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 4453–4455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. L. Yuen and C. A. Hutton, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 7899–7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Roy and H. C. Brown, J. Organomet. Chem., 2007, 692, 784–790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Sanchez and W. C. Trogler, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5134–5141 RSC .
L. Zhu, S. H. Shabbir, M. Gray, V. M. Lynch, S. Sorey and E. V. Anslyn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1222–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. L. Korich and P. M. Iovine, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 1423–1431 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Tokunaga, Heterocycles, 2013, 87, 991–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Ishikawa, N. Kameta, M. Masuda, M. Asakawa and T. Shimizu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 603–609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pascu, A. Ruggi, R. Scopelliti and K. Severin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 45–47 RSC .
G. Kaupp, M. R. Naimi-Jamal and V. Stepanenko, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9, 4156–4161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Weber, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 215, 39–77 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Weber, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 1–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Weber, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 5595–5609 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Maruyama and Y. Kawanishi, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2245–2249 RSC ; 
  (b) I. Yamaguchi, T. Tominaga and M. Sato, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 17–21 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Kubo, K. Tsuruzoe, S. Okuyama, R. Nishiyabu and T. Fujiwara, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3604–3606 RSC ; 
  (d) T. Kojima, D. Kumaki, J. Nishida, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6607–6613 RSC ; 
  (e) S. Hayashi and T. Koizumi, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 613–616 RSC ; 
  (f) J. H. Son, G. Jang and T. S. Lee, Polymer, 2013, 54, 3542–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Weber, D. Eickhoff, T. B. Marder, M. A. Fox, P. J. Low, A. D. Dwyer, D. J. Tozer, S. Schwedler, A. Brockhink, H.-G. Stammler and B. Neumann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1369–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otsuka, T. Kondo, R. Nishiyabu and Y. Kubo, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 5782–5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tönnemann, R. Scopelliti, K. O. Zhurov, L. Menin, S. Dehnen and K. Severin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 9939–9945 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) T. F. A. de Greef and E. W. Meijer, Nature, 2008, 453, 171–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. F. A. De Greef, M. M. J. Smulders, M. Wolffs, A. P. H. J. Schenning, R. P. Sijbesma and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5687–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, F. Wang, B. Zheng and F. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6042–6065 RSC .
M. Mikami and S. Shinkai, Chem. Lett., 1995, 603–604 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. K. Day, C. Bresner, I. A. Fallis, L. L. Ooi, D. J. Watkin, S. J. Coles, L. Male, M. B. Hursthouse and S. Aldridge, Dalton Trans., 2007, 3486–3488 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Niu, C. O'Sullivan, B. M. Rambo, M. D. Smith and J. J. Lavigne, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4342–4344 RSC ; 
  (c) W. Niu, M. D. Smith and J. J. Lavigne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16466–16467 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) B. M. Rambo and J. J. Lavigne, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3732–3739 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Li, T. Xiao, C. Lin and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5950–5968 RSC .
J. C. Huerta, D. Salazar-Mendoza, J. Hernández-Paredes, I. F. Hernández Ahuactzi and H. Höpfl, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4241–4243 RSC .
D. Salazar-Mendoza, J. Cruz-Huerta, H. Höpfl, I. F. Hernández-Ahuactzi and M. Sanchez, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2441–2454 CAS .
E. Sheepwash, N. Luisier, M. R. Krause, S. Noé, S. Kubik and K. Severin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7808–7810 RSC .
B. Icli, E. Solari, B. Kilbas, R. Scopelliti and K. Severin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14867–14874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Kapadia, J. C. Widen, M. A. Magnus, D. C. Swenson and F. C. Pigge, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 2519–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, H. Takata, K. Ono and N. Iwasawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11045–11048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Iwasawa and H. Takahagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7754–7755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Whittell, M. D. Hager, U. S. Schubert and I. Manners, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 176–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, W. Huang, C.-H. Chen, M. Pink and D. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3650–3658 CrossRef CAS .

          C. S. Lent, in Quantum Cellular Automata Theory, Experimentation and Prospects, ed. M. Macucci, Imperial College Press, London,  2006, pp. 269–276 Search PubMed .
K. Tahara, T. Akita, S. Katao, K. Tokunaga and J. Kikuchi, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 9579–9585 RSC .
X. Liao, G. Chen and M. Jiang, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1733–1745 RSC .

  (a) T. R. Hoare and D. S. Kohane, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1993–2007 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Qiu and K. Park, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 49–60 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Mateescu, Y. Wang, J. Dostalek and U. Jonas, Membranes, 2012, 2, 40–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Verhulsel, M. Vignes, S. Descroix, L. Malaquin, D. M. Vignjevic and J.-L. Viovy, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 1816–1832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guan and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8106–8121 RSC .
V. H. Deuel and H. Neukom, Makromol. Chem., 1949, 3, 13–30 CrossRef .
G. Keita, A. Ricard, R. Audebrt, E. Pezron and L. Leibler, Polymer, 1995, 36, 49–54 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Carretti, S. Grassi, M. Cossalter, I. Natali, G. Caminati, R. G. Weiss, P. Baglioni and L. Dei, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8656–8662 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Natali, E. Carretti, L. Angelova, P. Baglioni, R. G. Weiss and L. Dei, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 13226–13235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Millon and W. K. Wan, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2006, 79, 245–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitano, K. Kataoka, Y. Koyama, T. Okano and Y. Sakurai, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1991, 12, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Ivanov, H. Larsson, I. Yu. Galaev and B. Mattiasson, Polymer, 2004, 45, 2495–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Piest, X. Zhang, J. Trinidad and J. F. J. Engbersen, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11111–11118 RSC .
R. Nishiyabu, H. Kobayashi and Y. Kubo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6555–6561 RSC .
R. Nishiyabu, S. Ushikubo, Y. Kamiya and Y. Kubo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15846–15852 CAS .
Y. Chen, K.-Y. Han and Y. Liu, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2007, 15, 4537–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, 3rd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
T. Aikawa, T. Konno, M. Takai and K. Ishihara, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2145–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, M. Takahashi, M. Ito, E. Abe and J. Anzai, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9247–9250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Bowden, M. Weck, I. S. Choi and G. M. Whitesides, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 231–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Harada, R. Kobayashi, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume and H. Yamaguchi, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 34–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Kobayashi, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1243 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Nakahata, Y. Takashima and A. Harada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3617–3621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakahata, S. Mori, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 337–340 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Dawn, T. Shiraki, S. Haraguchi, S. Tamaru and S. Shinkai, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 266–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. W. Steed, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1379–1383 RSC .
T. D. James, K. Murata, T. Harada, K. Ueda and S. Shinkai, Chem. Lett., 1994, 273–276 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Abdallah and R. G. Weiss, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1237–1247 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, D. E. Fullenkamp, J. G. Rivera and P. B. Messersmith, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7497–7499 RSC .

  (a) X. Feng, X. Ding and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6010–6022 RSC ; 
  (b) S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .

  (a) M. Eddaoudi, D. B. Moler, H. Li, B. Chen, T. M. Reineke, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 319–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. C. Das, S. Xiang, Z. Zhang and B. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10510–10520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiang and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2691–2718 CAS .

  (a) A. P. Côté, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) H. M. El-Kaderi, J. R. Hunt, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés, A. P. Côté, R. E. Taylor, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2007, 316, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Dienstmaier, D. D. Medina, M. Dogru, P. Knochel, T. Bein, W. M. Heckl and M. Lackinger, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7234–7242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dogru, A. Sonnauer, A. Gavryushin, P. Knochel and T. Bein, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1707–1709 RSC .
E. L. Spitler, B. T. Koo, J. L. Novotney, J. W. Colson, F. J. Uribe-Romo, G. D. Gutierrez, P. Clancy and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19416–19421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Spitler and W. R. Dichtel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 672–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Levendorf, E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. Furukawa, J. Gao, A. Nagai, T. Nakamura, Y. Dong and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9806–9809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Nardes, A. J. Ferguson, P. Wolfer, K. Gui, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and N. Kopidakis, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1539–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, L. Chen, Y. Dong and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1979–1981 RSC .
M. Dogru, M. Handloser, F. Auras, T. Kunz, D. Medina, A. Hartschuh, P. Knochel and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2920–2924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Lanni, R. W. Tilford, M. Bharathy and J. J. Lavigne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13975–13983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. W. Steed, H. Zhang and J. L. Atwood, Supramol. Chem., 1996, 7, 37–45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. J. Hardie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 516–527 RSC .

  (a) K. Kataoka, T. D. James and Y. Kubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15126–15127 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Kubo, W. Yoshizumi and T. Minami, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 1238–1239 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Hutin, G. Bernardinelli and J. R. Nitschke, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4585–4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) K. Kataoka, S. Okuyama, T. Minami, T. D. James and Y. Kubo, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1682–1684 RSC .
J.-T. Yu, Z. Chen, J. Sun, Z.-T. Huang and Q.-Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5369–5373 RSC .
T.-Y. Zhou, F. Lin, Z.-T. Li and X. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 7745–7752 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Smith and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8783–8789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. K. Geim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6966–6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. S. Noveselov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6986–7002 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie and Y. R. Shen, Science, 2008, 320, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y.-m. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. Lukose, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5328–5331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Colson and W. R. Dichetel, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 453–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Mastalerz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5042–5053 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Zhang and M. Mastalerz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1934–1947 RSC .
J. Vile, M. Carta, C. G. Bezzu and N. B. McKeown, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2257–2260 RSC .
S. Klotzbach, T. Scherpf and F. Beuerle, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12454–12457 RSC .
G. Zhang, O. Presly, F. White, I. M. Oppel and M. Mastalerz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1516–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, O. Presly, F. White, I. M. Oppel and M. Mastalerz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5126–5130 CAS .
K. Ono, R. Aizawa, T. Yamano, S. Ito, N. Yasuda, K. Johmoto, H. Uekusa and N. Iwasawa, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13683–13686 RSC .
M. Sowinska and Z. Urbanczyk-Lipkowska, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2168–2203 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Xiao, K. Xiao, L. Berti, J. Luo, H. P. Tseng, G. Fung and K. S. Lam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2864–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, Y. Li, J. Luo, J. S. Lee, W. Xiao, A. M. Gonik, R. G. Agarwal and K. S. Lam, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 3435–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arzt, C. Seidler, D. Y. W. Ng and T. Weil, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1994–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nishiyabu, S. Teraoka, Y. Matsushima and Y. Kubo, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Oh and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2005, 438, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Nakanishi, W. Schmitt, T. Michinobu, D. G. Kurth and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5982–5984 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Maeda, M. Hasegawa, T. Hashimoto, T. Kakimoto, S. Nishio and T. Nakanishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10024–10025 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Y. Su, Q. He, X. Yan, J. Fei, Y. Cui and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3370–3375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
During preparation of the article, the relative work has been published;   L. Li, C. Yuan, L. Dai and S. Thayumanavan, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 5869–5876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsushima, R. Nishiyabu, N. Takanashi, M. Haruta, H. Kimura and Y. Kubo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24124–24131 RSC .
F. Zaera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2746–2762 RSC .
P. Hervés, M. Pérez-Lorenzo, L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Dzubiella, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5577–5587 RSC .

  (a) W. Liu, X. Yang and W. Huang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 304, 160–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Wang, G. Wei, W. Zhang, X. Jiang, P. Zheng, L. Shi and A. Dong, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 266, 233–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Zhang, L. Liu, C. Wu, G. Fu, H. Zhao and B. He, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1989–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; K. Kuroda, T. Ishida and M. Haruta, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 298, 7–11 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) M. H. Rashid and T. K. Mandal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2261–2271 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y.-C. Chang and D.-H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 165, 664–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) T. Huang, F. Meng and L. Qi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13636–13642 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) H. Koga, E. Tokunaga, M. Hidaka, Y. Umemura, T. Saito, A. Isogai and T. Kitaoka, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8567–8569 RSC ; 
  (h) Y. Choi, H. S. Bae, E. Seo, S. Jang, K. H. Park and B.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15431–15436 RSC .

  (a) M. Boudart, Nature, 1994, 372, 320 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            S. Schimpf, J. Gaube and P. Claus, Selective hydrogenation of multiple unsaturated compounds, Springer Series in Chemical Physics,  2004, vol. 75, pp. 85–123 Search PubMed .

  (a) H. Hagiwara, T. Nakamura, T. Hoshi and T. Suzuki, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1133–1137 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Nakao, H. Rhee and Y. Uozumi, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 163–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. M. Callis, E. Thiery, J. L. Bras and J. Muzart, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 8128–8131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Mhadgut, K. Palaniappan, M. Thimmaiah, S. A. Hackney, B. Török and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3207–3209 RSC .
S. Fujiwara, N. Takanashi, R. Nishiyabu and Y. Kubo, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3230–3236 RSC .

          C. L. Young, Hydrogen and Deuterium, Solubility data series, Pergamon, vol. 5/6,  1981 Search PubMed .
C. Vijayakumar, K. Sugiyasu and M. Takeuchi, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 291–294 RSC .
R. Nishiyabu, Y. Sugino and Y. Kubo, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9869–9871 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4332–4353 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
R. Hu, N. L. C. Leung and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4494–4562 RSC .
Z. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23726–23740 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Tao, Z. Chi, J. Xu and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4398–4414 RSC .

  (a) T. Noguchi, T. Shiraki, A. Dawn, Y. Tsuchiya, L. T. N. Lien, T. Yamamoto and S. Shinkai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8090–8092 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Noguchi, A. Dawn, D. Yoshihara, Y. Tsuchiya, T. Yamamoto and S. Shinkai, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 779–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Noguchi, B. Roy, D. Yoshihara, Y. Tsuchiya, T. Yamamoto and S. Shinkai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 381–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Liu, C. Deng, L. Tang, A. Qin, R. Hu, J. Z. Sun and B. Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 660–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Zhao, Y. Hong, S. Chen, C. W. T. Leung, C. Y. K. Chan, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 88–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Guo, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17622–17625 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. B. Shustova, A. F. Cozzolino, S. Reineke, M. Baldo and M. Dincǎ, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13326–13329 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Luo, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. He, Z. Chi, P. W. Miller, L. Chena and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11942–11945 RSC .
A. Ozawa, A. Shimizu, R. Nishiyabu and Y. Kubo, Chem. Commun., 2015 10.1039/C4CC07405J .
S. Wang, S. Westcott and W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 11203–11209 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Shustova, T.-C. Ong, A. F. Cozzolino, V. K. Michaelis, R. G. Griffin and M. Dincǎ, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15061–15070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. M. Kelly, Y. Pérez-Fuertes, S. Arimori, S. D. Bull and T. D. James, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1971–1974 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. M. Kelly, Y. Pérez-Fuertes, J. S. Fossey, M. E. Powell, S. D. Bull and T. D. James, Nat. Protoc., 2008, 3, 210–214 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Mirri, S. D. Bull, P. N. Horton, T. D. James, L. Male and J. H. R. Tucker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8903–8905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Metola, E. V. Anslyn, T. D. James and S. D. Bull, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 156–161 RSC .
X. Wu, X.-X. Chen, B.-N. Song, Y.-J. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Chen, T. D. James and Y.-B. Jiang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11793–11799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, I. Shin and J. Yoon, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5956–5967 RSC .

  (a) A. R. Lippert, G. C. Van de Bittner and C. J. Chang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 793–804 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Srikun, A. E. Albers and C. J. Chang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1156–1165 RSC ; 
  (c) W.-K. Oh, Y. S. Jeong, S. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8516–8524 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. W. Lee, H.-W. Rhee, Y.-T. Chang and J.-I. Hong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14791–14794 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) R. Weinstain, E. N. Savariar, C. N. Felsen and R. Y. Tsien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 874–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Schulte-Ladbeck, M. Vogel and U. Karst, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386, 559–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Lin and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15519–15521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. E. Germain and M. J. Knapp, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 9748–9750 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. He, D. Zhu, Q. He, L. Shi, Y. Fu, D. Wen, H. Cao and J. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5739–5741 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Xu, J.-M. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Yang and L. Zang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11779–11781 RSC ; 
  (d) A. Matsumoto, R. Nishiyabu and Y. Kubo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37973–37978 RSC .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor Seiji Shinkai to celebrate his 70th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Yuji Kubo
	Yuji Kubo is a Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University. After a postdoctoral stay (1990–1991) with Prof. J. L. Sessler at the University of Texas at Austin, since 1992, he first joined Saitama University as an Associate Professor, moving to Department of Chemistry at Tokyo Metropolitan University as a Professor in 2008. He was also a researcher of PRESTO under Japan Science Technology Agency (1997–2000) and has also been a researcher at Research Center for Gold Chemistry of Tokyo Metropolitan University Since 2014. His research interests focus on molecular systems based on self-organization and materials for applications in organic electronics.

Ryuhei Nishiyabu
	Ryuhei Nishiyabu is an Assistant Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University. He received his BS and then PhD in 2003 from Doshisha University under the direction of Professor Koji Kano. He worked with Professor Pavel Anzenbacher Jr. at Bowling Green State University as a postdoctoral fellow. Then he worked with Professor Nobuo Kimizuka at Kyushu University as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). He is now an Assistant Professor of Tokyo Metropolitan University, working with Professor Yuji Kubo. His research interests are the design and synthesis of supramolecular materials.

Tony D. James
	Tony D. James is a Professor at the University of Bath. He obtained his BSC from UEA in 1986, PhD in 1991 from the University of Victoria and worked as a PDRF in Japan from 1991–1995 with Seiji Shinkai. From 1995 to 2000 he was a Royal Society Research Fellow at the School of Chemistry at the University of Birmingham, moving to the Department of Chemistry at the University of Bath in September 2000. He has been a visiting professor at Tsukuba, Osaka and Kyushu Universities and is a guest Professor at East China University of Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Shandong Normal University and Nanjing University and is a Hai-Tian (Sea-Sky) Scholar at Dalian University of Technology. His research interests include many aspects of supramolecular chemistry, including molecular recognition, molecular self-assembly and sensor design. Within the area of molecular recognition his research has a particular focus on boronic acid based receptors for the fluorescence sensing of saccharides.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic overview of hierarchical systems using boronic acid building blocks.	 

 	Scheme 1  Boronate esterification and the related dehydrated compounds.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of {[5-iqba]2[C5H8]}·nEtOH and {[4-pyba]2-[C5H8]}·4nEtOH·H2O·toluene repeating unit.	 

 	Fig. 3  Aggregation of the heteroditopic boronate ester through dative B–N bond formation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of dative B–N bond-induced 2D polymer 3.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Formation of borate gel (5) from the guest-encapsulated macrocyclic boronate ester (4) along with release of the guest molecule into the gel. (b) Reconstruction of the macrocyclic boronate ester and recovery of the guest molecule from the gel.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Metal-containing boronate conducting polymers (6). (b) A 1D hydrogen network with 1′,1′′′-biferrocenediboronic acid (7).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) PVA–borate complexation. (b) PVA cross-linking with DMAA–NAAPBA copolymer derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photograph of the boronate hydrogel film with dansyl moieties and FE-SEM image of the xerogel; (b) proposed structure of the indicator hydrogel 8 wherein OH inserted sp3-hybridized tetrahedral boronate esters would be partly produced. (Adapted from ref. 55.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed structure of the film 9. Photographs of the boronate hydrogel films after immersion in aqueous solutions (5 mM HEPES buffer, pH = 7.0, 3.0 mL) of Zn2+ ions ([Zn2+] = (a) 0 M, (b) 3.0 × 10−5 M, and (c) 9.0 × 10−5 M) for 30 min. The photographs were taken under UV light: λex = 365 nm. (Adapted from ref. 56.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The gelation mechanism between PMBV and PVA. (b) Optical microscope image of polymer solution flow in the PDMS microfluidic channel device with fluorine modification. (c) Dissociation of the hydrogel upon adding D-sorbitol. (Reproduced with permission of The American Chemical Society from ref. 59.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Structures of phenylboronic acid-appended gel 10 and the gel possessing catechol moieties 11. (b) Chemical stimulus-controlled hierarchical molecular recognition. (Reproduced with permission of The American Chemical Society from ref. 63.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of catechol PEG. Self-healing properties of the covalent polymer gel formed from 12 (15 wt%) and benzene-1,3-diboronic acid at pH 9.0. The gel (a) as a cube, (b) cut into two pieces, (c) fused together, and (d) stretched without fracture 30 s after fusion. The molar ratio of 12 to benzene-1,3-diboronic acid was 1:8. (Adapted from ref. 67.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis of COF 13 with 4.0 nm open diameter (b) donor–acceptor COF with C60 (14).	 

 	Fig. 14  The host–guest complex of 15 and a PCBM molecule.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Partial structures of alkylated COFs (16). (b) CTC based two-dimensional covalent organic framework (17).	 

 	Fig. 16  The formation of 2D polymers and hollow spheres.	 

 	Fig. 17  Proposed models of boronate ester COF-5 growth.	 

 	Fig. 18  Synthesis of cages 20 under water removing conditions.	 

 	Fig. 19  Synthesis of cuboctahedral [12+8] cages (21).	 

 	Fig. 20  Crystal structure of cage catenane 23 generated from X-ray diffraction data published in ref. 91. Alkyl chains are omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 21  Procedure-dependent trimeric boronate assembles.	 

 	Fig. 22  Telodendrimer pair. (Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 99.)	 

 	Fig. 23  Plausible mechanism for the formation of the submicroparticles.	 

 	Fig. 24  Formation of flower-like microparticles (BP) composed of staked structures of boronate polymers 34. (a) TEM image of Au/BP. (b) TEM image of the corresponding microparticle. (c) The HR-TEM image of the lattice structure observed for the {111} facet of the Au NP. (Adapted from ref. 105.)	 

 	Scheme 2  Hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde (CA) over Pd/BP.	 

 	Fig. 25  Preparation of water-dispersible white-light emitting boronate microparticles. (Adapted from ref. 115.)	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structures of 1,1-DB-TPE and component polymer 35. (b) A fluorescence microscopic image of BP2. (Adapted from ref. 124.)	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Photographs of the corresponding boronate nanoparticle (R-BP2) dispersion in aqueous media. λex = 365 nm. The amounts of grafted rhodamine B are A, 0.0 mol g−1; B, 8.0 × 10−7 mol g−1; C, 2.7 × 10−6 mol g−1; D, 3.9 × 10−6 mol g−1 and E, 16 × 10−6 mol g−1. (b) A plausible partial structure where FRET occurs in R-BP2. (c) Overall fluorescence spectra of R-BP2(W) (0.1 mg mL−1) in water at various temperatures. (Adapted from ref. 124.)	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor Seiji Shinkai to celebrate his 70th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
