Exploring the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 : the role of atom kinetics   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR01818E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01818E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5896-5903Exploring the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition in CH3NH3PbI3: the role of atom kinetics†

        
          
            Ioannis 
            Deretzis
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Antonino 
            La Magna
          
        
      
Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems (CNR-IMM), Z.I. VIII strada 5, 95121 Catania, Italy. E-mail: ioannis.deretzis@imm.cnr.it;  Fax: +39 095 5968312;   Tel: +39 095 5968321
Received 
      14th March 2017
    , Accepted 13th April 2017First published on 13th April 2017AbstractMethylammonium lead tri-iodide is a polymorphic material with two temperature-induced phase transitions at 165 K and 327 K, accompanied by an orthorhombic-to-tetragonal and a tetragonal-to-cubic lattice modification. Understanding the origins of these transitions as well as their implications on the crystal structure of the material is fundamental for its technological optimization. Here, we use the density functional theory along with ab initio molecular dynamics to study the low-temperature phase transition of CH3NH3PbI3. Considering two kinetically robust models for the orthorhombic and the tetragonal phase, we show that the vibrational features of the material can be strongly affected by the orientations of the methylammonium ions. We argue that the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition is characterized by a partial rearrangement of the organic cations that locally relaxes the stress induced by the thermal movement of atoms. We finally propose a macroscopic model for the tetragonal phase that consists of rotated noncentrosymmetric domains, where the methylammonium ions are quasi-two-dimensionally confined around the a–b crystallographic plane.
1. Introduction
Methylammonium lead halide perovskites are organic–inorganic materials that are characterized by temperature-dependent phase transitions, which manifest with an orthorhombic-to-tetragonal and a tetragonal-to-cubic lattice modification upon temperature annealing.1–9 Unlike their manifestation, the origins of these transitions as well as the structure and symmetry of the different phases are still strongly debated in the literature; uncertainty exists on the space group of the tetragonal phase (centrosymmetric I4/mcm2,3 or noncentrosymmetric I4cm4) and consequently on the presence of ferroelectricity,10–21 on the orientation and rotational dynamics of the methylammonium (MA+) ions22–25 as well as on the capacity of common X-ray diffraction (XRD) models to accurately describe the local atomic features of the perovskite lattice.5,6 The key aspect of this controversy is the organic content of the material, whose spatial anisotropy and selective ionic bonding with the halide atoms of the inorganic cage26 influence the bond-length and bond-angle distributions, and consequently, the structural features of the crystal (space group, axis parameters, unit cell volume etc.). Understanding therefore the geometrical and kinetic properties of the MA+ cations could be a major step towards the disambiguation of the structural identity of these materials.
Among the methylammonium lead halides, CH3NH3PbI3 presents a series of photophysical characteristics that make it extremely important for light harvesting applications.27–29 It experiences its low-temperature phase transition at 165 K whereas the high-temperature shift takes place at ∼327 K.2,3 The phase symmetry of the material is strongly related to its photovoltaic properties, with the tetragonal phase near room temperature showing the best power conversion efficiency in solar cell applications.30 Regarding the role of the MA+ ions, recent experiments have argued that these are two-dimensionally confined in the orthorhombic and tetragonal phases (although with different levels of disorder),3,31 whereas three-dimensionally disordered in the cubic phase (with small instances of ordered structures also at temperatures above the tetragonal-cubic transition32). The confined motion of MA+ ions around the tetragonal a–b plane at room temperature has been also predicted by ab initio molecular dynamics calculations,25 showing however a local inorganic arrangement that is more similar to the orthorhombic rather than the standard tetragonal model based on XRD.1 Further similarities between the orthorhombic and the tetragonal phase include the same number of atoms in both unit cells as well as the presence of a rotational tilting between neighboring PbI64− octahedra. The clearly observable qualitative difference concerns the axis parameters that are totally anisotropic in the orthorhombic phase (a ≠ b ≠ c) whereas partially isotropic in the tetragonal phase (a = b ≠ c).1–3 Moreover, quantitative differences appear on the level of disorder for the MA+ ions (higher in the tetragonal phase3,31), the unit cell volume (bigger in the tetragonal phase2) and the average tilting of the PbI64− octahedra (lower in the tetragonal phase3). The understanding of the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition is still poor.
Phase boundaries are an important issue for perovskite materials and their electrical characteristics.33 In this study we employ both static (density functional theory [DFT]) and dynamic (Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics34 [CPMD]) calculations in order to explore the origins of the low-temperature phase transition in CH3NH3PbI3. Considering two kinetically robust models for the orthorhombic and the tetragonal phase, we argue that the vibrational features of the material are significantly affected by the orientation of the organic cations. We attribute the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition to a displacive stress-relaxation mechanism that involves the partial rearrangement of the MA+ ions from an anti-parallel to a quasi-parallel configuration. We finally propose a macroscopic model for the tetragonal phase that consists of equivalent noncentrosymmetric domains with a rotational stacking and a two-dimensional confinement for the MA+ ions. Section 2 discusses the computational methodology and describes the two models used for the orthorhombic and the tetragonal phase. In section 3 we employ DFT and CPMD calculations in order to study both static and dynamic aspects of the two structures, and propose a macroscopic scheme for the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition. Finally, in section 4 we discuss our results.
2. Computational methodology
2.1. 
          Ab initio calculations
Calculations were performed with the plane-wave QUANTUM ESPRESSO code.35 We used the Perdew–Burke–Ezernhof implementation36 of the generalized gradient approximation for the description of the exchange–correlation functional. Ultrasoft pseudopotentials37 were considered for the core electrons, with the exception of the 5d semicore electrons of Pb that were included in the valence group. The cutoff for the kinetic energy and the augmented charge density were set to 35 Ry and 280 Ry, respectively. For the DFT calculations, we considered several unit cell structures (containing 48 atoms each) with either an orthorhombic or a tetragonal symmetry and performed a full relaxation of the atomic positions followed by volume optimization. Convergence was achieved through a 6 × 6 × 4 Brillouin zone sampling within the Monkhorst–Pack scheme.38 The CPMD calculations were performed with the same cutoff energies, exchange–correlation functional and pseudopotentials as the DFT calculations. We used a Verlet algorithm39 for the integration of the equations of motion with a time step dt = 4 a.u. (∼0.1 fs) in order to minimize round-off and truncation errors. Simulations were performed in the canonical ensemble, setting the target temperature with a Nose thermostat40 to either T = 165 K or T = 295 K. All atoms were allowed to move without constrictions. The effective electronic mass was assigned to 100 a.u., whereas ionic masses were set to real values. For these calculations (2 × 2 × 2) Pmm supercells were considered (96 atoms each), corresponding to  supercells of the orthorhombic/tetragonal structures rotated by 45° on the a–b plane. The “neutral” cubic geometry for the CPMD calculations was preferred in order to avoid artificial constraints on the movement of the MA+ ions, as their orientations are the origin for the deformation of the inorganic lattice and not vice versa. The pair correlation functions g(r) were calculated as (1)where ρ is the atomic density, N the total number of atoms within the simulation box and rij the distance between atomic pairs.
2.2. Model descriptions
The entire computational study considers two local models, one for the orthorhombic and one for the tetragonal phase of CH3NH3PbI3. Both structures preserve the perovskite symmetry, comprising of subsequent PbI64− octahedra connected by apical iodine atoms, whereas MA+ cations stand in the intermediate spaces. The orthorhombic structure (Fig. 1(a)) adheres to the standard models deriving from XRD and neutron diffraction,1–3 after atomic and volume optimization from DFT. It is characterized by a centrosymmetric structure (space group Pnma) and a unit cell that contains 48 atoms, which can be considered as a distorted  supercell of the cubic Pmm space group, rotated by 45° on the a–b plane (see ESI†). The DFT-optimized lattice vectors are |a| = 9.16 Å, |b| = 8.69 Å and |c| = 12.99 Å. The MA+ ions lie on the a–b plane of the crystal, whereas neighboring MA+ along the c direction have an anti-parallel alignment. They point towards the four faces of the inorganic PbI3− framework that intersect the a–b plane. The exact point of projection is not on the center of the PbI3− faces, but rotated by ∼19° towards the in-plane iodine atoms of the PbI64− octahedra. Nearby octahedra are tilted on the a-b plane, as a result of the deformation of the inorganic cage from the ionic N–H⋯I interactions, which tend to displace the iodine atoms from their ideal positions.26 This model represents the lowest energy configuration with respect to different MA+ arrangements (see ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Atomic models for (a) the orthorhombic and (b) the tetragongal phase of CH3NH3PbI3, projected on the a–b crystallographic plane. 
The tetragonal structure derives from the previously discussed orthorhombic model by rotating half of the MA+ ions (belonging to a single a–b plane in Fig. 1(b)), in order to obtain a quasi-parallel alignment over the c direction. The coordination is not perfectly parallel, as neighboring MA+ ions are relatively rotated around their C–N axis by 60°. Such configuration is energetically more favorable with respect to the ideally parallel model (see ESI†). The partial rearrangement of the MA+ ions has an important impact on the equilibration of the a and b lattice vectors of the system, with the DFT estimates being |a| = 8.96 Å, |b| = 9.00 Å and |c| = 12.98 Å. The MA+ ions continue to lie on the a–b plane of the crystal, pointing however towards two out of the six faces of the inorganic PbI3− framework. Also here, the exact projection of each MA+ is not on the center of the respective face, but slightly rotated towards the in-plane I atoms by ∼19–21°. Contrary to the orthorhombic model, the adopted tetragonal structure is not centrosymmetric and therefore it is better described by the I4cm space group. We point out that this structure is spontaneously obtained by our molecular dynamics calculations at room temperature, even when the MA+ cations (as well as the inorganic framework) have different initial configurations.25
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Static calculations
Our DFT calculations show that the orthorhombic structure represents the ground state configuration of the CH3NH3PbI3 system, with its total energy being lower by 0.139 eV with respect to the tetragonal structure. A first-order analysis could attribute such energetic difference to the partially altered orientations of the MA+ ions in the two phases. It has been indeed demonstrated that small rearrangements of the MA+ ions give rise to metastable configurations with variable total energies.26,41,42 However, both models have their organic cations pointing towards faces of the inorganic PbI3− frameworks with an almost identical rotation angle towards the apical iodine atoms. A more careful analysis brings to attention the influence of the MA+ configuration on the local stretching of the ionic bonds.43 Here we consider the ionic bond lengths as a measure of the local stress present in the two structures. As a reference, we artificially subject the orthorhombic (centrosymmetric) unit cell to isotropic tensile and compressive strain and observe the relation between the ionic bond-lengths and the total energy of the system. Results are depicted in Fig. 2. The minimum of energy corresponds to a specific range of values for both Pb–I and N–H⋯I bonds (here we consider the single N–I distance as a simplification over the triple hydrogen bonding). In particular, the Pb–I values range between 3.26–3.32 Å, whereas N–I distances are found at 3.61–3.67 Å. The energetic cost appears to be significantly higher when the ionic bonds experience compression as compared to tension. We can therefore expect that during the thermal movement of atoms the local spread of the bond lengths will be anisotropic towards the higher-stress direction with respect to equilibrium. An indirect measure of local stress is the contemporary presence of both higher and lower values of the Pb–I bond-lengths, which for strain above ∼ 3–4% give rise to an apparent weakening of the inorganic bonds. This aspect is indicative of the soft character of the inorganic interactions in this material. On the basis of Fig. 2 it is now more easy to interpret the energetic differences between the orthorhombic and the tetragonal models. Fig. 3 shows the DFT-calculated equilibrium bond lengths for the two unstrained structures. The partial rearrangement of the MA ions in the tetragonal phase leads to a wider spread of the Pb–I bonds with respect to the orthorhombic structure, corresponding to an increased local stretching of the inorganic lattice (see Fig. 2). A similar result appears also for the N–I distances, which unidirectionally become higher. In this sense, the energetic stability of the CH3NH3PbI3 system in the studied models is shaped by the locally induced stain, which, in turn, is affected by the positions/orientations of the MA+ ions. This aspect confirms that the spatial/electronic asymmetry of the MA+ ions is a key issue for understanding the properties of this hybrid material.
 Fig. 2  (a) Total energy as a function of strain for the orthorhombic model of Fig. 1(a). (b) Pb–I and (c) N(H3)–I bond-lengths as a function of strain for the orthorhombic model. 
 Fig. 3  Ionic bond-length distributions for (a) the Pb–I and (b) the N(H3)–I bonds of the orthorhombic and the tetragonal models of Fig. 1, calculated from DFT. 
3.2. Dynamic calculations
The study of the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition (which is triggered by the temperature) necessitates the understanding of the kinetic/vibrational aspects of the perovskite lattice, as well as how such features can influence the energetic equilibrium discussed previously. Phonon properties are indeed on the basis of the structural/phase transitions often observed in other perovskite materials.44,45 Here we evaluate the role of lattice kinetics by means of CPMD, considering supercell structures for both models of Fig. 1. We perform the calculations in the canonical ensemble, setting the target temperature of the Nose thermostat to 165 K (i.e. to the transition temperature). After 3 ps of simulation time that serve for the thermodynamic equilibration of the two structures, we calculate the statistical properties integrated over 7 ps. The lattice vibrations are strongly anharmonic in both cases, due to the complex ionic N–H⋯I interactions through triple hydrogen bonding with nearby iodine atoms.26 We also note that throughout the simulation period no fourfold rotations of the MA+ ions are observed, indicating the kinetic robustness of the two models. In both cases, the MA+ ions are quasi-two-dimensionally confined around the a–b plane of the crystal, maintaining the principal characteristics of the static models of Fig. 1. Fig. 4 shows the ionic pair correlation functions for the Pb–I and N–I bonds, respectively. Focusing on the orthorhombic structure, we observe a splitting of the Pb–I bond-length distribution with peaks at 3.08 and 3.45 Å that diverge from the equilibrium values of Fig. 3. A similar effect is also calculated for the N–I distances, with peaks at 3.53 and 4.05 Å. As observed in Fig. 4, switching to the tetragonal configuration partially relaxes such local stress, giving rise to a percentage of ionic bonds that stand around equilibrium values. We note that in this case, the Pb–I pair correlation function shows three peaks, with the first one being quasi-identical with the orthorhombic phase, whereas a double peak at 3.3 Å (higher) and 3.77 A (lower) substitutes the 3.45 Å peak of the orthorhombic structure. Based on these models, the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition has as displacive character through the partial rotation of the MA+ ions and can be perceived as a local stress-relaxation mechanism due to the thermal movement of atoms. The persistent and distinct characteristics of the pair correlation functions of the two structures indicate also that the vibrational features of the material should be different for the two phases, giving rise to distinct entropic contributions in the free energy of the system.
 Fig. 4  Pair correlation functions for (a) the Pb–I and (b) the N(H3)–I bonds at a temperature of 165 K, calculated from ab initio molecular dynamics. The functions have been integrated over a 7 ps period of simulation time. 
In order to better understand the unequal kinetic features of CH3NH3PbI3 in the two configurations, we have decomposed the Pb–I pair correlation functions, considering separately the contributions along each direction of our simulation boxes (here the x, y and z axes of the simulation box are parallel to the a, b and c crystallographic axes, respectively). We notice that the vibrational differences of the two phases appear mostly on the a–b plane, whereas a smaller effect of the phase shift takes place along the c axis of the system (Fig. 5). The origin of such inhomogeneity stands at the unsymmetrical charge allocation of the organic cation over the -NH3 moiety26 that displaces its vibrational center from the geometrical center of the inorganic cage. As the MA+ ions have an anti-parallel alignment in the orthorhombic phase over the c-axis, the respective spatial dislocation is translated also to the surrounding inorganic framework, giving rise to a stretching of the inorganic bonds along the a–b plane. Such topological feature is partially corrected with the tetragonal symmetry, where the quasi-parallel alignment of the organic cations lowers this spatial dislocation and partially relaxes the mean stress over the inorganic framework.
 Fig. 5  Decomposition of the Pb–I pair correlation function along the three crystallographic axes for the orthorhombic and tetragonal phases of CH3NH3PbI3, based on ab initio molecular dynamics calculations at a temperature of 165 K. 
3.3. Macroscopic model for the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition
The limited simulation time of our CPMD calculations is prohibiting for the actual observation of the phase shift between the orthorhombic and the tetragonal structures (which should in principle be accessible only from accelerated kinetic Monte Carlo algorithms). However, the strong resemblance of the two models allows for a phenomenological description of the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition and a proposal of a macroscopic model that goes beyond the few-atom resolution of our molecular dynamics calculations. The basis of this transition stands in the quasi-parallel reconfiguration of the MA+ ions with respect to the c crystallographic direction through the rotation of half of the MA+ ions. This rotation can take place with an equivalent probability when starting from the orthorhombic structure (schematically depicted in Fig. 6(a)) and rotating the MA+ cations of either the first or the second a–b plane of each unit cell. These two transformations should give rise to the upper two tetragonal domains of Fig. 6(b), which are structurally equivalent, whereas relatively rotated by 180°. We note that in real crystals, both transformations can contemporary take place in different parts of the samples. Similarly, another plausible transformation can occur by rotating half of the MA+ ions of each a–b plane, giving again rise to two domains for the tetragonal structure (lower in Fig. 6(b)). Considering that the formation of the two upper (and similarly the two lower) domains is equiprobable, we propose that the tetragonal structure consists of equivalent noncentrosymmetric domains that locally resemble the model of Fig. 1(b) and are rotated by right angles on the a–b crystallographic plane. The present model captures (i) the partially isotropic lattice parameters of the tetragonal phase (a = b ≠ c) (ii) the quasi-two-dimensional confinement of the MA+ ions around the a–b plane,3,31 (iii) the orientation of the MA+ ions along four faces of the inorganic cage3 (considering that in each domain the MA+ ions point towards two faces), (iv) the presence of ferroelectric domains11,16,17,21 and (v) the local structural resemblance between the orthorhombic and the tetragonal distortion of the inorganic cage.5 Open issues that need to be clarified regard the dimensions of the tetragonal domains, their long-term robustness against fluctuations as well as the stability of domain boundaries. We finally note that the multiplicity of the tetragonal domains should also give rise to an increase in the configurational entropy of the system.
 Fig. 6  Scheme of (a) the orthorhombic and (b) the tetragonal phase. Each arrow represents a MA+ ion oriented towards the –CH3 moiety. Rectangular boxes represent the inorganic framework. The two MA+ ions present in each box are spatially separated along the c-axis and belong to neighboring cages. The orthorhombic model is consistent with the atomic model of Fig. 1(a). Each domain of the tetragonal model is consistent with the atomic configuration of Fig. 1(b). Tetragonal domains are rotated by 0°, 90°, 180° and 270°. Both models are projected on the a–b crystallographic plane. 
3.4. Temperature evolution of the tetragonal phase
The tetragonal phase of CH3NH3PbI3 persists for temperatures between 165 to 327 K, prior to the tetragonal-cubic transition. In order to investigate the static or dynamic character of this phase, we have repeated the same molecular dynamics simulation for the model of Fig. 1(b), setting the Nose thermostat to 295 K. Fig. 7 shows the calculated pair correlation functions and compares them to the ones extracted from the previous simulation at 165 K. Since no phase transition is observed in this temperature range, the qualitative characteristics of the two distributions persist with temperature. However, the triple peak of the Pb–I bond at 165 K merges into a single nonuniform peak at 295 K, where the three components can be only extracted through deconvolution. Also the N–I bond distribution shows a quantitative evolution with an overall reduction of its maximum at 3.61 Å. These results show that the tetragonal distribution is not static when varying the temperature of the CH3NH3PbI3 system. In order to explain this temperature evolution, we have projected the orientations of all MA+ ions on the inorganic framework, considering an integration period of 7 ps (see Fig. 8). We notice that at 165 K the MA+ orientations oscillate around the a–b crystallographic plane. At 295 K, albeit the qualitative features of the distribution remain unaltered, we observe a significant reduction of this confinement (i.e. a bigger spread of the MA+ projections around the a–b plane). Hence, the tetragonal phase is characterized by a gradual lowering of the two-dimensional confinement for the MA+ ions as a function of temperature, as a result of the increasing thermal movement of atoms. It can be expected that the temperature corresponding to the tetragonal-cubic transition signals the loss of this two-dimensional confinement.31
 Fig. 7  Ionic pair correlation functions of the tetragonal phase at 165 K and 295 K, integrated over 7 ps of simulation time. 
 Fig. 8  Projection of the MA+ orientations over the inorganic cage for the tetragonal phase at (a) 165 K and (b) 295 K, considering all MA+ ions present in the simulation box for 7 ps of simulation time. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, in this article we have employed two specific models for the orthorhombic and the tetragonal phase of CH3NH3PbI3 and computationally demonstrated that the orientation of the MA+ ions is strongly related to the typology of the lattice kinetics. The calculated pair correlation functions presented persistent and distinct characteristics for the two phases, indicating that vibrational contributions are important for the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition. Within this context, we have argued that the anti-parallel configuration of the organic cations in the orthorhombic structure pilots the phase transformation at 165 K. The resulting orthorhombic–tetragonal shift manifests as a partial stress-relaxation mechanism that “adjusts” a percentage of ionic bond-lengths around their equilibrium values. Such transition has a displacive character, as it involves the rearrangement of half of the MA+ ions present in the crystal, which however maintain a quasi-two-dimensional confinement around the a–b crystallographic plane. Considering all translational possibilities that can lead to the orthorhombic–tetragonal transition, we have proposed a macroscopic model for the tetragonal phase, based on equivalent noncentrosymmetric domains with a right-angle rotational stacking. Finally, we have discussed the temperature evolution of the tetragonal phase, pointing out that the level of the two-dimensional confinement for the MA+ ions gradually lowers when increasing the system temperature. Our results can be important for the disambiguation of the structural characteristics of this hybrid perovskite material.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Alessandra Alberti, Emanuele Smecca and Giovanni Mannino for useful discussions.
References
Y. Kawamura, H. Mashiyama and K. Hasebe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 71, 1694–1697 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 CAS .
M. T. Weller, O. J. Weber, P. F. Henry, A. M. Di Pumpo and T. C. Hansen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4180–4183 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Page, J. E. Siewenie, P. Quadrelli and L. Malavasi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 14532–14536 CrossRef .
K. Druzbicki, R. S. Pinna, S. Rudic, M. Jura, G. Gorini and F. Fernandez-Alonso, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4701–4709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Swainson, R. Hammond, C. Soulliere, O. Knop and W. Massa, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 176, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
P. Whitfield, N. Herron, W. Guise, K. Page, Y. Cheng, I. Milas and M. Crawford, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maalej, Y. Abid, A. Kallel, A. Daoud, A. Lautié and F. Romain, Solid State Commun., 1997, 103, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, S. K. Kim, B. J. Kim, K.-S. Shin, M. K. Gupta, H. S. Jung, S.-W. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1729–1735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kutes, L. Ye, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, B. D. Huey and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3335–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Xiao, K. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Ouyang, K. P. Ong, K. Zeng and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1155–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Govinda, P. Mahale, B. P. Kore, S. Mukherjee, M. S. Pavan, C. De, S. Ghara, A. Sundaresan, A. Pandey, T. N. Guru Row and D. D. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2412–2419 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081506 CrossRef .
M. Coll, A. Gomez, E. Mas-Marza, O. Almora, G. Garcia-Belmonte, M. Campoy-Quiles and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1408–1413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Wei, Q. Zhu, S. Xie, J. Liu, X. Meng and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3806–3817 RSC .
M. U. Rothmann, W. Li, Y. Zhu, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, J. Etheridge and Y.-B. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, P. Delugas, M. I. Saba and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4909–4915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stroppa, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis and S. Picozzi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2223–2231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. Wang and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. Van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, O. Selig, H. J. Bakker, Y. L. Rezus, C. Muller, T. Glaser, R. Lovrincic, Z. Sun, Z. Chen, A. Walsh, J. M. Frost and T. L. Jansen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3663–3669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, B. J. Foley, B. Ipek, M. Tyagi, J. R. Copley, C. M. Brown, J. J. Choi and S.-H. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31278–31286 RSC .
J. Even, M. Carignano and C. Katan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6222–6236 RSC .
I. Deretzis, B. N. Di Mauro, A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, E. Smecca and A. La Magna, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Deretzis, A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, E. Smecca, F. Giannazzo, N. Sakai, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 131904 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, W. Tress, J.-P. Correa-Baena, T. Edvinsson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11382–11393 CAS .
W. M. Franssen, S. G. van Es, R. Dervisoglu, G. A. De Wijs and A. P. Kentgens, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 61–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Beecher, O. E. Semonin, J. M. Skelton, J. M. Frost, M. W. Terban, H. Zhai, A. Alatas, J. S. Owen, A. Walsh and S. J. Billinge, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 880–887 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, D. Xiao and J. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2559–2595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni and I. Dabo, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1990, 41, 7892 CrossRef .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188 CrossRef .
L. Verlet, Phys. Rev., 1967, 159, 98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nosé, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 511–519 CrossRef .
J. S. Bechtel, R. Seshadri and A. Van der Ven, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12403–12410 CAS .
F. Brivio, A. B. Walker and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042111 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, M. Zhang and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 23969–23975 CAS .
W. Zhong, D. Vanderbilt and K. Rabe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 73, 1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tagantsev, K. Vaideeswaran, S. Vakhrushev, A. Filimonov, R. Burkovsky, A. Shaganov, D. Andronikova, A. Rudskoy, A. Baron and H. Uchiyama, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2229 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01818EThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Atomic models for (a) the orthorhombic and (b) the tetragongal phase of CH3NH3PbI3, projected on the a–b crystallographic plane.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Total energy as a function of strain for the orthorhombic model of Fig. 1(a). (b) Pb–I and (c) N(H3)–I bond-lengths as a function of strain for the orthorhombic model.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ionic bond-length distributions for (a) the Pb–I and (b) the N(H3)–I bonds of the orthorhombic and the tetragonal models of Fig. 1, calculated from DFT.	 

 	Fig. 4  Pair correlation functions for (a) the Pb–I and (b) the N(H3)–I bonds at a temperature of 165 K, calculated from ab initio molecular dynamics. The functions have been integrated over a 7 ps period of simulation time.	 

 	Fig. 5  Decomposition of the Pb–I pair correlation function along the three crystallographic axes for the orthorhombic and tetragonal phases of CH3NH3PbI3, based on ab initio molecular dynamics calculations at a temperature of 165 K.	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme of (a) the orthorhombic and (b) the tetragonal phase. Each arrow represents a MA+ ion oriented towards the –CH3 moiety. Rectangular boxes represent the inorganic framework. The two MA+ ions present in each box are spatially separated along the c-axis and belong to neighboring cages. The orthorhombic model is consistent with the atomic model of Fig. 1(a). Each domain of the tetragonal model is consistent with the atomic configuration of Fig. 1(b). Tetragonal domains are rotated by 0°, 90°, 180° and 270°. Both models are projected on the a–b crystallographic plane.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ionic pair correlation functions of the tetragonal phase at 165 K and 295 K, integrated over 7 ps of simulation time.	 

 	Fig. 8  Projection of the MA+ orientations over the inorganic cage for the tetragonal phase at (a) 165 K and (b) 295 K, considering all MA+ ions present in the simulation box for 7 ps of simulation time.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01818E

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
