Ultra-flexible and waterproof perovskite photovoltaics for washable power source applications   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC01519B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC01519B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 6320-6323Ultra-flexible and waterproof perovskite photovoltaics for washable power source applications†

        
          
            Zengqi 
            Huang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Long‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Runying 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaotian 
            Hu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liyun 
            Le
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiangchuan 
            Meng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Tan
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yiwang 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Advanced Scientific Research (iASR), Key Laboratory of Functional Organic Small Molecules for Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: tanlicheng@ncu.edu.cn
cState Key Laboratory of Nuclear Resources and Environment, East China University of Technology, 418 Guanglan Avenue, Nanchang 330013, China
Received 
      20th March 2021
    , Accepted 24th May 2021First published on 24th May 2021AbstractA washable perovskite solar cell with high efficiency (over 11%) and outstanding crumpling durability (maintaining 81.2% after 100 cycles crumpling) is demonstrated herein by combining the flexible self-encapsulation method with a waterproof glue coated substrate.
Solar cells based on organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials have attracted widespread interest as suitable power sources for wearable applications owing to their fantastic power conversion efficiency (PCE), low-temperature fabrication process and large-scale processability.1,2 These outstanding properties have prompted the development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) that shift to more stabilized and flexible devices. The recent progress in PSCs using various engineering approaches such as interfacial engineering,3 introduction of additives,4 and the substitution of the brittle transparent electrode,5,6 are the main directions to improve both the stability and flexibility of PSCs.
Nevertheless, it is still difficult for PSCs to simultaneously achieve high efficiency, moisture stability, mechanical robustness and washability. Lee et al. used an ultra-thin substrate to fabricate super flexible solar cells with crack-free perovskite films.7 However, the reduced thickness of the polymer substrate and passivation films actually suffer from insufficient barrier properties in both water vapour and oxygen.8 Thus, it is hard to meet the requirements of washing processes. Weerasinghe et al. used adhesive layers to encapsulate flexible PSCs (f-PSCs), which showed good moisture-barrier properties.9 Lam et al. demonstrated textile-based f-PSCs by incorporating an acrylic elastomer as an encapsulating material, which improved the ambient stability and washable capability.10 As a result, effective encapsulation methods can help achieve stable and washable PSCs. In addition, the undesirable contact and reaction between the metal electrode and perovskite absorber also result in a significant corrosion of the metal electrode layer, which leads to ion migration throughout the devices. To solve this problem, Kaltenbrunner et al. introduced a chromium oxide-chromium interlayer that protected the metal top contacts from reactions with the perovsktie.1 Therefore, an integrate fabrication process is urgent for developing wearable and washable PSCs.
In this work, we demonstrate a washable PSC device with high efficiency (over 11%) and crumpling durability (81.2% for 100 cycles). These devices are fabricated for the first time by a flexible self-encapsulation process, which enables the manufacturing of vacuum-evaporation metal-free f-PSCs. Moreover, the poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (EVA) modified poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate can effectively suppress the oxygen and moisture diffusion. As a result, these ultra-flexible PSCs can maintain 92% of the initial PCE value after storing for 10000 h under enclosed conditions filled with water vapor, and retain 95% of the original value even after dipping into water for 240 min. In addition, the resulting washable PSCs utilizing such a self-encapsulation method exhibit a significant reduction in lead leakage, which only exhibits a Pb concentration of 1.17 mg L−1 after 200 crumple cycles under water.
The ultra-flexible PSC devices are fabricated by laminating the front stack and back stack with the structure of PET/EVA/PET-ITO/NiOx/Perovskite/EVA and PET/EVA/PET-ITO/PEI/PCBM, respectively (Fig. 1a). As shown in Fig. 1b, the self-encapsulated f-PSC with a perovskite layer thickness of ∼450 nm is sandwiched between two PET/EVA substrates. The self-encapsulation process is accomplished by a temperature controllable laminator (Fig. S1a, ESI†). The detailed fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. S1b (ESI†) and Experimental section. And the perovskite chips have been successfully manufactured by this flexible lamination process (Fig. 1c and d). We first investigate the device performance of the self-encapsulated f-PSCs upon different lamination temperatures (Fig. S2, ESI†). The optimum device performance is found for a lamination temperature of 120 °C. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the resulting 0.19 cm2 champion f-PSC is displayed in Fig. 1e, which exhibits a PCE of 11.04% (reverse scan) with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.97 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.96 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.58. The laminated f-PSC also delivers a stabilized power output of 10.16% under a constant voltage bias near the maximum power point (0.62 V) under ambient conditions (Fig. S3a, ESI†), thus displaying an inconspicuous hysteresis phenomenon with a PCE of 10.12%, a Jsc of 19.56 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.96 V, and an FF of 0.54 for the forward scan. As shown in Fig. S3b (ESI†), the integrated Jsc determined from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum is quite consistent with the value obtained from J–V curves. This photovoltaic performance is a breakthrough in the flexible laminated PSCs without a metal electrode (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-encapsulation process of f-PSC. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of self-encapsulated f-PSC sandwiched between two PET/EVA substrates. (c and d) Photographs of the self-encapsulated f-PSC, the effective encapsulation area is marked in blue. (e) The J–V curves of the champion self-encapsulated f-PSC. The inset shows the working principle of the ultra-flexible PSC. 
Notably, an EVA bonding layer at the perovskite/PCBM interface has been introduced in this lamination process.11 The EVA bonding layer can significantly improve the device performance by spatially transporting electrons and blocking holes, which balance the charge transfer in the cell (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI†). To explore the pressure induced perovskite crystallization during flexible lamination, we therefore conduct scanning electron microscope (SEM) measurement. As shown in Fig. 2a–f, the average grain sizes of the perovskite films increased from 274.83 nm to 290.25 nm by introducing EVA. After lamination, the grain sizes of the perovskite films with or without EVA bonding layer both increase via this flexible lamination process. It has been reported that the increase of initial pressure can lead to a reduction in bond length of the perovskite lattice, which is associated with the perovskite crystallization during stress-induced phase transformations.12–14 Interestingly, the EVA induced morphology changes are observed in Fig. 2c. With a 120 °C annealing and 30 bar pressure lamination, the EVA polymer can lead to a more smooth and compact perovskite film (Fig. 2d and Fig. S6, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images of perovskite films laminated (a and b) without and (c and d) with an EVA bonding layer on the PET-ITO substrate. The scar bar is 1 μm. (e and f) Grain size distribution calculated from the SEM images using the Nanomeasurer 1.2 software. (g) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite films fabricated on PET-ITO before and after flexible lamination. 
Moreover, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films (contained EVA bonding layer) fabricated with or without flexible lamination are carried out in Fig. 2g. The protruding part is the characteristic peak of the PET substrate. The (110), (220) and (310) peaks significantly increase after flexible lamination, which demonstrates that pressure can influence the crystallinity properties of the perovskite films. It should be noted that the diffraction intensity of the perovskite characteristic peaks are observed to increase with enhancing lamination time from 0 to 20 min, and then decrease with 30 min lamination (Fig. S7, ESI†). This decrease can be attributed to the potential onset stress induced amorphization,12–15 which may be resulted from cracking or damage phenomena. Such localized amorphization can further affect the perovskite film quality, which is demonstrated by the photoluminescence (PL) and UV-Vis absorption spectra (Fig. S8, ESI†). Due to the adhesive interaction of an EVA bonding layer and flexible lamination process, self-encapsulated f-PSC with a PCE of 6.42% can be obtained (Fig. S2 and S4, ESI†). However, it still exhibits a relatively low Jsc of 13.17 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.51. Thus, we introduce polyethylenimine (PEI) as a buffer layer between the transparent electrode and PCBM to further improve the device performance. It has been reported that PEI can reduce the work function of the ITO electrodes, thus providing an Ohmic contact for effective electron collection.16 As shown in Fig. S9a and Table S2 (ESI†), self-encapsulated f-PSC with a champion PCE of 11.04% has been achieved by using a PEI buffer layer. In order to understand the PCE improvement upon PEI modification, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to analyze the physical phenomena for charge transport (Fig. S9b, ESI†). A better charge carrier transport between PCBM and the transparent electrode can be obtained by introducing PEI buffer layer, which leads to the enhancement of Jsc, FF and PCE.
The above results demonstrate the feasibility of our flexible lamination technique, thus we adopt an ultra-thin substrate to further investigate the device flexibility. For all the mechanical tests, both the front and back chips are fabricated on a 2.5 μm thick PET substrate by using poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) as a supporting fixture. And highly conductive poly(3,4-ethyle-nedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, PH1000) is used as the transparent electrode to replace the brittle ITO. As shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†), the sheet resistance of an ITO electrode has a distinct increase after 100 cycles. The photovoltaic performance of such an ultra-flexible device is first examined in Fig. S11 (ESI†), a champion PCE of 9.29% with a Jsc of 17.85 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.92 V, an FF of 0.57 has been achieved. In addition, the durability of the self-encapsulated f-PSCs with an EVA bonding layer under cyclic bending tests at various bending radii (R = 3, 2 and 1.5 mm) for 7000 cycles has been carried out in Fig. 3a. The ultra-flexible PSC retains 94% of its original PCE after 7000 bending cycles at the radius of 1.5 mm. Subsequent to the aforementioned success in cyclic bending tests obtained by such ultra-flexible devices, harsh deformation tests involving crumpling and complete folding are introduced to verify the possibility of using these cells in actual wearable devices. As shown in Fig. 3b, the ultra-flexible PSC fabricated via a flexible lamination process can maintain over 95% PCE of the original value after 1000 continual folding cycles with a 0.5 mm radius. However, the PCE of the conventional flexible PSC appears to show a significant decrease to less than 30% of its original value after only 200 folding cycles. Moreover, the normalized PCE versus crumpling cycles for the f-PSCs fabricated from conventional and flexible lamination methods are demonstrated in Fig. 3c. An obvious decrease in PCE can be observed after only 20 cycles of crumpling for the conventional flexible device due to the mechanical deformation beyond its endurance, which directly damages the charge carrier transport in the corresponding devices. Surprisingly, the self-encapsulated f-PSC maintains over 81% of the initial performance after 100 crumpling cycles. Photographic images of the ultra-flexible device with an EVA bonding layer before and after crumpling tests are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†). To investigate the outstanding mechanical durability of this self-encapsulated f-PSC, a neutral mechanical plane analysis has been carried out. The neutral plane is a plane passing through the device thickness with no uniaxial bending strain at a minimal radius curvature, where the strains are zero in this position.17 The Young's modulus and the thickness of each function layer are summarized in Table S3 (ESI†). As shown in Fig. 3d, with the flexible self-encapsulated process, the location of the neutral plane moves from the flexible substrate to the fragile perovskite layer, which can minimize the destruction resulting from the bending force. These above results suggest that our design of ultra-flexible PSCs exhibits good mechanical durability for wearable and washable power source applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) Normalized PCE of the self-encapsulated f-PSCs measured after 7000 bending cycles at different bending radii (R = 3, 2, and 1.5 mm). Normalized PCE of the corresponding f-PSCs as a function of (b) bending and (c) crumpling cycles with or without self-encapsulation. (d) Schematic illustration of the neutral mechanical plane of f-PSCs with or without self-encapsulation. 
Furthermore, the long-term stability of the corresponding encapsulated f-PSCs is carried out by storing these devices under enclosed conditions filled with water vapor (∼80% humidity) (Fig. 4a). The normalized PCE of conventional f-PSCs encapsulated by PDMS or EVA reduces by 30% and 16% after 10000 h, respectively. Unlike materials such as glass or metal, PET is permeable to gas, water vapor and volatile organic compounds.18 So that the degradation of f-PSCs occurs when storing under water vapor conditions. Surprisingly, the self-encapsulated f-PSCs exhibit excellent stability which only reduces 8% of the original PCE value after 10000 h of storage. This result is mainly attributed to the EVA upon the PET substrate that can limit the ingression of water vapor.11,19 We further investigate the water stability by directly immersing the corresponding devices in deionized water. As shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†), the photographs show that the self-encapsulated f-PSC can remain the original dark brown even if immersing in water for 24 h, which provides the possibility for the realization of a washable power source. Moreover, we actually demonstrate the excellent washability of a self-encapsulated f-PSC device by a washing experiment (Video S1, ESI†). And the electrical performance of the ultra-flexible devices is also characterized. As shown in Fig. 4b, the flexible PSC self-encapsulated by PET/EVA exhibits a negligible decrease (∼5%) in device performance after soaking in abstergent aqueous solution for 240 min. However, the PCE of the flexible PSC self-encapsulated by PET exhibits an obvious reduction of 39%. Besides, a cyclic crumpling test is performed by exposing the flexible self-encapsulated PSCs to water (inset in Fig. 4c). The ultra-flexible PSC self-encapsulated by PET/EVA remains at 85% of the original PCE value even after 30 crumpling cycles in water. Interestingly, the ultra-flexible PSC self-encapsulated by PET can also remain at 82% of its initial PCE value, indicating that the excellent mechanical durability is mainly attributed to the adjustment of the neutral mechanical plane. As a result, our design of ultra-flexible PSCs shows an excellent stability under simultaneous mechanical stress and water exposure.
 Fig. 4  (a) Long-term stability of the encapsulated f-PSCs upon storing in enclosed conditions filled with water vapor (∼80% humidity). Normalized PCE of the washable PSCs as a function of (b) dipping time and (c) crumpling cycles. The Pb concentration in the contaminated water is detected by ICP-MS measurements after (d) 24 h dipping or (e) 200 cycles crumpling. 
To further demonstrate the environmental friendliness of such ultra-flexible PSCs during washing, an inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) instrument is further used to quantify the leaked lead (Pb) concentration. As shown in Fig. 4d, the changing trend of Pb concentrations in the contaminated water is similar to f-PSCs encapsulated by PDMS and EVA when dipping in water for 24 h, which indicates that the conventional encapsulation methods (even EVA encapsulation) cannot effectively resolve the water infiltrating into flexible devices. However, the Pb concentration drastically decreases to 0.89 mg L−1 for the flexible self-encapsulation method. Moreover, we detect the Pb concentrations of the contamination solutions by washing the encapsulated f-PSCs under 200 cycles of crumpling (Fig. 4e). The flexible devices encapsulated by PDMS or EVA exhibit high Pb concentrations of 10.73 mg L−1 and 10.09 mg L−1, respectively. It is worth noting that the Pb concentration significantly decreases to 1.17 mg L−1 for the flexible self-encapsulation method, which is comparable to the previous reports (Table S4, ESI†). These results demonstrate that the EVA-coated PET substrate and flexible self-encapsulation method can substantially enhance the mechanical robustness of the f-PSCs and prevent Pb leakage into the environment. Our washable PSCs show promise as an ideal power source for wearable and clean energy applications.
In summary, the use of ultra-flexible and washable PSCs is demonstrated herein with a combination of a flexible self-encapsulation method and an EVA modified substrate. The simultaneous crumpling durability (81.2% for 100 cycles) and water stability enable the washability of PSCs with a maintained high efficiency (over 11%). The superior water stability is attributed to the EVA upon PET substrate, which can effectively suppress the oxygen and moisture diffusion, and result in a significant reduction in Pb leakage into the environment. Such rational design of flexible self-encapsulated PSCs against mechanical failure will provide a new design guideline for wearable and washable devices.
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51973088, 52063019, U20A20128, 51833004, and 51425304) and Distinguished Young Scholars of Jiangxi Province (20171BCB23011).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Głowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Baure, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, F. Li and Y. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1065–1072 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, K. Yao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800455 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Long, Z. Huang, J. Zhang, X. Hu, L. Tan and Y. Chen, Flexible Printed Electron., 2020, 5, 13002 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lee, M. C. Kim, Y. W. Choi, N. Ahn, J. Jang, J. Yoon, S. M. Kim, J. G. Lee, D. Kang, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3182–3191 RSC .
G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and A. Labouret, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3224–3233 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Weerasinghe, Y. Dkhissi, A. D. Scully, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Chegn, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lam, J.-Y. Chen, P.-C. Tsai, Y.-T. Hsieh, C.-C. Chueh, S.-H. Tung and W.-C. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 54361–54368 RSC .
Z. Huang, X. Hu, C. Liu, X. Meng, Z. Huang, J. Yang, X. Duan, J. Long, Z. Zhao, L. Tan, Y. Song and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902629 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Lü, W. Yang, T. Wen, L. Yang, X. Ren, L. Wang, Z. Lin and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11144–11149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lü, W. Yang, Q. Jia and H. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6764–6776 RSC .
O. V. Oyelade, O. K. Oyewole, D. O. Oyewole, S. A. Adeniji, R. Ichwani, D. M. Sanni and W. O. Soboyejo, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, Y. Fang, R. Li, H. Xiao, J. Crowley, C. Wang, T. J. White, W. A. Goddard, Z. Wang, T. Baikie and J. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 6650–6654 CrossRef .
J. Lee, H. Back, J. Kong, H. Kang, S. Song, H. Suh, S.-O. Kang and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1152–1157 RSC .
L. Mao, Q. Meng, A. Ahmad and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700535 CrossRef .
S. Amberg-Schwab, M. Hoffmann, H. Bader and M. Gessler, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim and C. Han, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and corresponding characterization including XRD, PL, UV absorption, EQE and device performances. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc01519b‡ Z. Huang and J. Long contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-encapsulation process of f-PSC. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of self-encapsulated f-PSC sandwiched between two PET/EVA substrates. (c and d) Photographs of the self-encapsulated f-PSC, the effective encapsulation area is marked in blue. (e) The J–V curves of the champion self-encapsulated f-PSC. The inset shows the working principle of the ultra-flexible PSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images of perovskite films laminated (a and b) without and (c and d) with an EVA bonding layer on the PET-ITO substrate. The scar bar is 1 μm. (e and f) Grain size distribution calculated from the SEM images using the Nanomeasurer 1.2 software. (g) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite films fabricated on PET-ITO before and after flexible lamination.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Normalized PCE of the self-encapsulated f-PSCs measured after 7000 bending cycles at different bending radii (R = 3, 2, and 1.5 mm). Normalized PCE of the corresponding f-PSCs as a function of (b) bending and (c) crumpling cycles with or without self-encapsulation. (d) Schematic illustration of the neutral mechanical plane of f-PSCs with or without self-encapsulation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Long-term stability of the encapsulated f-PSCs upon storing in enclosed conditions filled with water vapor (∼80% humidity). Normalized PCE of the washable PSCs as a function of (b) dipping time and (c) crumpling cycles. The Pb concentration in the contaminated water is detected by ICP-MS measurements after (d) 24 h dipping or (e) 200 cycles crumpling.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and corresponding characterization including XRD, PL, UV absorption, EQE and device performances. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc01519b
‡ Z. Huang and J. Long contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
