Solar-driven plasmonic heterostructure Ti/TiO 2−x with gradient doping for sustainable plasmon-enhanced catalysis   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP00672F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP00672F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 7769-7777Solar-driven plasmonic heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x with gradient doping for sustainable plasmon-enhanced catalysis†

        
          
            Chaoqun 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Nadeem 
            Akram
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ola 
            Nilsen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nini 
            Pryds
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Kaiying 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Microsystems, University of South-Eastern Norway, Raveien 215, 3184 Horten, Norway. E-mail: Kaiying.Wang@usn.no
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Postboks 1033, 0315 Oslo, Norway
cDepartment of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Risø Campus, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Received 
      6th February 2020
    , Accepted 16th March 2020First published on 16th March 2020AbstractPlasmon-enhanced harvesting of photons has contributed to the photochemical conversion and storage of solar energy. However, high dependence on noble metals and weak coupling in heterostructures constrain the progress towards sustainable plasmonic enhancement. Here earth-abundant Ti is studied to achieve the plasmonic enhancement of catalytic activity in a solar-driven heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x. The heterostructure was fabricated by engineering an intense coupling of a surface-etched Ti metal and a gradient-based TiO2−x dielectric via diffusion doping. Ti/TiO2−x exhibits a highly resonant light absorption band associated with surface plasmon resonances that exhibit strong near-field enhancement (NFE) and hot electron injection effects. In a photoelectrochemical system, intense interaction of the resonant plasmons with a vicinal TiO2−x dielectric accelerates the transfer of solar energy to charge carriers for plasmon-enhanced water splitting reactions. Moreover, the plasmonic Ti/TiO2−x structure presents sustained enhanced redox activities over 100 h. The intense coupling by gradient doping offers an effective approach to enable the plasmon resonances of Ti excited by visible light. The Ti-based plasmonic heterostructure potentially opens an alternative avenue towards sustainable plasmon-enhanced catalysis.
Introduction
Plasmon resonances provide an exciting path to advance catalytic conversion and storage of solar to chemical energy.1–5 The plasmons in metals (typically Au and Ag) can harvest photons from visible to infrared light by tuning their morphology.6,7 Hetero-coupling the plasmonic metals with semiconductors as plasmonic heterostructures is widely used to enhance the absorption of solar energy to drive chemical reactions through hot carrier injection, near-field enhancement and/or light scattering effects.3,8 However, the intrinsic features of the plasmonic heterostructures limit their further development for highly efficient coupling of plasmons with solar light and yields of energetic charge carriers, such as the weak coupling,9–11 dependence on noble metals and complexity of fabrication. Nowadays, non-noble metals are attracting high research interests due to their abundance and superior physicochemical properties,12–15 but only a few non-noble materials can support plasmon resonances (SPRs) in the visible light region and overcome the challenges which include chemical stability, controllability and reliable synthesis.12
In principle, metal Ti interfacing with a suitable dielectric environment, such as titanium oxides, can activate SPRs.16–19 The plasmonic energy could then be transferred to the dielectric of titanium oxides for applications. Since the first successful trial of TiO2 to split water under ultraviolet light in 1972 by Fujishima and Honda,20 a variety of strategies have been explored to enhance visible light driven catalytic activities,21 such as the plasmonic noble metals hetero-coupled with TiO2.22 The earth abundant Ti could function as an alternative plasmonic metal for sustainable enhancement. However, excitation of plasmon resonances of Ti in the visible light region and extraction of the plasmonic energy have not been achieved and basically studied.
Herein, a gradient-based heterostructure is proposed as a promising path by engineering a metal coupled with a gradient-based dielectric. Diffusion doping23 is employed to inject foreign atoms in the surface region of a metal, forming a gradient-based dielectric intensely coupling with the underneath metal. Variations of the dopant stoichiometry affect the distribution of hetero-atoms and further the states and density of free carriers.24 Therefore, it is possible to manipulate the dielectric properties at the interface between a metal and a dielectric via the diffusion doping, enabling the excitation of SPRs by visible light.
A gradient-based heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x is fabricated via a thermal diffusion doping process,25 using non-noble metal Ti foils with micro- and/or nano-prisms on the surface created by the chemical etching process. The prisms were designed to increase the aspect ratio of nanostructured surface edges for high density of hot spots and provide active sites for reactions. Excitation of SPRs of Ti and the transfer mechanism of the plasmonic energy to chemical molecules through the gradient dielectric were both investigated experimentally and theoretically. Our findings show that the SPRs of Ti are excited by visible light. The gradient-based heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x presents a strong resonant light absorption band associated with the SPRs that exhibit both NFE and hot electron generation effects. An intense interaction of SPRs between a plasmonic Ti metal and a gradient-based TiO2−x dielectric accelerates the conversion of solar to chemical energy. After the coating of the Ni thin film, the plasmonic heterostructure possesses long-term stability over 100 hours in the photoelectrochemical environment. The gradient-based heterostructure represents a novel approach to enable the SPRs of Ti excited in the visible light spectrum for sustainable plasmon-enhanced catalysis and photochemical applications.
Results and discussion
Gradient-based heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x

Fig. 1a shows two steps of the fabrication process: (1) an etching process for preparing the micro- and nano-prisms on the surface of Ti foils and (2) thermal oxidation to allow diffusion of oxygen into the surface of the patterned Ti foil. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a white-light interferometer were employed to examine the surface micro- and nano-prism arrays (Fig. 1b(I and II)). After the etching, SEM images show a high-density of micro- and nano-prisms formed on the surface (Fig. 1b(I)). The diameter of quasi-particles on the surface is about 10 nm (Fig. 1b(II)). After thermal oxidation, the micro- and nano-prism patterns remained the same (Fig. 1b(III)) with the height in the range of 0.0–2.0 μm. The morphology of the micro-prisms was further examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) surface topology (Fig. S1, ESI†). The etched Ti foils with prisms (before the thermal oxidation) are referred to as Ti foils in the following text.
 Fig. 1  Fabrication and micro/nano-prisms on Ti/TiO2−x. (a) Scheme for the processes: first etching to prepare micro- and nano-prisms on the surface of the Ti foil and the subsequent thermal diffusion of oxygen into the surface. (b) Scanning electron microscopic top views: surface prisms (I) (the inset scale bar, 6 μm) and surface nanoparticles (II) (the inset scale bar, 100 nm). 3-Dimensional mapping (III) of the surface micro- and nano-prisms scanned using an interferometer. The height of the prisms is in the range of 0.0–2.0 μm. 
Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) element analysis shows that Ti and O are distributed homogeneously on the top-surface with the atomic ratio close to 1:2 (Fig. 2a and b), forming a thin-film dielectric of TiO2 on the top surface. Dedicated line-scan EDX along the cross-section from the top into the deep surface layer discloses that the oxygen content gradually decreases from the top surface to the inner space, while the Ti content shows opposite tendency. The oxygen concentration shows a decreasing amount down to about distribution around 500 nm underneath the top surface. The cross-section revealed the formation of a varied-stoichiometry of titanium oxides from the top TiO2 dielectric thin film on the surface via a transition region TiO2−x (0 < x < 2) to underlying pure Ti in the bulk.25 This profile forms a quasi-sandwich configuration of the top dielectric film, middle transition region, and bottom original metal.26 Gradient variation of the dopant in the transition region constructs heterogeneous junctions. The X-ray diffraction pattern taken from these samples shows broadened peaks of Ti and rutile TiO2 phases (Fig. S2, ESI†), indicating the presence of a transition-phase state such as amorphous/crystalline. The gradient-based transition-phase state agrees with the possible formation of Ti and O with gradient distributions, denoted as TiO2−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 2). The variation affects the stoichiometry of hetero-atoms and therefore the states and density of free charge carriers, benefiting the transition region with a favoured variety of dielectric constants. For example, mixed-phase titanium oxides27 and vacancies28 of O and Ti can be specially formed to create proper interfacing between the TiO2 dielectric and Ti metal.
 Fig. 2  Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis. (a) SEM of the cross-section. Image (I); mapping of oxygen (O, red) element (II); and mapping of mixed O (red) and Ti (green) elements (III). (b) Composition of O and Ti on the top surface. (c) Composition of Ti and O along the cross-section. The inset shows the scanning direction from the top edge into the internal surface region. Scale bar: 1 μm. 
Optical properties

Fig. 3a shows the absorption spectra of bulk Ti foil and Ti/TiO2−x. Both spectra show a basic spectrum valley at around 350 nm. Remarkably, the Ti/TiO2−x heterostructure has a strong resonant absorption peak in the visible light range. According to the K–M function, the quality factor of the resonant absorption band is estimated to be about 8 which is close to the value of ∼9 for gold nanoparticles.24 This factor is defined by the ratio of the resonant peak energy to the FWHM (full width at half maximum) energy. For both specimens, absorption with small amplitude in the ultra-violet light range is assigned to an intrinsic absorption of TiO2 due to the native oxidation layer on Ti and the TiO2 on the surface of Ti/TiO2−x.26Fig. 3b shows a dark field image of Ti/TiO2−x exhibiting a distinct glowing on the surface due to scattering and free-space decaying on the periphery.29 This was not observed in the Ti foil (Fig. S3a–c, ESI†). The orange-yellow glowing color is consistent with the light wavelength of the absorption peak, indicating the possible excitation of plasmon resonances. Moreover, the resonant absorption band is even repeatable and controllable with a regular red-shift by variation of oxidation time (Fig. S4, ESI†). The redshift is due to alteration of the dielectric properties, such as thickness and optical constant, resulting in the transformation of electromagnetic field interaction between the dielectric and the metal substrate. The results are strongly related to the excitation of SPRs due to appropriate momentum of dielectric couples of photons into the surface plasmon of the Ti metal substrate, ruling out the possibility that the absorption peak is induced by defects associated with oxygen vacancies.30
 Fig. 3  Plasmon-induced solar-light absorption and near-field enhancement in Ti/TiO2−x upon excitation. (a) Strong optical absorption of representative Ti/TiO2−x with a high absorption-to-scattering ratio (K–M function), compared with that of the etched Ti foil. (b) Dark-field optical scattering image of Ti/TiO2−x (scale bar: 25 μm). (c) Ti/TiO2−x immersed in three different dielectrics: air without a solution, 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 1 M NaOH aqueous solutions, with refractive indices of 1, 1.3338 and 1.3358, respectively. (d) Spatial field-enhancement distribution |E|/|E0| at 290 nm for a TiO2 nanoparticle placed over a Ti substrate, with a 3 nm TiO2 film filled in the gap. (e) At a varied thickness of 1, 3 and 5 nm of the TiO2 dielectric film, the spectral maximum of the field intensity-enhancement in the gap (left), and the corresponding light absorption enhancement (right). (f) Same as (e) but with an altered thickness of 7, 10 and 20 nm of the TiO2 dielectric film. 
In general, the refractive index of the surrounding medium has an impact on the intensity and position of plasmon-induced light absorption peaks.31 The Ti/TiO2−x structure was immersed in different solvents, air, 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 1 M NaOH aqueous solutions with refractive indices of 1, 1.3338 and 1.3358, respectively. Fig. 3c shows the absorption spectra of Ti/TiO2−x under the influence of different solvents. The absorption band shows a blue shift with increasing refractive index, as expected from the characteristic of resonant plasmons.32 The reversible blueshift could be explained by a negative charging in the solution, thereby causing a change in charge carrier density in surface dielectrics.33
To further explore plasmon resonances in Ti/TiO2−x and relevance of the resonant light absorption band with surface plasmons, we have employed finite-element-method based calculations in the frequency-domain to extract the spatial electric field distribution in an approximated 3-dimensional model (Fig. S5, ESI†). The spatial field distribution (Fig. 3d and Fig. S6–S10, ESI†) shows the maximum of electric field enhancement that is localized in the region between the TiO2 nanoparticle and Ti following the trend of respective wavelengths, due to the polarization of surface plasmons in the Ti metal substrate with the presence of TiO2 on the top.34 The electric field enhancement spectra disclose two distinctive enhancement bands (Fig. 3e and f). One is at around 290 nm and the other is at about 430 nm. The enhanced band in the gap is dominated close to the bottom surface of the TiO2 particle, becoming more pronounced when the gradient decreases the thickness of the TiO2 dielectric film. In contrast, an enhanced field band becomes more pronounced at the interface between the Ti metal and TiO2 film dielectric (Fig. S6–S10, ESI†), when the gradient increases the thickness of the TiO2 dielectric film in the gap. The enhanced field distribution verifies that the surface dielectric particles promote the excitation of localized surface plasmonic resonances (LSPRs) by coupling light into the metal, while the gradient increasing the thickness of the TiO2 film in the gap enables confined excitation of SPRs in the interface between the dielectric and the metal substrate. Hybrid coupling of both excitations results in an enhanced resonant light absorption band in the visible light range (Fig. 3e and f).
The absorption valley at around 350 nm and the peak band close to 450 nm in the absorption enhancement spectra (Fig. 3e and f) both correlate with the field enhancement bands. In addition, the absorption peaks in the absorption enhancement spectra show a slight red shift with a gradient increasing the thickness of the TiO2 dielectric film, corresponding to the red shift of the experimental resonant absorption peaks. With the adjustment of the parameters, the calculated absorption band agrees with the positions of resonant absorption peaks present in the experimental absorption spectra. The calculated results further support the excitations of SPPs and LSPRs in Ti/TiO2−x. The resonant plasmons exhibit strong near-field effects interacting with surface mass through the transition region between the Ti metal and gradient-based dielectric for applications.
Plasmon-enhanced photoactivities for photoelectrochemical application
To investigate the effect of resonant plasmons on the energy transformation in Ti/TiO2−x, a photoelectrochemical system was employed, in which Ti/TiO2−x was used as a working electrode. Ti/TiO2−x immersed in liquid electrolyte forms a close and firm contacting interface. The built-in potential was characterized by open-circuit potential (Voc) under simulated solar light illumination (Fig. 4a). The saturation potential in the Voc corresponds to a steady-state distribution of the carriers. A large numerical difference between the Voc under the illumination and in the dark, ΔVoc = −350 mV, clearly indicates that the polarizability of electron and hole carriers upon excitation has been maintained, while back-recombination processes are retarded dramatically.35–37 In KOH solution, the positive carriers move towards an electrode/electrolyte interface, while the negative carriers move to the opposite direction. The negative tangent slope in Mott–Schottky curves (Fig. S11a, ESI†) reveals an n-type conductivity of Ti/TiO2−x both in the dark and under light. Therefore, the balanced distribution of carriers in bulk shifts the Voc to a more negative value upon excitation. Finally, a high plasmonic photovoltage of 350 mV is established across the heterojunction. Indeed, for example in a p-type photoelectrode, a positive shift caused by light irradiation was observed in Voc.37 With the high plasmonic photovoltage, Ti/TiO2−x can not only generate electron–hole pairs but also obtain a large number of separated charge carriers for photoelectron-chemical reactions.5
 Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical performance of Ti/TiO2−x. (a) Chronopotentiometry of open-circuit voltage (Voc). The solution was quietly placed in the dark with the photoanode immersed in the electrolyte for 2 h prior to the measurement. (b) Chronoamperometry at fixed 0 V under chopped light. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry in the dark and under light, respectively, at 1 mV s−1. (d–f) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra as a function of the wavelength at a constant potential of 0.21 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) IPCE spectrum of Ti/TiO2−x; the peak centered at 340 nm (blue line) was determined by fitting the IPCE band to a Gaussian function. The inset shows the corresponding absorbance spectra. (e) IPCE spectrum of a second specimen Ti/TiO2−x with an enhancement peak centered at 350 nm. The inset shows an absorbance spectrum of the second Ti/TiO2−x specimen. (f) IPCE spectrum of the Ti foils before (black line and left y-axis) and after coating the 2 nm Ni film followed by annealing (blue line and right y-axis), respectively. 
Giving an appropriate thermodynamic potential, the separated charge carriers can activate photoelectrochemical reactions to generate current. Ti/TiO2−x as a photoanode shows an enhanced photocurrent that is reproducible and timely responds to the periodic solar light illumination (Fig. 4b). When the light illumination is shielded, the anodic current drops immediately to a steady state without undergoing any attenuation which would be manifested by transient spikes. Spikes are usually observed due to bulk or surface recombination.35,38 The absence of spikes indicates that the ultrafast recombination process is inhibited. The continuous current response of the chemical reaction versus sweeping potential was also evaluated by linear sweep voltammetry (Fig. 4c). Upon exposure to simulated sunlight, the obtained current is amplified by a factor of 210 at a bias of 0.23 V compared to the case when exposed to the dark. A 200-fold enhancement is also obtained in the Na2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. S11b, ESI†). In addition, the anodic current shows a nearly linear response to different light power illumination, which is consistent with the expected OER driven by the hole carriers (Fig. S11c, ESI†).
Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured to clarify the dependence of the OER on the solar light at a specific energy. Interestingly, an enhancement peak is located at 340 nm (blue line, Fig. 4d). The entire IPCE spectrum shows a high conversion efficiency region below 400 nm (Fig. S12a, ESI†), which is fitted to a Gaussian function resulting in three enhanced peaks (Fig. S12b, ESI†). The ultra-high IPCE value activated by high-energy photons (blue line, Fig. 4d) is magnified by approximately 400%. A comparable enhancement is also attained in the second specimen, where the increase occurs at 350 nm (Fig. 4e). Between them (Fig. 4d and e), the shift of the enhancement peak is obvious, due to the difference of the maximum electric field varied by plasmon resonances, similar to the shift of absorption resonance peaks (the insets in Fig. 4d and e). The offset between the enhanced peaks is also obtained in the Ti foil and Ni-coated Ti foil with annealing (Fig. S13, ESI†) with cut-off edges at 350 nm (Fig. 4f), strongly indicating that the photons directly excited charge carriers through the surface TiO2 generating the photocurrent. The coating of Ni was used to protect the surface from corrosion.39,40 The result suggests that the OER activity is mainly caused by the hole carriers that are instantly excited by high energetic photons. In addition, compared to the Ti foil without Ni (Fig. 4f), the achieved ultra-high conversion efficiencies (Fig. 4d and e), benefiting from the introduction of a gradient-based dielectric, disclose that the direct photonic transition is enhanced by the localized electromagnetic field. This can be explained by the mechanism of plasmon-enhanced photonic energy transfer.11 The absorption edge of TiO2−x at 350 nm spectrally overlaps with the amplified near-field band, resulting in an increased light absorption that promoted the photonic transitions.
After deposition of a 2 nm Ni thin film (Fig. S14, ESI†) followed by annealing, we investigated the energy transfer process in the second specimen Ti/TiO2−x (Fig. S15, ESI†). The derived IPCE spectrum highlights two distinct regions with opposite polarities (Fig. 5a): one peak is at 360 nm and the other negative peak is at 500 nm. The peak at 360 nm with a rational offset fits the enhancement profile but has a lower amplitude compared to the specimen without the Ni-coating (Fig. 4e). The adverse enhancement peak indicates that the proton reduction reactions were activated under the light irradiation. Moreover, the IPCE curve faithfully follows the plasmon resonance absorption spectrum in the visible light region (Fig. 5b). This match confirms that the resonant absorption band present in the experimental absorption spectra originates from the excitation of SPRs. Furthermore, the reduction reactions are driven through the hot electron injection mechanism,11,41 so that Ti/TiO2−x can utilize the plasmonic energy of visible light below the absorption band edge of TiO2−x. Therefore, the plasmonic Ti/TiO2−x possesses two distinct mechanisms, one is the enhanced photonic energy transfer of ultra-violet light by a localized electric field, and the other is hot electron generation by plasmonic energy of visible light.
 Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical performance of the 2 nm Ni-coated Ti/TiO2−x. (a) IPCE spectrum; the inset shows the IPCE data within the negative range of the Y-axis. (b) The same as the inset in (a) but showing data of the y-axis in reverse (blue line). (c) Linear sweep voltammograms of Ti/TiO2−x/Ni taken at the different time points in order, 0 (at the beginning before the test), 24, 40, 64, 88 and 105 hours, respectively. All voltammograms were taken at 10 mV s−1 with no iR compensation applied. (d) Current density as a function of time, under constant illumination and at a potential of 0.21 V (versus Ag/AgCl) for over 100 hours. Insets (E and F) show details of the current with vibration fluctuations caused by the release of oxygen gas bubbles. The KOH aqueous solution in the cell was replaced using a completely new solution at the time moments of I, II and III, respectively, but maintaining the same volume. 
We then investigated the stability of the Ni-coated Ti/TiO2−x as a photoanode in the environment of photo-electrochemical system. The anode maintains the OER activity for over 100 hours (Fig. 5d) under the simulated solar light illumination, although cyclic voltammograms taken in the times show a slight change after 64 hours of a continuous test in aqueous KOH solution (Fig. 5c). The UV-Vis absorption spectra show no deviation in the resonance intensity of surface plasmons after 106 hours. A control third specimen of Ti/TiO2−x without coating Ni was measured under the identical conditions (Fig. S16a, ESI†). Apparent degradation of the light absorbance intensity can be observed in the UV-vis spectra (Fig. S16b, ESI†) after ∼25 hours. Clearly, the corrosion is suppressed to a large extent by coating Ni as a protection layer. As a result, the long-term and stable resonant plasmons and transfer of photonic to chemical energy are ultimately obtained.
To examine the origin of the charge carriers, we performed a density functional theory (DFT) based calculation of electronic properties on a doped Ti model (Fig. S17, ESI†). The density of states (DOS) predicts an initial energy distribution of the carriers over energy bands close to the Fermi level (Fig. S17a–c, ESI†). Increase in the oxygen concentration leads to stronger hybridization in s, p and d orbitals close to the Fermi level, which could provide local interband and intraband transitions of the charge carriers.42,43 Also, the gap between the O2p and Ti3d energy levels tends to decrease, which allows a higher possibility of interband transitions by high-energy photons.44 After heavy doping (Fig. S17c, ESI†), the energy gap between O2p and Ti3d orbitals shows an onset threshold of ∼3.54 eV (350 nm), which correlates with the enhancement peak at 350 nm in the IPCE spectra. Thus, the charge carriers could be generated from both the interband and intraband transitions by the localized electromagnetic field enhancement. The interband transitions dominate the top surface positions while the intraband transitions are mainly below the surface region.
With the generated charge carriers, the mechanism for the separation and transportation of charge carriers is understood through a proposed schematic (Fig. S18, ESI†) of the SPRs of the Ti metal intensely coupling with the gradient-based TiO2−x dielectrics.45 Their built-in band bending can suppress an undesirable recombination process while allowing charge carriers at low energy states to cross and be collected.46,47 Ti/TiO2−x holds a gradient profile of oxygen elements in the surface region of Ti (Fig. S18a, ESI†), forming a slight band bending (Fig. S18b, ESI†). Upon the excitation of SPRs, the enhanced local electric field forms a deeper band bending. This is in line with a photovoltage of ∼350 mV observed when subjected to the alkaline solution. The excited charge carriers tend to recombine, but the pulling force of a built-in electric field promotes the transfer electrons and holes, and accumulate and inhabit in the opposite directions away from the Fermi level (Fig. S18c, ESI†). With appropriate thermodynamic potential, the hole carriers are beneficial to the reaction sites involved in the OER, while the hot electrons injected into the conduction band of titanium oxides participate in the HER.
Conclusions
In summary, a solar-driven plasmonic heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x is fabricated via the diffusion doping process on earth-abundant Ti. The resonant plasmons of Ti intensely coupling with a gradient-based TiO2−x dielectric confine light to a resonant absorption band and exhibit an enhanced local electric field and hot electron generation effects. The excitation and quality of the SPRs in Ti/TiO2−x are adjustable in the visible light range by tuning the thermal doping parameters. The strong interaction between plasmonic Ti and the gradient-based TiO2−x dielectric enhances the conversion of solar energy to charge carriers through the plasmon-enhanced photonic energy transfer and the hot electron injection mechanisms. By adding a protective Ni thin film, a more robust plasmon resonance in Ti/TiO2−x is achieved in a chemical environment that maintains long-lasting plasmon-enhanced activity over 100 hours.
The gradient-based heterostructure Ti/TiO2−x represents a conceptually different approach to excite the SPRs by visible light and extract the plasmonic energy, using a thermal doping process to construct an intense coupling of Ti metal and the gradient-based TiO2−x dielectric. The Ti-based plasmonic structure with gradient doping could act as a platform to provide strong plasmon resonances in the visible light range and contribute to the conversion and storage of solar energy for sustainable plasmon-enhanced catalysis.
Experimental
Materials, fabrication and characterization
Titanium foils (Ti foils, L: 20 mm × W: 14 mm × T: 0.5 mm, 99.99% purity) were cut out from a Ti sheet, which was purchased from Baoji Titanium Industry Co., Ltd. The Ti foils were cleaned by immersing the foils into acetone and rinsing using an ultrasonic bath and subsequently dried in flowing nitrogen gas. Fabrication of Ti/TiO2−x consists of two steps. Micro- and nano-prisms on the surface of the Ti foil were first fabricated via wet etching in a diluted hydrofluoric acid solution, followed by thermal diffusion doping in a tube furnace with a controlled oxygen gas flowing.
Scanning electron microscope images with energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (Hitachi SU 8230), interferometry maps (Wyko NT9100) and atomic force microscope images (AFM XE-200) were used to confirm the morphology, surface roughness, and surface micro-prisms, respectively. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on an X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5405 Å) in the range of 2–80° (EQUINOX 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Light absorption properties were measured using a SHIMADZU, UV-2600 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrated sphere assembly using the diffuse reflection method. BaSO4 was used as a reference to calibrate all samples in the wavelength range of 250–800 nm with a slit width of 1 nm. Absorbance was obtained by logarithmically plotting the measured reflectance spectrum [log(1/R∞)]. Dark-field optical scattering images were taken using the optical microscope Leica DM3 XL. A sputtering machine (Sputter AJA) was used to deposit a 2 nm ultrathin film of nickel on top of samples, followed by ultra-vacuum annealing at 400 °C for 5 hours. The sputtering process was also employed to deposit the planar Ti film (300 nm) on the planar Si substrate.
The photoelectrochemical activities of Ti/TiO2−x before and after coating ultrathin Ni were determined using a three-electrode configuration on an electrochemical workstation of Model 600E Series. Ti/TiO2−x was employed as a working electrode, Pt foil as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl with saturated KCl solution as the reference electrode. All the potentials are reported with respect to the Ag/AgCl electrode in saturated potassium chloride electrolyte. 0.5 M Na2SO4, 1 M KOH and 1 M NaOH aqueous solutions were used as an electrolyte in their respective experiments. Before each measurement, the aqueous solutions were bubbled with N2 for 20 min to remove dissolved gas. IR compensation was automatically carried out in real time during the measurement unless otherwise stated. The visible light source employed in the measurement was a 500 W xenon lamp with AM 1.5G filter. In 1 M KOH aqueous solution, Ti/TiO2−x and Ni-coated Ti/TiO2−x are all under the illumination of AM 1.5G full-spectrum solar light with a power density of 100 mW cm−2. All the PEC measurements were performed by using at least three samples, and each sample was tested more than three times. The IPCE spectra were measured using the same AM 1.5G solar light source coupled with a monochromator (F/4.8; focal length: 300 mm), at a constant bias of 0.21 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The IPCE data are the arithmetic mean of three consecutive measurements. During the IPCE measurement, the power intensity of the xenon lamp source was kept at 100 mW cm−2. IPCE(λ) = 1240J/(λIlight), where J is the measured photocurrent density (μA cm−2), λ is the wavelength of the incident monochromatic light (nm) and Ilight is the measured light intensity (μW cm−2) at wavelength λ.48 DFT based calculation models and optimal parameters are included in the ESI.†
FEFD calculations
Finite element frequency domain (FEFD) simulations were performed using the commercially available COMSOL RF module.49,50 An approximated simulation model was constructed by using Ti metal foil as a substrate, and the TiO2 thin film with TiO2 nanoparticles in an ambient air atmosphere on the substrate. The Ti and TiO2 were modelled respectively using the full frequency-dependent dielectric functions. A uniform plane transverse electric (TE)-polarized electromagnetic wave was incident on the model. The optical constants for the materials, TiO2 and Ti, were taken from ref. 51 and 52, respectively. Perfectly matched layers (PMLs) were used in all boundaries to absorb the outgoing waves and simulate an open space around the model. The local field and absorption enhancement were both computed to investigate the nature of the constructed model. For more details, please refer to the numerical calculations in the ESI† (Fig. S5–S10).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the China Scholarship Council (CSC, Grant No. 201506930002) and the Norwegian Micro- and Nano-Fabrication Facility project (NorFab, project no. 245963/F50). We thank Z. Ramic, M. Tayyib, A. T. Thai Nguyen and B. K. Hønsvall at the department of microsystems, USN, for the assistance during the experiments. We thank K. Weibye at the department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, for the discussions on surface states of the heterostructure.
Notes and references
U. Aslam, V. G. Rao, S. Chavez and S. Linic, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 656 CrossRef .
C. Zhan, X.-J. Chen, J. Yi, J.-F. Li, D.-Y. Wu and Z.-Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 216 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Iocozzia, Y. Wang, X. Cui, Y. Chen, S. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 402 RSC .
S. Eustis and M. A. el-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, X. Li, N. Xin, Y. Gong, J. Guan, L. Meng, S. Meng and X. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600431 CrossRef .
N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2679 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, J. M. Kim, J. E. Park and J. M. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1704528 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hsun Su, C.-Y. Hsu, C.-C. Chang, S.-L. Tu and Y.-H. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 063703 CrossRef .
J. P. Zhao, M. Lu, Z. Y. Chen and J. W. Rabalais, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3626 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jokanović, B. Čolović, M. Nenadović, A. Trajkovska Petkoska, M. Mitrić, B. Jokanović and I. Nasov, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2016, 1 CrossRef .
V. Jokanović, B. Čolović, B. Jokanović, S. Stojadinović, A. Petkoska-Trajkovska and I. Nasov, Zast. Mater., 2016, 57, 225 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gomathi Devi and R. Kavitha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360, 601 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Vlaskin, C. J. Barrows, C. S. Erickson and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. W. Rogers, K. L. Erickson and D. N. Belton, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1988, 35, 16 CrossRef .
Y. Horio, Y. Hara, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Morimoto and T. Naitoh, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 015604 Search PubMed .
C. Cheng, G. Liu, K. Du, G. Li, W. Zhang, S. Sanna, Y. Chen, N. Pryds and K. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 416 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Wu, X. L. Liu, X. L. Lian, G. Tian, C. Janiak, Y. X. Zhang, Y. Lu, H. Z. Yu, J. Hu, H. Wei, H. Zhao, G. G. Chang, G. Van Tendeloo, L. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang and B. L. Su, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802173 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Cheng, L. Liao, H. Zhou, J. Bai, G. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 579 CrossRef PubMed .
V. N. Kuznetsov and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmoud, M. Chamanzar, A. Adibi and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 788 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ian Lapsley, A. Shahravan, Q. Hao, B. Krishna Juluri, S. Giardinelli, M. Lu, Y. Zhao, I. K. Chiang, T. Matsoukas and T. Jun Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 101903 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hutter, F. M. Huang, S. R. Elliott and S. Mahajan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7784 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Cornuz, S. D. Tilley, M. Gratzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kamimura, P. Bogdanoff, M. Ramsteiner, P. Corfdir, F. Feix, L. Geelhaar and H. Riechert, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, W. H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 17, 315 CrossRef .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Ling, G. Wang, T. Liu, F. Wang, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Narang, R. Sundararaman and H. A. Atwater, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5, 96 CAS .
Y. Kim, J. G. Smith and P. K. Jain, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Jiang, F. S. Hasoon, H. R. Moutinho, H. A. Al-Thani, M. J. Romero and M. M. Al-Jassim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 127 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, M. Liu, H. Tan, J. Liang, Q. Zhang, C. Wei, Y. Zhao, E. H. Sargent and X. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603527 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yi, J. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Cao, W. Luo, Z. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asapu, R. G. Ciocarlan, N. Claes, N. Blommaerts, M. Minjauw, T. Ahmad, J. Dendooven, P. Cool, S. Bals, S. Denys, C. Detavernier, S. Lenaerts and S. W. Verbruggen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Siefke, S. Kroker, K. Pfeiffer, O. Puffky, K. Dietrich, D. Franta, I. Ohlídal, A. Szeghalmi, E.-B. Kley and A. Tünnermann, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1780 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. M. Werner, K. Glantschnig and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2009, 38, 1013 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp00672fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication and micro/nano-prisms on Ti/TiO2−x. (a) Scheme for the processes: first etching to prepare micro- and nano-prisms on the surface of the Ti foil and the subsequent thermal diffusion of oxygen into the surface. (b) Scanning electron microscopic top views: surface prisms (I) (the inset scale bar, 6 μm) and surface nanoparticles (II) (the inset scale bar, 100 nm). 3-Dimensional mapping (III) of the surface micro- and nano-prisms scanned using an interferometer. The height of the prisms is in the range of 0.0–2.0 μm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis. (a) SEM of the cross-section. Image (I); mapping of oxygen (O, red) element (II); and mapping of mixed O (red) and Ti (green) elements (III). (b) Composition of O and Ti on the top surface. (c) Composition of Ti and O along the cross-section. The inset shows the scanning direction from the top edge into the internal surface region. Scale bar: 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Plasmon-induced solar-light absorption and near-field enhancement in Ti/TiO2−x upon excitation. (a) Strong optical absorption of representative Ti/TiO2−x with a high absorption-to-scattering ratio (K–M function), compared with that of the etched Ti foil. (b) Dark-field optical scattering image of Ti/TiO2−x (scale bar: 25 μm). (c) Ti/TiO2−x immersed in three different dielectrics: air without a solution, 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 1 M NaOH aqueous solutions, with refractive indices of 1, 1.3338 and 1.3358, respectively. (d) Spatial field-enhancement distribution |E|/|E0| at 290 nm for a TiO2 nanoparticle placed over a Ti substrate, with a 3 nm TiO2 film filled in the gap. (e) At a varied thickness of 1, 3 and 5 nm of the TiO2 dielectric film, the spectral maximum of the field intensity-enhancement in the gap (left), and the corresponding light absorption enhancement (right). (f) Same as (e) but with an altered thickness of 7, 10 and 20 nm of the TiO2 dielectric film.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical performance of Ti/TiO2−x. (a) Chronopotentiometry of open-circuit voltage (Voc). The solution was quietly placed in the dark with the photoanode immersed in the electrolyte for 2 h prior to the measurement. (b) Chronoamperometry at fixed 0 V under chopped light. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry in the dark and under light, respectively, at 1 mV s−1. (d–f) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra as a function of the wavelength at a constant potential of 0.21 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) IPCE spectrum of Ti/TiO2−x; the peak centered at 340 nm (blue line) was determined by fitting the IPCE band to a Gaussian function. The inset shows the corresponding absorbance spectra. (e) IPCE spectrum of a second specimen Ti/TiO2−x with an enhancement peak centered at 350 nm. The inset shows an absorbance spectrum of the second Ti/TiO2−x specimen. (f) IPCE spectrum of the Ti foils before (black line and left y-axis) and after coating the 2 nm Ni film followed by annealing (blue line and right y-axis), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical performance of the 2 nm Ni-coated Ti/TiO2−x. (a) IPCE spectrum; the inset shows the IPCE data within the negative range of the Y-axis. (b) The same as the inset in (a) but showing data of the y-axis in reverse (blue line). (c) Linear sweep voltammograms of Ti/TiO2−x/Ni taken at the different time points in order, 0 (at the beginning before the test), 24, 40, 64, 88 and 105 hours, respectively. All voltammograms were taken at 10 mV s−1 with no iR compensation applied. (d) Current density as a function of time, under constant illumination and at a potential of 0.21 V (versus Ag/AgCl) for over 100 hours. Insets (E and F) show details of the current with vibration fluctuations caused by the release of oxygen gas bubbles. The KOH aqueous solution in the cell was replaced using a completely new solution at the time moments of I, II and III, respectively, but maintaining the same volume.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp00672f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
