Active and responsive polymer surfaces  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B816231J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B816231J
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 676-693Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsActive and responsive polymer surfacesJilin Zhang and Yanchun Han*State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun 130022, Jilin Province, P. R. China. E-mail: ychan@ciac.jl.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85262126;   Tel: +86-431-85262175Received 23rd December 2008First published on 5th October 2009AbstractA central challenge in polymer science today is creating materials that dynamically alter their structures and properties on demand, or in response to changes in their environment. Surfaces represent an attractive area of focus, since they exert disproportionately large effects on properties such as wettability, adhesiveness, optical appearance, and bioactivity, enabling pronounced changes in properties to be accomplished through subtle changes in interfacial structure or chemistry. In this critical review, we review the recent research progress into active and responsive polymer surfaces. The chief purpose of this article is to summarize the advanced preparation techniques and applications in this field from the past decade. This review should be of interest both to new scientists in this field and the interdisciplinary researchers who are working on “intelligent” polymer surfaces (117 references).Jilin ZhangDr Jilin Zhang received his BS degree in polymer science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), China (2002) and PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC) (2008). Now he is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. His research interest is in active and responsive polymer surfaces.Yanchun HanProf. Yanchun Han received her BS degree in polymer science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), China (1990) and PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC) (1995). Now she is a professor at the State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry at CIAC. Her research interests include organic optoelectronic devices, polymer films, surfaces and interfaces, and nano-structured composite materials.1. IntroductionSurface structure and chemistry are very important properties of solid materials, because they exert disproportionately large effects on surface properties. Such properties include wettability, adhesiveness, optical appearance, and bioactivity. Recently, active and responsive surfaces, especially polymer surfaces, have attracted much interest, because of their great range of practical applications and potential research value. For example, superhydrophobic polymer surfaces modified with hierarchical structures can be used in self-cleaning or water-proof devices1–5 (superhydrophobicity means the static contact angle, measured with a sessile water drop, is larger than 150°, and the sliding angle—tilt angle of a solid surface when the droplet starts sliding downward—is less than 5°). Furthermore, surfaces grafted with functional polymer chains, known as polymer brushes, may have many intelligent properties, such as reversible switching of wettability, adhesion, etc.6–23 Usually, all these kinds of polymer surface have one or more activities (stimuli-responses) to the environment conditions. These would include temperature, pH, solvent, UV light, and electric field.Generally, there are two standard methods to fabricate active and responsive polymer surfaces. The first method, chemical modification, is to modify the target surface via grafting functional molecules, which include polymer molecules and small organic molecules. The chemical method has several advantages, including high stability, high responsivity, and ideal switchability. However, functionalizing the target surface with the active chemical groups is prerequisite. The second method, physical modification, is to modify functional surface structures on surfaces via self-assembly or artificial fabrication. This method is simple, efficient, and well-controlled, but suffers from instability and a short lifetime. Recently, scientists have combined the two methods. New physically structured surfaces which include grafted functional molecules were formed to amplify surface activity and responsivity and control wettability and adhesion. Moreover, the combination can also efficiently obtain multi-active or multi-responsive surfaces.In the past decade, many kinds of active and responsive polymer surfaces have been reported in the literature. With reference to the large number of published works in this area, the authors summarize the typical fabrication methods and significant applications in this critical review.2. Responsive self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and polymer brushes, i.e., chemical modifications2.1 SAMsSelf-assembled monolayers (SAMs) are organic layers, which are formed by the adsorption or chemical bonding of molecular components to surfaces. SAMs are usually formed in solution, or from the gas phase, and deposited onto the surface of solids or metal liquids. Molecules that are able to form SAMs usually have a special chemical functionality or “headgroup”, which has a specific affinity for the substrate. Thanks to the high affinity between the headgroup and the substrate, SAM molecules can displace pre-adsorbed molecules from the surface in many cases. For example, alkanethiols have a strong adsorption on many metals, including gold, silver, copper palladium, and platinum.24 Alkylsilanes can strongly bond to silicon dioxide, glass, mica, and alumina.25 Carboxylic acids can absorb onto the surface of silver, copper, and aluminium. SAMs have many useful properties, and can be used to prepare nanopatterns on surfaces. This is because SAMs are nanostructures with a thickness of 1–3 nm.25In this field, active and responsive ligands are often used to fabricate functional SAMs, such as electro-responsive,26 and photo-responsive SAMs.27 Due to the activity and responsivity of the ligand molecules, these functional SAMs can provide reversible switching surface properties (wettability, adhesion, and color). Lahann and co-workers26 prepared a low-density electro-responsive SAM by self-assembling (16-mercapto)-hexadecanoic acid (MHA) on gold—a SAM in which the hydrophobic chains are capped by hydrophilic carboxylate groups. With the negative charge of the carboxylate group, the SAM chains can reversibly switch between a bent state and an extended state depending on whether the gold substrate has a positive or negative charge (Fig. 1). The surface wettability also reversibly switches between a hydrophobic and hydrophilic state. Fig. 1  Idealized representation of the electro-responsive SAM reversibly switches between bending and extension when the gold substrate is on positive or negative charges.26 Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Azobenzenes are typically photo-responsive materials, which have often been used in the preparation of photo-responsive SAMs. This is because of a reversible conformational transition between cis and trans isomers under UV and visible irradiation. Ichimura and co-workers27 prepared a photo-responsive surface by self-assembling macrocyclic amphiphiles with tethered photochromic azobenzene units onto a silica surface. In this case they used O-carboxymethylated calix[4]resorcinarene (CRA-CM), which bore four p-octylazobenzene residues at the rim of the cyclic skeleton (Fig. 2, left). Olive oil droplets can self-move under a gradient irradiation of ultra-violet (UV) light because the receding contact angle for the trans isomer (θtranrec) is larger than the advancing contact angle for the cis isomer (θcrisadv) (Fig. 2, right). Furthermore, spiropyran and merocyanine, malachite green carbinol base, thymine-terminated thiols, and diarylethenes were also used to fabricate photo-responsive SAM surfaces (Fig. 3).28 Fig. 2  (Left): Schematic diagram of a macrocyclic amphiphile (CRA-CM) tethered to photochromic azobenzene units. (Right): Lateral photographs of the light-driven motion of an olive oil droplet on a silica plate modified with CRA-CM. The olive oil droplet on a cis-rich surface moved in the direction of higher surface energy by asymmetrical irradiation with 436-nm light perpendicular to the surface. (A–C) The sessile contact angles changed from 18° (A) to 25° (C). (D) The direction of movement of the droplet was controllable by varying the direction of the photo irradiation.27 Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science.  Fig. 3  Some photo-responsive SAMs. (a) Spiropyran and merocyanine SAM; (b) thymine-terminated thiol SAM; (c) malachite green carbinol base; (d) a diarylethene.28 Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 2.2 Polymer brushesPolymer brushes, end-tethered on the substrate through covalent bonds, supply an efficient method to coat well-defined thin polymer films on surfaces. These are used to target some specific properties, including wettability, friction, conductivity, adhesion, colloidal stability, biocompatibility, or adsorptivity.6–23 Usually, polymer brushes can be synthesized via“grafting from” and “grafting to” processes on flat surfaces and on colloidal particles.6–8 To fabricate active and stimuli-responsive surfaces, many responsive polymer brushes were investigated recently, including thermal-responsive,7,9,10 photo-responsive,7,11–14 and pH-responsive polymer brushes,15–21 and others.22,23Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) is one of the most widely researched thermal-responsive polymers, which has a typical transition from intramolecular hydrogen bonds to intermolecular hydrogen bonds to water, and consequently a transition from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity at a particular temperature. This is usually given the name the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) (Fig. 4, top). Sun and co-workers9 grafted PNIPAAm brushes onto a rough silica surface. By switching the temperature above and below the LCST, the wettability can reversibly change between a superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic surface due to amplification by the surface roughness (Fig. 4, bottom). Recently, Fu and co-workers10 prepared a hybrid mesoporous membrane from ordered porous silica grafted with PNIPAAm brushes, which had a highly thermal-responsive selectivity for permeation of crystal violet (CV) and polyethylene glycol (PEG). Fig. 4  (Top): Diagram of reversible formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonding between PNIPAAm chains and water molecules; (Bottom): Reversibly switching between superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic surfaces under the amplification of surface roughness.9 Copyright 2004 Wiley. In a similar way to the azobenzene molecules described above, polymers that contain azobenzene units in their main chains also have photo-responsivity. Optically excited cis-to-trans isomerization in azobenzene units results in an increase in the polymer length, and the production of deformations. Polymers contract against an external force acting along the polymer backbone, a feature that has been measured both macroscopically and at the single-molecule level.11 Hugel and co-workers12 reported that for aligned polymers, strains of 7% and work densities exceeding 1 mJ m−3 were achievable in theory, with measured strains in a single molecule of ∼1%. Due to the large energy barrier between cis and trans conformations, the estimating energy conversion efficiency is ∼10% when the quantum efficiency is 100%, since the energy difference between two states suggests that the efficiency will be moderate. Recently, Yamada and co-workers13 anchored a crosslinked azobenzene liquid-crystalline polymer on a flexible polymer film, which can provide a variety of simple devices. Induced by UV light and visible light, the devices can self-walk in one direction like an “inchworm” and move like a “robotic arm”, which has potential for the preparation of artificial muscle.13,14Furthermore, polyelectrolyte (PEL) brushes, especially weak PEL brushes, which have poorly ionizable groups, are one of the most interesting pH-responsive materials. Weak PEL brushes are highly responsive and able to carry different electrical charges in polar solvents depending on the external pH value and ionic strength, they have, for instance, switchable wettability and adhesion through changing the pH value.15–18 For example, alkaline PEL brushes prepared from poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) (hydrophobic backbone) have a much greater wettability in acidic water than in neutral or basic aqueous solutions.17 On the contrary, acidic poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) brushes are more wettable by basic water than by neutral or acid aqueous solutions.17 Moreover, the expansion and shrinking of responsive polymer brushes can be used to fabricate mechanical actuators. For example, strong PEL brushes grafted on a single-side of a substrate can expand in a humid atmosphere, which may be detected as a tiny change in the substrate’s curvature, such as the bending of a micro-cantilever used with an atomic force microscope.18,19 It also can be detected as a tiny change of an optical property such as ellipsometry,16 fluorescence intensity,20 or surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy.15Recently, Yu et al.21 took advantage of the adhesion between metal nanoparticles and PEL brushes to graft a block-copolymer–nanoparticles brushes on silicon wafers via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). In this case, polystyrene-b-(poly(methyl methacrylate)-co-poly(methacrylic acid)–CdS nanoparticle (PS-b-(PMMA-co-PMAA(CdS))) brushes were used. Alternating the treatment of PS-b-(PMMA-co-PMAA–CdS nanoparticle brushes with selective solvents for the outer block (PMMA and PMAA) (solvent: acetone–ethanol mixture) and the inner block (PS) (solvent: toluene) induced perpendicular phase separation of block-copolymer brushes. This resulted in reversibly switching between the lift and the fall of CdS nanoparticles in the perpendicular direction. The extent of the movement is under the control of the relative thickness of the two blocks in the polymer brushes.In addition, there are still many other active and responsive polymer brushes, which can be categorized as homopolymer brushes, mixed polymer brushes, block copolymer brushes, nonplanar brushes, and hierarchically structured brushes. For example, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) brushes (homopolymer brushes) have a high biocompatibility in that they prevent protein adsorption, which is one of the major concerns in the development of blood-contacting materials, without compromising the desirable bulk properties of the material.7,22 In experiments,23 it was found that the adsorption ratio of proteins on the surface decreased as the density of grafted PEO brushes on the surface increased. However, the adsorption ratio would never reach zero.3. Functional patterns induced by external fields, i.e., physical modificationsRight now, two major categories of fabrication methods commonly termed “bottom-up”, and “top-down”, have been developed to pattern polymer surfaces.29 Bottom-up processes are usually controlled by self-assembly, such as self-assembly of block-copolymers, the manufacture of complex proteins using a DNA blueprint, followed by an ever-larger scale of heirarchical assembly as in cell walls, cells, tissues and organs. Embryology is the ultimate bottom-up process of producing a macro-scale complex entity by manipulation at the smallest scale possible.29 On the contrary, top-down processes start on the macro scale and proceed to create fine features by processing the bulk on a fine scale, such as lithography techniques.29Recently, great interest has been generated in the preparation of functional structured surfaces by both “bottom-up” and “top-down” methods, i.e., self-assembly and soft lithography. Herein, the key point to obtain a functional structured surface is to change the surface from (meta)stable state I to (meta)stable state II by external field, including electric field, temperature, solvents, pH value, UV light, etc. In this chapter, we will summarize all the popular patterned methods used in this field, which can pattern surfaces from several nanometres to hundreds of microns (see Fig. 5) Fig. 5  Schematic representation of patterns scale and devices scale via different methods. 3.1 Adaptive surfaces under electrical control3.1.1 Polymer pattern under electric field. Electric field, as a highly efficient and orientational technique, could be employed to pattern polymer surfaces from several up to dozens of nanometres because of high responsivity, and good controllability. Schäffer and co-workers were the first to achieve the patterning of homopolymer films, including PS,30 PMMA,31 and brominated polystyrene (PBrS)31 by an electric field gradient. It was based on the rule that an electric field gradient could supply an external force on dielectric media, and the forces produced by strong electric field gradients can help overcome the surface tension in thin liquid surfaces, inducing an instability that features a characteristic highly-ordered honeycomb-like porous structure (Fig. 6, left top). Lin and co-workers32 systematically investigated the structure formation mechanism at the interface of liquid–liquid bilayers in the electric field. No matter what kind of homopolymers were used, very good agreement over many orders of magnitude in reduced wavelength and field strength could be observed using no adjustable parameters. Peng et al.33 also patterned a viscous fingering and novel stress-relief lateral morphology under a featureless mask in an electric field. (Fig. 6, left bottom). The patterns can be formed and transferred at above Tg + 30 °C in a short time, and the electrostatic force is assumed to be the driving force for the pattern transfer. Fig. 6  Homopolymer and block co-polymer patterns under electric fields. (Left top): Highly ordered honeycomb-like porous PS surface.30 Copyright 2000 Nature Publishing Group. (Left bottom): A viscous fingering morphology induced under a featureless mask.33 Copyright 2003 Elsevier. (Right top): Reversible lamellar structure of PS-b-PI controlled by electric field.34 Copyright 2007 Nature. (Right bottom): Orientational order in a block copolymer via a gradient electric field.35 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. Not only homopolymers, but some block copolymers can also be orientationally patterned on the sub-micrometre length scale in electric fields. In bulk, the incompatible segments can lead to the self-assembly of many highly regular microphase separation structures with characteristic length scales ranging up to tens of nanometres, such as cubic arrays, cylinders, bicontinuous phases and lamellae. Therefore block copolymers are considered to be a high potential material for use in nanotechnological applications, such as structuring networks and membranes on the nano scale, being templates to synthesize or self-assemble nanoparticles. Schmidt and co-workers34 took advantage of electric fields to reversibly tune the nano lamellar structure of polystyrene-b-polyisoprene (PS-b-PI) diblock copolymer with high accuracy (as much as 6% in a completely reversible way on a timescale of several milliseconds) (Fig. 6, right top). They found that the lamellar distance decreased as the chain conformation entropy increased when the lamellar structure was aligned parallel to the field direction because the electric field counteracted the stretching induced by the microphase separation. On the other hand, the lamellar spacing increased and the conformational entropy decreased when the lamellas were oriented perpendicular to the electric-field direction. The switching time of the process is considerably smaller than 45 ms. Recently, Olszowka and co-workers35 demonstrated a combinatorial approach, i.e., a gradient electric field in one experiment to investigate whether a given block copolymer system can be aligned via an electric field. The gradient electric field can be employed to investigate a minimum field strength at which the nanostructure orients in the applied field. They35 found by increasing the dielectric contrast of the polymer blocks a reduced threshold field strength and improved orientation of the lamellae can be achieved (Fig. 6, right bottom).3.1.2 Polymer optical devices via electrowetting. Electrowetting is a novel technique in which the surface wettability is controlled by voltage (eqn (1)). cos θ≈ cos θY + CV2/2γso(1)Here, θ is the contact angle of the saline as a function of voltage, θY is the Young’s contact angle, C is the capacitance (F m−2) of the hydrophobic dielectric, and V is the DC voltage or AC RMS voltage. The change in saline contact angle vs. voltage is the driving force behind electrowetting devices.36Recently, electrowetting devices36–42 (including lenses, display technology, electric-paper (e-paper)), especially electrowetting polymer devices, have attracted much interest because of their commercial applications. In contrast with the conventional optical devices, electrowetting polymer ones have high flexibility, strong optical power in lenses, and high definition in displays, etc. For example, Fig. 7 (left top) is the schematic cross section of an electrowetting lens. In a prepared cylindrical housing, which is coated by three layers, an electrode layer, a dielectric layer, and a hydrophobic coating (usually a fluoride-polymer layer), there are two immiscible liquids confined, one conductive (for example: saline), and the other one nonconductive (a transparent nonpolar oil, such as dodecane). These two liquids have different refractive indices and quite similar densities, which provides the liquid lens with a strong stability in the presence of shocks and vibrations. Thanks to the electrostatic attraction between the two electrodes, the contact angle of the conductive liquid on the hydrophobic surface can be efficiently varied via changing the voltage on the electrodes, which can induce a variation in the radius of the meniscus. The Philips research laboratories prepared a small assembled research prototype camera module containing a liquid lens which has two contact electrodes on the top (Fig. 7, left bottom).37 This small assembled camera with liquid lens has a super strong optical power compared to conventional cameras. Fig. 7 (right) shows the photographs of different objects from 50 cm to 2 cm distance taken by this camera module. Fig. 7  Left (top): Schematic cross section of a liquid-based variable lens in a cylindrical housing off voltage and on voltage.37Left (bottom): Photograph of an assembled research prototype camera module containing a liquid lens for focusing.37Right: Photographs taken with the research prototype camera module containing an electrowetting lens for an object at 50 cm distance (top) and an object at 2 cm distance (bottom).37 Copyright 2005 Springer. On comparison with conventional displays, e-paper (Fig. 8) as a novel display has many advantages, such as lower weight, higher flexibility, lower power consumption, and easier handling (Fig. 8, left). Thanks to the ability to display content in a paper-like manner, e-paper has a great potential to replace conventional newspaper publishing, and turn into a major method without the major publishing and distribution costs associated with printed newspapers.38 For example, the Philips research laboratory prepared a colorful electrowetting display by mixing different dyes in an oil.40 Recently, Zhou et al.41 prepared a flexible electrowetting e-paper on a polyethylenenaphthalate (PEN) film, which is able to be used as light valves (Fig. 8, right). Until now the research concerning electrowetting polymer displays is just beginning. Having such a high commercial value, electrowetting polymer displays are an outstanding representative of flexible display for the near future. Fig. 8  Some colorful and flexible novel e-papers. Left top: Samples of the brilliant colors that can be made with the electrowetting display technology.40 Copyright Liquavista B.V. Left bottom: Flexible light wave coupling (LWC) display.39 Copyright 2004 The Society of Information Display. Right: Flexible electrowetting light valves prepared on the poly-ethylenenaphthalate (PEN) substrate.41 Copyright 2007 IEEE. 3.2 Self-assembly of nanoparticles by block-copolymersIn bulk, block copolymers can self-assemble into many micro phase-separated structures.43 However, selective solvents may be a thermodynamically favorable solvent for one block but a precipitant for another. Amphiphilic block copolymer molecules tend to associate and self-assemble in different structured micelles, including spherical, cylindrical, and bilayer aggregates, which are on the scale of dozens of nanometres up to several microns. Usually block copolymer micelles consist of a lyophobic core, formed by the insoluble blocks, which is surrounded by a lyophilic corona formed by the soluble blocks. Driven by a need to develop technologically smart materials, a number of stimuli-responsive block copolymer micelles have been developed. These can be of a variety of sizes and the stable core–shell structures can be used in a diverse field of practical applications, such as catalysis, colloidal stabilization, latex technology, compatibilization in polymer blends, drug delivery, water purification, viscosity and surface modification. Herein we discuss the development of stimuli-responsive block copolymer aggregates with respect to varying thermal, pH, optical, and solvent sensitivities.Normally thermosensitive block copolymers are investigated in aqueous solutions because of their temperature-dependent variation in hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. In amphiphilic block copolymers, the hydrophilicity or hydrophilic/hydrophobic volume ratio can be reversibly switched, and they can be capable of undergoing drastic changes in sizes and shapes of the assemblies (micelles and/or vesicles). For example, He and Lodge44 prepared an amphiphilic block copolymer, poly((1,2-butadiene)-block-ethylene oxide (PB-b-PEO) which contains a poorly thermosensitive PEO block and a hydrophobic PB block. In an aqueous solution it can self-assemble into micellar aggregates (PB core and PEO corona). With an increase in temperature from 25 °C to 90 °C the hydrodynamic radius of the micelles (〈Rh〉) decreases from 61 to 57 nm. This happens due to the breaking of the ether–water hydrogen bond and a decrease in the PEO block’s hydrophilicity. In a 1 wt% ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([BMIM]-[PF6]) solution the size of micelles is temperature independent between a temperature of 25 °C and 100 °C. In mixed solvents micelles moving like shuttles start to leave the aqueous phase and enter the ionic liquid phase at a temperature of 75 °C and remain there for up to 90 °C and return to their aqueous phase when the temperature reaches ambient.Recently Sundararaman and co-workers45 prepared a triblock copolymer PEO-block-PNIPAAm-block-poly(isoprene) that has a hydrophilic PEO block, a strongly thermosensitive PNIPAAm block, and a hydrophobic poly(isoprene) (PI) block. In aqueous solution the ratio of the hydrophilic segment to the hydrophobic segment can reversibly switch by changing the temperature to above or below the LCST of PNIPAAm (∼32 °C) which in turn induces a morphological evolution of the self-assembled aggregates. They found that the 〈Rh〉 of micelles was initially 12 nm at room temperature. However, after four weeks at 65 °C the mean radius of the aggregates increased to greater than 100 nm and the morphology switched from small micelle to larger vesicular assemblies (Fig. 9, top). Fig. 9  Thermosensitive block copolymer self-assembled in selective solvents. (Top): Schematic illustration and TEM pictures of the expected change in amphiphilic balance for PEO-b-PNIPA-b-PI triblock copolymer chains with a stimulus-responsive PNIPAAm block.45 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of the thermally induced collapse of H40-PNIPAM-PDMA upon heating through the LCSTs of PNIPAM and PDMA.46 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. Except for PEO and PNIPAAm there are some other thermosensitive polymers currently being developed such as poly(N,N,-diethylacrylamide) (PDEAAm), poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (PVCL), poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline) (PIOZ), poly(propylene oxide) (PPO), poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMA), and poly(vinyl methyl ether) (PVME). To obtain multi-size or multi-morphology characteristics, some double thermosensitive block copolymers having two LCSTs where each block exhibits an individual LCST have also been explored. For example, Xu and co-workers46 have synthesized dendritic macromolecules of H40-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (H40-PNIPAAm-PDMA), which can self-assemble in to unimolcular core–shell–corona nanostructures. These consist of a hydrophobic H40 core, a thermosensitive PNIPAAm inner shell, and a thermosensitive PDMA corona. Because of the different LCST between PNIPAAm (32 °C) and PDMA (40–50 °C), two-stage thermoresponsive collapse or reswelling was found upon heating or cooling (Fig. 9, bottom).pH-Sensitive polyelectrolyte (PEL) polymers are not only used in grafting polymer brushes on surfaces, but also used in self-assembling stimuli-responsive nanostructures in aqueous solutions. At different pH, solutions of block copolymers containing PELs can reversibly self-assemble or dissociate into different morphologies due to the reversibly charged and uncharged properties that are widely used in inorganic nanoparticle synthesis and drug delivery. Recently He and co-workers47 synthesized a pH-sensitive four-arm poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(2-(diethylamino) ethyl methacrylate) (PEO-b-PDEAEMA) star block copolymer, which contains water-soluble PEO blocks grafted to a weak polybase PDEAEMA block. In 0.01 M NaCl solution the block copolymer could self-assemble into a spherical core–shell micelle at high pH (pH 10). Here the hydrophobic DEAEMA core is surrounded by a folded four-arm PEO corona. With the pH decreasing to 6.8 the hydrophobic core charges, which led to an increase in the micelle 〈Rh〉. At low pH (pH 3.0), the four-arm block copolymer was fully extended to yield positively charged segments, and the micelles tended to dissociate into unimers (Fig. 10 Top). Fig. 10  (Top): TEM micrographs of aggregates from four-arm PEO-b-PDEAEMA block copolymer in 0.01 M NaCl solution at pH 10 (left) and pH 6.8 (right).47 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of reversible pH-triggered encapsulation and release of pyrene by adsorbed block copolymer micelles.48 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. The whole formation and dissociation process of pH-sensitive micelles has been studied by Schatz and co-workers.48 They used another pH-responsive block copolymer called poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate)-b-poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMA-b-PDEA) to investigate the ability of pH-sensitive micelles to reversibly dissolve and release hydrophobic molecules from their hydrophobic cores through pH variation, when the micelles were adsorbed on solid particles. They found that the adsorbed micelles exhibited a largely reversible switching response to pH variation between 9 and 3.5. At pH 9, a pyrene was captured within the adsorbed micelles. However, at a pH of 3.5 the block copolymer was charged by a hydrogen ion, which would result in the release of the pyrene into the surrounding aqueous solution. Upon switching back to pH 9 the pyrene was recaptured within the micelles. (Fig. 10 bottom).Furthermore Yuan and co-workers49 took advantage of pH-sensitive diblock copolymer micelles to form nanosized templates for depositing silica nanoparticles from aqueous solutions at a pH of 7.5 at ambient temperature. The micelles were composed of cationic PDMA coronas and hydrophobic poly(2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl methacrylate (PDPA) cores on which silica nanoparticles became protonated at low pH and deprotonated at high pH. The reversible switching property suggests possible encapsulation and controlled release applications. Moreover, in situ silica deposition effectively stabilizes the PDPA-PDMA micelles which remain intact on lowering the solution pH.On the other hand, based on many studies of light-responsive micellar aggregates of small-molecule surfactants, recently, some light-sensitive block copolymer micelles have been investigated because of the transformation between micelle formation and unimer dissociation. Generally, in order to obtain light-sensitive block copolymer micelles, the polymers should contain photochromic groups whose photoreaction upon illumination enhances the polymer polarity and shifts the hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity ratio toward micelle dissociation. Wang and co-workers50 have investigated amphiphilic block copolymers comprising a hydrophilic PEO block and a hydrophobic azo-SCLCP (azobenzene-containing side-chain liquid crystalline polymer) block. They found that the self-assembled core–shell micelles and vesicles in solution can be dissociated by UV light irradiation and re-formed upon visible light exposure because of the reversible trans–cis photoisomerization of azobenzene side groups of the hydrophobic block.Jiang and co-authors51 investigated a new dye-containing block copolymer poly(2-nitrobenzyl methacrylate) (PEO-b-PNBM) to photocontrol the release of a model hydrophobic guest from light-dissociable polymer micelles. In this diblock copolymer, the photolysis of the 2-nitrobenzyl segment, via absorbing either one-photon UV (∼365 nm) or two-photon near-infrared (∼700 nm) detaches from the polymer, and the hydrophobic PNBM block transfers into the hydrophilic poly(methacrylic) acid (PMA) block. To characterize the 2-nitrobenzyl segment detaching and the micelle dissociation process, Nile Red (NR), a hydrophobic dye was used as a model hydrophobic guest to encapsulate the photolabile polymer micelles and investigate the photocontrolled release corresponding to the disruption of the micelles (Fig. 11, top). Fig. 11  (Top): Schematic illustration of the photocontrolled release of an encapsulated agent as a result of the photoinduced dissociation of the polymer micelle.51 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of two-photon absorbing block copolymer as a nano-carrier for porphyrin: energy transfer and singlet oxygen generation in micellar aqueous solution.53 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. Until now, most of the light-responsive block copolymer micelles that have been reported are mainly activated by UV and visible light. Only a limited number of micelles that can be activated by near-infrared radiation have been reported. Recently, Babin and co-workers52 synthesized an amphiphilic block copolymer, poly-([7-(diethylamino) coumarin-4-yl]methyl methacrylate (PEO-b-PDEACMM). Absorbing NIR protons, the 7-diethylamino-4-(hydroxymethyl) coumarin segment can detach from [7-(diethylamino)coumarin-4-yl] methyl esters because of photolysis. This photolysis reaction converts the ester groups to carboxylic acid groups, and the hydrophobic PDEACMM to hydrophilic PMA, which indicates coumarin groups on the hydrophobic block. This shows great potential as a near-infrared sensitive nano-carrier with interesting features.Light-sensitive block copolymer micelles can also be used as photochemical reactors using their ability to capture and release specific molecules. For example, Chen and co-workers53 synthesized a new amphiphilic 2PA-chromophore-containing block copolymer. In an aqueous solution the polymer can self-assemble into micelles with the hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) as the corona, and the hydrophobic 2PA-chromophore contained in the core. Taking advantage of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) in light harvesting dendrimers, efficient energy transfer (as high as 96%) from the 2PA chromophore to porphyrin was achieved in micellar aqueous solutions under a near-infrared irradiation. It was indicated that this can contribute towards enhancing the efficiency of 1O2 generation from the porphyrin guest molecules (Fig. 11, bottom).In selective solvents amphiphilic block copolymers can self-assemble into three basic structural micelles: spherical, cylindrical, or bilayers, when the concentration is well above the critical micelle concentration (cmc). Recently reversibly switching structures and more complex aggregates have been investigated by self-assembling AB diblock, ABA triblock, and ABC triblock copolymers because of the potential applications in drug delivery, cosmetics, electronics, etc. For example, Fu et al.54 found that in a crystalline-coil diblock copolymer solution of poly(L-lactic acid)-block-polystyrene (PLLA-b-PS) the self-assembled structures can switch from spinodal-like aggregates to spherical, cylindrical, or lamellar structures depending upon the type of solvent used.Hwang et al.55 have shown that toluene containing a trace amount of water can greatly influence the solubility and aggregation behavior of the PEO block in the semicrystalline ABC triblock copolymer polystyrene-b-poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PS-b-P2VP-b-PEO). It was found that PS-b-P2VP-b-PEO tended to form spherical micelles or square platelets with or without agitation of the polymer-toluene solution after which the micellar structure would eventually transfer to the square platelet. This square platelet structure is a special polymer brush which could be deemed a PS-b-P2VP brush grafted on a PEO single-crystal surface. The polymer brush surface composition could be reversibly changed upon treatment with a different solvent vapor (Fig. 12, top). Fig. 12  (Top): Schematic representation of the morphological evolution of PS-b-P2VP-b-PEO in toluene with trace amounts of water with or without stirring.55 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): TEM images of the micelles morphologies.56 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. Zhu and Jiang56 obtained a new type of giant segmented wormlike micelle (SWM) by self-assembling a linear ABC triblock copolymer poly(styrene-b-2-vinylpyridine-b-ethylene oxide) (PS-b-P2VP-b-PEO) in a ca. 9 wt% water in tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution. It was found that the thickness of the segment was nearly the same in each SWM and a kinetic study indicated that the SWMs were formed from a secondary self-assembly of the initial spherical micelles (Fig. 12, bottom).Zamurovic and co-workers57 sythesized a series of nonlinear comblike or brushlike block copolymers composed of PI, PB, and PS, and treated them with n-docane (selective solvent for PI or PB), N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA, selective solvent for PS) to investigate the influence of the macromolecular architecture on the micellization behavior of nonlinear block copolymers. Similar to the linear block copolymers, these nonlinear block copolymers could form micelles consisting of a PS core with a PI (PB) corona in n-decane solution, and those consisting of a PI (PB) core with a PS corona in N,N-dimethylacetamide solution. However, aggregation numbers and the hydrodynamic radii were lower than those of the corresponding linear block copolymers.Recently, Yu and Jiang58 investigated the self-assembly of an ABA triblock copolymer P4VP-b-PS-b-P4VP in dioxane–water mixtures and found that the shear flow was a key point in obtaining ring-shaped micelles via the rod-sphere-vesicle-ring process. Furthermore, they found copolymers were likely to form rings via end-to-end cylindrical connections at low stirring rates whereas at high stirring rates the preferred ring formation process was the pathway of the rod-sphere-vesicle-ring process. Both the ring size and its distribution were critically dependent on the stirring rate.Stimuli-responsive block copolymer research has led to the recent development of some multi-stimuli-responsive polymer micelles. These responsive polymers include characteristic combinations such as thermo- and pH-responsivity, magnetic field- and thermo-responsivity, thermo- and light-sensitivity, solvent- and thermo-responsivity, zwitterionic and thermo-responsivity, and more.593.3 Instabilities and interfacial mechanics3.3.1. Dewetting. When a polymer thin film including homopolymers, block copolymers, and blending polymers contacts a solid substrate or is treated by varied external conditions, such as temperature, solvent vapor, etc., it may rupture, dewet, phase separate, or wrinkle on the substrate from several up to dozens of microns. This depends upon the nature and magnitude of intermolecular forces within the film. Since film stability governs the function of synthetic coatings and properties of surface reactions, numerous efforts have been made to prepare useful patterns and elucidate the mechanism of these instability behaviors.Polymer films are known to be unstable on nonuniform substrates (both in physics and chemistry), which can be utilized to fabricate simple and complex polymer patterns. For example, Kargupta and Sharma60 have investigated the morphological evolution of thin films during dewetting on substrates with chemical patterns. They established that there is a coupling between the characteristic length scale of dewetting and the patterns on substrates. Based on this the ideal template was finally shown (Fig. 13, top left). Zhang et al.61 showed that dewetting PS films could be patterned via chemical modification of the substrate, i.e. inducing regular dewetting features on PS films on substrates grafted by patterned octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) SAMs. These patterns can then be transferred to polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps for soft lithography (Fig. 13, top right).62 Fig. 13  Polymer patterns by dewetting. (Top): Dewetting on chemically patterned substrates. (Left): Morphological phase diagram for the isotropic pattern consisting of less wettable blocks on a completely wettable substrate.60 Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. (Right): Dewetting pattern transferred onto the PDMS elastomer.62 Copyright 2003 Elsevier. (Bottom): Dewetting on physically patterned substrates. (Left): Morphology of underside of PMMA film floated from rubbed glass.63 Copyright 2000 Nature Publishing Group. (Right): Final dewetting result of PS thin film using PDMS with rectangular microwells.65 Copyright 2004 Elsevier. Apart from chemically patterned substrates, physically patterned subtrates can also be used to pattern polymer films. Higgins and Jones63 reported an anisotropic spinodal dewetting pattern of polymer films on rough surfaces by simply rubbing the substrate. The preferred morphology orientation of the film was observed after dewetting (Fig. 13, left bottom). Luo et al. patterned dewetting PS films via physical modification of substrates.64 They induced regular dewetting of PS films on a striped patterned substrate. Dewettting can also be induced by utilising the capillary effect due to a patterned top-substrate (Fig. 13, right bottom).653.3.2 Macrophase separations of polymer blends. Phase separation is one of the typical surface activities of blending polymers and block copolymers that can also be used to pattern polymer films. For example, Cui and Han66 studied morphologies and properties of polystyrene (PS)-poly(2-vinylpyridine) (PVP) blend films cast on the mica substrate from an ethylbenzene solution. A near-honeycomb-like surface morphology of the PS–PVP blend formed by controlling the solvent evaporation speed. This was due to the effect of Marangoni–Benard convection. Honeycomb macroporous films were also fabricated by the “breath figures” method composed of P2VP distributed in the holes of PS.67 The porous films exhibited reversible behavior responding to water and different solvent vapors. When the porous film was treated with water, the honeycomb pattern would change to a hexagonal island-like pattern. Once heated to remove the water, the honeycomb pattern formed again (Fig. 14). A proper amount of surfactant was then added, Triton X-100, to the PS-P2VP toluene solution.68 The ordered hexagonal island pattern was able to be switched to the ordered honeycomb pattern. The effects of the amount of Triton X-100 on the surface morphology and the pattern transformation are discussed in terms of the collapse of Triton X-100, phase separation between Triton X-100–P2VP and PS, the interfacial interaction between Triton X-100–P2VP and the mica substrate, and the Marangoni–Benard convection. Lu and co-workers69 took advantage of the Marangoni instability when spin casting poly(2-vinyl pyridine) (P2VP)–silver nanowire–chloroform suspensions to fabricate parallel striped silver nanowires. The same driving mechanism (Marangoni instability) was indicated based on the striped patterns of the silver nanowires similar to those obtained from spin-casting the corresponding pure polymer solutions. Fig. 14  3D restructuring images in water over time: (a) air; (b) 20 min; (c) 1 h; (d) 3 h; heated at 60 °C for (e) 1 h; (f) 3 h.67 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 3.3.3 Wrinkles. Wrinkles appear like small furrows, ridges, or creases on a normally smooth surface. They are caused by crumpling, folding, or shrinking, and are another typical property of polymer films. Wrinkles can also be used to pattern polymer surfaces. To date, there have been two main categories of methods to obtain patterned wrinkles:70 (1) the preparation of wrinkles in rigid sheets on elastic foundations, such as poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), and (2) fabrication of wrinkles in rigid sheets on viscoelastic foundations. Bowden and co-workers71 increased the volume of a PDMS block by heating, exposed it to oxygen plasma, and then cooled the sample down to room temperature. The plasma oxidation process switched the topmost layer of the PDMS film into a silica-like layer. The wavelength and the amplitude of the wrinkles increased with an increase in the plasma-treating time (Fig. 15, left). Bowden and co-workers72 also prepared wrinkled surfaces by depositing thin gold layers onto thick PDMS surfaces at high temperatures. The subsequent cooling down of the substrate developed compressive stresses in the specimens, which were the driving force for the formation of wrinkles having a periodicity of 20–50 mm. Although random winkles were generated on flat PDMS sheets, they induced oriented wrinkling morphologies over large areas when depositing gold films on PDMS substrates containing 3D protrusions. Fig. 15  Polymer patterns by wrinkling. (Left): Optical micrographs of wrinkled surfaces prepared on heated poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) sheet by plasma oxidation.71 Copyright 1999 American Institute of Physics. (Right): Optical microscope images of various wrinkles in different regions on the surface of the PS/PVP bilayer induced by water vapor in a PDMS mold.73 Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. Qian et al.73took advantage of solvent vapor instead of changing temperature to prepare highly oriented wrinkles. Water vapor induced wrinkles in a rigid-PS-viscous-poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)(PVP) bilayer confined by a soft mold, realizing an ordered pattern in the solvent state. With the shape-controlled mold, the orientations of the ordered wrinkles were either perpendicular or tilted to the orientation of the channels in the mold. Furthermore, the wrinkle period can be modulated through the film thickness of PVP and PS (Fig. 15, right). Dalnoki-Veress and co-workers74 reported on wrinkles that occurred in three layer systems comprising polystyrene (PS) films with various thickness sandwiched between two thin SiOx layers (thicknesses ranging from ∼18 to ∼30 nm).3.4 Active polymer surfaces via soft lithographyMicro-fabrication is a typical “top-down” patterning method to generate small structures in a size range from hundreds of microns down to hundreds of nanometres (Fig. 5), sizes that are essential in micro- and optoelectronics. In this field, photolithography is the most successful technology because of its capability to generate highly ordered patterns over large areas. Recently, many revolutionary technologies have been developed to fabricate very small features, such as extreme UV (EUV) lithography, soft X-ray lithography, electron-beam writing, and proximal-probe lithography.Photolithography is a widely accepted microfabrication technique, however, it is expensive, difficult to use on nonplanar surfaces, and has material limitations. Therefore, other technologies have been explored to complement photolithography. These technologies include microcontact printing (μCP), replica molding (REM), microtransfer molding (μTM), micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC), and solvent-assisted micromolding (SAMIM) (Fig. 16).75 These techniques are often named soft lithography because they all take advantage of at least one elastomeric mask, stamp, or mold to transfer patterns, or ink to substrates. Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of procedures for (a) replica molding (REM), (b) microtransfer molding (μTM), (c) micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC), and (d) solvent-assisted micromolding (SAMIM). Copyright 1998 Annual Reviews.75 In soft lithography, the elastomeric stamp is the key element for reprinting patterns or transfer inks at a fixed point. The stamp should have high modulus, low surface energy, chemical inertness, and resistance to swelling induced by solvents. Several elastomers have been investigated, including PDMS, polyurethane (PU), polyimide (PI), cross-linked Novolacresins (a phenol formaldehyde polymer), block copolymer thermoplastics, and fluorocarbon-modified siloxanes.76 Recently, Truong and co-workers77 tested a commercially available acryloxy perfluoropolyether (a-PFPE) as the reprinted elastomeric stamp for microcontact printing, nanotransfer printing, phase-shift optical lithography, proximity field nanopatterning, molecular scale soft nanoimprinting, and solvent-assisted micromolding techniques. They found in some cases, that the a-PFPE stamp performed better than many widely used materials, such as high modulus PDMS (h-PDMS).Lee and co-workers78 investigated a hydrophilic composite elastomeric mold by blending two UV-curable materials, Norland Optical Adhesives (NOA) 63 and poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) in an appropriate ratio. Under UV polymerization, the elastomeric mold was nanopatternable via SAMIM and μCP of polar inks. Unlike other elastomeric molds, this hydrophilic composite also has preferential aqueous and organic solvent permeability.Soft lithography, serves as an advanced technique in the fabrication of functional patterns, and has been used to prepare active polymer surfaces (Fig. 16). For example, Yan and co-workers79 used the μCP transfer technique to fabricate spread out colloidal arrays by using a swelled or stretched PDMS mold, on which a close packed colloidal array had self-assembled. This technique not only achieved 1D and 2D colloidal arrays, but also supplied a simple and flexible route for creating microlens arrays.Besides being utilized to pattern 1D or 2D polymer surfaces, soft lithography is also used to pattern complex 3D polymer surfaces if combined with other patterning methods. For example, Connal and Qiao80 combined soft lithography techniques with a “breath figure” method. They achieved hierarchical porous polymer films with a honeycomb morphology on nonplanar surfaces by using a solution containing a core-crosslinked star (CCS) polymer with PDMS arms. They also developed a nanoporous structure combined with a highly-ordered hexagonal structure by casting the star PDMS benzene solution onto a TEM grid with a 70% humid flow directed onto the surface. Furthermore, different hierarchical structures can be obtained through choice of TEM grid, and the opposing patterns could be formed by dipping the grids into a benzene solution of the CCS polymer instead of casting (Fig. 17). Fig. 17  SEM images showing the morphology of (f) 1000 mesh square TEM grid; (g) honeycomb material formed on the 1000 mesh square TEM grid surface; (h) negative image of honeycomb materials made by replica molding using (g) as master; (i) 2000 mesh square TEM grid; (j) honeycomb material on surface of 2000 mesh square TEM grid; (k) negative image of honeycomb materials made by replica molding using (j) as a master.80 Copyright 2006 Wiley. Recently, soft lithography has been used to improve functional polymer surface properties. For example, Hung and Stupp81 used a novel soft lithography technique, sonication-assisted solution embossing, to self-assemble nanofibers of peptide-amphiphile molecules. In this system, simultaneous self-assembly, alignment, and patterning of nanofibers were achieved by solvent evaporation. The nanofibers tended to orient parallel to the channels due to the influence of ultrasonic agitation and confinement within the structure of the elastomeric stamp. This nanostructure alignment technique has the potential to control macroscale cellular behavior or material properties by tuning the directionality of interactions at the nanoscale.Na and co-workers82 investigated polymer-based photovoltaic cells, with periodic sub-micrometre structures as an efficient light-trapping method to improve the performance of organic solar cells. It was based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61 (PCBM). They prepared organic solar cells (OSCs) with surface relief gratings (SRGs) on the active layers by using a soft lithography technique consisting of a PDMS stamp and light sensitive azo polymer films. They found that the energy conversion efficiencies of OSCs with SRGs increased corresponding to an increase in the short-circuit current density (Jsc). This indicated that SRGs induce additional photon absorption in active layers by increasing the optical path length and light trapping capability. Furthermore, this periodic structure fabrication method using soft lithography is important in the fabrication of high-efficiency and low-cost polymer solar cells.Aside from patterning functional polymers and fabricating controllable and complex polymer structures, soft lithography can also be used to synthesize polymer microparticles, fabricate microfluidic devices, design fixed-point polymer brushes, etc.3.5 Polymer microfluidic devicesMicrofluidic devices can be used to research many scientific issues in chemistry, physics, and biology. This includes preparing chemical reactors, analyzing chemical contents, synthesizing different functional nanoparticles, generating gradients, designing optical micro-prisms, self-assembling nanoparticles, coding/decoding, and separating and purifying protein, NDA, or cells. Thanks to the rapid growth of polymer materials in the past decade, commercial manufacturers of microfluidic devices see many benefits in employing plastics. This includes reduced cost and simplified manufacturing procedures, particularly when compared to glass and silicon. However, standard fabrication of polymeric microfluidic devices requires a regularly-maintained cleanroom facility with specialized lighting for working with UV-sensitive materials, which is a major drawback for many research groups. Even though PDMS, the most commonly used device substrate, is relatively inexpensive, much of the equipment and materials needed for photolithography are expensive. Therefore, some promising microfluidic device fabrication techniques have been developed in order to remove the necessity for a cleanroom and the related expensive materials. For example, Coltro and co-workers83,84 used standard office printers to generate channel walls and etchant masks for microfluidic devices. They used toner from a laser printer as the microchannel walls for microchip electrophoresis, then thermally transferred the toner to a glass substrate which worked as an etchant mask. This method seems promising due to well-characterized glass substrates in microfluidics. However, the fabrication of glass microfluidic devices is still an issue because of the requirement to use hydrofluoric acid (HF) as an etchant, and the inefficient thermal bonding process.On the other hand, Bao and co-workers85 used laser-printed toner as a positive-relief master in the fabrication of PDMS channels, which worked well in electrophoresis. Kaigala and co-workers86 also created similar master structures using a wax printer. These methods provide a rapid, inexpensive, and highly-repeatable alternative for PDMS microchip fabrication. However, the high dependence on the toner layer thickness to define the channel depth limits their applications. Recently, these methods have been improved by Easley and co-workers.87 They combined toner-based etchant masking with multi-layer soft lithography to thermally transfer a toner pattern to a metal master which served as an etchant mask. This showed both high efficiency and low fabrication cost.To solve chemical, physical, or biological issues, people usually prepare polymer microfluidic devices in structures of different polymer materials (hydrophobic/hydrophilic/bio-sensitive materials). They are often designed in a specifically shaped structure to control nanoparticle size, shape, adhesion, gradient generator, and flowing velocity. For example, Nie and co-workers88 synthesized amphiphilic Janus particles and three-phase particles with a monodiperse size distribution based on microfluidic systems. These Janus and three-phase particles with different volume fractions of the constituent phases had a sharp interface between the constituent phases, and formed clusters with different aggregation numbers.Frenz and co-workers89 studied a dual nozzle microfluidic device for the production of water-in-oil droplet pairs which were driven by hydrodynamic coupling of two nozzles over a wide range of aqueous and oil flow rates. The size ratio between paired droplets and the droplet production frequencies and volumes were directly controlled by the flow rates of the aqueous streams, which could be predicted via a model based on symmetry decomposition. This controllable and predictable generator of amphiphilic droplets pairs is promising in designing micro- and nanolitre reactors. (Fig. 18, left) Fig. 18  (Left): Two aqueous phases are injected by the outer channels and synchronously emulsified by the central oil channel.89 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (Right): Schematic diagram of a microfluidic device for generating complex static gradients in solution along microchannels. The three layers in the device are separated to show each layer clearly. Inlets can be formed on the bottom PDMS piece for the introduction of cells into the channels.90 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. Wu and co-workers90 generated a complex and steady gradient in a static solution via soft lithography combined with microfluidics. By sandwiching a 2D gradient hydrogel between two PDMS substrates, they found that molecules diffused between two reservoirs through the hydrogel, eventually reaching equilibrium. This was due to the thickness of the channel being much smaller than that of the hydrogel, which meant that the flux in the hydrogel dominated the variation of the molecular diffusion. The generated gradients were spatially and temporally stable, and could be predicted and calculated with a simple equation because of the static solutions tested in the device, which could prevent any effect from fluid flow (Fig. 18, right).Today, microfluidics as a “lab on a chip” technique, has made great contributions to many disciplines. However, the investigation of complex systems requiring separation, purification, concentration (dilution), and analysis of bio-molecules (or cells), means that an “updating” of current polymer microfluidics is imperative. For example, polymer microfluidics should have more intelligence, such as self-blending, molecular recognition (including molecular detection, capture, and release), smart valves (controlling reaction time, flowing direction, and production filtration), controllable pumping, and wettability switching. If given these updates, smart microfluidics would be promising for multi-disciplinary research questions. In the past decade, with the growth of research on intelligent polymer surfaces and materials, smart microfluidics have attracted a great deal interest.Recently, functional microfluidic devices have been achieved. For example, Terray and co-workers91 created micrometre-scale fluid pumps and particulate valves by manipulating colloidal microspheres within customized channels approximately the size of a human red blood cell. In their experiments, two positive-displacement designs served as a gear and a peristaltic pump, and two colloidal valve designs, one actuated and one passive (for controlling the direction of cells or small particles), were tested. It was found that the use of appropriately selected colloids as both valves and pumps would allow device integration that created a bridge towards complex, highly integrated, microscale total analysis systems.Taking advantage of the nonlinear flow phenomena of non-Newtonian fluids, Groisman and co-workers92 used an aqueous viscoelastic polymer solution instead of common solvents as a working fluid in sub-100-μm-width channels to construct a functional microfluidic memory and control device working at arbitrarily low Reynolds numbers (Re). In their experiments, both a flux stabilizer and a bistable flip-flop memory were found via exploiting the fluid’s non-Newtonian rheological properties. Analogous to their solid-state electronic counterparts, these circuit elements could be used as components of control systems for integrated microfluidic devices.Since surface hierarchical structures play a key role in enhancing adhesion, Majumder and co-workers93 investigated the strong and reusable bioadhesion in the feet of different arthropods and vertebrates. This was done by generating elastomeric layers with embedded air or oil filled microchannels. The modified devices showed a remarkable enhancement of adhesion because of the crack-arresting properties of the microchannels and the surface stresses caused by the capillary force. This is helpful in the development of an optimal design for microfluidic adhesions.Recently, Mair and co-workers94 prepared a dual functional micromixer–reactor in microfluidic channels which were filled by photopatterned porous polymer monoliths prepared via UV light irradiation. It was found that the mixing–reaction performance of the photopatterned periodic monolith was 22% better than both an empty channel and an equivalent continuous segment of the porous polymer monoliths. This indicated that the dual functional mixer–reactor was particularly important for proteomic applications requiring preconcentration, enzymatic digestion, and two-dimensional separations. (Fig. 19) Fig. 19  SEM images of porous polymer monoliths photopatterned in a periodic arrangement.94 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. Currently, some smart microfluidics have been achieved, however, further exploration is necessary, especially focused on multi-disciplinary issues.3.6 Gradient polymer surfaces and their applications3.6.1 Gradient polymer surfaces. Gradient polymer surfaces, where the surface energy gradually increases along their length, have a large number of practical applications, such as liquid self-transportation, biomolecular interaction investigations, cell tailoring, photonics, and microfluidics.95,96 Moreover, gradient polymer surfaces can also be used to replace many tedious and time-consuming experiments in a single study. For example, although the surface wettability can be investigated point-by-point, gradient surfaces are usually employed to systematically investigate the relationship between surface wettability, surface structure, and chemical composition. Gradient polymer surfaces are classified into three major categories; chemical gradients,97–100 physical gradients,101–104 and chemical–physical composite gradients (composition–topography composite gradients).105–107Chemical gradients involve the gradual variation of one or more chemical compositions on a substrate. For polymers, this typically equates to the macromolecule density or macromolecule weight gradient of polymer brushes. Ionov and co-workers97 grafted two mixed responsive PEL brushes (polyacrylic acid (PAA) and poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP)) on a flat surface with the two polymers having density gradients in opposite directions. Since PAA is more hydrophilic to basic water than neutral and acid solutions, and P2VP is more hydrophilic to acid water than neutral and basic solutions, the modified surface shows a high selectivity to different pH solutions (Fig. 20, left top). Fig. 20  Chemical gradients generated by grafting polymer brushes. (Left top): The density gradient of PAA brushes mixed with P2VP brushes.97 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (Left bottom): Smart microfluidic channels grafted by PAA and P2VP brushes with a gradient of composition.98 Copyright 2005 Wiley. (Right top): A novel method to generate gradient weights of PHEMA-b-PMMA block copolymers.99 Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry. (Right bottom): An orthogonal gradient surface grafted by gradient density and gradient weight PDMAEMA.100 Copyright 2004 Wiley. Ionov and co-workers98 also grafted PAA and P2VP brushes on the walls of microfluidic channels with a gradient of composition. The microfluidic channels show an excellent ability to select wetting solutions. Having a high “intelligence”, the “smart” devices can be used for the separation, selection, sensing, and dispensing of small volumes of liquids (Fig. 20, left bottom). Tomlinson and Genzer99 reported a simple method which would also generate surface-grafted brushes comprising block copolymers with tunable composition and molecular weight gradients along flat solid substrates. Fig. 20 (right top) is a schematic of the setup to generate gradients, from which the gradient weight of poly(hydroxyl ethyl methacrylate-b-methyl methacrylate) (b-PHEMA-b-PMMA) block copolymers is well tuned. Furthermore, an orthogonal polymer gradient for (poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA)) in molecular weight and grafting density of surface-anchored polymers was prepared by generating number density gradients of polymerization initiators on the surface followed by surface-initiated ATRP. These orthogonal gradients could be used as functional combinatorial templates to direct the assembly of nanoparticles (Fig. 20, right bottom).100Different to conventional gradients, physical gradients (structure gradient or topography gradient) can possess a gradual variation of some physical properties such as rigidity of the substrate, surface wettability, and optical property. For example, we reported a fabrication methodology for gradient topographical substrates in a temperature field.101 When the external temperature is over the glass transition temperature (Tg) of polystyrene (PS) (Tg∼ 90 °C), the PS chains can freely move, resulting in a PS surface turning flat. When under Tg, the PS chains are frozen, thus freezing the surface topography. By heating one side of a substrate assembled from PS microspheres to 130 °C, and leaving the other side at room temperature, a gradient from the high temperature side (flat) to the room temperature side (rough) could be achieved (Fig. 21, left top). This gradient showed a wettability that ranged from 89° to 148°. Lu et al.102 tried the same method to obtain gradient topographical low density polyethylene (LDPE) surfaces, which can be employed to investigate the wetting transition between the Cassie model and Wenzel model. We also presented a method for fabricating gradients over thickness.103 By creating a stable meniscus of a PS colloid solution, governed by the concentration and the bond numbers (i.e., the ratio of gravitational potential energy to adhesive energy), PS microspheres can self-assemble in a thickness gradient (Fig. 21, left bottom). Li and Han104 also obtained a gradient of colloid crystals by the vertical deposition technique, and found that the optical transmission intensity at the dip wavelength could be altered by changing the thickness of the colloidal crystals (Fig. 21, right). Fig. 21  Physical gradients generated by external forces. (Left top): Gradient topographical PS surfaces prepared in a temperature field.101(Left bottom): Gradients in thickness self-assembled by PS microspheres.103 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Right): Positional transmission spectra of gradient colloidal crystal.104 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. Chemical–physical composite gradients are a special class that are usually utilized to amplify surface wettability of chemical gradients by surface structure. Zhang and co-workers105 obtained a one dimensional gradient wettability surface from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity by self-assembling two different kinds of thiol molecules (hydrophobic ending and hydrophilic ending) on the rough gold surface in a gradient ratio (Fig. 22, left top). Liu and co-workers106 reported the fabrication of a rough one-dimensional, chemical composition gradient from organic to inorganic by the pyrolysis of a polymethylsilsesquioxane (PMSQ) thin film in a gradient temperature field. This shows a gradient wettability from 98° to 0°. Recently, we107 prepared an orthogonal topography and chemical composition gradient surface via gradually structuring and sulfonating PS in orthogonal directions. This was used to investigate the relationship between surface wettability, surface structure and chemical compositions. The prepared orthogonal gradient surface shows some one-dimensional wettability gradients in the x, y, and diagonal directions, such as hydrophobic to hydrophilic, superhydrophobic to hydrophobic, superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic gradients. Surface roughness can improve not only surface wettability but also the gradient slope (Fig. 22, right). Tsai and co-workers108 prepared gradient heterogeneous surfaces by mixing homopolymers with diblock copolymers at the opposite directions to investigate phase separation of polymers. Along the direction from which the ratio of homopolymers decreases, and block copolymers increases, surface structure gradually changes from the macroscopic to the microscopic scale. This is because the macrophase separation of homopolymers decreases, and the microphase separation of block copolymers increases (Fig. 22, left bottom). Fig. 22  Chemical–physical composite gradient surfaces. (Left top): Superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic gradient surface.105 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Left bottom): The gradient surface prepared by macroscopic phase separation and microscopic phase separation.108 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (Right): A composition–structure orthogonal gradient surface employed to investigate surface wettability.107 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 3.6.2 Tailoring gradient polymer surfaces for cells studies. Fabrication methods, and some applications of gradient polymer surfaces have been introduced in the last section. Such applications include surface wettability, photonics, smart microfluidics, and phase separation. In this section, we will introduce another kind of active gradient polymer surface, for use in cell tailoring. In this field, polymer brush gradients are mainly used to research the adsorption and adhesion of cells. Gallant and co-workers109 prepared a gradient of glycine-arginine-glycine-aspartate-serine (GRGDS) peptides by gradient UV exposure of the grafted SAMs, and passivated the surface with a poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(propylene oxide)-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO-PPO-PEO) triblock copolymer, and blocked the surface with bovine serum albumin (BSA), which helped to decrease the adsorption of cells. After planting A-10 cells, a putative vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) line isolated from rat thoracic aorta, on the prepared gradient substrates (3000 cells cm−2) in 2% (v/v) serum containing media, incubating for 6 h, and rinsing the nonadherent cells away, the number of adherent cells increased as a function of the position along the gradients. They found that all the measured trends (adhesion, spreading, and shape) appeared to saturate around a position 30 mm along the gradient, whereas the underlying RGD peptide density did not reach its maximal surface concentration until a position at 40 mm (Fig. 23, top left). Bhat and co-workers110 prepared an orthogonal gradient by grafting PHEMA brushes, a hydrophilic polymer, commonly used to partly or completely prevent adsorption of cells or proteins on artificial biomaterials, in gradient density and gradient molecular weight on a gradient fibronectin (FN) surface (usually containing specific functional groups and interacting with integrin receptors on the cell surface). They found, on the orthogonal gradient, the osteoblastic MC-3T3 E1 cell coverage decreased gradually with the increase of PHEMA layer thickness (i.e., decrease in FN availability). Furthermore, cell morphology also changed as a function of PHEMA coverage. There were two categories of adsorbed cells on the surface. One was well-spread, i.e., polygonal shaped cells, and the other is elongated (spindle-shaped cells). On this gradient surface, well-spread cells were found on regions that were grafted by a short PHEMA brush, whereas elongated cells were discovered on the places grafted by a thicker PHEMA layer (Fig. 23, top right). Fig. 23  Tailoring gradient polymer surfaces for cell studies. (Top left): A one-dimensional polymer brush gradient.109 Copyright 2007 Wiley. (Top right): An orthogonal polymer brush gradient.110 Copyright 2005 Wiley. (Bottom): A nanotopographical gradient.111 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. Not only chemical gradients, but also physical gradients can be used to research cell tailoring. Simon and co-workers111 prepared a gradient topographical gold surface containing nanostructures by creating a continuous change in the angle of incidence of gold atoms during vapor deposition. They patterned different-shaped SAMs consisting of HS(CH2)14CH3 surrounded by HS(CH2)12(OCH2CH2)3OH on the surface to confine the positions of cell adhesion. They found, in the high roughness region (the deposition angle is from 51° to 56°), the adsorbed cells were strictly confined in the patterns. With the topography decreasing (the deposition angle is from 43° to 50°), cells began to spread out of the confined patterns gradually. In the low topography region (the deposition angle is from 38° to 41°), cells were widely spread out of the confined patterns. These experimental results show that the confinement ratio of cell growth inside the patterns gradually decreased from high to low topography on the nano scale (Fig. 23, bottom).3.6.3 Liquid self-transportation via gradient polymer surfaces. Gradient surfaces can be used for liquid self-transportation, as first studied by Chaudhury and Whitesides.112 They prepared a gradient SAM of decyltrichlorosilane molecules on a silicon surface by evaporation. The chemical gradient surface can drive water droplets uphill at a velocity of 1 to 2 mm s−1 when the surface is inclined at ∼15° (Fig. 24, left). To achieve liquid self-transportation, the basic premise is that the difference between interfacial tensions along the gradient direction must be larger than the surface hysteresis. Fig. 24  Liquid self-transportation on gradient surfaces driven by different forces. (Left): driving by a SAM gradient112 Copyright 1992 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (Middle top): Driving by noncovalent molecular adsorption.113 Copyright 2000 American Chemical Society. (Middle bottom): Driving by electrochemical forces.114 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Right): Driving by interfacial forces.117 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. Until now, many gradient surfaces have been developed to drive liquid self-transportation, which work via chemical driving, thermal driving, electrochemical driving, and photochemical driving. Lee and Laibinis113 used the microcontact printing (μCP) method to pattern a gold-coated surface with hydrophilic-ended 16-mercaptohexadecanoic acid (HS(CH2)15COOH) SAM. The SAM was then surrounded by a hydrophobic-ended octadecanethiol (CH3(CH2)17SH) SAM. Driven by the chemical reaction between carboxyl groups on the substrate and alkylamines (CH3(CH2)n-1NH2 or CnNH2) in liquid solution, droplets can self-move along the HS(CH2)15COOH SAM pattern (Fig. 24, middle top). Yamada and Tada114 fabricated a ferrocenyl alkanethiol monolayer on a gold substrate. Adding a lateral bias voltage, Vbias, to generate a level gradient along the gold substrate, a wetting boundary on the surface from hydrophilic to hydrophobic was generated. Then a reversible move on the surface was performed by controlling the redox reaction of the monolayer on the substrate through applying an in-plane slope of electrochemical potential. Under the control of the electrochemical reactions, water droplets can self-run reversibly on the surface (Fig. 24, middle bottom). Sumino and co-workers115,116 prepared chemosensitive running droplets, which can self-run periodically and circularly by a chemical Marangoni effect. Recently, we prepared a shape-gradient on mica–wax and mica–low density polyethylene (LDPE) composite surfaces.117 Contributions from the: (1) large differences in wettability between mica and LDPE or wax, (2) low contact angle hysteresis on the flat mica, wax, and LDPE surfaces, (3) space limitations of the transportation area, water droplets can self-move at the average speed of 6.8–10.0 cm s−1 on a horizontal surface, and 2.8–3.4 cm s−1 on a surface inclined at an angle of 25° with respect to the horizon (Fig. 24, right). Through these active gradient surfaces, interfacial energy can be converted into mechanical energy spontaneously or catalyzed by chemical, thermal, electrochemical, or photochemical energy. This may be applied in liquid transportation, and smart microfluidic devices.4. ConclusionResearch into polymer surfaces is an important and promising subject in polymer science. Recently, active and responsive polymer surfaces, as a novel and multi-disciplinary subject in this field, have attracted great interest because of the great contribution to research in smart materials and devices. This critical review summarizes two basic methods in the fabrication of these “intelligent” polymer surfaces, including chemical or physical modifications, which can be further subdivided into “graft to” or “graft from”, and “bottom-up” or “top-down” techniques, respectively.As a novel field, the original research into active and responsive polymer surfaces comes from polymer chemistry, physics, and materials, and is focused on the fabrication methods and material properties. However, having one or several activities or responsivities to the external environment, these intelligent polymer surfaces have many potential applications in biology, microelectronics, and bionics, such as artificial muscle, flexible display, protein separation and purification, cell tailoring, and liquid self-transportation. Here, the pilot studies into active polymer surfaces used in multi-disciplinary devices have been explored. Such active polymer surfaces include electrowetting displays, smart microfluidic devices, and tailored cell gradients. How to design and apply these smart surfaces in biomaterials, electric devices and biochips will be the future of this young subject.
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20621401, 50773080) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2009CB930603).ReferencesT. Sun, L. Feng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 644 CrossRef CAS .D. Quéré, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 2495 CrossRef .M. Callies and D. Quéré, Soft Matter, 2005, 1, 55 RSC .X. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3063 CrossRef CAS .F. Xia and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2842 CrossRef CAS .B. Zhao and W. J. Brittain, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 677 CrossRef CAS .S. Minko, Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 397 Search PubMed .M. Ballauff, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1135 CrossRef CAS .T. Sun, G. Wang, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 357 CrossRef CAS .Q. Fu, G. V. R. Rao, T. L. Ward, Y. Lu and G. P. Lopez, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 170 CrossRef CAS .A. Natansohn, P. Rochon, M. Ho and C. Barrettt, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 4179 CrossRef CAS .T. Hugel, N. B. Holland, A. Cattani, L. Moroder, M. Seitz and H. E. Gaub, Science, 2002, 296, 1103 CrossRef .M. Yamada, M. Kondo, R. Miyasato, Y. Naka, J.-i. Mamiya, M. Kinoshita, A. Shishido, Y. Yu, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 60 RSC .T. Ikeda, J. Mamiya and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 506 CrossRef CAS .J. Ruhe, M. Ballauff, M. Biesalski, P. Dziezok, F. Gröhn, D. Johannsmann, N. Houbenov, N. Hugenberg, R. Konradi, S. Minko, M. Motornov, R. R. Netz, M. Schmidt, C. Seidel, M. Stamm, T. Stephan, D. Usov and H. Zhang, in Polyelectrolytes with Defined Molecular Architecture I, ed. M. Schmidt, Adv. Polym. Sci., Adv. Polym. Sci., Springer, New-York,  2004, pp. 79–150 Search PubMed .N. Houbenov, S. Minko and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 5897–5901 CrossRef CAS .K. Yu, H. Wang, L. Xue and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1443 CrossRef CAS .G. G. Bumbu, G. Kircher, M. Wolkenhauer, R. Berger and J. S. Gutmann, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2004, 205, 1713 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhou, W. Shu, M. Welland and W. T. S. Huck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5326 CrossRef CAS .L. Ionov, S. Sapra, A. Synytska, A. L. Rogach, M. Stamm and S. Diez, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1453 CrossRef CAS .K. Yu, H. Wang and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8957 CrossRef CAS .K. Yu and Y. Han, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 705 RSC .A. Kidane, T. B. Mcpherson, I. Szleifer and K. Park, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 214, 299 .J. C. Love, L. A. Estroff, J. K. Kriebel, R. G. Nuzzo and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1103 CrossRef CAS .A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533 CrossRef CAS .J. Lahann, S. Mitragotri, T. Tran, H. Kaido, J. Sundaram, I. S. Choi, S. Hoffer, G. A. Somorjai and R. Langer, Science, 2003, 299, 371 CrossRef CAS .K. Ichimura, S. Oh and M. Nakagawa, Science, 2000, 288, 1624 CrossRef CAS .S. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2007, 8, 18 CrossRef CAS .B. K. Teo and X. H. Sun, J. Cluster Sci., 2006, 17, 529 CrossRef CAS .E. Schäffer, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Nature, 2000, 403, 874 CrossRef CAS .E. Schäffer, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Europhys. Lett., 2001, 53, 518 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lin, T. Kerle, T. P. Russell, E. Schäffer and U. Steiner, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 3971 CrossRef CAS .J. Peng, Y. Han, Y. Yang and B. Li, Polymer, 2003, 44, 2379 CrossRef CAS .K. Schmidt, H. G. Schoberth, M. Ruppel, H. Zettl, H. Hänsel, T. M. Weiss, V. Urban, G. Krausch and A. Böker, Nat. Mater., 2007, 7, 142 .V. Olszowka, V. Kuntermann and A. Böker, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5515 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Hayes and B. J. Feenstra, Nature, 2003, 425, 383 CrossRef CAS .B. H. W. Hendriks, S. Kuiper, M. A. J. Van As, C. A. Renders and T. W. Tukker, Optical Rev., 2005, 12, 255 CrossRef .S. Leckner and E. Appelgren, Nordicom Rev., 2007, 28, 25 Search PubMed .J. Heikenfeld, S. C. Allen and A. J. Steckl, Soc. Info. Displ. Int. Symp. Seattle, 2004, P-59 Search PubMed .See information from Liquavista website, http://www.liquavista.com/.K. Zhou, Y. Lao and J. Heikenfeld, IEEE, 2007, 288 .See information from Varioptic website, http://www.varioptic.com/.V. Abetz and P. F. W. Simon, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2005, 189, 125 CAS .Y. He and T. P. Lodge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12666 CrossRef CAS .A. Sundararaman, T. Stephan and R. B. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12264 CrossRef CAS .J. Xu, S. Luo, W. Shi and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 989 CrossRef CAS .E. He, P. Ravi and K. C. Tam, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2382 CrossRef CAS .C. Schatz, E. G. Smith, S. P. Armes and E. J. Wanless, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8325 CrossRef CAS .J. Yuan, O. O. Mykhaylyk, A. J. Ryan and S. P. Armes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1717 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, X. Tong and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8911 CrossRef CAS .J. Jiang, X. Tong, D. Morris and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4633 CrossRef CAS .J. Babin, M. Pelletier, M. Lepage, J. Allard, D. Morris and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3329 CrossRef CAS .C. Chen, Y. Tian, Y. Cheng, A. C. Young, J. Ka and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7220 CrossRef CAS .J. Fu, B. Luan, X. Yu, Y. Cong, J. Li, C. Pan, Y. Han, Y. Yang and B. Li, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 976 CrossRef CAS .W. Huang, C. Luo, J. Zhang, K. Yu and Y. Han, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8022 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhu and W. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9315 CrossRef CAS .M. Zamurovic, S. Christodoulou, A. Vazaios, E. Iatrou, M. Pitsikalis and N. Hadjichristidis, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5835 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu and W. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3399 CrossRef CAS .I. Dimitrov, B. Trzebicka, A. H. E. Müller, A. Dworak and C. B. Tsvetanov, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1275 CrossRef CAS .K. Kargupta and A. Sharma, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 5153 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Xing and Y. Han, Surf. Sci., 2003, 539, 129 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Xing and Y. Han, Polymer, 2003, 44, 3737 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Higgins and R. A. L. Jones, Nature, 2000, 404, 476 CrossRef .C. Luo, R. Xing and Y. Han, Surf. Sci., 2004, 552, 139 CrossRef CAS .C. Luo, R. Xing, Z. Zhang, J. Fu and Y. Han, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 269, 158 CrossRef CAS .L. Cui and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11085 CrossRef CAS .L. Cui, Y. Xuan, X. Li, Y. Ding, B. Li and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11696 CrossRef CAS .L. Cui, B. Li and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3349 CrossRef CAS .S. Lu, H. Chen, K. Wu and Y. Chen, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10069 CrossRef CAS .J. Genzer and J. Groenewold, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 310 RSC .N. Bowden, W. T. S. Huck, K. E. Paul and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2557 CrossRef CAS .N. Bowden, S. Brittain, A. G. Evans, J. W. Hutchinson and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 1998, 393, 146 CrossRef CAS .W. Qian, R. Xing, X. Yu, X. Quan and Y. Han, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 064901 CrossRef .K. Dalnoki-Veress, B. G. Nickel and J. R. Dutcher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 1486 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 153 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Gates, Q. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171 CrossRef CAS .T. T. Truong, R. Lin, S. Jeon, H. H. Lee, J. Maria, A. Gaur, F. Hua, I. Meinel and J. A. Rogers, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2898 CrossRef CAS .N. Y. Lee, J. R. Lim, M. J. Lee, J. B. Kim, S. J. Jo, H. K. Baik and Y. S. Kim, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9018 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, J. Yao, G. Lu, X. Li, J. Zhang, K. Han and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7688 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Connal and G. G. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3024 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Hung and S. I. Stupp, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1165 CrossRef CAS .S. Na, S. Kim, J. Jo, S. Oh, J. Kim and D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3956 CrossRef CAS .W. K. T. Coltro, J. A. F. da Silva, H. D. T. da Silva, E. M. Richter, R. Furlan, L. Angnes, C. L. do Lago, L. H. Mazo and E. Carrilho, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25, 3832 CrossRef CAS .W. K. T. Coltro, E. Piccin, J. A. F. da Silva, C. L. do Lago and E. Carrilho, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 931 RSC .N. Bao, Q. Zhang, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1089, 270 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Kaigala, S. Ho, R. Penterman and C. J. Backhouse, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 384 RSC .C. J. Easley, R. K. P. Benninger, J. H. Shaver, W. S. Head and D. W. Piston, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 1119 RSC .Z. Nie, W. Li, M. Seo, S. Xu and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9408 CrossRef CAS .L. Frenz, J. Blouwolff, A. D. Griffiths and J. Baret, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12073 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu, B. Huang and R. N. Zare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4194 CrossRef CAS .A. Terray, J. Oakey and D. W. M. Marr, Science, 2002, 296, 1841 CrossRef CAS .A. Groisman, M. Enzelberger and S. R. Quake, Science, 2003, 300, 955 CrossRef CAS .A. Majumder, A. Ghatak and A. Sharma, Science, 2007, 318, 258 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Mair, T. R. Schwei, T. S. Dinio, F. Svec and J. M. J. Fréche, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 877 RSC .T. G. Ruardy, J. M. Schakenraad, H. C. van der Mei and H. J. Busscher, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1997, 29, 3 CrossRef .J. Genzer and R. R. Bhat, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2294 CrossRef CAS .L. Ionov, N. Houbenov, A. Sidorenko, M. Stamm, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9916 CrossRef CAS .L. Ionov, N. Houbenov, A. Sidorenko, M. Stamm, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1153 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Tomlinson and J. Genzer, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1350 RSC .R. R. Bhat, M. R. Tomlinson and J. Genzer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 270 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, L. Xue and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5 CrossRef .X. Lu, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 637 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, L. Xue and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5667 CrossRef CAS .J. Li and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1885 CrossRef CAS .X. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Jiang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4483 CrossRef CAS .H. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Li, B. Li, J. Ma and X. Zhang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1603 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 796 CrossRef CAS .I. Y. Tsai, M. Kimura and T. P. Russell, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5952 CrossRef CAS .N. D. Gallant, K. A. Lavery, E. J. Amis and M. L. Becker, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 965 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Bhat, B. N. Chaney, J. Rowley, A. Liebmann-Vinson and J. Genzer, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2802 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Simon, E. A. Burton, Y. Han, J. Li, A. Huang and Y. Luk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4892 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Chaudhury and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 1992, 256, 1539 CrossRef CAS .W. Lee and P. E. Laibinis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5395 CrossRef CAS .R. Yamada and H. Tada, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4254 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sumino, H. Kitahata, K. Yashikawa, M. Nagayama, S. M. Nomura, N. Magome and Y. Mori, Phys. Rev. E, 2005, 72, 041603 CrossRef .Y. Sumino, N. Magome, T. Hamada and K. Yashikawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 068301 CrossRef .J. Zhang and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6136 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Jilin Zhang	Dr Jilin Zhang received his BS degree in polymer science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), China (2002) and PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC) (2008). Now he is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. His research interest is in active and responsive polymer surfaces.
Yanchun Han	Prof. Yanchun Han received her BS degree in polymer science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), China (1990) and PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CIAC) (1995). Now she is a professor at the State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry at CIAC. Her research interests include organic optoelectronic devices, polymer films, surfaces and interfaces, and nano-structured composite materials.

 	Fig. 1  Idealized representation of the electro-responsive SAM reversibly switches between bending and extension when the gold substrate is on positive or negative charges.26 Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  (Left): Schematic diagram of a macrocyclic amphiphile (CRA-CM) tethered to photochromic azobenzene units. (Right): Lateral photographs of the light-driven motion of an olive oil droplet on a silica plate modified with CRA-CM. The olive oil droplet on a cis-rich surface moved in the direction of higher surface energy by asymmetrical irradiation with 436-nm light perpendicular to the surface. (A–C) The sessile contact angles changed from 18° (A) to 25° (C). (D) The direction of movement of the droplet was controllable by varying the direction of the photo irradiation.27 Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some photo-responsive SAMs. (a) Spiropyran and merocyanine SAM; (b) thymine-terminated thiol SAM; (c) malachite green carbinol base; (d) a diarylethene.28 Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (Top): Diagram of reversible formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonding between PNIPAAm chains and water molecules; (Bottom): Reversibly switching between superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic surfaces under the amplification of surface roughness.9 Copyright 2004 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of patterns scale and devices scale via different methods.	 

 	Fig. 6  Homopolymer and block co-polymer patterns under electric fields. (Left top): Highly ordered honeycomb-like porous PS surface.30 Copyright 2000 Nature Publishing Group. (Left bottom): A viscous fingering morphology induced under a featureless mask.33 Copyright 2003 Elsevier. (Right top): Reversible lamellar structure of PS-b-PI controlled by electric field.34 Copyright 2007 Nature. (Right bottom): Orientational order in a block copolymer via a gradient electric field.35 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 
cos θ≈ cos θY + CV2/2γso	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Left (top): Schematic cross section of a liquid-based variable lens in a cylindrical housing off voltage and on voltage.37Left (bottom): Photograph of an assembled research prototype camera module containing a liquid lens for focusing.37Right: Photographs taken with the research prototype camera module containing an electrowetting lens for an object at 50 cm distance (top) and an object at 2 cm distance (bottom).37 Copyright 2005 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 8  Some colorful and flexible novel e-papers. Left top: Samples of the brilliant colors that can be made with the electrowetting display technology.40 Copyright Liquavista B.V. Left bottom: Flexible light wave coupling (LWC) display.39 Copyright 2004 The Society of Information Display. Right: Flexible electrowetting light valves prepared on the poly-ethylenenaphthalate (PEN) substrate.41 Copyright 2007 IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 9  Thermosensitive block copolymer self-assembled in selective solvents. (Top): Schematic illustration and TEM pictures of the expected change in amphiphilic balance for PEO-b-PNIPA-b-PI triblock copolymer chains with a stimulus-responsive PNIPAAm block.45 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of the thermally induced collapse of H40-PNIPAM-PDMA upon heating through the LCSTs of PNIPAM and PDMA.46 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (Top): TEM micrographs of aggregates from four-arm PEO-b-PDEAEMA block copolymer in 0.01 M NaCl solution at pH 10 (left) and pH 6.8 (right).47 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of reversible pH-triggered encapsulation and release of pyrene by adsorbed block copolymer micelles.48 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (Top): Schematic illustration of the photocontrolled release of an encapsulated agent as a result of the photoinduced dissociation of the polymer micelle.51 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): Schematic illustration of two-photon absorbing block copolymer as a nano-carrier for porphyrin: energy transfer and singlet oxygen generation in micellar aqueous solution.53 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (Top): Schematic representation of the morphological evolution of PS-b-P2VP-b-PEO in toluene with trace amounts of water with or without stirring.55 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (Bottom): TEM images of the micelles morphologies.56 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Polymer patterns by dewetting. (Top): Dewetting on chemically patterned substrates. (Left): Morphological phase diagram for the isotropic pattern consisting of less wettable blocks on a completely wettable substrate.60 Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. (Right): Dewetting pattern transferred onto the PDMS elastomer.62 Copyright 2003 Elsevier. (Bottom): Dewetting on physically patterned substrates. (Left): Morphology of underside of PMMA film floated from rubbed glass.63 Copyright 2000 Nature Publishing Group. (Right): Final dewetting result of PS thin film using PDMS with rectangular microwells.65 Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  3D restructuring images in water over time: (a) air; (b) 20 min; (c) 1 h; (d) 3 h; heated at 60 °C for (e) 1 h; (f) 3 h.67 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Polymer patterns by wrinkling. (Left): Optical micrographs of wrinkled surfaces prepared on heated poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) sheet by plasma oxidation.71 Copyright 1999 American Institute of Physics. (Right): Optical microscope images of various wrinkles in different regions on the surface of the PS/PVP bilayer induced by water vapor in a PDMS mold.73 Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of procedures for (a) replica molding (REM), (b) microtransfer molding (μTM), (c) micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC), and (d) solvent-assisted micromolding (SAMIM). Copyright 1998 Annual Reviews.75	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images showing the morphology of (f) 1000 mesh square TEM grid; (g) honeycomb material formed on the 1000 mesh square TEM grid surface; (h) negative image of honeycomb materials made by replica molding using (g) as master; (i) 2000 mesh square TEM grid; (j) honeycomb material on surface of 2000 mesh square TEM grid; (k) negative image of honeycomb materials made by replica molding using (j) as a master.80 Copyright 2006 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  (Left): Two aqueous phases are injected by the outer channels and synchronously emulsified by the central oil channel.89 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (Right): Schematic diagram of a microfluidic device for generating complex static gradients in solution along microchannels. The three layers in the device are separated to show each layer clearly. Inlets can be formed on the bottom PDMS piece for the introduction of cells into the channels.90 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of porous polymer monoliths photopatterned in a periodic arrangement.94 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical gradients generated by grafting polymer brushes. (Left top): The density gradient of PAA brushes mixed with P2VP brushes.97 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (Left bottom): Smart microfluidic channels grafted by PAA and P2VP brushes with a gradient of composition.98 Copyright 2005 Wiley. (Right top): A novel method to generate gradient weights of PHEMA-b-PMMA block copolymers.99 Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry. (Right bottom): An orthogonal gradient surface grafted by gradient density and gradient weight PDMAEMA.100 Copyright 2004 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  Physical gradients generated by external forces. (Left top): Gradient topographical PS surfaces prepared in a temperature field.101(Left bottom): Gradients in thickness self-assembled by PS microspheres.103 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Right): Positional transmission spectra of gradient colloidal crystal.104 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical–physical composite gradient surfaces. (Left top): Superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic gradient surface.105 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Left bottom): The gradient surface prepared by macroscopic phase separation and microscopic phase separation.108 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (Right): A composition–structure orthogonal gradient surface employed to investigate surface wettability.107 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Tailoring gradient polymer surfaces for cell studies. (Top left): A one-dimensional polymer brush gradient.109 Copyright 2007 Wiley. (Top right): An orthogonal polymer brush gradient.110 Copyright 2005 Wiley. (Bottom): A nanotopographical gradient.111 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Liquid self-transportation on gradient surfaces driven by different forces. (Left): driving by a SAM gradient112 Copyright 1992 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (Middle top): Driving by noncovalent molecular adsorption.113 Copyright 2000 American Chemical Society. (Middle bottom): Driving by electrochemical forces.114 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (Right): Driving by interfacial forces.117 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
