Electron transfers in graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP06148D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP06148D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 1914-1922Electron transfers in graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites

        
          
            Alain 
            Moissette
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Isabelle 
            Batonneau-Gener
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matthieu 
            Hureau
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ludovic 
            Pinard
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hervé 
            Vezin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michel 
            Perdicakis
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Alain 
            Walcarius
          
        
      c
aLASIRE Bât. C5, Faculté des Sciences et Technologies, Université de Lille, 59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex, France. E-mail: alain.moissette@univ-lille.fr
bIC2MP, Université de Poitiers, 86073 Poitiers, France
cLCPME, Université de Lorraine, CNRS, 54600 Villers-lès-Nancy, France
Received 
      26th November 2020
    , Accepted 21st December 2020First published on 21st December 2020AbstractIn the present work, we report the electron transfers occurring after ionization of the guest molecules of t-stilbene incorporated in graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites and we compare these results with the data obtained previously for graphite-free zeolites. Complementary diffuse reflectance UV-vis and Raman scattering spectroscopies provide evidence for stabilization of long lived charge separated states as observed in non-graphitized ZSM-5. The spectral features indicate that these species are located in the channels of the zeolite structure. However, the pulsed EPR technique shows strong coupling between unpaired electrons and the 13C atoms in the case of graphitized zeolites while this interaction is not observed in normal zeolites. This is assigned to the presence of charge transfer complexes in the close vicinity of graphite areas and to the possible electron transfer to the graphitized domain. Using cyclic voltammetry, an electrochemical response is observed for the first time in such systems demonstrating the role played by graphite in the electron transfers.
Introduction
Electron-transfer processes represent one of the most important reactions in nature. Understanding these reaction mechanisms with a view to reproducing and adapting them to energy, environmental and industrial applications is a challenge of the utmost importance. In this context, the use of porous materials such as zeolites has already widely been demonstrated. Indeed, the rigid framework of zeolites constitutes an ideal environment to allow the accommodation of molecules in the ordered structure leading to many potential applications in the fields of optoelectronic,1–3 photovoltaic4–10 and heterogeneous catalysis.11–13 In our previous works, we have shown the importance of various parameters like the zeolite topology, the charge balancing cation, the Al content, and the confinement effect for orientating the reactivity in a controlled way and for stabilizing long lived charge separated states.14–16 In particular, the lifetime and stability of the radical cation/electron and electron/hole pairs thus obtained were found to depend on the accessibility of acid sites as the electron transfers take place by electron hopping in the channels.
To take advantage of the considerable slowdown of back-electron transfer compared to that in solution and of the charge delocalization within the framework, various approaches were already investigated to develop hybrid systems. For instance, co-adsorption of donor and acceptor molecules or incorporation of an electron relay between the donor molecule adsorbed in the internal volume and the acceptor molecule in the external surface or in solution was achieved.17–22
In this work, in order to improve the efficiency of the host material and to try to capture the unpaired electron to generate electric current, zeolites were combined with graphite and their combined properties facilitated the measurement of the current. Although these two materials are totally different, since microporous zeolites have a three-dimensional structure whereas graphite is composed of two-dimensional sheets, they both have large surface areas. To this end, hierarchized zeolites were prepared with a high graphitization level. Then, the graphite areas in direct contact with the zeolite framework were expected to extend and make easier charge delocalization by the electron hopping process in particular thanks to structure defects in the sp2-hybridized carbon framework.
The choice of a graphitized material was dictated by numerous studies highlighting the performance of different forms of carbon materials such as graphene, nanotubes, and mesoporous carbons with high specific surface area when used as high performance counter-electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells.23–28
Therefore, graphitized zeolites with hierarchical porosity can combine, in the same material, catalytic performances and charge stabilization ability (active sites are preserved) and better reactant and product transport inside an interconnected pore and sheet system. Thus, we investigate here the electron transfers in graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites after the incorporation of t-stilbene as a probe molecule. The objective is to determine the impact of the presence of graphitized domains on the ionization of the guest molecules and in particular to see if the partial modification of the structure has an effect on the preferential adsorption sites and on the subsequent electron transfers. Note that the present study was performed by mixing an electron donor molecule with acid HZSM-5 zeolite which is known to induce spontaneously charge separated states stabilized for months in high yield allowing clear characterization of the different species by complementary spectral techniques.
Experimental
Synthesis of graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites
The parent HZSM-5 zeolite (Si/Al = 20) was prepared according to the synthesis protocol described in our previous work.14 Zeolite graphitization was performed using a coking method. Zeolite coking was carried out in a continuous flow fixed bed reactor at 700 °C under atmospheric pressure for 1 h. The sample, deposited on a layer of glass wool in the quartz reactor, was first activated under 100 mL min−1 of N2 at 700 °C. Then, a gas mixture of ethylene diluted in N2 (5% C2H4/N2, PC2H4 = 50 hPa) was fed into the reactor.
Characterization techniques
Textural properties were determined by N2 physisorption at 77 K, using a Micromeritics TRISTAR 3000 instrument. Before analysis, the sample was degassed under secondary vacuum for 4 h at 423 K. Powder diffractograms were collected using a PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer using CuKα radiation (1.54059 Å), for 2θ ranging from 5° to 40°. The scan speed was fixed at 0.008° min−1. ATD–ATG analysis was used to determine the zeolite carbon content after graphitization. It was done on a thermal gravimetric analyzer SDT Q600 from Waters.
The voltammetric characterization of graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites was performed using the ‘voltammetry of microparticles’ (VMP) technique29 that allows the electrochemical characterization of any electroactive material, conducting or not, via the mechanical immobilization of microparticles on the cross-section of a pyrolytic graphite rod (PGR) which had been previously impregnated with solid paraffin to fill up the graphite pores. VMP has been already applied to electroanalysis with zeolite particles.30 In order to keep constant the active surface area of the electrode and to avoid the need for electric insulation of the lateral face of the rod, the active area was positioned on the top of a liquid meniscus formed at the solution surface. To transfer and immobilize the electroactive particles on the PGR surface, typically some μg graphitized HZSM-5 zeolites were placed on a filter paper and then the electrode was pressed onto the particles and gently moved. Then the PGR is gently struck against a glass surface, in order to remove the particles that were badly fixed onto the electrode, before its introduction into the electrochemical cell as a conventional electrode. After each voltammogram the active surface area is cleaned by polishing with a filter paper. The voltammetric measurements were performed with a model 174A polarographic analyzer (EG&G – PAR) interfaced via an ‘e-corder’ digital recorder and monitored by the ‘ChartTM’ software, both from Edaq. A three-electrode cell was used comprising the PGR as the working electrode, a platinum wire as the counter electrode and a saturated silver chloride electrode as the reference electrode.
The adsorption of t-stilbene was followed after mixing with graphitized zeolite by diffuse reflectance UV-visible (DRUVv) absorption spectroscopy using a Cary 6000 spectrometer. The instrument was equipped with an integrating sphere to study the powdered zeolite samples through diffuse reflectance. The DRUVv spectra were plotted as the Kubelka–Munk function.
Raman analyses of the graphitized host material were carried out on a LabRam HR-Evolution (Horiba scientific) microspectrometer equipped with a 600 lines per mm grating using a 100 × 0.9 NA Olympus objective and a λex = 515 nm excitation wavelength (1% laser power). Data processing was performed using LabSpec6 software. To prevent fluorescence phenomena, Raman spectra of t-stilbene adsorbed on the host material were recorded using a near-IR FT-Raman spectrometer (Bruker RFS 100/S instrument) with a CW Nd:YAG laser (λex = 1064 nm) as an excitation source and a laser power of 50 mW.
The CW X-band EPR spectra were obtained by using a Bruker ELEXYS 580-FT spectrometer. The EPR spectra were double integrated using Bruker software. The hyperfine sublevel correlation spectroscopy (2D-HYSCORE) measurements were carried out at 5 K using a CoolEdge cryofree cryostat system. The 2D-HYSCORE spectra were recorded with the following pulse scheme, π/2–t–π/2–t1–π–t2–π/2–t echo, and a four-step phase cycle where the echo is measured as a function of t1 and t2 with t1 and t2 being incremented by steps of 16 ns from their initial value. The pulse lengths of the π/2 and π pulses in these experiments were 16 and 32 ns, respectively. Prior to Fourier transformation of the HYSCORE data the background decay was removed using a polynomial fit and apodized with a Hamming function.
Adsorption procedure
After dehydration of the graphitized zeolite at 450 °C under dry Ar, the dehydrated host material was cooled to room temperature. Then, t-stilbene (t-St, C14H12, Merck-Schuchardt) corresponding to 1 t-St per unit cell was introduced into the cell under dry argon and the powder mixture was shaken. Finally, the powder was transferred under dry argon to a quartz glass Suprasil cell for spectral experiments.

Fig. 1 illustrates the flowchart of the sample transformations and reactions and shows the techniques used at each stage.
 Fig. 1  Description of the different steps and the associated characterization techniques. 
Results and discussion
1. Characterization of the materials

XRD. 
The diffractograms of the graphitized zeolite are very similar to those of the parent sample (Fig. 2). The highest graphite diffraction peak around 25° is not visible in our XRD pattern. The carbon proportion inside the graphitized zeolite determined by ATD–ATG is very low, around 0.7%, which is why only zeolite contribution is clearly present in the XRD pattern.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of graphite-free HZSM-5 zeolite and its graphitized counterpart. 


Porosity. 
Nitrogen sorption isotherms are presented in Fig. 3 for the parent and graphitized zeolites. No significant micropore blocking is observed since the graphite amount inside the zeolite is very low. The microporous volume is decreased from 0.17 cm3 g−1 to 0.13 cm3 g−1 in the graphitized zeolite.
 Fig. 3  Nitrogen sorption isotherms at −196 °C for graphitized zeolite. 


Raman scattering. 
The Raman spectrum of graphitized zeolite is mainly characterized by two relatively broad bands in the 1200–1700 cm−1 range at about 1340 cm−1 and 1605 cm−1 corresponding to the graphitized part of the material. A weak broad contribution is also observed between 350 and 500 cm−1 and corresponds probably to the zeolite vibrations as observed in the spectrum of non-graphitized HZSM-5 zeolite (Fig. 7a).
The normal graphite structure is known to display a sharp peak at 1580–1590 cm−1 due to E2g symmetry mode associated with the stretching movements of sp2 bonding carbon atoms. Then, the 1605 cm−1 band is probably composed of two contributions which were reported to be the G peak (normal graphite) and the D′ peak (defect structure) expected at about 1620 cm−1.31–37 The band observed at 1340 cm−1, known as the D peak, is also assigned to defect carbon and often associated with a disordered graphite-like structure. Numerous works have shown the intensity decrease of D and D′ bands from disordered materials to ordered materials especially upon heat treatment of the carbonaceous material.37
To assess the graphite fraction and to determine the size of the graphite crystallites in contact with the aluminosilicate porous material, curve fitting was carried out for the spectrum in the 1100–1800 cm−1 range by using Gaussian, Lorentzian or a mixture of both. In the literature many approaches were investigated to perform such processing on more or less distorted materials.31–37 To take into account the superimposing of several peaks and to consider the valley between the broad peak centered at 1340 cm−1 and the one observed at 1605 cm−1, the curve fitting was performed using five bands according to the method proposed by Kawakami et al. and by Xing et al. (Fig. 4).32,36 Thus, in addition to the G, D and D′ peaks, two other peaks were also considered at about 1240 and 1510 cm−1, respectively. These peaks denoted as R1 and R2 were assigned to a turbostratic or random structure, which is an intermediate structure between the graphite and amorphous structure.32,36 The best fitting of this deconvolution was obtained for three Lorentzian lines at about 1340, 1592 and 1615 cm−1 for the D, G and D′ peaks and two broad Gaussian lines around 1100–1300 and 1400–1600 cm−1 corresponding to R1 and R2, respectively. Using the integrated intensities of these bands, the fractions of graphite AG/ATotal, of defects (AD + AD′)/ATotal and of random structures (AR1 + AR2)/ATotal were estimated by applying the model described by Kawakami where ATotal corresponds to the total area and AX (with X = G, D, D′, R1, and R2) corresponds to the integrated intensities of the peaks obtained by deconvolution.32,36 From these calculations, the degree of graphitization is found to be about 25% while the defect fraction is about 56% and the random structure fraction is about 19%.
 Fig. 4  Raman spectrum recorded for graphitized HZSM-5 zeolite (λex = 515 nm) and fitted curves with the corresponding Raman bands. 
The crystalline size was also deduced from the Raman spectrum using the area ratio R = AD/AG by taking advantage of the correlation established previously31,33–35 between Raman scattering and X-ray diffraction data: La (nm) = 4.4/(AD/AG). It is worth noting that this relationship is particularly helpful when the X-ray (100) peak used for this determination is not well resolved35 and in particular in the present case where graphite is dispersed on the zeolite surface. Thus, the size of the partially disordered graphite crystallites in contact with the zeolite porous framework is estimated to be about: La = 2.2 nm. Note that, due to their size, most graphite crystallites must be outside the zeolite channels (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the graphite distribution on the external structure of the ZSM-5 zeolite framework. 

2. Electron transfers

Diffuse reflectance UV-vis absorption. 
The DRUVv spectra recorded as a function of time from the mixing of the guest t-St with the graphitized-HZSM5 host material are presented in Fig. 6. The spectra show the appearance and the development of an absorption band at 475 nm which is observed from the contact. This band reflects the spontaneous ionization process of t-St associated with the ejection of one electron from the guest and is assigned to the t-St radical cation. The band intensity is maximum between 61 h and 7 days and the band is still observed after 12 days. From about two days, new bands are also observed at 563 and 624 nm whose intensity increases progressively. These bands are well-known and by analogy with our previous works14–16 are assigned to the formation of a charge transfer complex due to the non-direct recombination of the radical cation by capture of another electron of the host. Thus, using DRUVv spectroscopy, the evolution of the present sample seems to be identical to that reported after mixing t-St and graphite-free HZSM-5.15 Thus, the stable charge separated state obtained after more than one month is composed of a charge transfer complex (CTC) which is constituted on the one hand by the molecule in close proximity to a positive electronic hole and on the other hand by the ejected electron delocalized over the host material. The 563 and 624 nm absorptions are relative to the CTC.
 Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectra recorded as a function of time after mixing t-St with dehydrated graphitized-HZSM-5 zeolite. 


Raman scattering. 
The FT Raman spectrum obtained 1.5 months after the mixing of t-St and graphitized zeolites (Fig. 7, spectrum g) shows bands at 517, 838, 1000, 1181, 1191, 1355, 1591, and 1612 cm−1. It is worth noting that the characteristic band of neutral t-St at 1639 cm−1 is not observed indicating the total conversion of t-St to form the radical cation and subsequent charge separated states. Moreover, even though the contributions of graphite are very intense compared to those of the zeolite ones in the spectrum of the host material, these bands are not observed after t-St adsorption, ionization and charge separated state stabilization following the electron transfer.
 Fig. 7  Raman spectra of graphitized zeolite (λex = 515 nm) and recorded after the mixing of solid t-St with graphitized and non-graphitized H-ZSM-5 dehydrated at 723 K under argon (λex = 1064 nm). (a) Graphitized zeolite, (b) solid t-St, (c–f) spectra recorded as a function of time after mixing t-St and graphite-free HZSM-5 (c: 1 week, d: 1 months, e: 2 months, and f: 5 months), (g) spectrum obtained 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphitized HSZM-5. 
After 1.5 months of contact, the spectrum recorded for t-St incorporated in graphitized zeolites better resembles spectrum (e) which was obtained 2 months after mixing t-St and graphite-free HZSM-5 and is assigned to the CTC.15 This result shows that the reaction mechanism is probably identical for both types of zeolites since the spectra display the same features in terms of band positions as well as relative intensities (see for instance I(1612)/I(1591)). In particular, the band at 517 cm−1 which corresponds to an intermediary state is clearly visible in the spectrum after this same period of time (about 2 months).
As reported in our previous works, the ionization of the guest occurs in the alumino-silicate porous volume after adsorption in the straight channels of graphite-free ZSM-5 and requires the presence of acid sites to take place.14 Consequently, after mixing t-St and graphitized zeolites, the t-St molecules are assumed to be also incorporated in the straight channels of the zeolite and the radical cation formation occurs in such an environment. The subsequent electron transfers leading to the non-direct recombination of the radical cation by capture of another electron of the zeolite are also assumed to take place in the channel. However, the fate of the initially ejected electrons in graphitized zeolites might differ from that of the ones observed in the graphite-free zeolites where they were described to migrate from one acid site to one other by electron hopping along the channels.14
If the UV-vis and Raman spectral features of radical cations and CTCs are well-known, the spectral signature of the ejected electron is not so obvious and optical spectroscopies like Raman scattering and UV-vis absorption cannot provide easily information about the environment of this unpaired electron. Indeed, the signatures of the ejected electron and the electron hole are expected in the near-infrared region of the absorption spectrum by a wide band between 1200 and 1500 nm,38 but no clear information could be obtained in this case to distinguish the evolution of these two species. The radical cation is characterized by the 475 nm absorption band as described above using UV-vis absorption and it is important to remind that the spectral signature of the CTC in Raman spectroscopy is characteristic of the molecule in close proximity to the electronic positive hole which modifies the polarisability and affects the vibrations of the molecule involved in the CTC. In the same way, it should be reminded that the band characteristics of the CTC at 563 and 624 nm are due to the intersystem electronic transitions between the molecules and the electronic holes in close proximity. Thus, the spectral features reported so far correspond only to the radical cation or to the CTC but do not concern the electrons initially ejected which can be delocalized not only in the zeolite framework by electron hopping as reported previously but also in the graphitized part of the zeolite. To obtain further information on the migration of the ejected electron through the host material, EPR experiments were carried out.


Electron paramagnetic resonance. 
To determine the structural surroundings of the unpaired electrons of the radical cation–electron pair and the subsequent charge transfer complex, CW and pulse EPR experiments were carried out 1.5 months after the mixing. 2D-HYSCORE can enable the appropriate assignment of the various couplings with a large number of nuclei.

Fig. 8A shows the 2 pulse echo field sweep experiment recorded at 5 K 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphitized HZSM-5. This spectrum corresponds mainly to the unpaired electrons of the charge transfer complex (electron/hole pair) with respect to the system advancement determined above using the DRUVv technique. This spectrum consists of a Gaussian line of 7.2 G linewidth with a g value of 2.0032.
 Fig. 8  (A) 2 pulse echo field sweep experiment. (B) 2D-HYSCORE spectrum recorded at 5 K obtained 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphite-containing H-ZSM5. 
The 2D-HYSCORE spectrum obtained 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphite-containing H-ZSM5 is shown in Fig. 8B. Two pairs of cross-peak ridges centered at 14.5 MHz corresponding to the 1H Larmor nuclear frequency are observed in the (+, +) quadrant indicating that these protons have weak hyperfine coupling Aiso < 2ν. The first pair of cross-peaks centered at the proton nuclear Larmor frequency with coordinates at (12.5, 17) and (17, 12.5) MHz is assigned to the electron/hole pair with respect to the spectra previously reported for this species after t-St ionization and charge separated state stabilization in graphite free-HZSM-5 and in HMOR.15 The other pair of cross-peaks that exhibits coordinates at (10, 19; 19, 10) MHz might come from residual t-St˙+ radical cations still present in the system at this time of evolution as it corresponds to the pattern observed after t-St ionization in HFER where the radical cation is the only stable species and for the early stages of contact after mixing t-St in graphite-free HZSM-5.15 Proton cross-peak features are principally dominated by the proton Aiso and the ridge extent arises from the anisotropic component. The proton cross-peak ridge is dominated by isotropic coupling of large coupling of proton radical cation species.
The 2D HYSCORE spectrum shows also cross-peak ridges with coordinates at (1, 6.5; 6.5, 1) centered at 3.7 MHz in the (+, +) quadrant corresponding to the 13C Larmor nuclear frequency. 13C coupling exhibits a vertical shift of T = 1.3 MHz arising from a hyperfine dipolar tensor. Such an observation shows that the electron probes two kinds of 13C species respectively those which are covalently bonded and those which are coupled through space. A value of 3.1 MHz is measured, and assuming single-point dipole approximation T = gegnβnβe h−3, it might correspond to an electron–carbon distance of 2.6 Å. In addition, a new feature is also observed in the (−, +) quadrant indicating a strong coupling pattern arising from 13C nuclei. This strong coupling that splits at 7.4 MHz which corresponds to 2νi13C is estimated at 9.6 MHz from the antidiagonal peak. This strong coupling is dominated by the Fermi contact term. It is worth noting that even though the presence of some possible coked areas in the host structure is known to be able to induce radical formation leading to an EPR signal, the coupling observed here is much stronger than that expected with coke radicals and has to be explained in relation to the charge separated states in contact with the graphitized zeolite.39,40 Furthermore, it should be noted that due to the huge 13C signal, contrary to what is observed after sorption of t-St on graphite-free HZSM-5, the possible coupling between unpaired electron and 27Al at 3.9 MHz and 29Si at 2.9 MHz nuclei could not be detected.


Cyclic voltammetry. 
Cyclic voltammograms of the sample (t-St incorporated in graphitized HZSM-5), as recorded in the aqueous electrolyte solution, exhibit well defined quasi-reversible redox peaks centered at −0.14 V (Fig. 9, curve “a”). They show a first cathodic peak at −0.205 V, suggesting the possible reduction of the charge transfer complex in which the positive hole is closely associated with the stilbene molecule in the zeolite matrix, which is re-oxidized on scan reversal at −0.075 V. The observed cathodic-to-anodic peak-to-peak separation of 130 mV is much larger than the 60 mV value expected for a reversible one-electron transfer process. The cathodic peak intensity (0.17 μA) was also larger than that of the corresponding anodic peak (0.13 μA), indicating that all the reduced species on forward scan cannot be quantitatively re-oxidized, in agreement with the significant loss of currents observed in the successive second potential scan. No steady-state can be reached. Anyway, this result shows the possible electrochemical transformation of stilbene species located in the graphitized zeolite sample contrary to that prepared from a non-graphitized zeolite for which no voltammetric signal was obtained (Fig. 9, curve “b”).
 Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammogram of immobilized microparticles of t-St containing graphitized HZSM-5 (a, first and second scans in red) recorded in NaClO4 0.1 M at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. The response of a non-graphitized HZSM-5 sample containing the same charge transfer complex is also shown (b, black dashed line). 
The observation of a signal by voltammetry after adsorption and ionization of t-stilbene in a graphitized zeolite is completely new and constitutes a significant result because all our previous attempts to measure the current after ionization of t-stilbene in graphite-free zeolites have failed. To interpret this result, we need to compare the data obtained for graphite-free and graphitized ZSM-5. In both cases, the DRUVv and Raman spectra provide evidence of an identical reaction mechanism in the two host materials leading to the stabilization of long lived charge separated states with identical spectral characteristics. However, the pulsed EPR HYSCORE spectra exhibit dramatic changes for graphitized zeolite by the observation of strong coupling between unpaired electrons and 13C atoms. As this feature is not observed in non-graphitized zeolites, it is assumed that the coupling is due to the close proximity of the unpaired electron to graphite domains. Therefore, it is assumed that the radical cation and charge transfer complex involved in the charge separated states remain within the channels of the aluminosilicate zeolite framework. On the other hand, some of the electrons initially ejected during ionization could migrate from the aluminosilicate part of the host to the graphitized zones by interfacial electron transfer. This hypothesis is based on various works reported by Mallouk and his co-authors who, using in particular cyclic voltammetry, have shown for different zeolite-based devices the electron hopping between an external species adsorbed on the surface and an internal redox species encapsulated in the cages and cavities of the zeolites.41–43 Nevertheless, in these previous works the measured currents are only due to the encapsulated complexes located at the surface boundary which are likely to be electrochemically accessible.44–46 Yet, intrazeolite electron transfer reactions have been suggested for zeolite modified electrodes containing high loadings of more or less mobile redox probes,47–49 whereas strongly immobilized species at lower contents (e.g., paraquat in ZSM-5) were not electrochemically accessible,50 and several papers discussed the question of intra-versus extra-zeolite electron transfer mechanisms possibly involved for such insulating microporous materials.51–53 On the other hand, it should be noted that if the graphitized phase is continuous within the zeolite, it can also contribute to some conduction and explain the currents observed for the present graphitized HZSM-5 zeolite. In this context, it is proposed that some CTC species be stabilized in the framework of zeolite at the interface with graphite. Unpaired electrons thus in the immediate vicinity of the graphite could migrate by electron hopping to graphitized zones leading to the observation by EPR of the strong coupling with 13C. The graphite would then behave as a relay facilitating the percolation of electrons between the charged stilbene species and the electrode allowing the detection of current; the redox couple involved in this reaction has so far not been clearly determined.

Conclusion
In the present work, the electron transfers occurring after the ionization of the guest molecule of t-stilbene incorporated in the graphitized HZSM-5 zeolite are compared to the data reported previously with the non-graphitized zeolites. The graphitization does not alter the crystallinity of the zeolite and the charge separated states stabilized in the internal volume are identical to those reported in the absence of graphite. Therefore, it is proposed that the guest molecules are encapsulated in the aluminosilicate framework of the host material. However, a strong coupling is observed using the pulsed EPR technique between the unpaired electron and the 13C atom in the case of graphitized zeolites. This interaction is attributed to the stabilization of some CTCs in the zeolite channels in close proximity to graphite and to the interfacial electron transfers to carbonaceous domains. Moreover, an electrochemical response is observed for the first time in such systems, which clearly demonstrates the role played by graphite in these electron transfers. However, the intensity of the voltammogram depends on the heterogeneity of graphitization on the external surface of the zeolite as well as on the spatial distribution of the guest that may be located in the channel away from the end of the zeolite crystal and therefore, on the distance along which the electron can migrate into the zeolite channels. Thus, not all unpaired electrons delocalized in the zeolite channels can lead to measurable currents. Indeed, with the ZSM-5, the graphitization is assumed to take place on the external surface of the microporous volume, which limits electron transfers to the graphitized domains. A solution would be to study these reactions in zeolites with larger pores such as BEA, where graphitization could also occur in the internal volume. Nevertheless, these results are interesting because they bring new knowledge for the valorization of charge separated states stabilized in zeolites by demonstrating the coupled effect of zeolite and graphite to make such a hybrid system conductive.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
References
E. Kianfar, Nanozeolites: synthesized, properties, applications, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2019, 91, 415–429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, S. Ye, H. Liao, J. Liu and D. Wang, Formation of luminescent silver-clusters and efficient energy transfer to Eu3+ in faujasite NaX zeolite, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 285, 121227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Li, H. Zhao, Y. Chen, J. Li, S. Liu and K. Zhao, Ultrastable perovskite-zeolite composite enabled by encapsulation and in situ passivation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23100–23106 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Abdallah, H. Saidani-Scott and J. Benedi, Experimental study for thermal regulation of photovoltaic panels using saturated zeolite with water, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 464–474 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calzaferri, H. Li and D. Brühwiler, Dye-Modified Nanochannel Materials for Photoelectronic and Optical Devices, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7442–7449 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calzaferri, R. Meallet-Renault, D. Brühwiler, R. Pansu, I. Dolamic, T. Dienel, P. Adler, H. Li and A. Kunzmann, Designing Dye–Nanochannel Antenna Hybrid Materials for Light Harvesting, Transport and Trapping, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 580–594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gigli, R. Arletti, G. Tabacchi, M. Fabbiani, J. G. Vitillo, G. Martra, A. Devaux, I. Miletto, S. Quartieri, G. Calzaferri and E. Fois, Structure and host-guest interactions of perylene-diimide dyes in zeolite L nanochannels, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3401–3418 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Xu, Z. Qin, Y. Wang and H. Li, An intense broadband sensitized near-infrared luminescence from Yb3+ and Bi3+ co-doped zeolite L crystals, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 239, 96–100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarwar, K.-W. Ko, J. Han, C.-H. Han, Y. Jun and S. Hong, Improved Long-term Stability of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell by Zeolite Additive in Electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 526–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Xuan, P. Li, H. Li, C. Wang and J. Wang, Photovoltaic efficiency enhancement for crystalline silicon solar cells via a Bi-functional layer based on europium complex nanozeolite and SiO2, J. Lumin., 2019, 215, 116708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, Zeolite-based photocatalysts, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1443–1459 RSC .
Z. Li, S. Ji, Y. Liu, X. Cao, S. Tian, Y. Chen, Z. Niu and Y. Li, Well-Defined Materials for Heterogeneous Catalysis: From Nanoparticles to Isolated Single-Atom Sites, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 623–682 CrossRef CAS .
K. Na and G. A. Somorjai, Hierarchically Nanoporous Zeolites and Their Heterogeneous Catalysis: Current Status and Future Perspectives, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 193–213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cremoux, I. Batonneau-Gener, A. Moissette, J.-L. Paillaud, M. Hureau, E. Ligner, C. Morais, S. Laforge, C. Marichal and H. Nouali, Influence of hierarchization on electron transfers in structured MFI-type zeolites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 26903–26917 RSC .
M. Hureau, A. Moissette, H. Vezin, C. Brémard and M. Orio, Influence of Confinement Effect on Electron Transfers Induced by t-Stilbene Sorption in Medium Pore Acidic Zeolites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1812–1825 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Moissette, M. Hureau, H. Vezin and R. F. Lobo, in Chemistry of Silica and Zeolite-Based Materials, ed. A. Douhal and M. Anpo, Elsevier,  2019, vol. 2, pp. 249–271 Search PubMed .
C. Aprile, L. Maretti, M. Alvaro, J. C. Scaiano and H. Garcia, Long-lived (minutes) photoinduced charge separation in a structured periodic mesoporous titania containing 2,4,6-triphenylpyrylium as guest, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5465–5470 RSC .
M. Borja and P. K. Dutta, Storage of light energy by photoelectron transfer across a sensitized zeolite-solution interface, Nature, 1993, 362, 43–45 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calzaferri, S. Huber, H. Maas and C. Minkowski, Host-guest antenna materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3732–3758 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Dutta and M. Severance, Photoelectron Transfer in Zeolite Cages and Its Relevance to Solar Energy Conversion, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 467–476 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, A. Itoh, K. Ohkubo and T. Suenobu, Size-selective incorporation of donor-acceptor linked dyad cations into zeolite Y and long-lived charge separation, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45582–45585 RSC .
K. B. Yoon, Electron- and charge-transfer reactions within zeolites, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 321–339 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Arbab, N. Mengal, A. A. Memon, K. C. Sun and S. H. Jeong, A rational design of low cost and flexible carbon composite dye sensitized solar cell, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 344, 136050 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, L. Xu, J. Li, X. Sun and H. Peng, Flexible solar cells based on carbon nanomaterials, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS .
T. Garcia-Perez, S. Hu, Y. Wee, L. Scudiero, C. Hoffstater, J. Kim and S. Ha, Effect of surface and bulk properties of mesoporous carbons on the electrochemical behavior of GOx-nanocomposites, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hwang, M. Batmunkh, Md. J. Nine, H. Chung and H. Jeong, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Counter Electrodes Based on Carbon Nanotubes, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 53–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohammadnezhad, G. S. Selopal, Z. M. Wang, B. Stansfield, H. Zhao and F. Rosei, Role of Carbon Nanotubes to Enhance the Long-Term Stability of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 653–664 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Jin, D. Li, Z. Fu, S. Gao, S. Cheng, X. Yu and Y. Xiong, Increased power conversion efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells with counter electrodes based on carbon materials, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22092–22100 RSC .
F. Scholz and B. Meyer, Voltammetry of solid microparticles immobilized on electrode surfaces, Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 20, 1–86 CAS .
M. Perdicakis, H. Aubriet and A. Walcarius, Use of a commercially available wood-free resin pencil as convenient electrode for the ‘voltammetry of microparticles’ technique, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 2042–2050 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jawhari, A. Roid and J. Casado, Raman spectroscopic characterization of some commercially available carbon black materials, Carbon, 1995, 33, 1561–1565 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawakami, T. Karato, T. Takenaka and S. Yokoyama, Structure analysis of coke, wood charcoal and bamboo charcoal by Raman spectroscopy and their reaction rate with CO2, ISIJ Int., 2005, 45, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Knight and W. B. White, Characterization of diamond films by Raman spectroscopy, J. Mater. Res., 1989, 4, 385–393 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Nakamura, E. Asari, M. Kitajima and T. Kawabe, The energy dependence of lattice damage in graphite induced by low energy helium-ion irradiation, J. Nucl. Mater., 1992, 187, 294–297 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Tai, C. Wei, S. H. Chang and W. S. Chen, Raman and X-ray diffraction analysis on unburned carbon powder refined from
fly ash, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2010, 41, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xing, G. Zhang, H. Rogers, P. Zulli and O. Ostrovski, Effects of Annealing on Microstructure and Microstrength of Metallurgical Coke, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 2014, 45, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Zickler, B. Smarsly, N. Gierlinger, H. Peterlik and O. Paris, A reconsideration of the relationship between the crystallite size La of carbons determined by X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3239–3246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moissette, R. F. Lobo, H. Vezin, K. A. Al-Majnouni and C. Brémard, Long Lived Charge Separated States Induced by trans-Stilbene Incorporation in the Pores of Brønsted Acidic HZSM-5 Zeolites: Effect of Gallium on the Spontaneous Ionization Process, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10280–10290 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pinard, S. Hamieh, C. Canaff, F. Ferreira Madeira, I. Batonneau-Gener, S. Maury, O. Delpoux, K. Ben Tayeb, Y. Pouilloux and H. Vezin, Growth mechanism of coke on HBEA zeolite during ethanol transformation, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 284–297 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Jia, A. Farouha, L. Pinard, S. Hedan, J.-D. Comparot, A. Dufour, K. Ben Tayeb, H. Vezin and C. Batiot-Dupeyrat, New routes for complete regeneration of coked zeolite, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Lai and T. E. Mallouk, Self-assembling trimolecular redox chains at zeolite Y modified electrodes, Inorg. Chem., 1989, 28, 178–182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and T. E. Mallouk, Vectorial electron transport at ion-exchanged zeolite-Y-modified electrodes, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 643–648 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. M. Wang, L. Persaud and T. E. Mallouk, Electrochemistry of metalloporphyrins and viologens at zeolite Y-modified electrodes: evidence for electron trapping by monomolecular porphyrin layers, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2592–2597 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bedioui, L. Roue, E. Briot, J. Devynck, S. L. Bell and K. J. Balkus Jr., Electrochemistry of chemically modified zeolites: discussion and new trends, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 373, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
E. Briot, F. Bedioui and K. J. Balkus Jr., Electrochemistry of zeolite-encapsulated complexes: new observations, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 454, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Rolison, Zeolite-modified electrodes and electrode-modified zeolites, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 867–878 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Pfanner and G. Calzaferri, Silver-Zeolite-Modified Electrodes: An Intrazeolite Electron Transport Mechanism, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 2119–2126 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calzaferri, M. Lanz and J. Li, Methyl viologen-zeolite electrodes: intrazeolite charge transfer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 1313–1314 RSC .
A. Walcarius, Zeolite-modified paraffin-impregnated graphite electrode, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 10, 469–478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, S. Rozanska, J. Bessière and J. Wang, Screen-printed zeolite-modified carbon electrodes, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1185–1190 RSC .
D. R. Rolison and C. A. Bessel, Electrocatalysis and Charge-Transfer Reactions at Redox-Modified Zeolites, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 737–744 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Walcarius, in Handbook of Zeolite Science and Technology, ed. S. M. Auerbach, K. A. Carrado and P. K. Dutta, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2003, ch. 14, pp. 721–783 Search PubMed .
A. Doménech-Carbó, Theoretical scenarios for the electrochemistry of porous silicate-based materials: an overview, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 19, 1887–1903 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Description of the different steps and the associated characterization techniques.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of graphite-free HZSM-5 zeolite and its graphitized counterpart.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nitrogen sorption isotherms at −196 °C for graphitized zeolite.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman spectrum recorded for graphitized HZSM-5 zeolite (λex = 515 nm) and fitted curves with the corresponding Raman bands.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the graphite distribution on the external structure of the ZSM-5 zeolite framework.	 

 	Fig. 6  Diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectra recorded as a function of time after mixing t-St with dehydrated graphitized-HZSM-5 zeolite.	 

 	Fig. 7  Raman spectra of graphitized zeolite (λex = 515 nm) and recorded after the mixing of solid t-St with graphitized and non-graphitized H-ZSM-5 dehydrated at 723 K under argon (λex = 1064 nm). (a) Graphitized zeolite, (b) solid t-St, (c–f) spectra recorded as a function of time after mixing t-St and graphite-free HZSM-5 (c: 1 week, d: 1 months, e: 2 months, and f: 5 months), (g) spectrum obtained 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphitized HSZM-5.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) 2 pulse echo field sweep experiment. (B) 2D-HYSCORE spectrum recorded at 5 K obtained 1.5 months after mixing t-St and graphite-containing H-ZSM5.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammogram of immobilized microparticles of t-St containing graphitized HZSM-5 (a, first and second scans in red) recorded in NaClO4 0.1 M at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. The response of a non-graphitized HZSM-5 sample containing the same charge transfer complex is also shown (b, black dashed line).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
