Self-sustainable, high-power-density bio-solar cells for lab-on-a-chip applications  - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7LC00941K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7LC00941K
(Paper)
Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 3817-3825Self-sustainable, high-power-density bio-solar cells for lab-on-a-chip applications

        
          
            Lin 
            Liu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Seokheun 
            Choi
          
        
      *
      Bioelectronics & Microsystems Laboratory, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, State University of New York-Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA. E-mail: sechoi@binghamton.edu
Received 
      1st September 2017
    , Accepted 2nd October 2017First published on 2nd October 2017AbstractA microfluidic lab-on-a-chip system that generates its own power is essential for stand-alone, independent, self-sustainable point-of-care diagnostic devices to work in limited-resource and remote regions. Miniaturized biological solar cells (or micro-BSCs) can be the most suitable power source for those lab-on-a-chip applications because the technique resembles the earth's natural ecosystem – living organisms work in conjunction with non-living components of their environment to create a self-assembling and self-maintaining system. Micro-BSCs can continuously generate electricity from microbial photosynthetic and respiratory activities over day–night cycles, offering a clean and renewable power source with self-sustaining potential. However, the promise of this technology has not been translated into practical applications because of its relatively low power (∼nW cm−2) and current short lifetimes (∼a couple of hours). In this work, we enabled high-performance, self-sustaining, long-life micro-BSCs by using fundamental breakthroughs of device architectures and electrode materials. A 3-D biocompatible, conductive, and porous anode demonstrated great microbial biofilm formation and a high rate of bacterial extracellular electron transfer, which led to greater power generation. Furthermore, our micro-BSCs promoted gas exchange to the bacteria through a gas-permeable PDMS membrane in a well-controlled, tightly enclosed micro-chamber, substantially enhancing sustainability. Through photosynthetic reactions of the cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 without additional organic fuel, the 90 μL single-chambered bio-solar cell generated a maximum power density of 43.8 μW cm−2 and sustained consistent power production of ∼18.6 μW cm−2 during the day and ∼11.4 μW cm−2 at night for 20 days, which is the highest and longest reported success of any existing micro-scale bio-solar cells.
Introduction
Miniaturization of biological and chemical assays through microfluidic lab-on-a-chip techniques has become an important area in analytical and clinical research.1,2 These systems provide the unique advantages of low sample and reagent consumption and fast analysis to perform all the sequential analytical procedures in a single chip, ranging from sample pretreatment, separation, chemical and biological processes, to molecular recognition and detection.3 A large portion of the excitement behind this technique is its potential to produce a portable, easy-to-use, hand-held lab-on-a-chip device, leading to a great effect on diagnosis and treatment of diseases at the point-of-care (POC).3,4 Ideal POC devices should provide in vitro diagnostics and immediately actionable medical information at the point of need even in resource-limited settings where the electricity grid is not well established. Therefore, integrable power sources in microfluidic labs-on-chips are critical to creating a POC device that can work independently and self-sustainably in those challenging field conditions.3
Because solar energy is the most promising source of sustainable energy even in resource-limited environments, and photosynthetic organisms occupy every habitat, including those with extreme conditions, biological solar cells (or BSCs) represent an important and novel technology breakthrough that offers a potentially viable power source.5–9 Furthermore, the BSCs can generate electricity continuously from microbial photosynthetic and respiratory activities throughout day–night cycles in the absence of an organic feedstock. Moreover, this technique resembles the earth's natural ecosystem, where living organisms work with non-living components as a system to self-assemble, self-repair, and self-maintain operational capabilities. In particular, the BSCs have distinct advantages as a power source for microfluidic lab-on-a-chip applications,10,11 including that they (i) can operate within the framework of a microfluidic platform, which allows reaction chambers and separators to function even in an aqueous environment, (ii) provide disposable, biocompatible and transparent characteristics of microfluidic materials, such as PDMS and SU-8, which are well suited for the bacterial photosynthesis, (iii) can be readily miniaturized and integrated within microfluidic labs-on-chips because of simple device configuration and fabrication, which offers versatile designs and produces inherently favorable conditions for device performance, and (iv) do not require additional energy for their operation because they can function under natural conditions, which means they do not need an organic fuel for microbes to survive.
The pioneering micro-BSCs were built on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).12,13 The microscale devices worked with blue-green algae or subcellular plant photosystems, producing light-driven biological electricity. However, their power densities (5.72 pW cm−2 and 40 pW cm−2) were extremely low, and they did not have any practical application. Since then, many other research groups have reported small-scale BSCs and generated a wealth of new scientific and technological results that clearly demonstrated exoelectrogenic activities in photosynthetic microbes as well as their promise to produce significant electrical power outputs without additional organic fuel.14–16 However, much of the work on BSCs has not been considered as a potential platform for self-sustaining, practical use because of their relatively low electrical performance. Even the latest advance in the micro-BSC technology with significant power enhancement up to 10 μW cm−2 limited their application only to a studying tool for better understanding overall device performance and photomicrobial energy production at the microscale level.11 The device demonstrated such a high performance only with a very short life time (∼2 hour).
For the past several years, our group has advanced knowledge about and applications for micro-BSC technology. In 2014, we developed our 1st generation micro-BSC, possessing a conventional membrane-based two-chambered configuration with a thin, transparent gold anode.17 We obtained a maximum power density of 7.09 nW cm−2, which was 170 times more than previously reported MEMS BSCs. However, the device required the continuous introduction of potassium ferricyanide as an electron acceptor, making it impractical and unsustainable for practical use. Furthermore, the anode showed a very low electron transfer efficiency, generating a high internal resistance (2.3 MΩ) and thus a low power (Fig. 1a). This device evolved over the past two years into a self-sustaining power source with significant power improvement. Our 2nd generation micro-BSC was based on a miniature, microfluidics-based single-chambered device that was improved from the conventional, dual-chambered BSCs with a face-to-face electrode arrangement (Fig. 1b).18 The device substantially reduced the internal resistance to 470 kΩ and increased the power density up to 90 nW cm−2. We also integrated an air-bubble trap to facilitate gas exchange to the bacteria and employed an air-cathode to use freely available oxygen as an electron acceptor, ultimately improving the device sustainability. Despite this innovative development, the performance of the micro-BSC remained insufficient to be used in truly functional, independent, self-sustaining medical devices. Significant performance enhancement was made in our 3rd generation micro-BSC by (i) screen-printing of a graphite/polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) nano-composite on a carbon cloth anode to improve the bacterial adhesion, biofilm formation, and electron transfer efficiencies, (ii) constructing a sandwiched electrode configuration to reduce the internal ohmic resistance, and (iii) inserting a headspace through a gas permeable membrane to store the carbon dioxide and oxygen produced from bacteria metabolism and facilitate gas exchange reversely to the bacteria.19 The power generation (2.7 μW cm−2) was a million times greater than the first MEMS BSC and was sustained over 10 days. Despite excitement about these results, significant challenges remain for sustainable use and there is abundant room for improvement. While the anode modifications increased their performance, nano-/micro-porous anodes were clogged by rapid microbial growth and only allowed biofilm formation on the outer surface, which hinders the transport of nutrients and waste products, and prevents further increases in the current density and long-term operation.20 Furthermore, the headspace for gas exchange could not support long-term operation and was limited to provide other necessary gases such as nitrogen.18,19 When external nitrogen availability remains low, the organisms are found to demonstrate extreme loss of photosynthetic activity and may subsequently enter a form of dormancy.21,22 For this reason, the previously reported BSCs were designed to be exposed to air, making them vulnerable to other bacteria or contaminants.15,23 Our 2nd and 3rd generation devices provided a system that avoided this contamination by being closed to air and incorporated a gas space with limited volume, but depletion of necessary gases gradually decreased bacterial growth and metabolism, and they did not sustain power generation longer than 10 days.18,19
 Fig. 1  (a) Our 1st generation micro-BSC using a face-to-face electrode configuration with a thin gold anode and a liquid electron acceptor. (b) Our 2nd generation micro-BSC using a face-up electrode configuration with an air-bubble trap and a single-chambered air-cathode. (c) Our 3rd generation micro-BSC using a sandwich electrode configuration with a nano-composite graphite/PTFE anode and a microfluidic headspace through a gas permeable polycarbonate membrane. (d) An innovative micro-BSC with a 3-D PEDOT:PSS coated carbon cloth anode and a gas permeable PDMS membrane. 
In this work, we revolutionized the performance of micro-BSC devices and attained 43.8 μW cm−2 of maximum electrical power and long-term operational capability (>20 days) with ∼18.6 μW cm−2 during the day and ∼11.4 μW cm−2 at night, which can provide a practical and sustainable power supply for lab-on-a-chip applications. This remarkable performance was achieved by creating a 3-D conductive polymer-coated anode and a gas-permeable configuration in a well-controlled, tightly enclosed micro-chamber. The 3-D porous anode ensured a large surface area for the bacterial attachment and efficient mass transfer to and from the anode, thus increasing the power. The gas-permeable microfluidic system enabled sustaining electricity generation for a longer period.
Results and discussion
The focus of this work is to pursue a new design for a high-performance, sustainable, miniaturized BSC. The micro-BSC consisted of seven functional layers; a top polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) layer, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gas permeable layer, a PMMA reservoir layer, the 1st rubber gasket layer, the 2nd rubber gasket layer, a sandwiched BSC, and a bottom PMMA layer (Fig. 2). All layers were aligned and assembled with bolts and nuts (Fig. 3a). The two rubber gaskets allowed a well-packaged, tightly-enclosed microfluidic chamber while the gas permeable membrane supplied necessary gases to the chamber for the continuous bacterial photosynthesis and respiration (Fig. 3b). The BSC was constructed by hot-pressing a 3-D anode, a proton exchange membrane (PEM, Nafion 117), and an air-cathode, which was inserted into a defined through-hole on the bottom PMMA layer (Fig. 3c). The fluidic inlet and outlet allowed the initial introduction of bacterial inoculum (Fig. 3d), which were eventually sealed for sustainable field applications (Fig. 2). Once the bacterial cells were injected into the microfluidic chamber, they penetrated through the 3-D anodic layer and accumulated on each conductive fiber, forming a conformal biofilm. Continuous gas supply through the PDMS membrane and light energy transfer through the transparent top layers enabled photosynthesis of the bacterial cells inoculated in the anode, harvesting electrons via the bacterial photosynthetic electron transfer chain. Simultaneously, the bacterial respiration produced all the energy-consuming activities of the bacterial cells, which was also involved in electron transfer even at night and cloudy days. The generated electrons were transferred to the anode and traveled to the cathode through the external electrical circuit, which created a potential difference between the anode and cathode. During those reactions, protons were released and diffused to the cathode, where they re-combine with the electrons that traveled from the anode and oxygen supplied from the air, forming water. The micro-BSC was first run in an open-circuit configuration and its open circuit voltage (OCV) was measured to confirm the initial device performance (Fig. 3e). The device showed positive light response during the 12 hour intervals of light and dark. The OCV increased under illumination while it slightly decreased in the dark. The OCV with the bacterial cells was significantly higher than the control sample containing no cells (abiotic), demonstrating that the electrical output from our micro-BSC originates from the biological activity of the bacterial cells.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of individual layers of the micro-BSC and its sustaining operation. 
 Fig. 3  Photos of (a) the assembled micro-BSC device, (b) its top view and (c) its bottom view. (d) A photo-image of the initial device measurement setup with the bacterial inoculation and (e) open circuit voltage responses of the micro-BSC as well as of an abiotic control under 12 hour light/dark intervals. 
Characterization of micro-BSCs with 3-D porous anodes
The anode is key in determining the performance of the BSC because the device relies primarily on the metabolic activity of the bacterial biofilm adhering to an anode to produce electricity.20,24 Therefore, it is critical to select a suitable anode material and engineer its structure so that the anode enhances bacterial adhesion/biofilm formation and improves the efficiency of electron transfer from inside the cells to the anode surface. 3-D porous carbonaceous materials (e.g. carbon cloth and carbon paper) have been widely used as anodes in microbial bioelectrochemical systems because of their biocompatibility, good chemical stability, low cost and high surface affinity.20,25 Anode performance can be improved by chemical or thermal treatment or coating with electrically conductive materials such as conductive polymers, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and nanoparticles.26,27 This is because anode surface topography and chemistry are critical in determining bacterial colonization and biofilm formation, electrical connectivity between cells and anode, and bioelectrocatalytic processes. Many prior studies provided an in-depth understanding of the interplay between various unmodified or modified carbonaceous anodes and active microbial biofilm.24–27 However, most studies are limited to heterotrophic bacteria in conventional microbial fuel cells and there are few investigations on the interplay between photosynthetic bacteria and the anode material for the BSCs.
In this work, we first investigated the adhesion and biofilm formation of photosynthetic microorganisms as well as their electrogenic capabilities on three potential anodes: (i) unmodified carbon cloth, (ii) carbon cloth modified with the graphite/polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) composite and (iii) carbon cloth modified with poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) (Fig. 4). Seven days after the individual micro-BSCs with those different anodes were inoculated under open circuit operation, their polarization curves and power outputs were measured and derived based on the maximum current value at a given external resistance (700 kΩ, 500 kΩ, 300 kΩ, 200 kΩ, 100 kΩ, 50 kΩ, 30 kΩ, 20 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 5 kΩ, 3 kΩ, 2 kΩ, and 1 kΩ). Four repeated measurements had a relative standard deviation of less than 3.1%. Also, the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of all anodes from the micro-BSCs were taken before and after biofilm formation. The unmodified carbon cloth provided a 3-D macroporous scaffold, enabling transport and colonization of the photosynthetic bacterial cells deep inside the anode (Fig. 4a). However, the bacterial cells did not cover the entire anodic surface area even after seven days, generating relatively low power (1.6 μW cm−2) and current (10.8 μA cm−2) densities compared to other anodic candidates. Our previous report demonstrated that the doubling time (∼24 hours) of photosynthetic bacteria and their biofilm development on anodic surfaces was much slower, and their current generation was also significantly lower than that of other heterotrophic bacteria (e.g. Shewanella or Geobacter sp. (their doubling time: ∼40 min)).28 In addition, compared to other heterotrophic bacteria, the photosynthetic bacterial adhesion was poor on the anodic surface, decreasing the electron transfer efficiency. Surface modification of the carbon cloth with the graphite/PTFE increased its performance significantly, producing 17.5 μW cm−2 and 141 μA cm−2 (Fig. 4b). These modifications created nanostructures and activation centers on anodic surfaces to improve the bacterial adhesion and the electron transfer efficiencies. The polymer was very useful as an anode material because of its facile processability, hydrophilicity, biocompatibility and stability, all of which led to a high bacterial density while the graphite particles increased the mechanical properties and electrocatalytic activities. However, the large size of viscous composite particles filled the pores of the carbon cloth, developing a two-dimensional, non-porous bulk anode and thus allowing biofilm formation only on the outer surface. This 2-D like anodic structure prevented further increases in the current density and long-term operation. Furthermore, the biofilm hardly formed multi-layer biofilms (Fig. 4b), which are essential for high power generation in the BSC device. An innovative anodic structure was provided by a 3-D conformal modification of each carbon cloth fiber with the conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 4c). Substantial power and current densities were produced by optimizing the nanostructured polymeric anodic surface to enhance surface affinity for bacterial adhesion and to maximize electrocatalytic reactions while ensuring pores were as large as possible for optimal microbial activity.29,30 PEDOT:PSS has been widely used for electrode modification because of its high conductivity, biocompatibility, and great surface affinity for the biological components.31 As shown in Fig. 4c, the PEDOT:PSS treatment over the carbon cloth did not change the fiber thickness and pores and the deposition was very conformal and tight. The modified anode showed a 3-D macroporous structure and allowed the photosynthetic bacterial cells to enter deep inside the anode and form densely packed biofilm. The high porosity even after the biofilm formation seems to provide efficient transport of nutrients and waste products, ultimately leading to higher and longer performance of the BSC. The maximum power and current densities were 43.8 μW cm−2 and 227 μA cm−2, respectively, which are the highest output so far reported in the literature for micro-BSCs. Using the polarization curves, we can analyze the major electrochemical losses in our micro-BSCs. The individual losses can be divided into three zones: the activation loss region (initial steep decrease of the voltage), ohmic loss region (linear voltage drop with the current) and mass transfer loss region (rapid decline of the voltage at high currents). Furthermore, we can estimate the device internal resistance, which is equal to that of the external resistor where the maximum power density is acquired.32 Regardless of the anode treatment, the internal resistances (∼2 kΩ) of our micro-BSCs were not significantly changed, which are several orders of magnitude lower than those of other previous micro-BSCs (>470 kΩ). The reduced internal resistances primarily are due to the sandwiched electrode configuration, minimizing the proton travelling distance.33 It should be noted that the range of the anode conductivity changes (∼a few tens of Ω) is negligible compared to the overall internal resistance (a few kΩ) of the devices. Further anode modification with graphite/PTFE or PEDOT:PSS improved the electrocatalytic activities for high electron transfer efficiency and maximized the affinity of the anode surface for microbial colonization, leading to considerable enhancement of power and current generation. The higher performance of the PEDOT:PSS treated BSC than the graphite/PTFE one was attributed to the 3-D porous structure with larger accessible surface for microbial attachment. However, we need to further study how the porous structure facilitates the transport of nutrients and waste products and how it affects sustainability of the device.
 Fig. 4  SEM images and electrical outputs of micro-BSCs (under illumination) with different anodes: (a) unmodified carbon cloth, (b) carbon cloth modified with the graphite/PTFE composite, and (c) carbon cloth modified with PEDOT:PSS. Their polarization curves and power outputs were measured and derived based on the maximum current value at a given external resistance (700 kΩ, 500 kΩ, 300 kΩ, 200 kΩ, 100 kΩ, 50 kΩ, 30 kΩ, 20 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 5 kΩ, 3 kΩ, 2 kΩ, and 1 kΩ). 
Effect of the gas permeable membrane on device performance
Although our 2nd and 3rd generation micro-BSCs were designed to have an enclosed space for gas storage, their operation was very limited because of depletion of necessary gases that could not be replenished by microbial photosynthetic and respiration. Recently, we created a 13-day operating micro-BSC by using syntrophic interactions between photosynthetic and heterotrophic bacteria.28 Organic compounds and some necessary gases needed for heterotrophic microbial respiration were internally regenerated by photosynthetic bacteria whose reactants were produced by the heterotrophic bacteria, which consequently exhibited self-sustainable capabilities. Although this innovative work established the groundwork for advances in sustainable energy, their power generation decreased after 13 days of operation because of imbalanced bacterial growth and reproduction between the co-cultures. Furthermore, there are still gaps in scientists' understanding of the individual and synergistic roles for key microbial populations.
In this work, we proposed a simple but powerful approach to enabling self-sustainable and long-life micro-BSCs by using a PDMS gas-permeable membrane. This PDMS membrane permitted the exchange of oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and other gases while simultaneously acting as a liquid barrier to prevent leakage of the bacterial solution in the micro-chambered BSC.34 PDMS has become a common material for microfluidic devices because of its advantages including biocompatibility, transparency, microfabricability, and low-cost. Furthermore, its excellent gas permeability has been extensively used for various organ-on-a-chip applications that require gas exchange in a fluidic environment.35 A thin PDMS membrane was first incorporated into our micro-BSCs for consistent microbial gas exchange and long-term device operation. To investigate the effect of the gas permeable membrane on device performance, two micro-BSCs with the PEDOT:PSS modified anodes were prepared; one with the PDMS membrane and the other without it. Their power densities were monitored under the operational conditions of 12 h/12 h light/dark consecutive cycles with a 2 kΩ resistor (Fig. 5). Other design parameters and operating conditions were consistently maintained. A positive light response was observed from both micro-BSCs; higher power was generated during the 12 h illumination than during the dark phases, indicating that microbial photosynthesis provides additional electrons during the day. However, the main source of electrons harvested from the devices must be the microbial respiration because the minimum power generated during the dark periods was almost equal to the minimum power generated during the day. Photosynthesis did generate some additional amount of power during the day. Both micro-BSCs with or without the membrane gradually increased the power generation for the first seven days and sustained consistent power production for the next nine days. It was surprising that even the membrane-less BSC produced a quite long-term power output (∼16 days), which is the longest power generation among all micro-BSCs reported. This suggests that the 3-D porous anodic structure may increase the transport efficiency of nutrient and waste products to and from all the bacterial cells colonized deep inside the anode, ultimately improving the bacterial survival and growth over the longer-term. However, the device without the PDMS membrane substantially decreased its power generation 16 days after operation while the membrane-based micro-BSC kept the power production of ∼18.6 μW cm−2 during the day and ∼11.4 μW cm−2 at night over 20 days. This output is the highest and longest reported success of any existing micro-scale BSCs. Finally, it should be noted that the membrane-less micro-BSC generated much lower power density than the membrane-based device, which demonstrates that gas exchange not only improves the microbial self-sustainability and life-time, but also facilitates microbial photosynthetic and metabolic activities, increasing power performance.
 Fig. 5  Power densities (at a 2 kΩ resistor) measured from the PEDOT:PSS modified micro-BSCs (a) without and (b) with the gas permeable PDMS membrane. The white bars indicate the 12 h illumination period and the shadow indicates the 12 h dark period. 
Longer-term studies as well as further investigation on gas transfers and bacterial growth are required to advance the micro-BSC technology toward practical, real-world applications such as a power source for unattended environmental sensors deployed in remote and resource-limited field locations. However, this work contributes to an in-depth understanding of the interplay between photosynthetic bacteria and miniature device architectures and establishes fundamental knowledge critical to enabling much higher power production in a more sustainable way.
Conclusion
We created a microscale microfluidic biological solar cell that can attain high electrical power and long-term operational capability, which will provide a practical and sustainable power supply for lab-on-a-chip applications. The 90 μL single-chambered bio-solar cell generated maximum power and current density of 43.8 μW cm−2 and 227 μA cm−2, respectively, and sustained consistent power production of ∼18.6 μW cm−2 during the day and ∼11.4 μW cm−2 at night for 20 days. This output is the highest power density for the longest time among any existing micro-scale bio-solar cells. The device performance was considerably improved in an engineered microfluidic device by (i) using a 3-D macroporous polymeric anodic structure for better bacterial adhesion and electrical coupling, (ii) designing a sandwiched electrode configuration for lower internal resistance, and (iii) integrating a gas permeable membrane for continuous supply of necessary gases to the bacteria. The device will release biological photo-energy conversion technology from its restriction to conceptual research, and advance its translational potential toward practical and sustainable power applications for point-of-care diagnostics to work independently and self-sustainably in limited-resource and remote regions.
Experimental section
Materials
Untreated carbon cloth (CCP10), 30% wet-proofed carbon cloth (CCWP), 10% Pt on Vulcan XC-72, and carbon black powder (XC-72) were purchased from Fuel Cell Earth. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), phosphate buffer saline, a Nafion solution, Nafion 117 membrane, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and glutaraldehyde were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and its curing agent (Kit Sylgard™ 184) were purchased from VWR. Graphite particles (GS-TC307, particle size distribution: 0.2–20 μm) were obtained from GraphiteStore.
Electrode preparation
Three anodes were prepared: (i) an untreated carbon cloth, (ii) a treated carbon cloth with graphite/PTFE, and (iii) a treated carbon cloth with PEDOT:PSS. The second anode (ii) was roll-pressed with the mixture of 56 mg graphite particles and 40% PTFE emulsion on the untreated carbon cloth. The third anode (iii) was brush-painted with a mixture of 1 wt% PEDOT:PSS and 5 wt% DMSO. The DMSO was added to increase the PEDOT:PSS conductivity.36 All the carbon cloths were exposed to oxygen plasma for 1 min for hydrophilization.
The air-cathode was constructed on 30% wet-proofed carbon cloth with four layers of a mixture of carbon powder and the PTFE solution.37 The other side of the cathode was coated with 10% Pt on carbon black and a binder solution including 5 wt% Nafion solution, DI water, and isopropanol. The anodes and cathode were pierced with a 0.5 mm thick Ti wire as a current collector.
PDMS membrane preparation
A PDMS sample was prepared by mixing the polymer base and the curing agent with a weight ratio of 10:1. The sample was degassed in a vacuum desiccator for about 30 min and was spun on a glass wafer (Pyrex) at 1500 rpm for 30 seconds to be 40 μm-thick. The membrane was then thermally cross-linked at 100 °C for 1 h. The PDMS membrane was gently peeled off from the wafer and transferred onto the PMMA layer of the device.
Device fabrication
The Nafion 117 membrane was hot-pressed directly between the anode and the air-cathode to form the sandwich electrode configuration. The projected anode and cathode surface areas were 0.385 cm2 and 0.636 cm2, respectively. The micro-BSC was assembled as shown in Fig. 2, where the main body of the device consisted of three polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) substrates, a PDMS membrane, two rubber gasket layers and the sandwiched electrode assembly. The PMMA and rubber layers were precisely cut by a laser cutting machine (Universal Laser System, VLS3.5). All layers were aligned and assembled with 10 small screws. The micro-BSC possessed two holes for the fluidic inlet and outlet. Tubes (CODAN, 0.35 mL volume) were plugged into the holes with adhesive to form a fluidic channel. After bacterial inoculation, however, the tubes were removed and the holes were sealed with silicone for sustainable field applications. The 1.6 mm-thick PMMA microfluidic chamber layer and 0.508 mm-thick rubber gasket layer were precisely laser-machined to define a 90 μL chamber over the electrodes. The size of a completely assembled device was 6 cm × 3.5 cm. The assembled device was sterilized with 70% ethanol and ultraviolet light for 24 hours.
Inoculum

Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 were grown from −80 °C glycerol stock cultures by inoculating 15 mL of BG-11 medium with gentle shaking under 12 hour light and dark intervals. The BG-11 contained 1.5 g of NaNO3, 40 mg of K2HPO4, 75 mg of MgSO4, 36 mg of CaCl2, 1 mg of EDTA, and 6 mg of citric acid and of ferric ammonium citrate per 1 L of distilled water. A fluorescent lamp-controlled chamber provided continuous aeration at 30 ± 2 °C and illumination for 2 weeks. Growth was monitored by measuring the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) and the culture reached an OD600 of 1.2.
Measurement setup
We measured the potentials between the anodes and the cathodes with a data acquisition system (National instrument, USB-6212), and recorded the readings every 1 min via a customized LabView interface. An external resistor connected the anode and cathode and closed the circuit. The current through this resistor was calculated using Ohm's law. All the experiments were done in the temperature/light-controllable incubator (The VWR® Signature™ Diurnal Growth Incubator, Medel 2015).
Bacterial fixation and SEM imaging
After all the experiments with the micro-BSCs, their anodes were examined under a SEM. The anodes were treated with a 4% glutaraldehyde solution overnight at 4 °C and rinsed three times with 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline. They were then dehydrated by 5 minute serial transfers through 30, 50, 70, 80, 90, 95, and 100% ethanol. Fixed samples were examined using a FESEM (Field Emission SEM) (Supra 55 VP, Zeiss).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
D. M. Mark, S. Haeberle, G. Roth, F. von Stetten and R. Zengerle, Microfluidic lab-on-a-chip platforms: requirements, characteristics and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1153–1182 RSC .
S. Vyawahare, A. D. Griffiths and C. A. Merten, Miniaturization and parallelization of biological and chemical assays in microfluidic devices, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 1052–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, Powering point-of-care diagnostic devices, Biotechnol. Adv., 2016, 34, 321–330 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jung, J. Han, J. Choi and C. H. Ahn, Point-of-care testing (POCT) diagnostic systems using microfluidic lab-on-a-chip technologies, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 132, 46–57 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hasan, V. Grippo, E. Sperling, M. A. Packer, D. Leech and L. Gorton, Evaluation of photocurrent generation from different photosynthetic organisms, ChemElectroChem., 2017, 4, 412–417 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Sarma, S. Kaushik and P. Goswami, Cyanobacteria: A metabolic power house for harvesting solar energy to produce bio-electricity and biofuels, Biomass Bioenergy, 2016, 90, 187–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, R. Thorne, T. Wenzel and C. J. Howe, Biophotovoltaics: Oxygenic photosynthetic organisms in the world of bioelectrochemical systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1092–1109 CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Light energy to bioelectricity: photosynthetic microbial fuel cells, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Strik, R. A. Timmers, M. Helder, K. Steinbusch, H. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Microbial solar cells: applying photosynthetic and electrochemically active organisms, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 41–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, Microscale microbial fuel cells: advances and challenges, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 69, 8–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bombelli, T. Muller, T. W. Herling, C. J. Howe and T. R. J. Knowles, A high power-density, mediator-free, microfluidic biophotovoltaic device for cyanobacterial cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401299 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chiao, K. B. Lam and L. Lin, Micromachined microbial and photosynthetic fuel cell, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2006, 16, 2547–2553 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lam, E. A. Johnson, M. Chiao and L. Lin, A MEMS photosynthetic electrochemical cell powered by subcellular plant photosystems, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2006, 15, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Inglesby, K. Yunus and A. C. Fisher, In situ fluorescence and electrochemical monitoring of a photosynthetic microbial fuel cell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6903–6911 RSC .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. G. Smith, A. C. Fisher and C. J. Howe, Photosynthetic biofilms in pure culture harness solar energy in a mediatorless bio-photovoltaic cell system, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4699–4709 CAS .
P. Bombelli, M. Zarrouati, R. J. Thorne, K. Schneider, S. J. L. Rowden, A. Alik, K. Yunus, P. J. Cameron, A. C. Fisher, D. I. Wilson, C. J. Howe and A. J. McCormick, Surface morphology and surface energy of anode materials influence power outputs in a multi-channel mediatorless bio-photovoltaic system, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12221–12229 RSC .
S. Yoon, H. Lee, A. Fraiwan, C. Dai and S. Choi, A microsized microbial solar cell: a demonstration of photosynthetic bacterial electrogenic capabilities, IEEE Nanotechnol Mag., 2014, 8, 24–29 CrossRef .
H. Lee and S. Choi, A micro-sized biosolar cell for self-sustaining power generation, Lab Chip, 2014, 15, 391–398 RSC .

          X. Wei, M. Mohammadifar, W. Yang and S. Choi, A microscale biophotovoltaic device, Proceeding of IEEE Sensors 2016, Oct. 30- Nov. 2,  2016, Orlando, FL, USA, pp. 1613–1615 Search PubMed.
X. Xie, C. Criddle and Y. Cui, Design and fabrication of bioelectrodes for microbial bioelectrochemical systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3418–3441 CAS .
V. Krasikov, E. A. V. Wobeser, H. L. Dekker, J. Huisman and H. C. P. Matthijs, Time-series resolution of gradual nitrogen starvation and its impact on photosynthesis in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC 6803, Physiol. Plant., 2012, 145, 426–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gorl, J. Sauer, T. Baier and K. Forchhammer, Nitrogen starvation-induced chlorosis in Synechococcus PCC 7942. Low-level photosynthesis as a mechanism of long-term survival, Microbiology, 1998, 144, 2449–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. J. McCormick, S. M. Cruz, A. Anderson, K. Yunus, D. S. Bendall, P. J. Cameron, J. M. Davies, A. G. Smith, C. J. Howe and A. C. Fisher, Quantitative analysis of the factors limiting solar power transduction by Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 in biological photovoltaic devices, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4690–4698 CAS .
V. Gadhamshetty and N. Koratkar, Nano-engineered biocatalyst-electrode structures for next generation microbial fuel cells, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, C. Cheng and A. Thomas, Carbon-based microbial-fuel-cell electrodes: From conductive supports to active catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602547 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. Kumar, V. G. S. Sarathi and K. S. Hahm, Recent advances and challenges in the anode architecture and their modifications for the applications of microbial fuel cells, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 461–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guo, A. Prevoteau, S. A. Patil and K. Rabaey, Engineering electrodes for microbial electrocatalysis, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 149–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and S. Choi, Self-sustaining, solar-driven bioelectricity generation in micro-sized microbial fuel cell using co-culture of heterotrophic and photosynthetic bacteria, J. Power Sources, 2017, 348, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Huang, D. Li, H. Yu and L. Yan, Preparation of a macroporous flexible three dimensional graphene sponge using an ice-template as the anode material for microbial fuel cells, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21619–21624 RSC .
X. Xie, L. Hu, M. Pasta, G. F. Wells, D. Kong, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Three-dimensional carbon nanotube-textile anode for high performance microbial fuel cells, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 291–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, L. J. Halverson and L. Dong, A miniature microbial fuel cell with conducting nanofibers-based 3D porous biofilm, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2015, 25, 125017 CrossRef .
Y. Fan, E. Sharbrough and H. Liu, Quantification of the internal resistance distribution of microbial fuel cells, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8101–8107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ahn and B. E. Logan, Altering anode thickness to improve power production in microbial fuel cells with different electrode distances, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lamberti, S. L. Marasso and M. Cocuzza, PDMS membranes with tunable gas permeability for microfluidic applications, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61415–61419 RSC .
R. Sreenivasan, E. K. Bassett, D. M. Hoganson, J. P. Vacanti and K. K. Gleason, Ultra-thin, gas permeable free-standing and composite membranes for microfluidic lung assist devices, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 3883–3889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chou, S. Chen, Y. Chiang, Y. Lin and C. Chao, Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films by post-treatment with dimethyl sulfoxide for ITO-free liquid crystal display, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3760–3766 RSC .
S. Cheng, H. Liu and B. E. Logan, Increased performance of single-chamber microbial fuel cells using an improved cathode structure, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Our 1st generation micro-BSC using a face-to-face electrode configuration with a thin gold anode and a liquid electron acceptor. (b) Our 2nd generation micro-BSC using a face-up electrode configuration with an air-bubble trap and a single-chambered air-cathode. (c) Our 3rd generation micro-BSC using a sandwich electrode configuration with a nano-composite graphite/PTFE anode and a microfluidic headspace through a gas permeable polycarbonate membrane. (d) An innovative micro-BSC with a 3-D PEDOT:PSS coated carbon cloth anode and a gas permeable PDMS membrane.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of individual layers of the micro-BSC and its sustaining operation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photos of (a) the assembled micro-BSC device, (b) its top view and (c) its bottom view. (d) A photo-image of the initial device measurement setup with the bacterial inoculation and (e) open circuit voltage responses of the micro-BSC as well as of an abiotic control under 12 hour light/dark intervals.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images and electrical outputs of micro-BSCs (under illumination) with different anodes: (a) unmodified carbon cloth, (b) carbon cloth modified with the graphite/PTFE composite, and (c) carbon cloth modified with PEDOT:PSS. Their polarization curves and power outputs were measured and derived based on the maximum current value at a given external resistance (700 kΩ, 500 kΩ, 300 kΩ, 200 kΩ, 100 kΩ, 50 kΩ, 30 kΩ, 20 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 5 kΩ, 3 kΩ, 2 kΩ, and 1 kΩ).	 

 	Fig. 5  Power densities (at a 2 kΩ resistor) measured from the PEDOT:PSS modified micro-BSCs (a) without and (b) with the gas permeable PDMS membrane. The white bars indicate the 12 h illumination period and the shadow indicates the 12 h dark period.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
