Hybridization of inorganic nanoparticles and polymers to create regular and reversible self-assembly architectures   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35038F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35038F
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6066-6088Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHybridization of inorganic nanoparticles and polymers to create regular and reversible self-assembly architectures†

        
          
            Hao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bai 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: byangchem@jlu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85193423;   Tel: +86-431-85168478
Received 
      8th February 2012
    First published on 28th May 2012AbstractInorganic nanoparticles (NPs) with diversified functionalities are promising candidates in future optoelectronic and biomedical applications, which greatly depend on the capability to arrange NPs into higher-order architectures in a controllable way. This issue is considered to be solved by means of self-assembly. NPs can participate in self-assembly in different manners, such as smart self-organization with blended molecules, as the carriers of host molecules for assembly and disassembly with guest molecules, as netpoints to endow the architectures specific functionalities, and so forth. To enhance the structural stability of the as-prepared assembly architectures, polymers have been utilized to create NP–polymer composites. Meanwhile, such a strategy also demonstrates the possibility of integrating the functionalities of NPs and/or polymers by forming regular architectures. The emerging interest in the current optoelectronic and biological areas strongly demands intelligent nanocomposites, which are produced by combination of the excellent functionalities of NPs and the responsiveness of polymers. On the basis of the recent progress in fabricating NP–polymer composites, this critical review summarizes the development of new methods for fabricating regular self-assembly architectures, highlights the reversible assembly and disassembly behavior, and indicates the potential applications.
Hao Zhang
Hao Zhang received his PhD degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 2004. He was an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in 2004, and continued his research as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Helmuth Möhwald at Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces at Potsdam, Germany. Presently, he is a professor of chemistry at Jilin University. His scientific interests are focused on synthesis, assembly, and application of functional nanoparticles.
Yi Liu
Yi Liu is currently in his fourth year of PhD study in Chemistry at Jilin University. He received his BS degree from Jilin University in 2008. His research is focused on the synthesis and photovoltaic application of nanoparticles.
Dong Yao
Dong Yao is currently an undergraduate student (the fourth year) in the Pilot Class of Biology and Chemistry, Jilin University. He has been working as a research assistant in Prof. Hao Zhang's group since 2010. His research focuses on the photothermal therapy using inorganic nanoparticles for the selective treatment of tumor cells.
Bai Yang
Bai Yang currently is a professor of chemistry and the director of the State Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials in the college of Chemistry at Jilin University. He received his PhD in polymer chemistry and physics in 1991 under the supervision of Prof. Jiacong Shen at Jilin University. His research interests relate to composite assembly of nanoparticles in polymers, nano-micro-scale fabrication of ordered array structures, and high performance and functional polymer nanocomposite optical materials.
1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the innovation of nanoscience and nanotechnology trending from synthesis of nanoscale components to construction of the composite architectures using these building blocks.1–9 This transition is essentially stimulated by the increasing requirements in energy, material, and biomedical fields, which highly desire novel nano-objects with small size and improved performance.10–16 Performance enhancement by forming composite structures is not a new idea, but the capability of controlling the sizes, geometrical dimensions, spatial couplings, as well as the environmental response behavior of the composites is still challenging.17–21 In this scenario, self-assembly technology has been demonstrated as a robust method to overcome the aforementioned challenges.22–27 Self-assembly is the hallmark of supramolecular chemistry, in which the constituent components are spontaneously connected and integrated using specific and/or non-covalent interactions, such as van der Waals interactions, electrostatic interactions, molecular surface forces, entropic effects, and so forth. These unique conjugation fashions give the opportunity to tune the dimensions of architectures, from one-dimensional (1D) fibers, 2D films, to 3D bulk materials.28–34 Again because of the weak interactions of self-assembly, which are sensitive to environmental variation, disassembly of the preformed architectures, the reversible process of assembly, may occur.35,36 This is the basis of smart materials. Self-assembly technology also exhibits an immense flexibility in achieving the architectures from various macromolecular and small molecular building blocks, and generating the architectures over macroscopic and microscopic scales. The architectures may have defined size, molecular weight, and stoichiometric ratio of different components.37–41
As a large class of functional materials, inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) are more and more important in the materials science, which are irreplaceable in the self-assembly research.23–26 Here, NPs are not limited to spherical particles, but refer to nanometer-sized inorganic materials of different shapes, such as nanodots, nanorods, nanocubes, nanodisks, nanostars, and so forth. They are composed of metals, metallic oxides, and semiconductors with at least one dimension in the range of 1–10 nm.42,43 These materials exhibit unique size- and shape-dependent physicochemical properties arising from the quantum confinement effects and surface effects.44,45 For example, the photoluminescence (PL) of CdSe nanodots strongly depends on their sizes. The PL is continuously tunable from green to red by synthesis of different sized nanodots.46 Au nanorods with a tunable aspect ratio are another example. With the increase of the aspect ratio, the plasmonic absorption of Au shifts from the visible to near infrared (NIR) range.47 Due to these unique properties, NPs are considered as crucial building blocks for constructing nano-structural materials to obtain specific functionalities, multifunctional integration, and functional modulation. In this context, self-assembly technology is an efficient means to implement the purposes. Through self-assembly, NPs with different functionalities can be integrated, endowing the supramolecular architectures with enriched functionalities.48–51 Self-assembly technology has the flexibility to tune the spatial distance between NP components, and therewith control energy and/or charge transfer within the regular architectures.52 By introducing the responsiveness of supramolecular assembly, the state-of-the-art assembly and disassembly in between NPs or other discrete components are also practicable with environmental stimulus.53–55 This in turn leads to diversified switches, which will be the prototypes of next generation nano-devices.
Note that the development of NP self-assembly methods is impelled by the advances in NP synthesis and surface modification technologies. After over two decades of research, the methodology of NP synthesis is well established. It is facile and feasible to obtain NPs with specific components, sizes, shapes, and surface characteristics. With respect to self-assembly research, the surface characteristics of NPs are especially important, because the self-assembly and in particular reversible assembly are driven by the intermolecular interactions brought from the surface nature of NPs.56 Thus, specific molecules should be anchored on the NP surface beforehand. Numerous successful technologies have been exploited to decorate target molecules on NPs, such as the selective conjugation of mercapto-compounds on the ends of Au nanorods,57 and the asymmetric polymerization on NPs to produce Janus composite NPs.58 Profiting from the tremendous progress in surface modification technologies, a large toolbox is presented for researchers to design and realize the expected surface characteristics, and hence the final self-assembly architectures.
Many research papers and excellent review articles have mentioned the creation of NP superstructures driven either by interparticle weak interactions or the interactions between low-molecular-weight molecules, including NP crystallization, interfacial self-assembly, host–guest recognition, and so forth.59–68 As a parallel protocol, polymer-mediated NP assembly leads to several advantages, such as high structural stability, multifunctional integration, and the capability of functional modulation.69–72 With the purpose to stress the features of polymers, this article will focus on polymer-related NP self-assembly. The first section summarizes recent literature studies using artificial polymers rather than natural polymers and biomacromolecules to fabricate regular self-assembly architectures of NPs. The reversible assembly and disassembly are highlighted in the second section. In the last section, the applications of the self-assembly architectures are indicated.
2. Polymer-enabling NP self-assembly into regular architectures
In comparison to conventional inorganic and low molecular weight organic materials, polymers exhibit unique properties, such as good physical and chemical stability, mechanical strength, elasticity, and ductility, which are essentially originated from the intrinsic chain structure. Polymer chains are dynamic when polymers are kept under usual conditions and in particular induced by an external environment, e.g., annealing, stretching, and swelling. This property strongly gives the opportunity to direct the self-assembly of NPs using polymers. In this section, we will describe the self-assembly of NPs on the basis of polymer chain movement, including the spontaneous aggregation of NPs and the external field-enabled NP orientation in the preformed nanocomposites.
2.1 Templated self-assembly
In geometrical terms, templates are the substrates containing active sites, which can selectively induce NPs aggregation or orientation.73 Some polymers possess specific functional groups or patterned nanostructures. These active sites can catch NPs at the addressed location. However, most homopolymers and copolymers have no such sites. The selective distribution of NPs in nanocomposites is guided by the miscibility upon blending with polymers. Consequently, the templates mentioned here refer to any polymer scaffolds that can arrange NPs to specific structures.

2.1.1 NP aggregation in polymer films. 
The spontaneous diffusion of NPs in blending nanocomposite films has long been observed, which is understandable according to the equilibrium of enthalpic and entropic interactions between NPs and polymers.74 For a nonequilibrium system, NPs strongly tend to aggregate or migrate to the interfaces, which is an energy-favored process. Note that NP diffusion is still dynamic even when the temperature is below the glass transition temperature (Tg) of a polymer, making it inevitable in the practical applications of blending nanocomposite films. Although this problem is currently not expected, sometimes, it leads to new methods to direct NP self-assembly. The tendency of NP migration strongly depends on the NP surface ingredient that influences the equilibrium of enthalpy and entropy. For example, tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO)-coated NPs are difficult to be blended into the bulk of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) films, but migrate to the polymer–air interface. In comparison, the surface decoration of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) on NPs increases the miscibility with PMMA, because the segmental interactions between PEO and PMMA are small, thus eliminating enthalpic interaction between NPs and the PMMA host.74 This surface ingredient-dependent migration provides a basic method to design NP self-assembly systems.
Such migration may finally lead to the agglomeration and hence the size increase of NPs. Cohen et al. forecasted the diffusion and subsequent growth of NPs in polymer films through a diffusion–aggregation mechanism, in which NPs first form aggregates and then fuse to larger NPs.75–77 An increased temperature is the key to accelerate this process. When the temperature is higher than the critical temperature in a diffusion–aggregation model, an exponentially accelerated growth is observed. Besides the agglomeration, growth of NPs also depends on three aspects; the mobility of polymer chains, the compatibility between the polymer chains and NPs, and the interactions of NPs with polymer media.78,79 Thus by altering Tg and molar mass of polymers, the behavior of NP self-assembly and the final size of NPs are controllable (Fig. 1). This extended self-assembly method indicates the advantage to further arrange NPs on substrates via thermal annealing, thus opening a new door to design and fabricate novel nano-structures and devices.80
 Fig. 1  UV-vis absorption (A) and PL (B) spectra of CdTe–PS composite films heated at 180 °C for different intervals. (C) PL image of CdTe–PS films heated at 200 °C for different intervals. (D) Temporal evolution of the PL peak position of CdTe–PS films at different temperatures. Patterned CdTe–PMMA composite films before (E) and after (F) gradient heating at 240 °C.79 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.2 Self-assembly using 2D block copolymer templates. 
Due to the special structures, block copolymers can self-assemble into nanoscale domains with tunable size, shape, and surface chemistry, making them ideal templates to direct NP self-assembly. Site-selective growth and direct assembly of NPs are two major methods to obtain the architectures.81–83 These two methods begin from preassembled block copolymer films via either thermal or solvent annealing.84–88 Poly(styrene-b-acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA) is taken as the example to describe the site-selective growth method.81 After preassembly of PS-b-PAA on flat substrates, it has two chemically distinct surface functionalities, hydrophobic PS and hydrophilic PAA. In aqueous media, the interfacial energy contrast between the PAA and PS domains causes preferential heterogeneous nucleation and growth of NPs at the PAA domains, producing ordered arrays of NPs.81 Utilization of the intrinsic difference in surface chemistry and nanotopography of preassembled block copolymer templates is the key to perform the NP nucleation and growth at desired sites. Thus, the species and arrangements of NPs are tunable by altering the components and structures of block copolymer templates.
The typical feature size of block copolymer domains is comparable to the size of NPs. So block copolymer templates are potential alternatives to perform NP self-assembly directly. However, the height contrast of preassembled block copolymer nanostructures is usually within 2 nm, not enough for NP deposition. The increase of the contrast between domains is required before NP assembly, which can be achieved by chemical modification,89 topographical enhancement,90 or the combination of these two methods. Selective etching of a single domain is a conventional method to increase the topographical contrast, in which the preassembled block copolymers are exposed to ultraviolet irradiation followed by removal of the degraded domain to prepare templates.90 Selective solvent annealing is the recent method to maximize the advantage of exploiting the enhanced topography.83 In this method, the surface reconstruction of preassembled block copolymers is achieved by a treatment of both blocks with selective solvent vapors, creating the topographical nanopatterns with enough height contrast of up to 15 nm. The subsequent spin-coating of NPs on block copolymer templates directly places NPs in the patterned grooves (Fig. 2). Besides the facility and reproducibility of this method, further combination of electron beam irradiation leads to dual arrangement of NPs.83
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the control of NP arrangements on patterned block copolymer thin films. (B–E) Microscopic images of NPs deposited on the surface reconstructed PS-b-PMMA block copolymer thin films with perpendicular orientation after the solvent treatment with PMMA-selective acetic acid. SEM images of NPs located in the nanoscale-grooves in (B) randomly oriented lamellar, (C) 1D directed-assembled lamellar, and (D) cylindrical morphology, and (E) the AFM image of well aligned 1D ZnO nanorod arrays placed in the nanoscale-grooves in 1D directed-assembled lamellar morphology block copolymer pattern.83 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 


2.1.3 Microphase separation in block copolymers. 
As mentioned above, block copolymers can self-assemble into topographical structures under proper annealing. This ability permits the ordered self-assembly of NPs in the block copolymer host. As predicted by Thompson et al., the interactions between mesophase-forming copolymers and NPs can lead to highly ordered nanocomposites.91 The morphology of the nanocomposites depends both on the characteristics of copolymers, such as the relative length of polymer blocks, and the features of the NPs, such as the size and surface ingredient.92 By combination of self-consistent field theory for block copolymers and density functional theory for NPs, they predicted that the location of self-assembled NPs is determined by the size of NPs. Namely, larger NPs locate at the center of the miscible copolymer domain, whereas smaller NPs locate at the interface of the domains.91 This prediction is experimentally proved by Thomas et al. by studying the self-assembly behavior of Au and silica NPs in poly(styrene-b-ethylene propylene) (PS-b-PEP) copolymers.92 In their study, Au and silica NPs possessing similar surface ingredients but different sizes are blended with PS-b-PEP to fabricate a thin film. After annealing under a toluene atmosphere, larger silica NPs (with the diameter of 21.5 nm) are found to be located at the center of the PEP domains, whereas smaller Au NPs (with the diameter of 3.5 nm) segregate to the intermaterial dividing surface between the PS and PEP domains, producing hierarchical self-assembly architectures (Fig. 3). This hierarchical assembly involves an entropy-driven mechanism. NPs are inorganic solids that obstruct the stretching of polymer chains and therewith decrease conformational entropy. Larger NPs are easier to be expelled from the immiscible polymer bulk, whereas smaller ones cannot.92 This spontaneous size-selective assembly of NPs gives the opportunity for controlling the spatial distance of different NP components in nanocomposite-based devices.
 Fig. 3  Microscopic images of 21.5 nm SiO2 and 3.5 nm Au NPs co-assembled in PS-b-PEP.92 Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the size effect, the compatibility of NPs with polymer blocks is another influence factor. Computer simulation reveals that if NPs are only miscible with one polymer block, they will be repulsed to this favorable domain.93–96 For the amphiphilic NPs, however, they tend to stay at the interface between copolymer domains, because neither copolymer domain is more favorable to hold NPs. Take the mixture of Au NPs and poly(styrene-b-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-PVP) as the example.95 If NPs are decorated by PS, they segregate to the center of PS domains. In contrast, PVP-decorated NPs segregate to PVP domains. The NPs, that are co-decorated by PS and PVP, locate at the interfaces of PS and PVP domains.95 This phenomenon is understandable in terms of the interfacial energies of the PS–PVP, NP–PS, and NP–PVP interfaces. For PS- or PVP-decorated NPs, the chain stretching free energy can be reduced if NPs move from the interfaces to favorable domains. In contrast, the location of PS and PVP co-decorated NPs at the interface keeps the lowest free energy.
The aforementioned examples focus on the NP assembly architecture driven by block copolymer microphase separation, in which NPs are passively arranged at specific locations. Actually, NPs can in turn induce the microphase transition under proper experimental variables, and therewith produce new architectures. These variables include deliberate control of supramolecular interaction, variation of NP concentration, and so forth.97–102 Watkins et al. demonstrated that hydrogen-bonding can be applied to induce ordered self-assembly architectures, and in otherwise a disordered system.99 They used hydroxyl-decorated Au NPs or amine-decorated Si NPs as hydrogen-bonding donors to selectively attach with the PEO block of a triblock copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide-b-propylene oxide-b-ethylene oxide) (PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO). Such interaction can enhance the segregation strength and induce microphase separation, and therefore an ordered self-assembly structure (Fig. 4A).99 Molar fraction is another factor to induce copolymer microphase transition. By continuously increasing NP concentration, a morphological transformation of PS-b-PVP composite films from hexagonally packed cylinder structure to lamellar structure has been revealed by Wei et al.100 CdS NPs are capped by thioglycolic acid, making NPs selectively disperse in PVP domains through hydrogen-bonding interaction. In comparison to pure PS-b-PVP, which indicates hexagonally packed cylinder structure, the nanocomposites transform into a lamellar structure as the weight fraction of CdS is increased to 7%. This morphological transformation results from the volume increase of CdS, which swells the PVP domain, and subsequently leads to the microphase transition. Further increasing the CdS fraction to 28% makes the PVP domains expand widely, already intervening with the lamellar structure, and deteriorates the long-range order of the self-assembly structures (Fig. 4B). Similar order to order microphase transition is also observed for the Au NP–PS-b-PVP nanocomposites with the increase of Au NP concentration, except that Au NPs are capped by hydrophobic PS.101
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of NP-driven assembly of block copolymers via hydrogen bonding.99 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Effect of the NP content on the morphological transformation.100 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 

2.2 Combination of external fields
Resulting from the structural properties of polymer materials, they exhibit excellent mechanical performance towards external forces, such as the swelling, stretching, and thermal press of polymer nanocomposites. This makes polymer materials perfect scaffolds to shoulder various external fields, and meanwhile command inner NPs to assemble or orientate. Such a strategy allows the spatial array of NPs into 1D, 2D, and 3D architectures under isotropic or anisotropic forces, and also the orientation of NPs induced by electric and magnetic fields.

2.2.1 Force field. 
The stretching characteristic of polymers can be used to direct NP orientation. By combination of heating and subsequent stretching of Au nanorod–poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) composite films, a spatial alignment of nanorods is obtained.103,104 It is observed that as the polymer is stretched in one direction, nanorods orient with their long axes along the stretched direction. Consequently, the resultant films indicate anisotropic optical properties distinctly different from the homogeneous nanocomposites. Electrospinning can also induce 1D-orientated alignment of NPs in the nanocomposites, because the wet nanocomposites are sprayed toward one direction and frozen to form solid fibers rapidly, thus suppressing the random aggregation of NPs (Fig. 5).105–109 Ultralong hierarchical V2O5 nanowires are prepared by electrospinning the composite solution of PVA and NH4VO3 nanorods. After thermal annealing to produce V2O5 nanorods, the hierarchical nanowires, constructed from 1D-orientated V2O5 nanorods, are fabricated. Compared with the random aggregated V2O5 nanorods, the hierarchical nanowires lead to much higher cycling performance of lithium ion batteries, because they increase the efficient contact areas with other active materials.105 The number of NPs in the self-assembly architectures is also tunable by an electrospinning technique. For example, Yu et al. demonstrated the ability to control the length of Ag NP chains within composite nanofibers by adjusting the concentration of NPs dispersed in electrospun solution. In comparison to casting films, the composite fibers containing NP dimers and chain-like aggregates exhibit an enhanced surface-enhanced Raman scattering activity.106
 Fig. 5  Aligned Au nanorods in electrospun PEO fibers as respective functions of fiber diameter and nanorod volume fraction (Φ): (A) 40 nm and Φ = 0.006, (B) 50 nm and Φ = 0.045, (C) 650 nm and Φ = 0.035, and (D) 3000 nm and Φ = 0.031. A selected area electron diffraction pattern of the corresponding sample is included as an inset in (B).107 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
The interfacial tension, existing at liquid–liquid and liquid–air interfaces, is an ideal force field to create 2D self-assembly architectures of NPs.110–118 To perform the self-assembly at the water–oil interface, amphiphilic surface decoration is the prerequisite. In this context, although the interfacial attachment of microspheres has been extensively studied, only limited reports involve NPs, because the thermal fluctuation energy is usually comparable to the binding energy of NPs at the water–oil interface.110 This problem is solved by construction of amphiphilic NPs using polymers, profiting from the recent advances of the surface decoration technique. In this context, “grafting onto”, namely direct grafting of the preformed polymers on NPs,119–132 and “grafting from”, namely surface initiated polymerization from NPs,133–150 are two major routes to produce polymer-decorated NPs. Duan et al. reported a method to decorate Au NPs with mixed polymer brushes by combining “grafting onto” and “grafting from” methods, allowing the co-decoration of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) and PMMA on NPs.116 The amphiphilic Au NPs are dispersible in both water and organic solvents, such as chloroform. In a mixture of water and chloroform, NPs prefer to stay in chloroform because of the favorable solubility of PMMA. The assembly of NPs at the water–oil interface is triggered by adding hexane, which is a nonsolvent of both PEG and PMMA, into this dual system (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Interfacial assembly of Au NPs with mixed PEG and PMMA brushes. (A) Schemes of the NP in chloroform, water, and at interfaces. (B) Photographs of the assembling process. (C) TEM images of the Au NP assembly with different magnifications.116 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Langmuir–Blodgett deposition at the water–air interface is also workable to achieve 2D self-assembly of NPs.117 As we know, a droplet of hydrophobic polymer solution tends to spread on the water surface and form a thin film. By mixing hydrophobic NPs with this polymer solution and performing Langmuir–Blodgett deposition, a polymer-supported NP monolayer is obtainable.117 The thickness of the resultant films ranges from several nanometers to tens of nanometers depending both on the NP diameters and polymer concentration. Due to the polymer support, the films are transferable to arbitrary substrates. This strategy has been recently extended to non-spherical NPs, such as the ordered and oriented alignment of nanorods. Cheng et al. reported the regular array of PS-coated Au nanorods into free-standing and large-area monolayers by a polymer-mediated interfacial self-assembly method (Fig. 7).151,152 Because the entropy-driven self-assembly is greatly influenced by the equilibrium of van der Waals attraction and the steric hindrance of PS, the orientation of nanorod arrays inside the films, typically horizontal and vertical alignment, highly depends on the nature of polymers and the operating temperature. High molecular weight PS facilitates the formation of ordered nanorod alignment by generating a steric hindrance comparable to the van der Waals attraction, and subsequently permits the controllable self-assembly. At room temperature, the horizontal alignment of nanorods is favored, whereas vertical alignment is dominant as the operating temperature is risen to 60 °C. This is attributed to the temperature-dependent shear viscosity of PS-coated nanorods, which decreases at higher temperature. The low shear viscosity makes the nanorods more dynamic in the self-assembly process, allowing the system to reach the most thermodynamically stable state. It finally produces horizontally aligned nanorods.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of horizontally (A) and vertically aligned (B) Au nanorods constructed through polymer-mediated interfacial self-assembly. The nanorods are capped by the PS with the molecular weight of 20000 g mol−1. The horizontal alignment of nanorods is favorable at room temperature, whereas vertical alignment is dominant at 60 °C.151 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
By utilization of interfacial tension, a mixture of water and oil can transform into oil-in-water microemulsion or in contrast water-in-oil microemulsion under proper conditions. These microemulsion templates are good platforms to extend the 3D self-assembly of NPs in restricted space. For instance, oil-in-water microemulsion templates are used to fabricate superparticles (SPs), defined as the water-dispersible colloidal particles made of hundreds of NPs.153,154 In comparison to the self-assembly using low molecular weight surfactants, amphiphilic polymers can enhance the structural stability of SPs. Park et al. used a triblock copolymer of PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO as the agent to stabilize SPs.155 In their method, a dispersion mixture of hydrophobic Fe3O4 NPs, doxorubicin, and poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) in chloroform is injected into an aqueous solution containing PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO and underwent ultrasonication to create oil-in-water microemulsion. After chloroform evaporation, PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO-capped composite SPs are fabricated. PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO and PLGA are polymers, which greatly enhance the structural stability of SPs (Fig. 8).155 In principle, all hydrophobic NPs are suitable for this method, making it facile to integrate different functional NPs within one SP.
 Fig. 8  (A) Synthetic procedure for the multifunctional NP–polymer composite SPs. TEM images of NP–PLGA–DOXO SPs embedded with 7 nm (B) and 15 nm (C) Fe3O4 NPs.155 Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


2.2.2 Electric and magnetic fields. 
Many NPs naturally possess electric or magnetic performance and controllable anisotropic morphologies. This may lead to the removal or orientation of NPs in external electric or magnetic fields. As tested by Alivisatos et al., a DC electric field can assist the self-assembly of CdS nanorods to perpendicularly oriented superlattices.156 By the combination of electric field-assistance and solvent evaporation, TOPO-capped CdS nanorods initially suspended in toluene are found to align perpendicular to the substrate (Fig. 9). The self-assembly of nanorods to densely packed superlattices resulted from the minimization of interfacial energy between the nanorods and the surrounding polymers.156 Although an external electric field greatly contributes to such self-assembly, the surface ingredient of CdS nanorods is also important. Only TOPO-capped nanorods exhibit such alignment behavior, whereas PEO- and PS-capped ones cannot. It means that in comparison to the interfacial energy between the nanorods and the polymer host, the interaction between nanorods and electric field is still weak, confirming the auxiliary role of an electric field.157,158
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of electrode assembly for nanorod alignment. (B) TEM images of perpendicularly aligned CdS nanorod superlattices under a field of 1 V μm−1. (C) Azimuthal alignment of the nanorods.156 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
On the basis of magnetic interaction, a magnetic field may intervene the self-assembly of magnetic NPs with the polymer host. For example, PAA-capped Fe3O4 NPs and poly(trimethylammonium ethylacrylate methylsulfate-b-acrylamide) can spontaneously assemble into spherical aggregates via electrostatic attraction.159 Induced by a magnetic field, however, the elongation of spherical aggregates to rod-like aggregates is observed (Fig. 10). This is attributed to the effect of magnetic field on the ionic strength of the dispersion, which controlled the electrostatic interaction between NPs and polymers. Again, the randomly orientated rod-like aggregates in the absence of magnetic field are orientated spontaneously following the external magnetic field lines.159
 Fig. 10  (A) Scheme developed for the co-assembly of NPs and polymers in aqueous solution. Phase contrast optical microscopy image of a nanorod dispersion without the magnetic field (B), with the magnetic field applied perpendicular (C) and parallel (D) to the optical axis of the microscope.159 Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 

3. Reversible self-assembly architectures on the basis of NPs–polymer hybrids
One of the most promising features of NP self-assembly is the potential to create smart structures and materials, namely endowing NP–polymer composites with stimuli-responsive behavior and even reversible assembly. Most recently, the increasing requirements in ultrasensitive sensors, bio-mimic materials, and new generation optoelectronic devices greatly aroused the design and construction of intelligent nanocomposites by combining the excellent performance of functional NPs and the environmental response of specific polymer materials.160–164 In this scenario, many natural and artificial polymers are sensitive to the variation of surrounding environments.165 The external optical, electrical, thermal, mechanical, and chemical signals can direct the movement of polymer chains inside or at the interfaces of the nanocomposites, thus leading to macroscopic or microscopic performance variation. With respect to the binding manner of NPs and polymers, the intelligent self-assembly is practicable either in NP-filled polymeric composites or between discrete polymer-capped NPs. The former leads to stimuli-responsive signal conversion without breaking the uniform structures of the nanocomposites, whereas the latter exhibits reversible assembly and disassembly by completely disconnecting the coalescence of NP building blocks.
3.1 NP-filled stimuli-responsive composites
NP-filled polymeric composites are constructed from rigid NPs and flexible polymers, which can be looked as bricks and mortar.166,167 The functionalities of the composites are mainly contributed from NP bricks, while polymer mortar connects the bricks to maintain the structural integrity. In this case, polymers act as fixed and inert matrices to suppress the mobility of NPs. However, in polymer gels, the polymer chains and/or networks may shrink or swell under external stimuli, and therewith drive NPs aggregation or disaggregation within the nanocomposites.54,55 Because the energy and charge transfer between neighboring NPs are distance-dependent, the external stimuli on polymer matrices can further convert the optical and electrical signals of NPs, thus exhibiting stimuli-responsive behavior. With consideration of the environmental problem and biological applications, composite hydrogels, namely crosslinked polymer networks swollen by water simultaneously filled with NPs, have been widely investigated.168 These composite hydrogels are composed of diversified homopolymers and copolymers, and functional NPs with specific performance. Also, they can be shaped into the form of bulks, microspheres, films, capsules, and so forth.

3.1.1 Hydrogel bulk. 
Most stimuli-responsive nanocomposites are based on the shrinking and swelling of the polymer networks under thermal or ionic stimulation. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM)-based composite hydrogels are a well-known class of thermoresponsive materials that possess reversible coil–globule transition in aqueous solution at a lower critical solution temperature (LCST), whereas the voids in between the swollen PNIPAM structures allow us to carry nanometer-sized objects without affecting the phase transition behavior.54,55 The embedment of NPs into the hydrogel bulk of PNIPAM is one simple method to obtain thermoresponsive nanocomposites which are achievable either through the copolymerization of preformed NPs with NIPAM or in situ synthesis of NPs in PNIPAM hydrogels.54,55 In the copolymerization method, water-soluble NPs are mixed with an aqueous solution of a NIPAM, N,N′-methylenebisacrylamine crosslinker and an N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine accelerating reagent. Common aqueous initiators can initiate the copolymerization at room temperature.54 The LCST of PNIPAM is around 32.5 °C. So, a reversible phase transition is tunable by heating or cooling the composite hydrogel around this temperature. Meaningfully, the shrinking and swelling of the PNIPAM networks will in turn drive the embedded NPs movement, thus shortening or lengthening the separation distance between NPs.54 For luminescent semiconductor NPs, the interparticle fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) depends on the distance of neighboring NPs, occurring only when the distance is short enough. Thus, the shrinking of the PNIPAM networks at the temperature higher than the LCST leads to an obvious spectral redshift and emission weakening that is restored as the composite hydrogels are cooled below the LCST (Fig. 11). The shift of NP emission is reversible when the system undergoes heating–cooling cycles.54In situ synthesis of NPs in a PNIPAM hydrogel is a different route, in which NPs formed inside an existing PNIPAM hydrogel. For example, to produce an Au NP-containing hydrogel, a hydrogel is first prepared by crosslinking polymerization of NIPAM and co-monomers containing mercapto-groups that are used to adsorb Au3+ ions. After the addition of reductants, Au NPs form in PNIPAM hydrogels.55 These Au NP-filled thermoresponsive hydrogels are potentially useful in temperature-dependent devices related to the plasmon resonance of Au.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Au PNIPAM hydrogels.55 Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) PL images of CdTe PNIPAM hydrogels excited by an ultraviolet lamp. (C) Maximum emission wavelengths of CdTe PNIPAM hydrogel as a function of heating–cooling cycles between 25 and 4.1 °C.54 Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


3.1.2 Microgel. 
Although composite hydrogels exhibit interesting responsive behavior under external stimuli, the real-life utilization of this feature requires shaping the hydrogel to submicrometer microspheres or ultrathin films. Profiting from the advance in microemulsion polymerization, submicrometer hydrogel particles, namely microgel, can be prepared.169–171 The subsequent embedment of NPs into the microgel produces a responsive composite microgel. By deliberately choosing the components of both polymers and NPs, the microgel may possess optical and electronic performance, which is selectively switchable to the stimuli of ion, pH, and temperature.170–179 A prerequisite to achieve such a composite microgel is to prevent the extrusion of embedded NPs during the shrinking of microgel networks. The general strategy is to form a non-covalent linkage between NPs and microgels.170 For specific microgels, such as PNIPAM, a hydrogen bonding can be introduced by decoration of NPs with hydroxyl-rich ligands. For specific NPs, the composed polymers of microgels can be also designed. For example, pyridine segments have been introduced into PNIPAM microgels through the copolymerization of NIPAM and 4-vinylpyridine, which bestow positive charges on microgel networks. Thus, under acidic conditions, the microgel adsorbs negatively charged NPs, whereas NPs are extruded from the microgel under basic conditions.171 Note that a non-covalent linkage is important to avoid the shift of LCST of the microgel, because NPs can act as the crosslinking centers to lower the mobility of microgel networks. Such an effect is especially obvious for covalent linked NPs and polymers, even making the microgel lose responsive behavior.
It should be mentioned that the main component of a microgel is water. The poor rigidity of microgels limits the practical applications. Silica NPs can act as the supports to improve the structural stability, and in particular enhance the performance of composite microgels without weakening the responsive behavior.180 Wang et al. designed a smart microstructure on the basis of the NP-embedded silica core and the NP-filled PNIPAM shell. The inner silica core combines the functionalities of various NPs, whereas the outer PNIPAM shell contributes to the thermoresponsive adsorption and release of small molecules.173
Because of the size- and shape-dependent performance, the embedded NPs can act as the bridge to direct the shrinking and swelling of microgels.174,175 A photothermal modulation of the volume transition of microgels using NIR irradiation is tested by doping Au nanorods in a PNIPAM-co-PAA microgel.174 PAA is introduced to fully swell the microgel through the electrostatic repulsion between the PAA segments and increase the electrostatic attraction with positively charged Au nanorods, both of which favor the embedment of Au nanorods into the microgel. Since Au nanorods have plasmonic absorption in the NIR range and can convert irradiation to thermal energy, the microgel with nanorods embedded shrinks by ca. 53% under the irradiation at 810 nm (Fig. 12). The photothermally induced shrinking and swelling transition is repeatable several times without notable loss of nanorods.174
 Fig. 12  (A) Low- and (B) high-resolution TEM images of PNIPAM-co-PAA microgels loaded with Au nanorods. Scale bars are 1 μm and 100 nm, respectively. (C) Variation in volume of pure and nanorod hybrid PNIPAM-co-PAA microgels plotted as a function of the number of laser on and laser off events, n.174 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
Besides hydrophilic NPs, microgels are also capable of carrying hydrophobic NPs. Because microgels can be dispersed in a wide range of solvents with different polarity, the direct incorporation of hydrophobic NPs from water-immiscible organic solvents to microgels is achievable through solvent exchange.181 As shown in Fig 13, agarose microgels with diameters of 20–50 μm are washed with tetrahydrofuran (THF) three times and incubated in THF overnight to remove the entrapped water. Subsequently, the dispersions of microgels in THF are mixed with the chloroform solution of hydrophobic NPs followed by centrifugation to obtain the composite microgels with hydrophobic NPs embedded. Since the embedded NPs are hydrophobic, they exhibit excellent chemical stability and therewith maintain the intrinsic properties as the microgels are dispersed in water.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of loading hydrophobic NPs into microgels via solvent exchange. The red spots represent hydrophobic NPs and their hydrophobic surfaces are highlighted in yellow. The large sphere with dashed grids represents a microgel.181 Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


3.1.3 Smart interfaces. 
The location of composite hydrogels on the solid substrate by forming a thin layer further improves the practicability in optical and electrical applications.182–184 A smart interfacial structure can be created by incorporating metal or semiconductor NPs into stimuli-responsive polymers following the classical methods of preparation of NP–polymer hybrids.185,186 Through introducing metal NPs into the PNIPAM film associated with an electrode, the electronic properties become controllable by the thermal phase transition of PNIPAM.182 In a shrinking–swelling cycle, the embedded metal NPs decrease the resistance of the shrunken PNIPAM interface, and therewith facilitate the electron transfer for redox transformations at the electrode. In contrast, at a swollen PNIPAM interface, the composite electrode indicates a high resistance, because of the large separation distance between metal NPs.182 Such temperature-switchable electronic properties can be extended to solvent-switchable using polyacrylamide as the polymer host. Because the shrinking and swelling of polyacrylamide are switchable by exposing to acetone and water, the subsequent NP aggregation and disaggregation lead to electrically communicating and non-communicating states (Fig. 14).183 Replacing metal NPs using semiconductor NPs further produces the smart electrode with solvent-switchable photoelectrochemical functions.184 Since other functionalities and stimuli signals can be brought, respectively, by changing the polymer host and the diversified NPs, this protocol should be general for fabricating a variety of smart electrodes. By construction of a composite smart interface, the plasmonic effects of Au NPs are also controllable. For example, a vertically aligned cylindrical pore structure from pH-responsive P2VP and Au NPs is tested as the platform for the transduction of external stimuli into an optical signal.187 The nanocomposites are supported on the Au substrate. The pH variation may trigger the shrinking and swelling of the P2VP host, thus changing the separation distance between NPs and/or the substrate. Thus, the coupling of localized plasmon resonance of Au NPs is greatly influenced. This concept enables the opportunities to tune the metal NP-enhanced plasmonic effects.
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the construction of Au NP composite smart film and the control of electronic properties of the electrode interface by solvent switching. (B) Frequency changes of the smart film by solvent switching.183 Copyright 2001 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Again, the affinity of responsive polymers and embedded NPs greatly contributed to the apparent performance of smart interfaces.188,189 Even for the same polymer, the molecular weight can significantly influence the transmitted signals. A smart interface between poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA)-g-PEG and citrate-capped Au NPs is sensitive to heat, pH and ion stimulus, represented by the colorimetric sensitivity. The molecular weight of PEG strongly affected the apparent color of the interface under thermal stimulus, because the length of PEG chains controls NP affinity for the surface. Higher molecular weight PEG chains possess increased binding affinity toward NPs, which leads to higher relative NP density in the composite interface and concurrent sluggish desorption of NPs by heat-triggered shrinking of the polymer host.189
A layer-by-layer (LbL) technique provides a facile method to tune the component and thickness of the self-assembly films, which is also practicable to construct smart interfaces. Kotov et al. demonstrated the capability to achieve reversible loading and unloading of NPs in a swollen LbL film. Because the loading cycle is based on the electrostatic attraction between the polymer components and aqueous NPs, the responsive behavior is determined by the experimental variables that affected this interaction, typically the protonization of negatively charged polyelectrolytes (Fig. 15).190 Since the variation of the structure of LbL films and the nature of NPs can be used for a selective adsorption and release of the NPs, LbL-related smart interfaces will enhance the sensing, protective, catalytic, and optoelectronic functionalities.
 Fig. 15  (A) Loading and unloading of the polyelectrolyte films with green emission CdTe NPs. Confocal microscopy images of the polyelectrolyte films with NP loaded (B) and unloaded (C).190 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4 Other stimuli-responsive nanostructures. 
NP-filled responsive composites may be in other forms, such as capsules, nanotubes, patterned nanostructures, and so forth.191–195 By means of the self-assembly of block copolymers, lots of responsive nanocomposites are created.192–195 Tsukruk et al. demonstrated the construction of pH-responsive nanotubes composed of PS-b-P2VP and Au NPs that exhibit a reversible change in the plasmon resonance position. This pH-response is attributed to the large surface-to-volume ratio of nanotubes which maximizes the interaction of P2VP domains with the external environment. The opening of central pores through P2VP swelling upon exposure to acidic conditions enhances the tunable response to the external stimuli.192 Besides nanotubes, PS-b-P2VP can form other self-assembly structures. By exploiting the stimuli-responsive property of PS-b-P2VP micelles, ordered arrays of Au NP rings with tunable size and array periodicity are created. Since these composite architectures are sensitive to pH and ion alteration, they are potentially applicable in biosensors.192 Other block copolymers also possess responsive behavior and are capable of incorporating NPs.
Deliberate design of the components and the hierarchical structures may satisfy the increasing requirements of NP-filled stimuli-responsive composites. As a good example, Xing and Chen et al. reported a controllable coiling of Au nanowires within PS-b-PAA to achieve the storage and release of mechanical energy (Fig. 16).196 The nanowire-filled polymers are prepared by mixing nanowires and PS-b-PAA in a ternary solvent mixture of N,N′-dimethyl formamide (DMF), THF and water in a volume ratio of 4/4/1. The large ratio of DMF and THF makes polymer swollen, thus facilitating the coassembly at room temperature. The as-prepared composites are finally deswollen using water to transform the originally straight nanowires into ordered coplanar coils. In this process, the advantage of polymer swelling and deswelling is the key. The increase of polymer–solvent interfacial tension leads to the contraction of polymer shells, which initiates the coiling of nanowires. Besides, the polymer shell on the coil maintains an inward compression, counteracting the elastic tension of coiled nanowires. The mechanical energy stored in the aforementioned system can be released by deconstructing the micelles via proper external stimulus.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the polymer-induced coiling of Au nanowires. TEM images of (B) the original hydrophobic nanowires, (C and D) coiled nanowires embedded in PS-b-PAA micelles, (E and F) two typical Au nanosprings from different perspectives with arrows indicating their ends. (G and H) TEM image and schematic illustration of a typical Au nanospring that does not coil along its first loop but via a new loop formed by the folded double-wire. (I) Diameter distribution of the Au nanosprings.196 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Reversible assembly and disassembly
The capability of decorating responsive polymers onto individual NPs permits the observable assembly and disassembly of NPs under external stimuli.197 Such a reversible process is closer to the demands of nanoscale devices and switches, because the assembly–disassembly cycle allows for the reversible coupling of NP component-, size- and shape-dependent optical and electronic performance, for instance absorption, emission, and conductivity. In principle, diversified functional conversions are achievable through the assembly and disassembly of NPs with different functionalities.

3.2.1 Isotropic assembly. 
Polymer brushes can be homogeneously located on NPs via covalent linkages, thus endowing the NPs with responsive behavior. The shrinking and swelling of the grafted polymers greatly alter the surface properties and hence the affinity of NPs, leading to reversible assembly and disassembly.198–201 Depending on the species of the grafted polymers, the composite NPs are responsive to the external temperature, pH, and ion stimulus following a similar responsiveness to the polymers. Of course, the responsive behavior is also determined by the nature of NPs, such as the NP size.198 For thermoresponsive assembly of composite NPs, an important parameter is the aggregation temperature, Tagg, which is sensitive to the nature of grafted polymers, the salt concentration, as well as the size of NPs. Besides the effect of the composition of the polymer corona on Tagg, the grafting of the same thermoresponsive polymer on the NPs with different size also influences Tagg of NPs. This thermal response resulted from the conformation variation of the grafted polymers on the NP surface, relating to the hydration state of the polymer chains.198 The size effect of NPs in pH-response is not serious in comparison to temperature-response, but mainly depending on the structural changes of the grafted polymers.199–201 Because the pH variation may lead to diversified structural changes of polymers, a pH-induced strategy provides the opportunity to tune the geometrical dimensions of the NP architectures. For example, carboxyl-containing polymers possess intermolecular hydrogen-bonding between two carboxyls, which is inherited after grafting polymers on NPs. The affinity is greatly governed by the pH. Namely at the pH < 2.5 the strong hydrogen-bonding leads to a 3D self-assembly of NPs, whereas only 1D NP chains form at pH 4.0 driven by weakened hydrogen-bonding. A mixture of 1D and 2D architectures is observed in the pH range of 2.5 to 4.0, resulting from the mild hydrogen-bonding interaction.200 By choosing the responsive groups in polymers, the critical pH for determining the geometrical dimensions of the assembly architectures is alterable.199,201


3.2.2 Anisotropic assembly. 
Anisotropic assembly and disassembly are more important in optical and electronic applications that are achievable using anisotropic NP building blocks,202 anisotropic decoration of original isotropic NPs,58 anisotropic external field-induction,203 or a combination of them. Nanorods are typical anisotropic building blocks, which have been tested to demonstrate the state-of-the-art assembly and disassembly.197,202 Because the exposed crystallographic facets of nanorods are anisotropic, the initiators can selectively adsorb on the ends or the longitudinal sides.204 Subsequently, the polymers are grafted on the ends or the sides, producing an anisotropic distribution of polymers. As a result, variation of solution polarity can trigger the anisotropic self-assembly of nanorods either to 1D or 3D architectures. For example, if PS-capped Au nanorods are dispersed in the binary solvents of DMF and water, nanorods can spontaneously assemble to end-to-end conjugated chains. If they are dispersed in the mixture of THF and water, side-to-side assembly is observed. Such solvent-dependent self-assembly is attributed to the different solubility of PS and cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB)-capped nanorods in the solvent mixture, arousing the competition between end-to-end and side-to-side aggregates. The polar surrounding that favors PS interaction facilitates the end-to-end assembly of nanorods, and in contrast 3D assembly forms via side-to-side assembly.202 It should be mentioned that the self-assembly of NPs is quite similar to reaction-controlled stepwise polymerization.37 The existence of reversibility, number distribution, structural isomers, as well as bond angle, strongly suggests that the self-assembly process of NPs should obey the basic principle of stepwise polymerization (Fig. 17). Borrowing the classical polymer theory, the puzzled process of NP self-assembly will be understandable and predictable.
 Fig. 17  Similarity in the growth of colloidal nanorod chains and stepwise polymerization. (A) The side view of the long side and the end of nanorod with PS decorated on the ends. (B and C) Dark field TEM images of the nanorod chains after 2 (B) and 24 (C) h assembly. Scale bar, 100 nm. (D) Variation in the number average degree of polymerization with time. (E) Dependence of chain growth rate on [M]0.37 Copyright 2010 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Introducing responsive polymers on nanorods further permits a reversible self-assembly, for instance a photothermally-induced self-assembly of Au nanorods.197 In this method, thermoresponsive PNIPAM is foremost decorated on the ends of Au nanorods to generate an aqueous solution of nanorods. After being illuminated with a NIR light, the nanorods can adsorb irradiation and convert to thermal energy, leading to the coil-globule transition of PNIPAM. Because of the hydrophobic–hydrophobic interaction between shrunken PNIPAM, nanorods undergo end-to-end conjugation and form chains (Fig. 18). This anisotropic assembly results in an obvious red-shift in the longitudinal absorption peak of the nanorods. By cooling the solution to room temperature, the disassembly of nanorod chains is easily achieved because of the swelling of PNIPAM below the LCST.197
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the approach to photothermally-triggered self-assembly of Au nanorods. TEM images of PNIPAM-decorated nanorods at room temperature (B), CTAB-capped nanorods at 45 °C (C), and self-assembled structures of PNIPAM-decorated nanorods at 45 °C (D and E).197 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Decorating NPs with a specific anisotropic surface pattern is an emerging means to accurately control the conjugation fashion with other discrete components, namely bestowing NPs with surface valence like atoms. This may lead to hierarchical self-assembly architectures with highly ordered structures and defined number of NPs. Among various asymmetric systems, Janus NPs are the simplest noncentrosymmetric structures to perform anisotropic polymer decoration of original isotropic NPs,205,206 which can be fabricated by template synthesis,207–212 microfluidic synthesis,213 electrified co-jetting,214 and direct polymerization.58 The pH- and temperature-responsive polymers can be selectively located on one side of spherical NPs to direct the self-assembly and disassembly of NPs through pH and/or temperature triggering.205,206 Hatton et al. demonstrated the reversible assembly of Janus magnetic NPs. An anisotropic decoration is foremost implemented by grafting polystyrene sodium sulfonate (PSS), polydimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (PDMAEMA), or PNIPAM onto PAA-capped NPs to create a Janus structure. Controlled assembly of the Janus NPs is observed at low pH values, with the formation of stable aggregates of the size 2–4 times larger than the initial size of the NPs. The assembly process is reversible by restoring the pH to high values. At intermediate pH values, PSS–PAA Janus NPs show moderate aggregation, while PDMAEMA–PAA Janus NPs aggregate uncontrollably due to strong dipole–dipole interactions. The number of aggregated NPs is controllable either by increasing the molecular weight of the grafted polymer or decreasing the surface-to-volume ratio of NPs for grafting, both of which increase the number of NPs in the architectures. The addition of PAA-capped homogenous NPs into Janus NPs further increases the number of NPs in the architectures, because these variations favor the conjugation of neighboring NPs by increasing the available contact surface.205,206
Note that for a variety of NPs, they inherently possess dipole. The dipolar association between NPs can lead to an anisotropic self-assembly by combination of other supramolecular interactions.18 Magnetic NPs composed of Fe, Co and Ni possess strong magnetic dipole. It allows for the self-assembly of NPs in chain-like and necklace-like structures (Fig. 19).215 A high concentration of polymers favors the formation of necklace-like structures, because polymers enhance the structural stability of NP architectures. This facilitates two neighbouring short NP chains with the opposite magnetostatic direction to join each other end-by-end. Since the composite NP necklaces still have magnetism, they strongly tend to assemble together induced by a secondary magnetostatic field, which results in long chains made up of nanorings and bigger rings composed of nanorings.215 However, except ferromagnetic NPs, the dipolar association is not strong enough to perform self-assembly.216,217 An external field is usually demanded to enhance the association. Besides the induced orientation of NPs (see Section 2.2.2), an external field can direct an anisotropic assembly of individual NPs to ordered arrays. For example, imposing a magnetic field on the NPs with magnetic components will lead to the 1D assembly of NPs along the magnetic field lines.218 In particular, the assembly on the basis of polymer-capped magnetic NPs improves the structural stability of the assembly architectures as the magnetic field is removed. A structural rearrangement in response to the magnetic field is also achievable after polymer decoration.218 The current challenge for maximizing the advantages of external field-assistant NP self-assembly is to exploit a new method to disassemble the assembled architectures by counteracting the strong dipolar association. Nevertheless, the combination of anisotropic decoration of stimuli-responsive polymers on NPs and external field-induction assembly and disassembly should be the key.
 Fig. 19  TEM images of the necklace-like Ni7Co3 nanorings with different assembled nanostructures.215 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 

4. Applications
4.1 Photovoltaic devices
The size-dependent electronic structure of NPs arouses unique properties, such as the tunable band gap of semiconductor NPs,46 the surface plasmon resonance of metal NPs,42 and the superparamagnetism of magnetic NPs,43 laying out the promising applications in diversified optoelectronic devices. The main problem in commercial use of NP-based devices is the difficulty of large-scale fabrication of NP architectures with desired structures through low-cost but high-efficient methods. Although a self-assembly technique indicates a methodology to solve the problem, technical progress is still dependent on the creative design and ingenious actualization of the self-assembly concept. In this respect, polymer-enabled NP self-assembly is a main route toward the hope. Besides the ability to direct NP arrays, polymers greatly enhance the structural stability and the performance of the NP architectures, acting as additional active components. Thus, the nanocomposites and in particular self-assembled nanocomposites are emerged as potential candidates to realize the optoelectronic applications of NPs in light-emitting devices, field-effect transistors, photovoltaic devices, photodetectors, and thermoelectric devices.219
Due to the urgent need of renewable energy and the problem of global climate change, the construction of low-cost, high-efficient photovoltaic devices is the current hot point of both academic research and industrial applications.220–225 There are several kinds of NP-based photovoltaic cells, including all-inorganic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, and hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells, all of which are based on the harvest of light and the subsequent separation of photogenerated electrons and holes at electrodes. Among these, bulk-heterojunction solar cells based on semiconductor NPs and conjugated polymers exhibit huge potential by combining the advantages of polymers and NPs, in particular the solution processability of polymers and high electron mobility of NPs.220 This strategy leads to facile and feasible fabrication of photovoltaic devices in large area, low-cost, and improved efficiency. A wide variety of NPs have been tested for fabricating NP–polymer hybrid solar cells, such as TiO2, ZnO, CdSe, PbS, PbSe, and CdTe. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is less comparable to that of conventional photovoltaic technologies, for example crystal silicon and thin film solar cells, due to the poor charge transport and/or low carrier separation at the NP–polymer interface.
The electron transport is improved using semiconductor nanorods. Because in comparison to spherical NPs, elongated nanorods decrease the number of interparticle hopping events.220 Note that with the consideration of spatial orientation, nanorods may randomly distribute in the polymers or vertically assemble on the substrates. The photovoltaic performance of vertically arranged nanorods is theoretically better than that of random distribution ones due to the improved efficiency in collection of photogenerated electrons.221 In practical device fabrication, however, this desired structure is difficult to construct. Although an external electric field may induce an orientated self-assembly of nanorods, the less capability of removing the capping ligands and connecting with a working electrode makes this method fail in practical applications.156 This problem is partially solved by using tetrapod or hyperbranched NPs, for instance CdSe and CdTe.222 These branched NPs greatly shorten the charge transport distance between an anode and a cathode, simultaneously avoiding the parallel array of nanorods on substrates and the aggregation of nanorods in polymer matrices.
Although the charge transport efficiency has been improved by selecting the shape of NPs, the PCE is still not satisfied for technical applications. The current efforts are focused on the construction of unhindered percolation networks for each component, through which electrons and holes can freely transfer to the device electrodes.223–225 NP–polymer percolation networks are constructed either through direct growth of NP networks in polymer films or post-preparation annealing of NP–polymer composites.224,225 Haque et al. demonstrated a direct growth of CdS NPs in the poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) film using cadmium ethylxanthate pyridine as the precursor. The nanomorphology of the composites depends greatly on the growth temperature. A high growth temperature results in a percolation network of CdS constructed from spherical CdS aggregates of approximately 30–50 nm in diameter. This feature is important for improving the performance of photovoltaic cells, because the high surface area nanostructured heterojunction facilitates efficient charge photogeneration and the percolation network promotes charge carrier transport and collection at the device electrodes. The photovoltaic devices based on such CdS–P3HT structure exhibit the PCE in excess of 2%.224 Using water-soluble materials to fabricate photovoltaic devices is closer to the green chemistry concept, namely producing clean energy via clean approaches. Yang et al. indicated the formation of percolation networks from water-processable CdTe NPs and poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV).225 In this method, aqueous CdTe NPs with the diameter of 2.8 nm are synthesized in water, and the PPV precursor is also soluble in water, permitting the device to be processed in aqueous solution. An annealing treatment at 320 °C is conducted to produce high molecular weight PPV and remove the capping ligands on CdTe NPs. Most importantly, the percolation networks of CdTe and PPV form in the active layer, which greatly contribute to the high photogenerated current and efficiency. By optimizing the device structure, a PCE of 2.14% is achieved (Fig. 20).225 In the foreseeable future, using narrow gap semiconductor NPs to compensate the light harvest in the NIR solar spectrum should be the next step for maximizing the device efficiency, though the material choice, device design, and surface chemistry are still challenging. Again, the self-assembly strategy will be the toolbox to overcome the problems.
 Fig. 20  (A) The structure of PPV:CdTe solar cells. (B) TEM image of the original CdTe NPs. SEM (C) and TEM (D) images of annealed PPV:CdTe composite film. The composite film was annealed at 320 °C for 60 min. (E) The effect of CdTe concentration on the PCE of the cells. (F) Current density–voltage characteristics of the solar cells with different structures. (G) Semi-logarithmic plots of the ITO–PEDOT:PSS–PPV:CdTe–ZnO–Al cells. (H) EQE versus wavelength of the same device as used for (G).225 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Chemical sensing and switches
Because NPs have a large surface-to-volume ratio, the optical and electronic properties are highly sensitive to the variation of the external environment, making NPs useful in the target analysis of a variety of ions and gases.226–229 Although numerous reports have tested the possibility of NPs in sensing and detection, the poor colloidal stability of NPs limits the practical applications. Incorporation of NPs with polymer supports is the current means to overcome this problem. Moreover, polymers also act as the robust host to integrate the functionalities of NPs by further combining a self-assembly technique. For example, fluorescent semiconductor NPs are useful in the detection of highly toxic and bioaccumulative heavy metal ions on the basis of NP PL quenching.226,227 Employing polymers as supports further enhances the performance in the correlated studies. Yang et al. demonstrated a versatile approach for fabricating NP–polymer composite architectures using the co-assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers and fluorescent CdTe NPs. The embedment of NPs in composite architectures greatly improves the PL stability in the acidic range, permitting the detection of metal ions under low pH conditions (Fig. 21A). This method also significantly broadens the concentration range of detection with 7 magnitudes (Fig. 21B and C).226 The separation of NPs after detection is highly desired with the consideration of environmental problem, in situ detection, and/or the detection in living specimens. Because semiconductor NPs are usually composed of metal components, typically Zn, Cd, and Hg, the remains of NPs lead to a secondary contamination. In technical applications, it is difficult to separate NPs from the detected solution due to the small size of NPs. The integration of NPs into higher-order architectures through the self-assembly strategy is thought to solve this disadvantage. Fluorescent CdTe and magnetic Fe3O4 NPs are co-assembled into spherical SPs using oil droplets in microemulsion as templates (Fig. 21D). The as-prepared CdTe–Fe3O4 binary SPs simultaneously exhibited strong fluorescence and magnetism, thus achieving the separation of NPs from the detected system.227
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of water-dispersible CdTe NP–polymer composite architectures via two step phase transfers. PL spectra of aqueous CdTe NPs (B) and NP–polymer composite architectures (C) with the addition of different concentrations of Ag+.226 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic illustration for fabricating CdTe-based binary SPs.227 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By combination of the stimuli-responsive properties of polymers and the electronic properties of metal NPs, such as the interparticle distance-dependent conductivity and surface plasmon resonance coupling, novel nanosensors are fabricated.228,229 Such sensors are essentially smart composite interfaces (Section 3.1.3). Au NPs are assembled with P2VP to form a thin film on the patterned Au substrate. Since P2VP is pH-sensitive, a reversible swelling and shrinking is achievable by changing the pH from 5.0 to 2.0, accompanied with the thickness variation of the film from 8 to 24 nm and the subsequent reversible surface plasmon resonance signals. Monitored by Au NP enhanced transmission surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, a spectral shift of 50 nm is found.228 The environment-dependent conductivity of Au NPs is applicable in vapor sensing applications.229 In a self-assembled thin film, Au NPs give the electric conductivity and polymers serve to crosslink the NPs for the selective adsorption of vapor molecules. The adsorption of vapor molecules leads to significant variation of the film resistance, which is capable of analyzing vapor traces. The sensitivity to detect vapor is tunable by altering the polarity of composed polymers. Namely hydrophobic polymers increase the sensitivity for hydrophobic vapors but decrease that for hydrophilic vapors. The vapor sensing behavior is totally contrast for the hydrophilic polymers.229
For magnetic NPs, the magnetism and the self-assembly behavior are alterable under external magnetic fields. Novel magnetic sensors are fabricated after co-assembling with conjugated polymers.230,231 Polydiacetylene (PDA) exhibits chromatic transition from blue to red if the conjugation length is shortened resulting from the changes in the conformation of the polymer backbone under stimuli. Through incorporation of superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs with PDA and stimulation under an AC magnetic field, the nanocomposites change color from blue to red (Fig. 22A). This magnetochromatism is attributed to the heat-induced conformation change of PDA, because superparamagnetic NPs produce thermal energy through Néel relaxation under an AC magnetic field.230 Magnetoswitchable charge transport is achievable by assembling γ-Fe2O3–Au core–shell NPs with polyaniline (PANI) on an electrode surface. PANI is redox-active under highly acidic conditions. The doping of γ-Fe2O3–Au core–shell NPs, a negatively charged component, further improves the charge transport properties due to the high electron conductivity of Au. Besides, the magnetic component makes the nanocomposites as a magnetoswitchable material in which the charge transport through the polymer is controllable by an external magnetic field. With the help of a magnet, the electrode can attract the composites, thus shortening the interparticle distances. It improves the charge transport through the composites by generating a conductive Au pathway (Fig. 22B). The removal of magnet allows the relaxation of the composites to its extended configuration, and therewith increases the interparticle distance. This decreases the charge transport efficiency through the composites.231
 Fig. 22  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the magnetochromatic polydiacetylene by incorporation of Fe3O4 NPs. The subscripts x and y refer to the numbers of methylene groups.230 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) Magnetic control of the charge transport across the composites of Fe2O3–Au core–shell NP and PANI.231 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Photonic crystals, which are constructed from periodic nano- and micro-meter-sized structures, have attracted intense research interest in optical enhancement and modulation. By combining stimuli-responsive materials, photonic crystals are developed for chemical sensing, because external stimuli may alter the microstructures and therefore the optical properties. The apparent color changes are easily observable by the naked eye, facilitating the technical applications of photonic crystals in sensing and detection. The 1D photonic crystal can be fabricated by alternatively constructing periodic planar structures from the materials with high and low refractive index.232–234 Usually, silica and titania NPs are adopted as the high refractive index component, whereas polymers are used as the low refractive index component.232 A water-vapor-responsive 1D photonic crystal is fabricated by alternating thin films of titania and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-glycidyl methacrylate) (PHEMA-co-PGMA).233 Due to the response of PHEMA-co-PGMA to water vapor, the 1D photonic crystal possesses fast water-vapor responsiveness and reversible full-color switching (Fig. 23). Depending on the humidity, the apparent color of the 1D photonic crystals varies from blue to green, yellow, orange, and red. At high water-vapor concentrations, the apparent color rapidly alters from blue to red and comes back to the original blue immediately after exposure to air. The 1D photonic crystal is also workable for detection of ions.234 Following the fabrication method mentioned above, except using PDMAEMA-co-poly(ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) rather than PHEMA-co-PGMA, a 1D photonic crystal gel is prepared. This self-assembled gel is selectively sensitive to SCN−, which is facilely observable by the naked eye on the basis of the color change.
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of a 1D composite photonic crystal by alternated assembly of titania and PHEMA-co-PGMA. (B) Sensitivity of the 1D photonic crystal towards water vapor. (C) Swelling–deswelling cycles of the 1D photonic crystal with water-vapor concentration at 0.0177.233 Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
As another type of stimuli-responsive material, shape-memory nanocomposites are capable of remembering a preprogrammed shape during preparation, reforming at a higher temperature to maintain a temporary shape, and recovering the original shape by heat-, light-, or magnetic field-stimulus.235 Filling NPs into shape-memory polymers by elaborate design can enhance the overall performance, because NPs act as the netpoints to crosslink the polymer network (Fig. 24). This avoids the disadvantages by physical dispersion of NPs in polymer networks. Primary result indicates that the crosslinking of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) by PEG-decorated silica NPs significantly increases the elastic modulus, and sharpens the transition temperature.235 Since the sizes, shapes, and mass distributions of composed NPs are optional in large range, shape-memory nanocomposites will exhibit multifunctional features.
 Fig. 24  (A) Schematic depiction of the reaction scheme. (B) Transformation of un-cross-linked, liquid like nanocomposites (left) into cross-linked solid shape memory polymers (right). The TEM image of the shape memory polymers (center) shows that the NPs are well dispersed and that the size of the silica NPs is 10 nm. (C) Pictures showing shape fixing at −10 °C and recovery at 60 °C.235 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
4.3 Biological applications
Since NPs possess small size and excellent performance, they have been greatly welcomed by biological researchers.236–238 On the basis of the diversified performance of NPs, the applications widely cover biological imaging, labeling, catalysis, sensing, adsorption, separation, delivery, therapy, and so forth.236–238 The toxicity and bio-incompatibility of NPs have greatly limited the biological applications, which are recently solved by assembling NPs with specific polymers. Many amphiphilic copolymers simultaneously possess hydrophobic parts and hydrophilic parts, such as alternating copolymers of poly(maleic anhydride-alt-octadecene) (PMAO), grafted copolymers of poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl-grafted PMAO (PMAO-g-PEG), diblock copolymers of PS-b-PAA and PS-b-P2VP, and tri-block copolymers of PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO. The hydrophobic parts may generate the affinity with the hydrophobic ligands of NPs via hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions, and the hydrophilic parts may spread in the aqueous media to make the composite NPs dispersible in water.123–131 Consequently, the surface decoration of NPs with these amphiphilic copolymers finally produces the composite NPs suitable for biomedical applications. In particular, passivation of NPs using PEG-containing polymers simultaneously lowers the toxicity and enhances the biocompatibility.238 For example, in the case of bio-imaging, most high-quality NPs are synthesized in high-boiling-point organic solvents. The hydrophobic nature makes NPs insoluble in water. Aiming at these NPs, a hydrophilic decoration with amphiphilic polymers has been successfully established.238
The current focus is trended to explore new type NPs to replace conventional II–IV semiconductor NPs, for example CdSe and CdTe, with the purpose to exclude heavy metals. These novel NPs include carbon, silicon, III–V and I–III–VI semiconductors, rare-earth-doped fluorides, and so forth.239–250 In particular, rare-earth-doped fluorides possess up-conversion fluorescence, namely adsorb two or more NIR exciting photons but emit one higher energy photon in the visible range.247 This property is especially important in bio-analysis. In this scenario, the conventional NPs are from down-conversion materials, namely the fluorescence is excited by higher energy blue or ultraviolet light. Besides exciting the NPs, the high energy radiation may simultaneously induce the autofluorescence of biological molecules or tissues, thus disturbing the detected fluorescence. This drawback is avoidable using an excitation with NIR light, which will lead to higher signal-to-noise ratio and therewith improve the accuracy in bio-analysis. The utilization of NIR excitation also minimizes the photobleaching and photodamage to an organism, enabling the tissue imaging with the depth of several inches. Accordingly, up-conversion rare-earth-doped fluoride NPs are intensely studied as new generation fluorescent probes. Nevertheless, a foremost polymer decoration is always necessary to increase the biocompatibility and decrease the toxicity.
Another trend in the current NP-based biological research is the application of multifunctional probes to perform bio-analysis. In view of this, polymers act as powerful carriers to combine the functionalities of various components.251,252 For example, the co-assembly of CdSe and Au NPs on the surface of PS microspheres creates FRET probes.251 Due to the FRET between CdSe and Au, the fluorescence of CdSe is completely quenched, which can be restored as Au NPs are removed from the microsphere surface by treatment with dithiothreitol. On the basis of the technique to fabricate NP SPs, polymer-supported multifunctional SPs are prepared.252 Such composite SPs are composed of NPs with diversified performance, specific drugs, and degradable polymers. For example, the assembly of magnetic NPs and anticancer drugs in amphiphilic polymers produces multifunctional magneto-polymeric SPs (Fig. 25). The therapeutic antibody-decorated composite SPs demonstrate ultrasensitive targeted detection by magnetic resonance imaging of in vitro and in vivo models. Besides, the composite SPs indicate excellent synergistic effects for the inhibition of tumor growth.252
 Fig. 25  (A) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of magneto-polymeric SPs. TEM images of magnetic NPs of (B) MnFe2O4 and (C) Fe3O4 and magneto-polymeric SPs containing (D) MnFe2O4 or (E) Fe3O4 NPs.252 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
NPs are also potential candidates for the constructions of biological sensors. On the basis of a competitive fluorescence quenching and recovering, Rotello et al. fabricated the “chemical nose” from cationic Au NPs and anionic fluorescent poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) to detect, identify and quantify protein targets.253 The polymer fluorescence is originally quenched by Au NPs, whereas the addition of proteins disrupts the NP–polymer interaction, leading to the fluorescence response (Fig. 26). This method is highly repeatable and available for detecting proteins at the ppb level. Because the combination of NPs and polymers leads to many advantages, such as the reversible functional integration and modulation in this example, it opens the door to create novel biological sensors with different responsive behavior.
 Fig. 26  Fluorophore displacement protein sensor array. (A) Removal of quenched fluorescent polymers by protein analytes. (B) Fluorescent pattern generation through differential release of fluorescent polymers from Au NPs.253 Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group. 
Many NPs may directly act as medicines to participate in therapy, for instance the photothermal therapy of cancer.254–264 The use of NPs for absorbing light in the NIR range has the highest transmissivity, and meanwhile, NPs can convert the adsorbed photons into thermal energy, causing tumor cell destruction. Au nanostructures, such as nanoshells, nanorods, nanocages, and nanoflowers, possess strong optical absorption and are useful as photothermal agents for cancer therapy.263 For example, Au nanoflowers with a strong optical absorption in the NIR windows are tested as photothermal therapy agents. Through an antibody-based therapy, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is conjugated with Au nanoflowers to actively target human ovarian epidermal cancer cells. After exposing the cells to a NIR laser, Au nanoflowers-targeted cancer cells are destructed, whereas no cell death is observed for control samples, demonstrating the high specificity of anti-HER2 conjugated Au nanoflowers.263 Semiconductor NPs that possess NIR absorption are also potentially workable in photothermal therapy.264 High-quality Cu2−xSe NPs that exhibit an intense NIR absorption have been synthesized in organic solvents. The surface-decoration using amphiphilic polymers further make the NPs soluble in water. NIR photoexcitation of the Cu2−xSe NPs in the presence of human colorectal cancer cells leads to significant cell death, confirming the use in photothermal therapy (Fig. 27).264 In comparison to Au nanorods and nanoshells, the Cu2−xSe NPs indicate higher photothermal transduction efficiency because of the smaller light scattering to the optical cross-section which greatly contributes to heating.
 Fig. 27  (A) TEM image of hydrophobic Cu2−xSe NPs. Inset: HRTEM image of one Cu2−xSe NP. (B) Hydrophilic decoration of Cu2−xSe NPs using amphiphilic copolymers. Comparison of photothermal destruction of human colorectal cancer cells without (C and D) and with (E and F) the addition of Cu2−xSe NPs.264 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions
In summary, self-assembly is convenient and versatile for organizing NPs into higher-order architectures with defined size, shape, and geometrical dimensions, which is considered as an important instrument to integrate and modulate the functionalities of NPs. However, the main driving forces for NP self-assembly are interparticle weak interactions, which make the assembled architectures unstable. In this scenario, polymers act as inert matrices to enhance the structural stability by forming nanocomposites both from unitary NPs and multiple ones. Meanwhile, polymers are capable of offering compensated supramolecular interactions, shoulder as accessional templates, provide additional functionalities, or conduct external stimuli, thus enabling the self-assembly and/or co-assembly with NPs to create novel composite assembly architectures. These composite structures greatly contribute to the functionalities and even generate new functionalities of the NP-based device prototype by manipulating the energy and electron transfer in between NP and/or polymer components. Moreover, the current advances in polymer preparation and NP surface chemistry permit the decoration of polymers on individual NP or selective location on specific sites. By further combining the responsiveness of polymers, the reversible assembly and disassembly of NPs are achievable under a variety of external stimuli. This capability leads to the dynamic control of the spatial coupling of NPs in a broadened range and hence the outcoming signals through optical, electric, magnetic, thermal, ionic, and molecular control. Such properties greatly arouse the promising applications in optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices, high performance catalyst, ultrasensitive nanosensors, various biological materials, and so forth.
The further development of the correlated areas continuously depends on the progress in the methodologies for preparing NP–polymer composites and in particular the advances toward intelligent nanocomposites. Since the previous efforts have demonstrated diversified examples of polymer-enabled NP self-assembly, the forthcoming attempts are expected to extend the academically tested systems to commercial materials. Low-cost, high-efficient, and environment-friendly routes are highly desired. With this consideration, the co-assembly of polymers and NPs in aqueous media by using less polluting components will be the most favorite protocol. This in turn demands the aqueous synthesis and hydrophilic decoration of novel NPs with high performance, multiscale self-assembly of NP directed by aqueous miscible polymers, and creation of new strategies for water-processing nanocomposites. Although the road toward the innovation of nanoscience and nanotechnology is always filled with problems and challenges, the combination of nano-objects with polymers will act as the road roller to clear the obstruction.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the 973 Program of China (2012CB933802, 2009CB939701), NSFC (21174051, 20974038, 20921003, 91123031), and the Special Project from MOST of China.
Notes and references
X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mohanan, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Science, 2005, 307, 397 CAS .
M. R. Jones, R. J. Macfarlane, B. Lee, J. Zhang, K. L. Young, A. J. Senesi and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. C. Glotzer and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2006, 314, 274 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tessler, V. Medvedev, M. Kazes, S. H. Kan and U. Banin, Science, 2002, 295, 1506 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, H. Skaff, T. Emrick, A. D. Dinsmore and T. P. Russell, Science, 2003, 299, 226 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dubertret, P. Skourides, D. J. Norris, V. Noireaux, A. H. Brivanlou and A. Libchaber, Science, 2002, 298, 1759 CrossRef CAS .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Larson, W. R. Zipfel, R. M. Williams, S. W. Clark, M. P. Bruchez, F. W. Wise and W. W. Webb, Science, 2003, 300, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal, F. Ilhan, J. E. DeRouchey, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and V. M. Rotello, Nature, 2000, 404, 746 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, N. A. Kotov and M. Giersig, Science, 2002, 297, 237 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Leunissen, C. G. Christova, A.-P. Hynninen, C. P. Royall, A. I. Campbell, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij and A. van Blaaderen, Nature, 2005, 437, 235 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Park, A. K. R. Lytton-Jean, B. Lee, S. Weigand, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2008, 451, 553 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shenhar, T. B. Norsten and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 657 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, E. W. Edwards, D. Wang and H. Möhwald, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3288 RSC .
A. Haryono and W. H. Binder, Small, 2006, 2, 600 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. M. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3591 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Pavan and R. Shenhar, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2028 RSC .
G. Markovich, C. P. Collier, S. E. Henrichs, F. Remacle, R. D. Levine and J. R. Heath, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 415 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Reynolds, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3795 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 653 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shenhar and V. M. Rotello, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 549 CrossRef CAS .
M.-P. Pileni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 685 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8412 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Tran-Thi, R. Dagnelie, S. Crunaire and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 621 RSC .
D. Grosso, F. Ribot, C. Boissiere and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 829 RSC .
K. Liu, Z. Nie, N. Zhao, W. Li, M. Rubinstein and E. Kumacheva, Science, 2010, 329, 197 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3984 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, Z. Chen and S. O’Brien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3594 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dong, X. Ye, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1804 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Dahl, B. L. S. Maddux and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niederberger and H. Cölfen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3271 RSC .
C. Lü and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2884 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Han and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1533 CrossRef CAS .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4878 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 47 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schexnailder and G. Schmidt, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 1 CAS .
J. Li, X. Hong, Y. Liu, D. Li, Y. Wang, J. Li, Y. Bai and T. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, N. T. Flynn and R. Langer, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1074 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. DeVries, M. Brunnbauer, Y. Hu, A. M. Jackson, B. Long, B. T. Neltner, O. Uzun, B. H. Wunsch and F. Stellacci, Science, 2007, 315, 358 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nie, D. Fava, M. Rubinstein and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3683 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xing, Y. Feng, Y. Y. Tay, T. Chen, J. Xu, M. Pan, J. He, H. H. Hng, Q. Yan and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9537 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 1995, 270, 1335 CAS .
S. Kinge, M. Crego-Calama and D. N. Reinhoudt, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 20 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Binder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5172 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Bigioni, X.-M. Lin, T. T. Nguyen, E. I. Corwin, T. A. Witten and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Wang, N. S. Sobal, M. Giersig, M. Jiang and H. Möhwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7963 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen and M. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2254 RSC .
Y. Ofir, B. Samanta and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1814 RSC .
K. Saha, S. S. Agasti, C. Kim, X. Li and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2739 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nie, A. Petukhova and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and X. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2741 RSC .
C. Sanchez, B. Julián, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559 RSC .
R. A. Vaia and J. F. Maguire, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2736 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nie and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 277 CrossRef CAS .
P. Akcora, H. Liu, S. K. Kumar, J. Moll, Y. Li, B. C. Benicewicz, L. S. Schadler, D. Acehan, A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, V. Pryamitsyn, V. Ganesan, J. Ilavsky, P. Thiyagarajan, R. H. Colby and J. F. Douglas, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 354 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Pavan and R. Shenhar, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2028 RSC .
S. Gupta, Q. Zhang, T. Emrick, A. C. Balazs and T. P. Russell, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 229 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kane, R. E. Cohen and R. Silbey, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 39 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Cao and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6653 CAS .
L. Meli and P. F. Green, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, H. Zhang, Z. Fan, M. Li, J. Han, F. Dong and B. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11843 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Yao, X. Li and B. Yang, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4113 RSC .
W. K. Lee, Z. Dai, W. P. King and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 129 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Morin, Y.-H. La, C.-C. Liu, J. A. Streifer, R. J. Hamers, P. F. Nealey and S. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
R. Umeda, H. Awaji, T. Nakahodo and H. Fujihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3240 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Son, W. K. Bae, H. Kang, P. F. Nealey and K. Char, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3927 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Deshmukh, G. A. Buxton, N. Clarke and R. J. Composto, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6316 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Fogg, L. H. Radzilowski, R. Blanski, R. R. Schrock and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 417 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, D. H. Kim, M. Wolkenhauer, G. G. Bumbu, W. Knoll and J. S. Gutmann, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 370 CrossRef CAS .
R. Suntivich, I. Choi, M. K. Gupta, C. Tsitsilianis and V. V. Tsukruk, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, M. Drechsler and A. H. E. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 537 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Misner, H. Skaff, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 221 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Darling, N. A. Yufa, A. L. Cisse, S. D. Bader and S. J. Sibener, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2446 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Thompson, V. V. Ginzburg, M. W. Matsen and A. C. Balazs, Science, 2001, 292, 2469 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Bockstaller, Y. Lapetnikov, S. Margel and E. L. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5276 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Schultz, C. K. Hall and J. Genzer, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3007 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huh, V. V. Ginzburg and A. C. Balazs, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8085 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Chiu, B. J. Kim, E. J. Kramer and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5036 CrossRef CAS .
L.-T. Yan, N. Popp, S.-K. Ghosh and A. Böker, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 913 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sknepnek, J. A. Anderson, M. H. Lamm, J. Schmalian and A. Travesset, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1259 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Krishnan, M. E. Mackay, P. M. Duxbury, A. Pastor, C. J. Hawker, B. V. Horn, S. Asokan and M. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, V. K. Daga, E. R. Anderson, S. P. Gido and J. J. Watkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6513 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Yeh, K.-H. Wei, Y.-S. Sun, U.-S. Jeng and K. S. Liang, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6559 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, J. J. Chiu, G.-R. Yi, D. J. Pine and E. J. Kramer, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2618 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Jang, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16986 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy and C. J. Orendorff, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérz-Juste, B. Rodríguez-González, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1065 CrossRef .
L. Mai, L. Xu, C. Han, X. Xu, Y. Luo, S. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4750 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, B. Hu, Q.-F. Yao, K. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3993 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Roskov, K. A. Kozek, W.-C. Wu, R. K. Chhetri, A. L. Oldenburg, R. J. Spontak and J. B. Tracy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 13965 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kalra, J. Lee, J. H. Lee, S. G. Lee, M. Marquez, U. Wiesner and Y. L. Joo, Small, 2008, 4, 2067 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Huang and C. Wang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 152 CrossRef .
F. Reincke, W. K. Kegel, H. Zhang, M. Nolte, D. Wang, D. Vanmaekelbergh and H. Möhwald, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3828 RSC .
A. Rizzo, M. Mazzeo, M. Palumbo, G. Lerario, S. D'Amone, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1886 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Park and S. Park, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Taccola, A. Desii, V. Pensabene, T. Fujie, A. Saito, S. Takeoka, P. Dario, A. Menciassi and V. Mattoli, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5589 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Johnston-Peck, J. Wang and J. B. Tracy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5040 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lau, H. Duan, F. Wang, C. B. He, H. Y. Low and J. K. W. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3355 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, A. Liu, S. Peng and H. Duan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6098 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, S. Xiong, F. Jaeckel, Z. Sun, D. Dunphy and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3284 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, M. J. Campolongo, J. J. Cha, S. J. Tan, C. C. Umbach, D. A. Muller and D. Luo, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takae, Y. Akiyama, H. Otsuka, T. Nakamura, Y. Nagasaki and K. Kataoka, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 818 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Wang, T. E. Dykstra, M. R. Salvador, I. Manners, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7784 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, J. Ge, Y. Hu and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3203 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, N. Felorzabihi, G. Guerin, J. C. Haley, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Geidel, S. Schmachtel, A. Riedinger, C. Pfeiffer, K. Müllen, M. Klapper and W. J. Parak, Small, 2011, 7, 2929 CrossRef CAS .
C.-A. J. Lin, R. A. Sperling, J. K. Li, T.-Y. Yang, P.-Y. Li, M. Zanella, W. H. Chang and W. J. Parak, Small, 2008, 4, 334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, R. Thakar and P. T. Snee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3744 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. R. Dave and X. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5286 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Kairdolf, A. M. Smith and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12866 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pellegrino, L. Manna, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, D. Koktysh, A. L. Rogach, S. Keller, J. Rädler, G. Natile and W. J. Parak, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 703 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, D. Wang, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1620 CAS .
L. Yuwen, B. Bao, G. Liu, J. Tian, H. Lu, Z. Luo, X. Zhu, F. Boey, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Small, 2011, 7, 1456 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, S. Hou, B. Ren, Z. Zheng and G. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3720 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hong, N. O. Fischer, T. Emrick and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4617 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, M. Kuang, D. Wang, D. G. Kurth and H. Möhwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1717 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Lu, S. A. Curda and J. Lal, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4985 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Goff, P. P. Huffstetler, W. C. Miles, N. Pothayee, C. M. Reinholz, S. Ball, R. M. Davis and J. S. Riffle, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4784 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Vestal and Z. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14312 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Ressell and T. Emrick, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and T. R. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3647 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Cui, K. Wang, Q. He, X. Yan and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Q. He, Y. Cui and J. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Skaff, M. F. Ilker, E. B. Coughlin and T. Emrick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 5729 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Belfield and L. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5929 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, H. Skaff, A. Böker, A. D. Dinsmore, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12690 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. J. Li, A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3901 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge, Y. Kang, T. A. Taton, P. V. Braun and D. G. Cahill, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 531 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sánchez-Iglesias, M. Grzelczak, B. Rodríguez-González, P. Guardia-Girós, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, M. Prato and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3184 CrossRef .
Y. Kang and T. A. Taton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 409 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Xiong, Z.-D. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 748 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Benetti, X. F. Sui, S. Zapotoczny and G. J. Vancso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 939 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. Howarth, A. B. Greytak, Y. Zheng, D. G. Nocera, A. Y. Ting and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Ng, I. B. Udagedara, I. D. Rukhlenko, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, M. Premaratne and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Fu, K. C. Ng, Y. Tang and W. Cheng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4742 CAS .
F. Bai, D. Wang, Z. Huo, W. Chen, L. Liu, X. Liang, C. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuang, H. Wu, Y. Yang and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. E. Lee, S. H. Lee, J. H. Yu, J. H. Lee, T. G. Park and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 478 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Ryan, A. Mastroianni, K. A. Stancil, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, Q. Zhang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2066 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. Xu, D. Butterfield, M. J. Misner, D. Y. Ryu, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fresnais, J.-F. Berret, B. Frka-Petesic, O. Sandre and R. Perzynski, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3877 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan and H. Tenhu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4580 RSC .
D. W. Grainger and D. G. Castner, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 867 CrossRef CAS .
L. Senesac and T. G. Thundat, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Hu and X. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7234 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Xue, J.-J. Wang, Y.-Q. Wang, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3704 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Paul and L. M. Robeson, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal, T. H. Galow, F. Ilhan and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 461 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal, B. L. Frankamp, O. Uzun, M. T. Tuominen and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3252 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Müller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, X. Ding, Z. Deng, Z. Zheng, Y. Peng and X. Long, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, M. Gao, D. Wang and H. Möhwald, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, D. Wang, H. Bao, M. Gao, H. Möhwald and M. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 267 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, A. Pich, D. Fava, M. Wang, S. Kumar, C. Wu, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 763 RSC .
J. Guo, W. Yang, C. Wang, J. He and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5554 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gorelikov, L. M. Field and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15938 CrossRef CAS .
M. Das, N. Sanson, D. Fava and E. Kumacheva, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 196 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Lazim, M. Bradley and J. Eastoe, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11779 CrossRef .
B. M. Budhlall, M. Marquez and O. D. Velev, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11959 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and T. R. Lee, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salcher, M. S. Nikolic, S. Casado, M. Vélez, H. Weller and B.
H. Juárez, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1367 RSC .
A. Burns, H. Ow and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1028 RSC .
S. Bai, T.-L. Nguyen, P. Mulvaney and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3247 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheeney-Haj-Ichia, G. Sharabi and I. Willner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 27 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pardo-Yissar, R. Gabai, A. N. Shipway, T. Bourenko and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1320 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pardo-Yissar, T. Bourenko, J. Wasserman and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 670 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Wang, W. Chen, A.-H. Liu, G. Lu, G. Zhang, J.-H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13358 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cui, J. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Cui, W. Chen, F. Xu, Z. Wang, K. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 481 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tokarev, I. Tokareva and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. Agrawal, P. Uhlmann, F. Simon, U. Oertel and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Diamanti, S. Arifuzzaman, J. Genzer and R. A. Vaia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srivastava, V. Ball, P. Podsiadlo, J. Lee, P. Ho and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3748 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. del Mercato, E. Gonzalez, A. Z. Abbasi, W. J. Parak and V. Puntes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11468 RSC .
S. Chang, S. Singamaneni, E. Kharlampieva, S. L. Young and V. V. Tsukruk, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5781 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, F. Montagne, P. Hoffmann and R. Pugin, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3798 RSC .
C.-M. Huang, K.-H. Wei, U.-S. Jeng and K. S. Liang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5067 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, K. Ohno, V. Ladmiral, D. E. Milkie, J. M. Kikkawa and R. J. Composto, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Yang, T. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Wang, X. Liu, B. Xing and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11920 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fava, M. A. Winnik and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2571 RSC .
C. Durand-Gasselin, M. Capelot, N. Sanson and N. Lequeux, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12321 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sardar, N. S. Bjorge and J. S. Shumaker-Parry, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Si and T. K. Mandal, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Ma, L. Xu, J. Li and W. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9172 CAS .
Z. Nie, D. Fava, E. Kumacheva, S. Zou, G. C. Walker and M. Rubinstein, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 609 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai and A. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4057 RSC .
N. Zhao, K. Liu, J. Greener, Z. Nie and E. Kumacheva, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3077 CrossRef CAS .
T. Isojima, M. Lattuada, J. B. V. Sande and T. A. Hatton, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1799 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lattuada and T. A. Hatton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12878 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walther, K. Matussek and A. H. E. Müller, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Tang, J. Li, K. Shen, J. Liu, X. Qu, J. Li, Q. Wang and Z. Yang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, X. Qi, X. Cao, J. Lu, Q. Xu and H. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4228 RSC .
S. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Samarajeewa, G. Sun, C. Yang and K. L. Wooley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11046 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and C. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, B. Li, B. Zhao and C. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11594 CrossRef CAS .
S.-N. Yin, C.-F. Wang, Z.-Y. Yu, J. Wang, S.-S. Liu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lahann, Small, 2011, 7, 1149 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Hu, Y. Lu, S. Zhang, S.-R. Guo, B. Lin, M. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11606 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Keng, B. Y. Kim, I.-B. Shim, R. Sahoo, P. E. Veneman, N. R. Armstrong, H. Yoo, J. E. Pemberton, M. M. Bull, J. J. Griebel, E. L. Ratcliff, K. G. Nebesny and J. Pyun, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3143 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Korth, P. Keng, I. Shim, S. E. Bowles, C. Tang, T. Kowalewski, K. W. Nebesny and J. Pyun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6562 CrossRef CAS .
H. Singh, P. E. Laibinis and T. A. Hatton, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11500 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bouclé, S. Chyla, M. S. P. Shaffer, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 622 CrossRef .
H.-C. Chen, C.-W. Lai, I.-C. Wu, H.-R. Pan, I.-W. P. Chen, Y.-K. Peng, C.-L. Liu, C.-H. Chen and P.-T. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5451 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dowland, T. Lutz, A. Ward, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2739 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Fan, J. Zhang, H. Wei, D. Zhou, B. Xu, F. Li, W. Tian and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2831 CAS .
Y. Ning, H. Zhang, J. Han, C. Yang, Y. Liu, D. Zhou and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6837 RSC .
J. Han, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Ning, J. Wu, S. Liang, H. Sun, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2679 RSC .
I. Tokareva, S. Minko, J. H. Fendler and E. Hutter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15950 CrossRef CAS .
N. Krasteva, I. Besnard, B. Guse, R. E. Bauer, K. Müllen, A. Yasuda and T. Vossmeyer, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 551 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Li, X. Sun, Y. Liu, B. Luo, C. Wang, Y. Bao, H. Xu and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riskin, B. Basnar, Y. Huang and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2691 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Bonifacio, B. V. Lotsch, D. P. Puzzo, F. Scotognella and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1641 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Xie, C. Li, Y. Li, S. Liang, Z. Tian, T. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Li, W. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3784 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Tian, Z. Wang, Y. Li, S. Liang, L. Cui, L. Zhang, H. Zhang and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8636 RSC .
P. Agarwal, M. Chopra and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8670 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai and X. Chen, Small, 2007, 3, 1840 CrossRef CAS .
M. De, P. S. Ghosh and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4225 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, E. Lees, F. Amin, P. Rivera-Gil, F. Yang, P. Mulvaney and W. J. Parak, Small, 2011, 7, 3113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858 RSC .
Y. Fang, S. Guo, D. Li, C. Zhu, W. Ren, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 400 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hessel, M. R. Rasch, J. L. Hueso, B. W. Goodfellow, V. A. Akhavan, P. Puvanakrishnan, J. W. Tunnel and B. A. Korgel, Small, 2010, 6, 2026 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Atkins, A. Thibert, D. S. Larsen, S. Dey, N. D. Browning and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20664 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Maier-Flaig, D. Faulkner, E. J. Henderson, C. Kübel, U. Lemmer and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, R.-G. Xie and W.-S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3357 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, Y. Zhang, C. Xie, H. Su, J. Liu, C. Zhang, N. Dellas, S. E. Mohney, Y. Wang, J. Wang and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3553 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haase and H. Schäfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Ai, J. Liu, Q. Yuan, Y. He and L. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1437 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ju, D. Tu, Y. Liu, R. Li, H. Zhu, J. Chen, Z. Chen, M. Huang and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Z. Luo, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Y. Lee and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8800 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Quach, G. Crivat, M. A. Tarr and Z. Rosenzweig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2028 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C.-H. Lee, H.-J. Ko, J.-S. Suh, H.-G. Yoon, K. Lee, Y.-M. Huh and S. Haam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8836 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. You, O. R. Miranda, B. Gider, P. S. Ghosh, I.-B. Kim, B. Erdogan, S. A. Krovi, U. H. F. Bunz and V. M. Rotello, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 318 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ye, K. Y. Win, H. R. Tan, M. Lin, C. P. Teng, A. Mlayah and M.-Y. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8506 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Melancon, M. Zhou and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 947 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vauthier, N. Tsapis and P. Couvreur, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 99 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Dreaden, M. A. Mackey, X. Huang, B. Kang and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3391 RSC .
R. Bardhan, S. Lal, A. Joshi and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 936 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin and J. C. Bischof, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1191 RSC .
M. E. Caldorera-Moore, W. B. Liechty and N. A. Peppas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1061 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khlebtsov and L. Dykman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1647 RSC .
Y. Li, C. Jing, L. Zhang and Y.-T. Long, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 632 RSC .
B. V. de Broek, N. Devoogdt, A. D'Hollander, H.-L. Gijs, K. Jans, L. Lagae, S. Muyldermans, G. Maes and G. Borghs, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4319 CrossRef .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of a themed issue on supramolecular polymers.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Hao Zhang
	Hao Zhang received his PhD degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 2004. He was an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in 2004, and continued his research as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Helmuth Möhwald at Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces at Potsdam, Germany. Presently, he is a professor of chemistry at Jilin University. His scientific interests are focused on synthesis, assembly, and application of functional nanoparticles.

Yi Liu
	Yi Liu is currently in his fourth year of PhD study in Chemistry at Jilin University. He received his BS degree from Jilin University in 2008. His research is focused on the synthesis and photovoltaic application of nanoparticles.

Dong Yao
	Dong Yao is currently an undergraduate student (the fourth year) in the Pilot Class of Biology and Chemistry, Jilin University. He has been working as a research assistant in Prof. Hao Zhang's group since 2010. His research focuses on the photothermal therapy using inorganic nanoparticles for the selective treatment of tumor cells.

Bai Yang
	Bai Yang currently is a professor of chemistry and the director of the State Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials in the college of Chemistry at Jilin University. He received his PhD in polymer chemistry and physics in 1991 under the supervision of Prof. Jiacong Shen at Jilin University. His research interests relate to composite assembly of nanoparticles in polymers, nano-micro-scale fabrication of ordered array structures, and high performance and functional polymer nanocomposite optical materials.

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis absorption (A) and PL (B) spectra of CdTe–PS composite films heated at 180 °C for different intervals. (C) PL image of CdTe–PS films heated at 200 °C for different intervals. (D) Temporal evolution of the PL peak position of CdTe–PS films at different temperatures. Patterned CdTe–PMMA composite films before (E) and after (F) gradient heating at 240 °C.79 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the control of NP arrangements on patterned block copolymer thin films. (B–E) Microscopic images of NPs deposited on the surface reconstructed PS-b-PMMA block copolymer thin films with perpendicular orientation after the solvent treatment with PMMA-selective acetic acid. SEM images of NPs located in the nanoscale-grooves in (B) randomly oriented lamellar, (C) 1D directed-assembled lamellar, and (D) cylindrical morphology, and (E) the AFM image of well aligned 1D ZnO nanorod arrays placed in the nanoscale-grooves in 1D directed-assembled lamellar morphology block copolymer pattern.83 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Microscopic images of 21.5 nm SiO2 and 3.5 nm Au NPs co-assembled in PS-b-PEP.92 Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of NP-driven assembly of block copolymers via hydrogen bonding.99 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Effect of the NP content on the morphological transformation.100 Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Aligned Au nanorods in electrospun PEO fibers as respective functions of fiber diameter and nanorod volume fraction (Φ): (A) 40 nm and Φ = 0.006, (B) 50 nm and Φ = 0.045, (C) 650 nm and Φ = 0.035, and (D) 3000 nm and Φ = 0.031. A selected area electron diffraction pattern of the corresponding sample is included as an inset in (B).107 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Interfacial assembly of Au NPs with mixed PEG and PMMA brushes. (A) Schemes of the NP in chloroform, water, and at interfaces. (B) Photographs of the assembling process. (C) TEM images of the Au NP assembly with different magnifications.116 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of horizontally (A) and vertically aligned (B) Au nanorods constructed through polymer-mediated interfacial self-assembly. The nanorods are capped by the PS with the molecular weight of 20000 g mol−1. The horizontal alignment of nanorods is favorable at room temperature, whereas vertical alignment is dominant at 60 °C.151 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Synthetic procedure for the multifunctional NP–polymer composite SPs. TEM images of NP–PLGA–DOXO SPs embedded with 7 nm (B) and 15 nm (C) Fe3O4 NPs.155 Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of electrode assembly for nanorod alignment. (B) TEM images of perpendicularly aligned CdS nanorod superlattices under a field of 1 V μm−1. (C) Azimuthal alignment of the nanorods.156 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Scheme developed for the co-assembly of NPs and polymers in aqueous solution. Phase contrast optical microscopy image of a nanorod dispersion without the magnetic field (B), with the magnetic field applied perpendicular (C) and parallel (D) to the optical axis of the microscope.159 Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Au PNIPAM hydrogels.55 Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) PL images of CdTe PNIPAM hydrogels excited by an ultraviolet lamp. (C) Maximum emission wavelengths of CdTe PNIPAM hydrogel as a function of heating–cooling cycles between 25 and 4.1 °C.54 Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Low- and (B) high-resolution TEM images of PNIPAM-co-PAA microgels loaded with Au nanorods. Scale bars are 1 μm and 100 nm, respectively. (C) Variation in volume of pure and nanorod hybrid PNIPAM-co-PAA microgels plotted as a function of the number of laser on and laser off events, n.174 Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of loading hydrophobic NPs into microgels via solvent exchange. The red spots represent hydrophobic NPs and their hydrophobic surfaces are highlighted in yellow. The large sphere with dashed grids represents a microgel.181 Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the construction of Au NP composite smart film and the control of electronic properties of the electrode interface by solvent switching. (B) Frequency changes of the smart film by solvent switching.183 Copyright 2001 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Loading and unloading of the polyelectrolyte films with green emission CdTe NPs. Confocal microscopy images of the polyelectrolyte films with NP loaded (B) and unloaded (C).190 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the polymer-induced coiling of Au nanowires. TEM images of (B) the original hydrophobic nanowires, (C and D) coiled nanowires embedded in PS-b-PAA micelles, (E and F) two typical Au nanosprings from different perspectives with arrows indicating their ends. (G and H) TEM image and schematic illustration of a typical Au nanospring that does not coil along its first loop but via a new loop formed by the folded double-wire. (I) Diameter distribution of the Au nanosprings.196 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Similarity in the growth of colloidal nanorod chains and stepwise polymerization. (A) The side view of the long side and the end of nanorod with PS decorated on the ends. (B and C) Dark field TEM images of the nanorod chains after 2 (B) and 24 (C) h assembly. Scale bar, 100 nm. (D) Variation in the number average degree of polymerization with time. (E) Dependence of chain growth rate on [M]0.37 Copyright 2010 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the approach to photothermally-triggered self-assembly of Au nanorods. TEM images of PNIPAM-decorated nanorods at room temperature (B), CTAB-capped nanorods at 45 °C (C), and self-assembled structures of PNIPAM-decorated nanorods at 45 °C (D and E).197 Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM images of the necklace-like Ni7Co3 nanorings with different assembled nanostructures.215 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) The structure of PPV:CdTe solar cells. (B) TEM image of the original CdTe NPs. SEM (C) and TEM (D) images of annealed PPV:CdTe composite film. The composite film was annealed at 320 °C for 60 min. (E) The effect of CdTe concentration on the PCE of the cells. (F) Current density–voltage characteristics of the solar cells with different structures. (G) Semi-logarithmic plots of the ITO–PEDOT:PSS–PPV:CdTe–ZnO–Al cells. (H) EQE versus wavelength of the same device as used for (G).225 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of water-dispersible CdTe NP–polymer composite architectures via two step phase transfers. PL spectra of aqueous CdTe NPs (B) and NP–polymer composite architectures (C) with the addition of different concentrations of Ag+.226 Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic illustration for fabricating CdTe-based binary SPs.227 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the magnetochromatic polydiacetylene by incorporation of Fe3O4 NPs. The subscripts x and y refer to the numbers of methylene groups.230 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) Magnetic control of the charge transport across the composites of Fe2O3–Au core–shell NP and PANI.231 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of a 1D composite photonic crystal by alternated assembly of titania and PHEMA-co-PGMA. (B) Sensitivity of the 1D photonic crystal towards water vapor. (C) Swelling–deswelling cycles of the 1D photonic crystal with water-vapor concentration at 0.0177.233 Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Schematic depiction of the reaction scheme. (B) Transformation of un-cross-linked, liquid like nanocomposites (left) into cross-linked solid shape memory polymers (right). The TEM image of the shape memory polymers (center) shows that the NPs are well dispersed and that the size of the silica NPs is 10 nm. (C) Pictures showing shape fixing at −10 °C and recovery at 60 °C.235 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of magneto-polymeric SPs. TEM images of magnetic NPs of (B) MnFe2O4 and (C) Fe3O4 and magneto-polymeric SPs containing (D) MnFe2O4 or (E) Fe3O4 NPs.252 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 26  Fluorophore displacement protein sensor array. (A) Removal of quenched fluorescent polymers by protein analytes. (B) Fluorescent pattern generation through differential release of fluorescent polymers from Au NPs.253 Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) TEM image of hydrophobic Cu2−xSe NPs. Inset: HRTEM image of one Cu2−xSe NP. (B) Hydrophilic decoration of Cu2−xSe NPs using amphiphilic copolymers. Comparison of photothermal destruction of human colorectal cancer cells without (C and D) and with (E and F) the addition of Cu2−xSe NPs.264 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Part of a themed issue on supramolecular polymers.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
