Radiative sky cooling of solar cells: fundamental modelling and cooling potential of single-junction devices  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01536A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01536A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 2085-2096Radiative sky cooling of solar cells: fundamental modelling and cooling potential of single-junction devices

        
          
            Jérémy 
            Dumoulin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Emmanuel 
            Drouard
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mohamed 
            Amara
          
        
      *a
aUniv Lyon, INSA Lyon, CNRS, ECL, UCBL, CPE Lyon, INL, UMR5270, 69621 Villeurbanne, France. E-mail: jeremy.dumoulin@insa-lyon.fr; mohamed.amara@insa-lyon.fr
bUniv Lyon, ECL, INSA Lyon, CNRS, UCBL, CPE Lyon, INL, UMR5270, 69130 Ecully, France
Received 
      14th October 2020
    , Accepted 10th March 2021First published on 11th March 2021AbstractRadiative sky cooling is a promising method to passively cool photovoltaic cells under outdoor conditions, thus improving their power conversion efficiency along with their lifetime. Analyses for some devices have suggested temperature reductions of several degrees thanks to this method, but they remain insufficient to estimate the cooling potential for different technologies according to their basic electrical and thermal properties. Furthermore, the ideal thermal emissivity profile that permits the best cooling has never been studied in detail. This paper investigates the effect of radiative sky cooling on single-junction solar cells from a general perspective. A numerical model based on detailed-balance theory and heat balance allows us to estimate the temperature and the electrical power output for different cells. A focus is made on devices based on three representative solar absorber materials: silicon, gallium arsenide, and perovskite. We first demonstrate that a broadband emissivity profile (a blackbody-like emissivity) overcomes the performance of a selective emissivity profile (with a non-zero emissivity only in the 8 μm to 13 μm atmospheric window) in most scenarios. Secondly, we quantify the potential of this ideal emissivity profile in terms of temperature reduction and electrical power enhancement. We study the influence of both the thermal emission and sub-band gap parasitic solar absorption on thermal management. This allows us to predict the possible performance enhancement of a device according to its initial emissivity profile. Material specific effects such as band gap dependance with temperature and non-radiative recombination are also discussed. The sensitivity to heat exchange on the rear and sides of a device is quantified. This study provides a fundamental basis for radiative sky cooling of photovoltaic cells and a guideline for further simulation-based studies.
1 Introduction
The energy conversion efficiency of single-junction photovoltaic (PV) cells has increased considerably over the years, reaching 26.7% (ref. 1) for silicon (Si) solar cells under standard testing conditions (25 °C, 1000 W m−2 with the reference AM 1.5 spectrum). However, their efficiency remains intrinsically limited to ∼33% by detailed-balance theory.2 For silicon-based cells, the theoretical limit is even lower (29.4% (ref. 3)). While solar cells absorb most incident solar energy, this results in a significant heating of the cells and of the entire solar module. Under outdoor conditions, Si modules typically reach 50–60 °C.4 These high temperatures cause efficiency and reliability issues, leading to a reduced energy output over the module's lifetime. For most technologies, the conversion efficiency is decreasing when the cell temperature rises. For example, the relative efficiency loss of crystalline silicon cells is about 0.45% for every 1 °C increase.5 High temperatures also accelerate degradation: it was reported that the ageing rate doubles for each 10 °C increase.6 Thus, there is considerable interest in developing cooling strategies for PV devices. Conventional PV cooling technologies include natural and forced ventilation, hydraulic cooling, heat pipe, phase-change materials and thermoelectric cooling.7–11 However, most of them require extra energy input or significantly increase the system complexity.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in the radiative sky cooling (RSC) strategy. As PV systems have a large surface area oriented towards the sky, they are naturally good candidates for this technique, which uses the transparency of the earth's atmosphere in the 8–13 μm range in order to enhance radiative heat transfer.12–14 In practice, improving RSC consists in tuning the optical absorption and thermal emission in the infrared range which makes it possible to also reduce the absorption of sub-band gap photons, referred hereafter as parasitic solar absorption. Such photons, which are present up to ∼4 μm, cannot be converted into electricity and can represent an important parasitic heat source. When considering the band gap energy of silicon and the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum (which has a total irradiance of 1000 W m−2) about 200 W m−2 of the incoming solar power lies in the sub-band gap range. Based solely on the optimisation of the optical properties, the RSC strategy thus allows to passively cool solar cells by controlling both radiative heat transfer with the sky and parasitic solar absorption. It is known to have an impressive cooling potential:14 by suppressing non-radiative heat transfer and minimising solar radiation by using a sun shade, a multi-layer photonic structure has been cooled down to 42 °C below the ambient temperature.15 However, as PV systems exhibit specific constraints, it is not yet clear what the cooling potential is and what are the pathways to fully exploit it.
Zhu et al.17 showed in 2014 that a 2D photonic crystal could lower the operating temperature of a doped crystalline silicon wafer by about 18 °C. Experimentally, a cooling of nearly 13 °C was achieved in 2015,18 and Long et al.19 also demonstrated a 2 °C temperature reduction under outdoor conditions. The aforementioned studies were conducted on silicon wafers, not on operational cells, but simulations from An et al.20 predict a 10 °C reduction also for thin silicon cells operating at maximum power point. On the other hand, Gentle and Smith21 noticed that the starting point for studies should be the solar module, not only the cell. Their simulations suggest that enhanced RSC of standard silicon modules could only provide less than 2 °C additional temperature reduction. Nonetheless, parasitic solar absorption were not taken into account in their approach. Simulations of silicon modules performed by Li et al.22 showed that a decrease of 9 °C is possible if parasitic solar absorption were entirely suppressed. Other recent theoretical work dedicated to silicon solar modules also indicate that enhanced RSC is worth pursuing, but predict slightly different cooling potentials.23,24 Furthermore, very few studies focus on other technologies than silicon devices. Sun et al.25 have shown that the difference in cooling potential between technologies is significant: for the Si-based device considered in their study, enhanced RSC leads to a cooling of 6 °C whereas for the considered CdTe and GaAs modules it reaches 10 °C and 2 °C, respectively. Safi et al.26 suggest that cells made from materials with a higher band gap energy than silicon could operate even below ambient temperature through enhanced RSC.
This wide variability in the predicted cooling potential is related to several factors:
(1) The considered solar technology and the modelling hypothesis. For instance, many studies do not take into account the coupling between electrical and thermal properties although the latter is intrinsically present in any solar cell. It must be considered to estimate the cell temperature at maximum power point, which can differ from the temperature in open-circuit by several degrees.27,28
(2) The thermal emissivity profiles used as starting and ending points. In fact, we predict in this work a temperature difference as high as 110 °C between the worst (no radiative cooling with the atmosphere and total parasitic solar absorption) and the ideal thermal emissivity profiles. As the initial emissivity contributing to RSC strongly depends upon technologies, so it is for the potential predicted through further optimisation. Measured absorption spectra on different solar absorber materials shows, for example, that parasitic absorption can be much higher for Si-based than for GaAs-based devices.25 Moreover, the absorption/emission profile is affected by the encapsulation layers22 or the cell's architecture.29,30 It is also not clear at this time which emissivity profile should be used to get the best out of radiative sky cooling. In fact, two profiles are generally presented in literature:31–33 a broadband profile with unity thermal absorption/emission above ∼4 μm and zero below in order to suppress unwanted solar absorption, and a selective profile with a thermal absorption/emission restricted to the main atmospheric transparency window. The absorbed and the emitted radiation from a surface for both profiles is shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, whether the one or the other is the ideal emissivity profile has never been studied in detail for PV devices.
 Fig. 1  Absorbed and emitted atmospheric irradiance of a cell with a broadband (top) and a selective (bottom) thermal emissivity. For illustration purpose, we assume an ambient temperature Ta = 15 °C and a cell operating at T = 5 °C. The dotted line of the graph on the top shows the thermal emission of a black body at 15 °C. The absorbed irradiance (blue) corresponds to the US standard atmosphere.16 
(3) Environmental conditions used as inputs (solar irradiance, atmospheric irradiance, level of convection relative to wind speed, ambient temperature). For example, several studies use the AM1.5 standard spectrum with an atmospheric irradiance computed from the Gemini observatory data.34 However, this combination is not close to realistic operating conditions since the standard solar spectrum is based on the US standard atmosphere.35
In this paper, we propose a general framework to study RSC based on a fundamental thermal and electrical model of single-junction solar systems. We also introduce reference climatic conditions to estimate the potential of RSC close to real operating conditions. Our approach aims to explain, describe, and predict the impact of RSC on the temperature and also on the electrical output for a wide variety of single-junction devices, by avoiding material and design peculiarities as a first step. Although based on basic assumptions, it includes the specificities of PV systems that must be taken into account to assess their thermal and electrical behaviour. Indeed, PV systems are out-of-equilibrium systems where part of the absorbed solar energy is converted into work and where luminescent radiation is present. As mentioned above, the coupling between thermal and electrical properties must be considered to estimate the cell temperature. It is also important to take into account a possible change in the temperature coefficient, which may, for example, arise from a change in band-to-band absorption properties.36
We first use our model to assess the ideal emissivity profile for single-junction PV devices. Then, we determine the potential benefit of the latter for solar cells with three different band gap energies, representative of relevant technologies: silicon (Si), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3), referred hereafter as perovskite. The benefit, expressed in terms of temperature decrease and electrical power enhancement, is computed as a function of the initial emissivity profile of the device in order to estimate the potential for a wide range of solar cells/modules. The influence on this potential of band gap change with temperature, non-radiative recombination, and imperfect band-to-band absorption is studied. Finally, the effect of heat transfer that occur at the rear and sides of the PV device is also quantified.
2 Methods
In this section, we: (1) formulate the thermal and electrical model used to compute the temperature and the electrical output of the solar cell from environmental conditions; (2) introduce a “step-model” for the emissivity profile that allows us to decouple the contribution of parasitic solar absorption and radiative exchange with the atmosphere; (3) describe and justify the reference conditions chosen in this work in order to estimate the potential benefit of enhanced RSC, i.e. its ability to lower the device temperature and increase its electrical power output.
The presented model describes the thermal and electrical behaviour of single-junction cells with ideal electrical and optical properties. An extended model is presented in the appendix to study the influence of other major effects present in real solar cells in a second stage, such as band gap change with temperature, non-radiative recombination, imperfect band-to-band absorption, and heat transfer on the rear side.
2.1 Thermal and electrical modelling
The electrical output power is calculated using a detailed-balance approach, in combination with a heat balance model to obtain the operating temperature. Steady state conditions and perfect impedance matching are assumed, so that the solar cell is operating at maximum power point (MPP). To assess the latter we first calculate the current–voltage characteristic while finding the equilibrium temperature for each voltage. Then, the MPP is extracted.
Solar cell models derived from the principle of detailed-balance are powerful to gain insights on many phenomenon, by describing a near-ideal solar cells with a restricted set of parameters. In the classical Shockley–Queisser approach, the band gap energy Eg is the only parameter that defines a solar cell.2 Assuming purely radiative band-to-band recombination, perfect absorption of photons with energies above the band gap, one electron–hole pair per absorbed photon, ideal selective contacts and no resistive losses, the produced surface power density Pelec, is expressed via (1)with V being the internal voltage, q the elementary charge, Eg the band gap energy, T the cell temperature, E the photon energy. As there is no fundamental dependency between the band gap energy and the temperature, a constant energy gap is taken as a first approximation. In general, the solar cell is illuminated by the sun and the atmosphere. Here ϕin denotes the incoming photon flux of the two contributions. The second term ϕem refers to the luminescence flux emitted by the solar cell as required by the detailed balance between absorption and emission of photons. It is given by the generalised Planck's law,37 as long as the temperature and the quasi-Fermi level splitting is constant over the thickness of the cell (2)where ℏ is the reduced Planck's constant, c the speed of light. The eqn (2) describes an hemispherical emission of photons restricted to the front side,38 by means of a perfect reflector on the rear. The maximum energy conversion efficiency given by this approach is 33,7% for a band gap energy of 1.34 eV under standard test conditions. This value is slightly different from that obtained with the original Shockley–Queisser model (i.e. an ideal diode model) because we do not assume thermal equilibrium with a surrounding blackbody radiation and do not approximate carrier statistics by the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution. This makes our model more general and valid in a wider range of temperature.
The cell temperature T is calculated using the balance between heat sources (l.h.s) and heat sinks (r.h.s) Pbbin + Pthin = Pbbem + Pthem + Pelec + Pcon(3)
Convection is described by the Pcon term. It acts as a heat sink as long as the device temperature T lies above the ambient temperature Ta Pcon = h(T − Ta)(4)with h the convective heat transfer coefficient39 of the front side, in W m−2 K−1. In eqn (3), we consider that the heat transfer is restricted to the front side only. The extended model presented in the appendix makes it possible to also take into account convection and radiation on the back and sides of the device.
The Pbbin term denotes the power density absorbed by band-to-band transitions (5)
Part of this energy is converted into electricity Pelec, according to the previously established equation, while another part Pbbem is emitted back to the surrounding due to luminescence (6)
The device is also required to absorb thermal radiation from the atmosphere and the sun. We assume that these absorptions occur only for photons with energies below the band gap energy, as required by an ideal solar cell with perfect band-to-band absorption. Hence, we allow a non-zero thermal absorptance α(E) only for energies E < Eg (7)
Accordingly to Kirchhoff's law, the device also emits thermal radiation with a thermal emissivity ε equal to its thermal absorptance (8)
Thermal emission is always present in solar cells due to free carriers and lattice. Even though it might be weak without optimisation and lead to poor radiative cooling properties, one can shape the emissivity profile by photonic microstructures or by adding a radiative cooling layer as depicted in Fig. 2. In the latter case our model remains valid as long as there is a perfect thermal coupling between the solar cell and the cooling layer.
 Fig. 2  Problem schematic description with the parameters of the model. 
To summarise, the proposed modelling allows us to assess both the electrical output power and the cell temperature at MPP, as a function of the environmental conditions and the fundamental parameters involved in the thermal and electrical modelling. Hence, it is very general and does not require any empirical parameters unlike other approaches, such as a temperature sensitivity coefficient.25 This makes it a powerful tool to explain and predict the influence of RSC on a wide range of systems. In particular, it allows to predict the temperature reduction due to enhanced RSC, according to a change in the thermal emissivity profile ε(λ).
2.2 Thermal emissivity model
Changing the emissivity in the thermal wavelength range (i.e. for energies smaller than Eg) has a two-fold influence on thermal management. First, parasitic solar absorption can occur below ∼4 μm if the thermal emissivity is high in this range. At longer wavelengths, the emissivity profile influences the balance between emission and absorption of atmospheric radiation. To study the impact of these two phenomena, we introduce an appropriate step-model for the emissivity ε, as depicted in Fig. 2. For convenience, it is represented as a function of wavelength rather than energy (9)with λg being the threshold wavelength associated with the band gap energy Eg. The solar spectrum has almost no overlap with the thermal emission and absorption spectrum (inset of Fig. 2). By setting λ1 to 4 μm it is thus possible to decouple the contribution of parasitic solar absorption (value of ε1) and radiative heat exchange with the atmosphere (value of ε2). When taking λ1 = 4 μm and λ2 → ∞ together with ε1 = 0 and ε2 = 1, the broadband profile is retrieved. When now setting λ1 = 8 μm and λ2 = 13 μm in addition to ε1 = 0 and ε2 = 1, the selective profile is retrieved. It should be noted that the radiative heat exchange must be calculated well beyond 20 μm as, for example, a blackbody at 25 °C emits more than 25% of its energy beyond this wavelength. In this study, λ2 was therefore set to 100 μm for the broadband case. Sensitivity to this threshold wavelength is studied in more detail in Section 3.
2.3 Reference environmental conditions
Choosing a relevant set of environmental conditions is of significance to assess the potential of a cooling strategy. Indeed, the predicted temperature reduction attributed to radiative sky cooling greatly changes according to the level of solar and atmospheric irradiance, ambient temperature, and wind speed. Defining reference climatic conditions is also essential to compare the potential between technologies.
To show the potential in terms of temperature reduction and power enhancement, we require for these conditions to be favourable to RSC while remaining close to real operating conditions. To follow the path of the photovoltaic community and respect these constraints, we choose the standard ASTM G-173-03 spectrum for solar irradiance. Accordingly, the atmospheric hemispherical irradiance is given by the US standard atmosphere and an ambient temperature of 15 °C (Fig. 1). In the 4–20 μm range, data for the atmosphere is taken from X. Yu and C. Chen.16 Beyond 20 μm, we assume an opaque atmosphere. The convection level is set to h = 5 W m−2 K−1 (natural convection40) in the first place, i.e. when radiative cooling is of primary importance. The influence of variable convection, solar irradiance, and transparency of the atmosphere is discussed elsewhere in the results section.
3 Results and discussion
In this section, we first compare the operating temperature and the electrical output power provided by the selective and the broadband emissivity profiles in different scenarios, in order to determine the ideal profile for single-junction cells. Then, we also allow for parasitic sub-band gap absorption. Using the step-model emissivity, we assess the cooling potential for Si, GaAs, and perovskite based devices according to their initial thermal emissivity profile. Lastly, we study the sensitivity of this potential to major effects that are generally present in real devices (i.e. with non-ideal electrical and optical properties, or rear/lateral heat transfer). As a case study, we consider Si-based devices.
3.1 Broadband against selective thermal emission
In order to asses the potential of radiative sky cooling for solar cells it is first necessary to know which thermal emissivity profile provides the best benefit. As mentioned in the introduction, there are two competitors for the latter: the broadband profile (ε1 = 0, ε2 = 1, λ1 = 4 μm, λ2 = 100 μm) and the selective profile (ε1 = 0, ε2 = 1, λ1 = 8 μm, λ2 = 13 μm). Whether one or the other is the ideal thermal emissivity is not trivial because solar cells are required to operate in a wide range of climatic conditions and may exhibit a different thermal and electrical behaviour. As a starting point, we investigate the influence of the cell band gap under the reference climatic conditions defined in the method section. We then study the effect of solar and atmospheric irradiance on the cell temperature and electrical power output provided by both profiles.

Fig. 3 depicts the cell temperature as a function of its energy band gap, for a selective and a broadband thermal emissivity. Under the reference spectral conditions chosen here, it can be seen that the broadband profile allows lower operating temperatures than the selective profile as long as the band gap is smaller than ∼2.3 eV. This energy gap also roughly coincides with the limit between the above-ambient (T > Ta) and the below-ambient (T < Ta) temperature regime for both emissivity profiles, as shown in insets. This is due to the fact that, when the cell temperature is above ambient, the broadband profile always offers a higher net radiative power Pthem − Pthin than the selective profile, as in this case the difference between the heat emitted by thermal radiation and the heat absorbed from the atmosphere is positive regardless of the wavelength (upper graph of Fig. 1). On the other hand, the selective profile restricts the radiative exchange to wavelengths inside the 8–13 μm atmospheric window and therefore provides a higher net radiative power Pthem − Pthin in the below-ambient temperature regime (lower graph of Fig. 1). Thus, selective emission is no longer of interest when the temperature is restricted above ambient due, for example, to heat generated by solar absorption. It is also noticeable to see from the inset of Fig. 3 that the broadband profile allows lower temperatures slightly below ambient as it takes advantage of the other regions of transparency in the atmospheric spectrum.
 Fig. 3  Operating temperature for a selective and a broadband thermal emissivity profile as a function of the cell energy band gap. The temperature is calculated without convection (upper graph) and with a natural convection level (lower graph). The energy gaps at 25 °C used in this work, for Si,41 GaAs,41 and perovskite42 cells are also represented. 
Convective heat transfer has a two-fold impact on the results of Fig. 3. First, it reduces the temperature difference between the selective and the broadband profile. Whereas, without convection (upper graph), the broadband profile allows a temperature 67 °C lower for a 1.12 eV band gap (Si), the decrease is only 18 °C when natural convection is present (lower graph). The difference is greater for higher band gaps: for GaAs and perovskite based cells it goes from 48 °C to 11 °C, and from 35 °C to 8 °C, respectively. More importantly, the difference is strongly reduced for cells that operate below the ambient temperature. For example, for a band gap energy Eg = 3.0 eV, the difference goes from 31 °C without convection to only 2 °C with it. Second, the reader's attention is drawn to the fact that convection acts differently in the above-ambient and below-ambient temperature regime. In the first case, convection acts as a heat sink and therefore allows lower temperatures. In the second case, convection becomes a heat source which limits the temperature reduction achievable with RSC.
It should also be noted that the level of convection h slightly changes the band gap energy where the selective profile overcomes the broadband profile, but does not affect the band gap where the transition to the below-ambient regime occurs. This is due to the fact that the convective flow vanishes when the cell temperature tends to the ambient temperature.
Thus, a selective profile is only appropriate for cells with a large band gap energy (Eg ≥ 2.3 eV) and require the suppression of convection. Indeed this combination would allow cell temperatures well below the ambient temperature, even under strong solar irradiance as considered here. As terrestrial solar cells generally have much smaller band gaps, the broadband profile appears to be more profitable and convection should not be suppressed. However, since PV devices can be subjected to a wide range of environmental conditions, especially variable solar and atmospheric irradiance, it is important to gain more insights on those.
To highlight their influence, Fig. 4 shows the difference in temperature ΔT and electrical power output ΔPelec between cells with a selective emissivity profile and cells with the broadband profile. For ΔT > 0 and ΔPelec < 0, the broadband profile performs better. The differences are computed as a function of solar and atmospheric irradiance. Solar irradiance varies according to the location, the season, and the time of the day, reaching up to ∼1000 W m−2 on clear days, even in mid-latitude sites on summer days.43 Atmospheric irradiance is mainly related to the transparency of the atmosphere in the 8–13 μm range: the higher the transparency, the lower the total atmospheric irradiance. As shown on the vertical axis of Fig. 4, it can vary by about 140 W m−2 between a perfectly transparent atmosphere in 8–13 μm range (lower bound of the vertical axis) and an opaque atmosphere (upper bound of the vertical axis), when the ambient temperature is 25 °C. This order of magnitude is in good agreement with pyrgeometer measurements in warm seasons.44 The relationship between solar and atmospheric irradiance is not straightforward, we therefore consider a wide range of possible combinations in Fig. 4 but we ask the reader to bear in mind that both are correlated to some extent. Under clear sky conditions, the atmospheric transparency is mainly affected by humidity,33,45 therefore radiative sky cooling is generally considered to be more effective in hot and arid climates. Conversely, solar irradiance is expected to decrease as the humidity increases because water vapor has several absorption bands in the spectral range of solar radiation.33 Under cloudy sky conditions, a similar trend is expected because an increase in cloud cover fraction is generally associated with an increase in atmospheric irradiance, but a decrease in solar irradiance.46 For overcast conditions, the atmosphere can be considered entirely opaque in the 8–13 μm range.33,47 On the other hand, solar radiation does not fall to zero under overcast sky conditions, but may remain as high as 25% of its level under clear sky conditions.46 Cloud cover can under certain conditions even slightly increase solar irradiance.48
 Fig. 4  Difference in performance (operating temperature and output power) between a selective and a broadband profile as a function of solar and atmospheric irradiance levels. The thick solid line shows the conditions for which the two profiles have the same cooling properties. The results are calculated without convection, for Si (upper graphs), GaAs (middle graphs), and perovskite (lower graphs) cells. The solar spectrum, modelled by a 5527 °C (5800 K) blackbody, is normalised to give the desired intensity. The atmospheric irradiance is modelled by a blackbody at Ta = 25 °C outside the 8–13 μm transparency window, and by a greybody within this range. The irradiance in the 8–13 μm window is modified by changing the atmospheric emissivity between 0 (perfectly transparent atmosphere) and 1 (opaque atmosphere), according to the model proposed by Granqvist and Hjortsberg.14 
Even in the scenario of Fig. 4, a case rather favourable to the selective profile (high ambient temperature, no convection), the benefit provided by the selective emissivity profile appears to be small compared to that provided by the broadband profile. It can be seen that the broadband profile allows better performance as soon as the solar irradiance exceeds 310 W m−2 for Si, 430 W m−2 for GaAs, and 570 W m−2 for perovskite cells, even if the atmosphere is completely transparent in the 8–13 μm range. This threshold is too low to benefit the selective profile. Under 1000 W m−2 solar irradiance, the latter would lead to temperatures up to 40–60 °C higher than the broadband profile. This would accelerate degradation and lead to a significant peak power loss: up to 30 W m−2 for Si, 20 W m−2 for GaAs, and 15 W m−2 for perovskite. This loss is high compared to the gain of 1–2 W m−2 allowed by the selective profile under lower illumination. Obviously, the more opaque the atmosphere is, the more the threshold illumination decreases. However, it is important to notice that this behaviour is in favor of the broadband profile. Especially, if solar irradiance is low due to cloud cover, then the atmospheric irradiance will generally be high.33 One could argue that the threshold illumination is rather high in certain situations, e.g. for mid-latitude regions in winter or autumn, but the ambient temperature is then generally much lower which causes the threshold illumination to further drop. For example, additional simulation shows that the threshold for Si is only ∼140 W m−2 when the ambient temperature is 15 °C and the atmosphere is entirely transparent between 8 μm and 13 μm.
This shows that the broadband profile is the ideal emissivity for single-junction cells operating in terrestrial conditions, as it significantly lowers their temperature and increases their electrical power output in most scenarios. If we allow for convection, we expect even better performance for the broadband profile.
3.2 Cooling potential of ideal single-junction cells
We demonstrated that the broadband profile is the ideal one. This allows us to assess the potential of RSC. Once again, this potential depends on environmental conditions, and we therefore consider the reference conditions to begin with. More importantly, the potential depends on the initial thermal emissivity profile, that is the emissivity for wavelengths λ greater than λg. We use the previously introduced step-model to study the influence of the latter by decoupling the effect of sub-band gap solar absorption (emissivity ε1 below 4 μm) and radiative heat exchange with the atmosphere (emissivity ε2 above 4 μm).

Fig. 5 shows the heating and the electrical power loss attributable to these two phenomena with respect to the ideal emissivity profile, i.e. ε1 = 0 and ε2 = 1 (top left corner of the graphs), for Si, GaAs, and perovskite cells. In all cases, the importance of tailoring thermal emission can be stressed. A total suppression of thermal emission together with strong parasitic solar absorption (ε1 = 1, ε2 = 0) would lead to a temperature increase up to 110 °C and a power loss of 50 W m−2. This figure also shows that a reduction of nearly 10 °C is achievable thanks to the broadband profile even if the device has already a reasonably good emissivity profile (ε1 ∼ 0.2 and ε2 ∼ 0.8). This would increase the peak power by almost 5 W m−2 even for ideal single-junction cells as considered here (∼ +0.5% absolute energy conversion efficiency). As explained in Section 3.3, a higher potential is expected for non-ideal cells operating far from the radiative limit due to their higher operating temperatures and temperature sensitivity coefficients.
 Fig. 5  Difference in performance (temperature on the upper part and output power on the lower part) between an ideal broadband profile and an emissivity profile that includes parasitic solar absorption below 4 μm (ε1 ≠ 0) and less thermal emission beyond 4 um (ε2 ≠ 1). The results are given for Si, GaAs and perovskite cells with a natural convection level (h = 5 W m−2 K−1). This illustrate the potential of enhanced radiative sky cooling as a function of the initial emissivity profile. The solid lines represents the isothermal (top) and isopower (bottom) curves. 

Fig. 5 also highlights different trends for the three technologies. For silicon cells, increasing the emissivity above 4 μm appears to be the main optical lever for cooling: as a rule of thumb, a 10% increase above 4 μm is equivalent to a 20% decrease in emissivity below 4 μm. For GaAs and perovskite cells, the temperature decrease is more sensitive to parasitic solar absorption because of their higher band gap.
The cooling potential also depends on how a real emissivity profile could be tailored to fit the emission thresholds of the ideal case, namely the values of λ1 and λ2. Fig. 6 describes the temperature difference T − Tideal between a cell with a cell with a variable threshold wavelength λ1 and a cell with the ideal broadband profile (λ1 = 4 μm and λ2 = 100 μm), for different values of λ2. Here, ε1 and ε2 are kept to 0 and 1, respectively. The graph shows clearly a minimum for λ1 = 4 μm. In order to keep a temperature difference of less than 1 °C with this minimum (the ideal profile), it is sufficient to have λ1 between ∼2.5 and ∼4.5 μm. Additionally, λ2 should be greater than 40 μm. Increasing the emission between 40 μm and 60 μm only brings an additional temperature reduction of ∼0.3 °C.
 Fig. 6  Temperature increase of a Si cell due to a non-ideal thermal emissivity profile: threshold wavelength for suppression of parasitic solar absorption λ1 different from 4 μm, thermal emission restricted to a wavelength λ2 below 100 μm. The reference spectral conditions are used. 
3.3 Towards real devices: influence of non-ideal cell properties and back-side heat transfer
The results of Sections 3.1 and 3.2 can be used as a fundamental basis for understanding and optimising radiative sky cooling of single-junction PV devices. In particular, they provide an order of magnitude of the potential of this strategy for three common technologies. However, the results are quantitatively accurate for devices that meet the assumptions of the thermal and electrical modelling. In this part, we address the effect of first-order phenomenom that may occur in real devices. First, we investigate independently non-ideal cell properties. These are: (1) band gap temperature dependence; (2) non-radiative recombination; (3) imperfect band-to-band absorption. Then, we study the influence of additional heat transfers at the back and sides of the PV device. Si-based devices with an ideal broadband emissivity are considered here as a case study.
The temperature variation attributable to non-ideal cell properties is pictured in Fig. 7. This graph shows the temperature difference T − Tref between a cell with (cases A, B, and C) or without these effects (reference case, i.e. T = Tref), as well as the various heat sinks and sources. Case D shows the temperature difference when all the effects are considered together.
 Fig. 7  Influence on relative operating temperature T − Tref (red dots) and heat flows attributable to different first-order effects present in a real Si solar cell. The reference case (T = Tref) shows the different heat sources and heat sinks for an ideal cell described by the model presented in the methods section. Case A shows the effect of the temperature dependence of the band gap. Case B shows the effect of non-radiative recombination (Qlume = 1.6%, the radiative efficiency of the highest performing Si cell produced so far49) and case C the effect of non-ideal solar absorption (αbb = 90%, representative of a 22% efficient PERC solar cell50). Case D results in the addition of these three phenomena. In each case, a broadband profile together with the reference environmental conditions (h = 5 W m−2 K−1, Ta = 15 °C) were chosen. 
In a first step, the constant band gap energy is replaced by a temperature-dependent energy gap (case A) for crystalline silicon.41 As expected, the temperature is increased but the difference is rather small (+0.3 °C) compared to the other effects.
Second, we introduce the external luminescence efficiency Qlume to take non-radiative recombination into account. This quantity is defined as the proportion of total dark current that leads to radiative emission from the cell (cf. Appendix). As can be seen from Fig. 7, the temperature of a state-of-the-art Si cell with a high Qlume value (case B) is already 6 °C higher than the temperature predicted for a cell operating within the radiative limit (Qlume = 100%, reference case). This is because non-radiative recombination reduce the operating voltage of the cell.2,51 Therefore, the electrical power extracted is also reduced and the heat extracted by luminescence becomes negligible compared to other heat sinks.
Next, the absorbed fraction of photons which carry energies higher than the band gap, αbb (i.e. the band-to-band absorption coefficient), is changed to a realistic value (case C). At 25 °C, a perfect solar absorption (αbb = 1.0) leads to a short-circuit current of approx. 44 mA cm−2. State-of-the-art cells49 reach currents of 42.6 mA cm−2 whereas industrial cells50 reach currents close to 40 mA cm−2, which corresponds to an already good absorption coefficient αbb ∼ 0.9. In this case, the temperature is significantly reduced by 4 °C.
Altogether (case D), however, the temperature is higher than for an ideal cell. As lower quality cells generally have comparable solar absorption due to anti-reflection coatings and pyramid texturing but higher non-radiative recombination rates, higher temperatures are expected for these cells. In addition, effects such as resistance loss or charge carrier collection loss,27 not considered here, should further reduce the energy conversion efficiency and thus increase the cell temperature. Therefore, we expect an even higher absolute temperature reduction achievable with RSC for most solar cells. Non-radiative recombination are also known to significantly affect the temperature sensitivity coefficient,36i.e. the relative electrical power loss associated with a change in the cell temperature. The calculated temperature coefficient within the radiative limit (−0.15% K−1) is lower than the values generally reported for current Si devices (typically between −0.29% K−1 and −0.45% K−1). For most real devices, we therefore also expect a higher electrical power enhancement than the fundamental value shown in Fig. 5.
Finally, we analyse the influence of heat transfer that are present on the back and sides of the device. As a first approximation, this effect can be described by introducing an effective heat exchange coefficient h* that accounts for both natural convection and thermal radiation39 (see the Appendix for further details), because the radiative exchange of surfaces that do not face the sky is also limited by the ambient temperature. In essence, an increase in convection or radiation at the back and/or sides has the same effect as an increase in front-side convection: a lower device temperature in the above-ambient regime, and therefore a lower cooling potential of RSC. This also indicates that the broadband profile remains the ideal thermal emissivity, even in presence of these additional heat transfers, because the below-ambient regime would be more difficult to achieve.

Fig. 8 shows the reduction in cooling potential as a function of h* for a Si cell. The graph represents the temperature decrease that can be achieved by switching from an already good emissivity profile (ε1 = 0.3 and ε2 = 0.8) to the ideal profile (a gain of about 10 °C is expected if we allow only heat transfers at the front, i.e. for h* = 0). Although the potential decreases when the rear/side heat transfer increases, it remains above 3 °C even for h* = 15 W m−2 K−1. This difference is almost the same when considering a thick device with lateral heat transfers (difference between the lower limits of the curves in Fig. 8). More importantly, this reduction remains of the same order of magnitude than an improvement in h* above ∼10 W m−2 K−1. In this sense, RSC appears to be a complementary lever to other passive cooling strategies even for thick systems.
 Fig. 8  Influence of heat transfers (convective and/or radiative) present on the back and the sides of the PV device. The dashed lines represent the temperature of a flat device (negligible lateral heat transfers) and the dot-dashed lines the temperature of a thick device (i.e. a Si cell encapsulated into a standard module: 156 mm2 × 5 mm (surface × depth). Both are calculated for a system without enhanced radiative sky cooling (red area) and with an ideal broadband profile (blue area). The case without improved sky cooling already shows good optical properties on the front side (30% of parasitic solar absorption together with a 80% thermal emissivity above 4 μm). Results are calculated for a device based on silicon, operating under the reference environmental conditions. 
4 Conclusions
In summary, a fundamental modelling framework was presented to study the influence of radiative sky cooling on the thermal and electrical behaviour of single-junction solar cells. Thanks to this model, we demonstrate that a broadband emissivity profile provides the best performance for radiative sky cooling of single-junction devices operating under terrestrial conditions. Compared to a selective emissivity, the broadband profile allows much lower temperatures (up to 60 °C lower with a 1000 W m−2 solar illumination) as long as the solar illumination exceeds ∼300 W m−2 for a solar absorber with a 1.12 eV band gap (Si), and ∼500 W m−2 for an absorber with a 1.64 eV band gap (perovskite). This allows for a significantly higher electrical power output than a selective emissivity (up to 30 W m−2 with a 1000 W m−2 illumination).
For near-ideal cells (i.e. operating close to the radiative limit and with perfect band-to-band absorption), our simulations show that an improvement in RSC can easily reduce the cell temperature by 10 °C. This would increase their power output by more than 5 W m−2. For Si-based devices with high non-radiative recombination, our model predicts an even higher temperature reduction. This cooling potential appears to be unchanged as long as the thermal emissivity profile fits the broadband profile up to 40 μm, meaning that optimising the emissivity beyond this limit will result in a temperature decrease of less than 0.5 °C. The potential is reduced when lateral and rear side heat transfer is important and/or for thick devices, as they already operate in a lower temperature regime. However, the radiative sky cooling strategy remains important to cool them down further. Even in the worst scenario (a thick device with initially good thermal management on the front and the rear), a broadband profile can further reduce the temperature by almost 3 °C.
Parasitic sub-band gap solar absorption play an important role in thermal management of single-junction cells. For Si cells, we show that a 20% reduction in parasitic absorption produces roughly the same effect as a 10% increase in emissivity above 4 μm. For GaAs and perovskite cells, the effect is even more pronounced. In order to predict in detail the cooling potential of a device according to its initial thermal emissivity, we have developed graphs accounting for both sub-band gap solar absorption below 4 μm and thermal emission above 4 μm. These can be used as a guide for device optimisation or for further simulation-based studies. Our model could also easily be extended to study the fundamental thermal and electrical behaviour of other PV technologies, such as multi-junction solar cells.
5 Appendix
To gain insights on additional phenomena in real devices, one can extend the detailed-balance model to a more general situation by the use of external parameters.51 First, if we allow for non-radiative recombination to happen, we include the external luminescence efficiency Qlume, which is defined as2 (10)with Jbbgen being the current density generated under dark conditions by surrounding blackbody radiation in thermal equilibrium with the cell (11)and Jradrec(V) the current density loss due to radiative recombination (12)
Quantities Jnon-radgen and Jnon-radrec(V) refer respectively to the generation and recombination current due to non-radiative effects. The total current density J under illumination can be written as (13)where Jin is the current density generated by absorption of photons from the sun and the surrounding atmosphere (14)
The electrical power Pelec then rewrites as (15)within the limit where the approximation of eqn (13) is valid (the typical one diode model with non-radiative recombination), we see that the quantity Qlume corresponds to the proportion of total dark current that leads to radiative emission from the cell.51
Second, we switch from the ideal band-to-band absorptance equal to the step function H(E − Eg), to a more realistic situation where band-to-band absorption is less efficient and the temperature dependence of the band gap energy of the material is taken into account as αbbH(E − Eg(T)), with αbb between 0 and 1 (16)
The ideal expression (eqn (1)) is retrieved by setting αbb = 1, Qlume = 1 and by ignoring the temperature dependance of the band gap. As seen in Table 1, this improved detailed-balance model is sufficient to describe the open-circuit voltage Voc of a state-of-the-art Si solar cell with only ∼2% relative error.
Table 1 Comparison between electrical parameters obtained with our detailed-balance model (ideal and extended) and electrical parameters of a real Si cell. The value of Qlume was taken from ref. 49, and the value of αbb was chosen to fit the short-circuit density jsc




Model

E
g, (eV)

α
bb


Q
lume


J
sc, (mA cm−2)

V
oc, (V)
Efficiency, (%)




Ideal
1.1
1.0
1.0
44.22
0.860
33.0


Extended
1.1
0.965
0.016
42.65
0.754
27.4


exp.49
1.1
—
0.016
42.65
0.738
26.7




To take the heat exchange on the back and sides of the device into account, we add two parameters to the heat balance. First, a combined heat transfer coefficient h* is introduced for these surfaces to account for both convection and radiation. As a first approximation, the latter effect is limited by the ambient temperature Ta because the rear/sides do not face the sky, so that the net heat flux at the rear/sides Pr/s is39 Pr/s = Sr/sh*(T − Ta)(17)with Sr/s the sum of the rear and side surfaces of the device. The combined heat transfer coefficient h* writes as h* = hr/s + εr/sσ(T + Ta)(T2 + Ta2)(18)hr/s being the convective heat transfer at the rear/sides, εr/s the emissivity, σ the Stefan–Boltzmann constant. For a perfectly emitting surface (εr/s = 1), the second term of eqn (18) is only 6 W m−2 K−1 when T = Ta = 25 °C. When taking T = 100 °C and Ta = 25 °C, it remains less than 10 W m−2 K−1 so that the h* is in the range 5–15 W m−2 K−1 for natural convection. Finally, a geometric factor s is introduced. It represents the ratio between the front surface and the total surface, so that the heat balance (eqn (3)) simply rewrites as Pbbin + Pthin = Pbbem + Pthem + Pelec + Pcon + (s−1 − 1)h*(T − Ta)(19)
From eqn (19), we see that this additional heat transfer acts in the same way than front convection (eqn (4)).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge support from the CNRS/IN2P3 Computing Center (Lyon – France) for providing computing and data-processing resources needed for this work. We also would like to thank Pr. Mustapha Lemiti for the valuable discussions about silicon solar cell material properties.
Notes and references
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2020, 28, 3–15 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1184–1191 Search PubMed .
L. Weiss, M. Amara and C. Ménézo, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2016, 24, 12–27 CrossRef .
E. Skoplaki and J. A. Palyvos, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 614–624 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Otth and R. Ross, 29th Institute of Environmental Sciences, Annual Technical Meeting,  1983, pp. 121–126 Search PubMed .
A. W. Kandeal, A. K. Thakur, M. R. Elkadeem, M. F. Elmorshedy, Z. Ullah, R. Sathyamurthy and S. W. Sharshir, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 273, 122772 CrossRef .
S. Nižetić, E. Giama and A. M. Papadopoulos, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 155, 301–323 CrossRef .
S. Nižetić, A. M. Papadopoulos and E. Giama, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 149, 334–354 CrossRef .
A. Shukla, K. Kant, A. Sharma and P. H. Biwole, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 275–286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Du, J. Darkwa and G. Kokogiannakis, Sol. Energy, 2013, 97, 238–254 CrossRef CAS .
F. Trombe, Comptes rendus de l'Académie des sciences, 1963, 256, 735–738 Search PubMed .
S. Catalanotti, V. Cuomo, G. Piro, D. Ruggi, V. Silvestrini and G. Troise, Sol. Energy, 1975, 17, 83–89 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist and A. Hjortsberg, J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 52, 4205–4220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Zhu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–5 Search PubMed .
X. Yu and C. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 209, 110459 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, A. Raman, K. X. Wang, M. A. Anoma and S. Fan, Optica, 2014, 1, 32 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, A. P. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12282–12287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Long, Y. Yang and L. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 197, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. An, C. Sheng and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17073–17083 RSC .
A. R. Gentle and G. B. Smith, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 150, 39–42 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Shi, K. Chen, L. Zhu and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 774–782 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vaillon, O. Dupré, R. B. Cal and M. Calaf, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–9 CAS .
G. Perrakis, A. C. Tasolamprou, G. Kenanakis, E. N. Economou, S. Tzortzakis and M. Kafesaki, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 18548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, T. J. Silverman, Z. Zhou, M. R. Khan, P. Bermel and M. A. Alam, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2017, 7, 566–574 Search PubMed .
T. S. Safi and J. N. Munday, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A1120–A1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Couderc, M. Amara and M. Lemiti, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2016, 6, 1123–1131 Search PubMed .
B. Guillo Lohan, M. Amara, A. Kaminski-Cachopo and M. Lemiti, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Vogt, H. Holst, M. Winter, R. Brendel and P. P. Altermatt, Energy Procedia, 2015, 77, 215–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and A. Chowdhury, Sol. Energy, 2019, 183, 410–418 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hossain and M. Gu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Sun, Z. Zhou, M. A. Alam and P. Bermel, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 997–1015 Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, A. Aili, Y. Zhai, S. Xu, G. Tan, X. Yin and R. Yang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 021306 Search PubMed .

          G. Observatory, IR Transmission Spectra, https://www.gemini.edu/observing/telescopes-and-sites/sites#Transmission, accessed: 2020-09-22 Search PubMed.
C. A. Gueymard, D. Myers and K. Emery, Sol. Energy, 2002, 73, 443–467 CrossRef .
O. Dupré, R. Vaillon and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 92–100 CrossRef .
P. Würfel and W. Ruppel, J. Lumin., 1981, 24–25, 925–928 CrossRef .
A. Marti and G. L. Arafijo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 43, 203–222 CrossRef CAS .

          F. P. Incropera, D. P. DeWitt, T. L. Bergman and A. S. Lavine, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 6th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. Armstrong and W. G. Hurley, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2010, 30, 1488–1495 CrossRef .
R. Pässler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 1–18 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, A. M. Soufiani, A. Gentle, F. Huang, A. Ho-Baillie and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 061905 CrossRef .
T. Huld, R. Müller and A. Gambardella, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1803–1815 CrossRef .
A. Viúdez-Mora, M. Costa-Surós, J. Calbó and J. A. González, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2015, 120, 199–214 Search PubMed .
X. Yin, R. Yang, G. Tan and S. Fan, Science, 2020, 370, 786–791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kasten and G. Czeplak, Sol. Energy, 1980, 24, 177–189 CrossRef .
M. Martin and P. Berdahl, Sol. Energy, 1984, 33, 321–336 CrossRef .
D. Matuszko, Int. J. Climatol., 2012, 32, 2403–2414 CrossRef .
M. A. Green and A. W. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1639–1644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Müller, G. Fischer, B. Bitnar, S. Steckemetz, R. Schiepe, M. Mühlbauer, R. Köhler, P. Richter, C. Kusterer, A. Oehlke, E. Schneiderlöchner, H. Sträter, F. Wolny, M. Wagner, P. Palinginis and D. H. Neuhaus, Energy Procedia, 2017, 124, 131–137 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703385 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Absorbed and emitted atmospheric irradiance of a cell with a broadband (top) and a selective (bottom) thermal emissivity. For illustration purpose, we assume an ambient temperature Ta = 15 °C and a cell operating at T = 5 °C. The dotted line of the graph on the top shows the thermal emission of a black body at 15 °C. The absorbed irradiance (blue) corresponds to the US standard atmosphere.16	 
	(1)
	(2)
Pbbin + Pthin = Pbbem + Pthem + Pelec + Pcon	(3)
Pcon = h(T − Ta)	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 2  Problem schematic description with the parameters of the model.	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Operating temperature for a selective and a broadband thermal emissivity profile as a function of the cell energy band gap. The temperature is calculated without convection (upper graph) and with a natural convection level (lower graph). The energy gaps at 25 °C used in this work, for Si,41 GaAs,41 and perovskite42 cells are also represented.	 

 	Fig. 4  Difference in performance (operating temperature and output power) between a selective and a broadband profile as a function of solar and atmospheric irradiance levels. The thick solid line shows the conditions for which the two profiles have the same cooling properties. The results are calculated without convection, for Si (upper graphs), GaAs (middle graphs), and perovskite (lower graphs) cells. The solar spectrum, modelled by a 5527 °C (5800 K) blackbody, is normalised to give the desired intensity. The atmospheric irradiance is modelled by a blackbody at Ta = 25 °C outside the 8–13 μm transparency window, and by a greybody within this range. The irradiance in the 8–13 μm window is modified by changing the atmospheric emissivity between 0 (perfectly transparent atmosphere) and 1 (opaque atmosphere), according to the model proposed by Granqvist and Hjortsberg.14	 

 	Fig. 5  Difference in performance (temperature on the upper part and output power on the lower part) between an ideal broadband profile and an emissivity profile that includes parasitic solar absorption below 4 μm (ε1 ≠ 0) and less thermal emission beyond 4 um (ε2 ≠ 1). The results are given for Si, GaAs and perovskite cells with a natural convection level (h = 5 W m−2 K−1). This illustrate the potential of enhanced radiative sky cooling as a function of the initial emissivity profile. The solid lines represents the isothermal (top) and isopower (bottom) curves.	 

 	Fig. 6  Temperature increase of a Si cell due to a non-ideal thermal emissivity profile: threshold wavelength for suppression of parasitic solar absorption λ1 different from 4 μm, thermal emission restricted to a wavelength λ2 below 100 μm. The reference spectral conditions are used.	 

 	Fig. 7  Influence on relative operating temperature T − Tref (red dots) and heat flows attributable to different first-order effects present in a real Si solar cell. The reference case (T = Tref) shows the different heat sources and heat sinks for an ideal cell described by the model presented in the methods section. Case A shows the effect of the temperature dependence of the band gap. Case B shows the effect of non-radiative recombination (Qlume = 1.6%, the radiative efficiency of the highest performing Si cell produced so far49) and case C the effect of non-ideal solar absorption (αbb = 90%, representative of a 22% efficient PERC solar cell50). Case D results in the addition of these three phenomena. In each case, a broadband profile together with the reference environmental conditions (h = 5 W m−2 K−1, Ta = 15 °C) were chosen.	 

 	Fig. 8  Influence of heat transfers (convective and/or radiative) present on the back and the sides of the PV device. The dashed lines represent the temperature of a flat device (negligible lateral heat transfers) and the dot-dashed lines the temperature of a thick device (i.e. a Si cell encapsulated into a standard module: 156 mm2 × 5 mm (surface × depth). Both are calculated for a system without enhanced radiative sky cooling (red area) and with an ideal broadband profile (blue area). The case without improved sky cooling already shows good optical properties on the front side (30% of parasitic solar absorption together with a 80% thermal emissivity above 4 μm). Results are calculated for a device based on silicon, operating under the reference environmental conditions.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

Ideal	1.1	1.0	1.0	44.22	0.860	33.0
Extended	1.1	0.965	0.016	42.65	0.754	27.4
exp.49	1.1	—	0.016	42.65	0.738	26.7
Pr/s = Sr/sh*(T − Ta)	(17)
h* = hr/s + εr/sσ(T + Ta)(T2 + Ta2)	(18)
Pbbin + Pthin = Pbbem + Pthem + Pelec + Pcon + (s−1 − 1)h*(T − Ta)	(19)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
