Novel ZnO nanostructured electrodes for higher power conversion efficiencies in polymeric solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP22830G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP22830G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20871-20876Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNovel ZnO nanostructured electrodes for higher power conversion efficiencies in polymeric solar cells†

        
          
            Jon 
            Ajuria
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ikerne 
            Etxebarria
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eneko 
            Azaceta
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ramón 
            Tena-Zaera
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nuria 
            Fernández-Montcada
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Emilio 
            Palomares
          
        
      cd and 

        
          
            Roberto 
            Pacios
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Microsystems, IKERLAN S. COOP. Goiru Kalea, 2. 20500 Arrasate-Mondragon, Spain E-20500. E-mail: rpacios@ikerlan.es
bNew Materials Department, Centre for Electrochemical Technologies (CIDETEC), Paseo Miramón, 196, Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain E-2009
cInstitute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Avda. Països Catalans 16, Tarragona, Spain E-43007
dInstitució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Avda. Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, Spain E-08010
Received 
      6th September 2011
    , Accepted 26th September 2011First published on 17th October 2011Abstract1-Dimensional nanostructured ZnO electrodes have been demonstrated to be potentially interesting for their application in solar cells. Herein, we present a novel procedure to control the ZnO nanowire optoelectronic properties by means of surface modification. The nanowire surface is functionalized with ZnO nanoparticles in order to provide an improved contact to the photoactive P3HT:PCBM film that enhances the overall power conversion efficiency of the resulting solar cell. Charge extraction and transient photovoltage measurements have been used to successfully demonstrate that the surface modified nanostructured electrode contributes in enhancing the exciton dissociating ratio and in enlarging the charge lifetime as a consequence of a reduced charge recombination. Under AM1.5G illumination, all these factors contribute to a considerably large increase in photocurrent yielding unusually high conversion efficiencies over 4% and external quantum efficiencies of 87% at 550 nm for commercially available P3HT:PCBM based solar cells. The same approach might be equally used for polymeric materials under development to overcome the record reported efficiencies.
1. Introduction
Organic photovoltaics are attracting an increasing attention in the industrial community due to recent maximum power conversion efficiencies (PCE) above 8% achieved with a new generation of materials still under development, and therefore not commercially available. High efficiencies combined with the potential for low cost and large scale production present the technology as a serious candidate to finally penetrate into the photovoltaic market.1,2
In spite of chemical advances focused on the synthesis of this new generation of materials, their use is limited to a few research groups under very restrictive agreements that partially impede a faster development of the technology. Therefore, a parallel strategy is needed in order to improve the overall operation of OSC based on commercially available materials that can be equally used for materials under development once they also reach a commercial state. One example is the effort to increase the lifetime, a prerequisite for market success.3 The most widely used electrodes, calcium and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) PEDOT:PSS, have been replaced by semiconducting inorganic oxides to result in the so called inverted configuration with similar or even superior power conversion efficiencies depending on the fabrication procedure and the resulting nanomorphology in the photoactive film.4–6
In addition to stability issues, there are efficiency limitations concerning charge generation, transport and recombination that hamper a faster evolution of the technology towards market entry.7 An elegant way to overcome these two limitations at once—stability and efficiency—can be achieved by introducing air stable vertically aligned 1-dimensional nanostructures based on inorganic semiconducting oxides that can provide a direct path for electrons to the corresponding electrode and might additionally contribute to enhance light absorption and the exciton splitting ratio.
Different nanostructures using both TiO2 and ZnO in inverted nanostructured hybrid organic P3HT:PCBM solar cells have reported efficiencies around 4%. Grimes et al. synthesized highly ordered, vertically oriented TiOxnanotubes by means of anodization, giving rise to an increase in the photocurrent up to 12.6 mA cm−2 due to enhanced absorption and improved charge separation and transport. They reported conversion efficiencies of 4.1%.8 Since ZnO exhibits higher electron mobility,9 longer electron lifetimes—consequent with slower recombination mechanisms—can be expected in these devices. Moreover, a great variety of nanomorphologies can be achieved by many different synthetic routes, some of them are of low-cost and easily scalable such as electrodeposition.10,11 The first successful attempt using ZnO nanowires was done by Takanezawa et al. in 2008, yielding an impressive 3.9% PCE by means of an increased FF and photocurrent.12 Difficulties in properly adjusting the optoelectronic properties (doping level, surface states…) of the ZnO nanowires to achieve efficient junctions with the photoactive P3HT:PCBM film have limited the number of publications with efficiencies above 4%.13 On the other side, many interesting studies related to ZnO nanowires/P3HT solar cells have demonstrated the high potential of nanostructured ZnO for its application in organic solar cells.14–17 However, in all these attempts, the parameters chosen for the ZnO nanowire deposition define their doping level and hence optoelectronic properties of the ZnO nanostructure. If these are not properly adjusted to the energy levels of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer, the photovoltaic behaviour of the device is not acceptable and one has to repeat the electrodeposition step under new conditions. We demonstrate that the same electrochemically grown ZnO nanostructure can be easily modified to adjust its electronic properties to the energy levels of the photoactive film by simply covering it with ZnO nanoparticles, without the need for growing a new structure.
In this work, we therefore present a novel idea to tune at wish the optoelectronic properties of the ZnO nanostructure with a simple strategy for surface modification of ZnO nanowires (ZnO NWs) by using ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), see inset in Fig. 7. ZnO NWs are functionalized with ZnO NPs by means of spin coating. In this way, the critical surface electronic properties of the ZnO nanostructure are determined by the ZnO NPs that can be easily synthesized and afterwards deposited on top of any previously grown nanostructure with a morphology optimizely pre-designed for charge generation and transport of the photovoltaic cell. Thus, we can avoid the tedious task of adjusting the growth of a geometrically ideal nanostructure with the appropriate optoelectronic properties but easily post-tailor them by adding a simple subsequent step. As a result, benefits from the NW array morphology and optoelectronic properties of ZnO NPs are exploited together.
2. Results and discussion
Photovoltaic devices initially made with as-electrodeposited nanowire arrays presented inadequate operation mainly due to a decreased Voc and FF (see Fig. 1, filled circles, and Table 1, fourth line), while the measured photocurrent is similar to the reference solar cell (Fig. 1, filled squares, and Table 1, third line) based on a planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM). We assign this loss to an imperfect hole blocking behaviour of nanowires, related to their highly n-doped electronic configuration.11,13 The reported corrective actions to modify the optoelectronic properties of the nanowire arrays have been mostly focused on reducing the level of impurities in the doping process and/or in the seed layer.18 In contrast, we present an alternative nanowire surface modification to provide a correct contact to the P3HT:PCBM without modifying the electronic configuration of the beforehand grown ZnO nanostructure or synthesis method.
 Fig. 1  Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for devices with nanostructured electrodes. Open squares: ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT/MoO3/Ag. Open up triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT/MoO3/Ag. Filled circles: ITO/ZnO NW/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Filled squares: ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Filled down triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag with poor BHJ infiltration into the ZnO nanowire array. Filled up triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag with good BHJ infiltration into the ZnO nanowire array. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance for the different organic solar cells tested in this work




 

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE [%]





                  P3HT
                
0.50
0.10
0.38
0.02



                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT
0.50
1.96
0.42
0.41


Ref P3HT:PCBM
0.56
9.48
0.64
3.41



                  ZnONW:P3HT:PCBM
0.43
8.34
0.40
1.42



                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT:PCBM (poor P3HT:PCBM infiltration)
0.57
11.18
0.57
3.63



                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT:PCBM (good P3HT:PCBM infiltration)
0.57
13.75
0.52
4.1




The morphological surface modification of nanowires is clearly detected in Fig. 2 after depositing by spin-coating a thin layer of ZnO NPs over the nanostructure from the ZnO colloidal suspension. The effect of this surface modification is also evident in the overall solar cell performance since Voc is corrected to 0.57 V and a 45% increase in photocurrent is observed (see Fig. 1, filled triangles up and down, and Table 1, lines fifth and sixth).
 Fig. 2  Top view FE-SEM micrographs of (a) as-electrodeposited ZnO nanowire arrays. Magnified views of (b) as-electrodeposited and (c) ZnO nanoparticle modified ZnO nanowire arrays are also shown. 
Another important aspect to be taken into account is the P3HT:PCBM blend penetration into the ZnO nanostructure. As an example, Fig. 3 shows SEM micrographs of the cross section of samples obtained from depositing P3HT:PCBM onto different ZnO nanostructures. Poor blend penetration leads to a kind of bilayer structure with the photoactive P3HT:PCBM layer only covering the top surface of the ZnO nanostructure (Fig. 3a). This design would not take full advantage of the potential of interpenetrated nanostructures and might additionally limit the performance of the resulting solar cell by introducing potential electrical and optical losses in the form of series resistances and reduced light absorption. In contrast, when the photoactive blend smoothly covers every nanowire (Fig. 3b and c) an ideal morphology for light conversion into electricity is reached. It is worth mentioning that, additionally to the P3HT:PCBM layer deposition parameters (solution concentration, spin rate, etc.), the morphological features of the ZnO nanowire arrays such as dimensions and interspacing distance affect critically the P3HT:PCBM blend penetration.
 Fig. 3  
          FE-SEM micrographs of the cross sections of devices with: (a) poor and (b) good P3HT:PCBM penetration into the ZnO nanowire array nanostructure. A higher magnification view of the ZnO nanowire well covered by the P3HT:PCBM blend is also shown in (c). The typical brush-like physical appearance of ZnO nanorods is observed at the bottom of (a) and (b) images while the P3HT:PCBM is on top of it. 
In order to study the blend penetration effect in detail, the cross section of solar cells exhibiting the intermediate (down triangles in Fig. 1) and the highest Jsc (up triangles in Fig. 1) were analyzed by FESEM (Fig. 4). The micrographs—using secondary (Fig. 4a and c) and backscattered (Fig. 4b and d) electron detectors—are shown in Fig. 4 left and right, respectively. The backscattered micrographs give information not only on the microstructural features, but also on the chemical composition features of the devices. For solar cells with the highest Jsc, the ZnO nanowires cannot be easily distinguished in the secondary electron micrographs (Fig. 4c) because they are covered by the P3HT:PCBM blend and therefore a rather compact film is detected. However, backscattered electron micrographs clearly show the ZnO nanowire array underneath the polymeric film (Fig. 4d). A good blend penetration can be thus confirmed for devices with the highest photocurrent. In contrast, for solar cells with intermediate photocurrents, micrographs with similar features were obtained by using secondary and backscattering electron detectors (Fig. 4a and b). This observation indicates a lower penetration rate, appearing as the main cause of the relatively lower photocurrent measured in the Jsc.
 Fig. 4  
          FE-SEM micrographs using secondary (left) and backscattered (right) electron detectors for solar cells exhibiting the intermediate (a and b) and highest (c and d) Jsc. It is worth mentioning that secondary and backscattered electron micrographs were taken from exactly the same device area. The ZnO nanostructure is evident at the bottom of all images while the P3HT:PCBM is over it on images (a) and (b) and infiltrated between the nanowires on images (c) and (d). 
Further studies have been performed in order to understand the mechanisms overlying behind the surface modification that leads to such a large increase in photocurrent. Irrespective of the ZnO architecture, no significant differences were detected in the absorbance spectra of glass/ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM (Fig. S1, ESI†). Therefore, the main contributions to the enhanced photocurrent seem to be related to electronic phenomena such as either further improved charge generation due to a more efficient exciton dissociation rate, or larger charge lifetimes and therefore reduced charge recombination mechanisms, or most likely, a combination of all of them. Both phenomena are analyzed, separately, in the following sections
2.1. Charge generation
In order to analyze the influence of the ZnO nanostructure on the charge generation processes of a polymeric solar cell, a single P3HT film of 300 nm has been used to produce an ITO/ZnO:P3HT/MoO3/Ag type solar cell, with and without the ZnO nanowire array underneath the ZnO NP layer. Given the high thickness of the P3HT layer, the photocurrent, potentially being generated only at the ZnO/P3HT, P3HT/MoO3 and within the bulk due the presence of impurities in the P3HT, is negligible. The introduction of surface modified nanowire arrays as a nanostructured n-type electrode yields a 20-fold increase in the photocurrent (see Fig. 1). The pronounced increase in the photocurrent provides clear evidences that the modified ZnO NW:P3HT interface contributes to the exciton dissociation and nanowires increase the dissociating area so that exciton splitting is enhanced. Even though this type of solar cell configuration is useful to understand the mechanisms and physical concepts taking place in the photoactive area, its low efficiency relegates this architecture only to basic research.
The influence of the ZnO nanowire architecture on an operational P3HT:PCBM solar cell has been further analyzed by means of interfacial charge recombination kinetics under working conditions in order to monitor the accumulated charge in devices with and without the ZnO nanoparticle surface modification with respect to also the planar ZnO reference. It consists in applying a white light pulse, large enough to reach the steady state under open circuit voltage conditions. Since Voc depends on the light intensity, it is adjusted in order to achieve different initial open circuit voltages. After the light pulse ends, the device is short circuited and the current flow is monitored.19,20 The amount of charge accumulated in the device can be plotted as a function of the photovoltage generated by the light pulse.
The amount of accumulated charge for a given identical light intensity is considerably larger for ZnO nanowire array-based devices in comparison to standard ones based on a planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion—ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM (Fig. 5). This is indicative of a larger amount of free charges and evidences once more the contribution of the ZnO nanowire array architecture in the exciton dissociation process, and therefore on the expected increase of the photogenerated current if both devices have similar charge collection efficiencies under short circuit conditions.
 Fig. 5  Charge density versus device voltage under different illumination intensities (light bias). Inset: resulting sigma values from the fits for the reference (planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion) ZnO NW and ZnO NW/NP devices to eqn (1). 
The experimental data from Fig. 5 can be fitted to eqn (1) (see ref. 19 and 20) in order to calculate the DOS distribution (σ): (1)The obtained values (inset, Fig. 5) suggest a broadening of the DOS for the ZnO nanowire array based on a comparison with planar devices, if we assume that the maximum of the Gaussian curve is identical for both devices since they both were made by using the same bulk-heterojunction. The broadening of the DOS causes a shift in the quasi Fermi levels of the HOMO and LUMO of the polymer film that leads to a reduced Voc.21 When the nanowire array is however modified with ZnO NPs such a reduction in the Voc is not observed. Charge recombination under operating conditions is one of the most important factors affecting the final Voc of the device. As it is shown below in more detail, slower recombination processes measured for ZnO NW + NP (Fig. 6) in comparison to standard devices explain that the final Voc is similar. However, the similar lifetime trends observed for standard—planar—ZnO NW confirm the expected lower Voc from the broader DOS observed for ZnO NW devices.
 Fig. 6  Lifetimes (τΔn) extracted from the TPV experiment plotted against the correspondent charge density (n). The reference cell is a planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM). 
2.2. Charge lifetime and recombination
Transient photovoltage measurements were performed in order to compare the electron lifetime in nanowire array-based and planar devices. It is additionally possible to measure the charge carrier lifetime, thus recombination kinetics, under working conditions. The device is continuously illuminated using white light in order to keep it at Voc. A nitrogen pumped-dye pulsed laser was used to generate a small-perturbation on Voc. As the system is under open-circuit conditions, the Voc decay is proportional to the photogenerated excess carrier relaxation, which allows direct measurement of the carrier lifetime under open circuit conditions.19,20 Different initial photovoltages—and therefore charge densities—are obtained by modifying the intensity of the white light bias. Thus, the carrier lifetime can be plotted as a function of the charge density. The slightly faster recombination kinetics observed for the not modified ZnO nanowire array compared to the reference ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM system (Fig. 6), together with the shift in the exponential of the acceptor states explain the severe reduction of the Voc from 0.56 to 0.43 V. On the other hand, the slower recombination kinetics measured for the surface modified ZnO nanowire array-based devices are indicative of improved electron lifetime owing to the direct electron path provided by the nanowire from the dissociating interface to the collecting electrode. Therefore, accumulated charges in the film do not necessarily recombine at the same time scale and are more efficiently transported and extracted, leading to recovery of the final Voc of the device, and even to an increased photocurrent.
Combined contributions to absorption, charge generation and extraction yield a considerable increase in the photocurrent. This is reflected in the EQE that reaches an impressive 87% at 550 nm (Fig. 7), to our knowledge one of the highest reported EQE values for a P3HT:PCBM OSC up-to-date. By integrating the EQE spectra multiplied by the photon flux over the solar irradiance spectrum, theoretical maximum photocurrent for the device can be calculated: (2)Comparing the theoretical value of the photocurrent (13.53 mA cm−2) with the one measured under AM1.5G conditions (13.75 mA cm−2) is the best method to avoid wrong assignments originated by miscalibrations of the solar simulator (inset, Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  
            EQE
            spectra: filled squares, EQE for ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Empty squares, EQE for ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Inset figure: (a) inverted planar P3HT:PCBM reference system using metal oxides as electrodes. (b) Introduction of the ZnO nanowire array as an n-type electrode. (c) Surface modification of ZnO nanowires by addition of ZnO nanoparticles. Inset table: photocurrents measured under solar simulator and calculated from integration of EQE spectra according to eqn (2). 
On the other hand, the introduction of the ZnO nanostructure in the photoactive area reduces the FF that becomes the limiting factor to achieve higher efficiencies. The most likely reason for this to occur is the high density of generated charges for these devices that overcome the transport capabilities of the cell. Under the same light intensity the ZnO nanostructure and the increased dissociating ZnO/P3HT interface contribute in generating additional charges in comparison to the planar reference cell. In any case, this reduction is compensated by the large increase in Jsc, giving rise to one of the highest reported PCE for a P3HT:PCBM polymeric solar cell based on commercially available materials.
3. Conclusions
We have demonstrated a novel method to introduce nanostructured electrodes in organic solar cells using a low cost and easily scalable procedure. Unusually high efficiencies over 4% for exclusively commercially available materials—P3HT and PCBM—are reached, thanks to: first, an enhanced exciton splitting ratio due to the increase in the ZnO/active film dissociating area—interface—that the nanostructure provides in comparison to a planar structure. Second, an improved charge lifetime owing to a direct electron path from the exciton dissociating point to the collecting electrode. Even though all these contributions have been successfully proven, reaching an increase of 45% in the short circuit current density (i.e. 13.75 mA cm−2), it is difficult to exactly quantify the individual impact of each of them on the overall improvement of the photogenerated current. Furthermore, even not significant changes have been observed in absorption, the ZnO nanostructure may also behave as a plasmonic structure generating photon dispersion through the nanowires, increasing the travelling path within the semiconductor, and thus slightly enhancing the number of absorbed photons.More importantly, the use of ZnO nanowire arrays functionalized with ZnO nanoparticles as electron transport building blocks has been demonstrated as a promising way to increase the efficiency of organic solar cells. 
4. Experimental

        ZnO
        electrodeposition: ZnO nanowire arrays (Fig. 2a and b) were electrodeposited by the reduction of dissolved molecular oxygen in zinc chloride solutions.10,11 They were electrodeposited on a patterned conducting glass/ITO substrate, which was previously covered by a thin continuous ZnO sprayed layer.22 The electrolyte was a 5 × 10−4 M ZnCl2 (>98.0%), 0.1 M KCl (>99.5%) ultrapure aqueous solution, saturated with bubbling oxygen. The deposition was performed at 70 °C at constant potential (V = −1 V vs.SCE), passing a charge density of ∼1.25 C cm−2 resulting in ∼400 nm high and ∼100 nm diameter nanowires.

        ZnO
        nanoparticle dispersion: it was prepared according to the Pacholski method.23 Briefly, 0.11 g of zinc acetate dihydrate were dissolved in 50 mL of methanol under vigorous stirring at 60 °C. Subsequently, a 0.03 M solution of KOH (25 mL) in methanol was added dropwise at 60 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h at 60 °C producing ∼5 nm diameter colloidal ZnO nanoparticles. The obtained colloidal suspension, without any further purification treatment, was spin casted at 2000 rpm for 30 s on the ZnO nanowire arrays. The spin-coating deposition process was followed by a 5 min air annealing at 150 °C and repeated four times to achieve a good coverage of the nanowires (Fig. 2c).
Photoactive film: commercially available P3HT and PCBM from American Dye Source and Nano-C, respectively, were used to produce the starting solution. This P3HT:PCBM starting solution was prepared by mixing 25:25 mg in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. The solution was then heated overnight at 80 °C. Dr Blade was used to coat the P3HT:PCBM film: the plate temperature was set to 60 °C and the blade speed to 25 mm s−1. The substrate was then covered for 90 s with a Petri dish for slow drying of the film. The photoactive area thickness for the reference planar ZnO/P3HT:PCBM device was around 600 nm. Depending on the penetration degree of the P3HT:PCBM solution into the ZnO nanostructure the thickness of the ZnO:P3HT:PCBM compound varied from 800 nm for good penetration rates to 1.1 μm for poor penetration rates. Device fabrication was completed by thermal evaporation of the anode at room temperature under vacuum at a base pressure of 4 × 10−6 mbar. The deposited area of the electrode defines an active area of 9.4 mm2. When depositing MoO3 in combination with silver, a 5 nm thick metal oxide layer was thermally evaporated prior to Ag under the same vacuum conditions. After fabrication, devices were annealed at 140 °C for 15 min.

SEM and FE-SEM: the morphology of the ZnO nanostructures and the microstructural features of the device cross sections were analyzed using a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (ULTRA plus ZEISS FESEM).
Solar cell characterization: J–V characteristics of the encapsulated devices were taken using a Keithley 4200 source unit under 1 sun AM1.5G illumination conditions from a xenon lamp based Oriel 9600 150 W Sun Simulator. The calibration of the incident light for J–V was performed with a NREL certified monocrystalline silicon photodiode, making sure that the Jsc measured under the calibrated 1000 Wm−2 white incident light coincides with the Jsc calculated by integrating the External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) times the photon flux across the visible spectrum. In this way, we can avoid any type of mistake due to solar simulator intensity miscalibration when reporting efficiencies.
Transient Photovoltage Measurements (TPV): devices were directly connected to an oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS2022, 1 MΩ) and illuminated with a ring of white Luxeon Lumileds leds. The small perturbation (∼2 mV) was applied through a light pulse (N2 laser nominal wavelength, ∼50 ns pulses, excitation at 550 nm using the Coumarin 153 dye). The polaron-recombination rate was calculated for illumination intensities ranging from 0.1 sun to 1 sun.
Charge extraction measurements (CE): devices are held in open circuit equilibrium through illumination with white light (white Luxeon Lumileds leds). Then the light is switched off and the circuit is contemporarily closed, while charges are forced to pass through a resistance (R = 50 Ω). The time-dependent variation of the potential through R is due to the device discharge, if recombination losses are sufficiently low to be negligible. Integrating the voltage decay over time at a specific light bias allowed us to calculate the excess concentration of charges accumulated in the device under the working conditions specified.
Acknowledgements
We thank financial support from Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia under the project HOPE CSD2007-00007 (Consolider-Ingenio 2010) and CIC EnergiGUNE. R.T.-Z. acknowledges the support from the “Ramón y Cajal” Program of the Spanish MICINN. E.P. thanks the EU for the ERC starting grant PolyDot, the Catalan Government for the 2009 SGR 207 and the Spanish MICINN for the project CTQ2010-18859. The ICIQ and ICREA financial support is also acknowledged.
References

          www.konarka.com
        .

          www.solarmer.com
        .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 685 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. P. Ruan, G. H. Xie, X. Z. Kong, L. Shen, F. X. Meng, C. X. Liu, X. D. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043311 CrossRef .
J. Ajuria, I. Etxebarria, W. Cambarau, U. Munecas, R. Tena-Zaera, J. C. Jimeno and R. Pacios, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 453 CAS .
M. Lenes, L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 243502 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 152111 CrossRef .
M. Quintana, T. Edvinsson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1035 CAS .
S. Peulon and D. Lincot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 864 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tena-Zaera, J. Elias, C. Levy-Clement, C. Bekeny, T. Voss, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16318 CAS .
K. Takanezawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 063308 CrossRef .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19 CAS .
J. Boucle, H. J. Snaith and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3664 CAS .
P. Atienzar, T. Ishwara, B. N. Illy, M. P. Ryan, B. C. O'Reagan, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 708 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takanezawa, K. Hirota, Q.-S. Wie, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7218 CAS .
K. Takanezawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 8049 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, Y. J. Lee, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, J. A. Voigt and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9544 CAS .
A. Sánchez-Díaz, M. Izquierdo, S. Filippone, N. Martin and E. Palomares, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2695 CrossRef .
M. Bolognesi, A. Sanchez-Díaz, J. Ajuria, R. Pacios and E. Palomares, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6105 RSC .
G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 113301 CrossRef .
J. Elias, R. Tena-Zaera and C. Levy-Clement, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 8553 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp22830gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for devices with nanostructured electrodes. Open squares: ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT/MoO3/Ag. Open up triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT/MoO3/Ag. Filled circles: ITO/ZnO NW/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Filled squares: ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Filled down triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag with poor BHJ infiltration into the ZnO nanowire array. Filled up triangles: ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag with good BHJ infiltration into the ZnO nanowire array.	 


                  P3HT
                	0.50	0.10	0.38	0.02

                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT	0.50	1.96	0.42	0.41
Ref P3HT:PCBM	0.56	9.48	0.64	3.41

                  ZnONW:P3HT:PCBM	0.43	8.34	0.40	1.42

                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT:PCBM (poor P3HT:PCBM infiltration)	0.57	11.18	0.57	3.63

                  ZnONW+NP:P3HT:PCBM (good P3HT:PCBM infiltration)	0.57	13.75	0.52	4.1

 	Fig. 2  Top view FE-SEM micrographs of (a) as-electrodeposited ZnO nanowire arrays. Magnified views of (b) as-electrodeposited and (c) ZnO nanoparticle modified ZnO nanowire arrays are also shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  
          FE-SEM micrographs of the cross sections of devices with: (a) poor and (b) good P3HT:PCBM penetration into the ZnO nanowire array nanostructure. A higher magnification view of the ZnO nanowire well covered by the P3HT:PCBM blend is also shown in (c). The typical brush-like physical appearance of ZnO nanorods is observed at the bottom of (a) and (b) images while the P3HT:PCBM is on top of it.	 

 	Fig. 4  
          FE-SEM micrographs using secondary (left) and backscattered (right) electron detectors for solar cells exhibiting the intermediate (a and b) and highest (c and d) Jsc. It is worth mentioning that secondary and backscattered electron micrographs were taken from exactly the same device area. The ZnO nanostructure is evident at the bottom of all images while the P3HT:PCBM is over it on images (a) and (b) and infiltrated between the nanowires on images (c) and (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge density versus device voltage under different illumination intensities (light bias). Inset: resulting sigma values from the fits for the reference (planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion) ZnO NW and ZnO NW/NP devices to eqn (1).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Lifetimes (τΔn) extracted from the TPV experiment plotted against the correspondent charge density (n). The reference cell is a planar ZnO layer processed from a NP dispersion (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  
            EQE
            spectra: filled squares, EQE for ITO/ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Empty squares, EQE for ITO/ZnO NW + ZnO NP/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. Inset figure: (a) inverted planar P3HT:PCBM reference system using metal oxides as electrodes. (b) Introduction of the ZnO nanowire array as an n-type electrode. (c) Surface modification of ZnO nanowires by addition of ZnO nanoparticles. Inset table: photocurrents measured under solar simulator and calculated from integration of EQE spectra according to eqn (2).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp22830g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
