Planar dye -sensitized photovoltaics through cavity mode enhancement   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01578H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01578H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2980-2985Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPlanar dye-sensitized photovoltaics through cavity mode enhancement†

        
          
            Alex B. F. 
            Martinson
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Noel C. 
            Giebink
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            Gary P. 
            Wiederrecht
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            D. 
            Rosenmann
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Michael R. 
            Wasielewski
          
        
      bcd
aMaterials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA. E-mail: martinson@anl.gov
bArgonne–Northwestern Solar Energy Research (ANSER) Center, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA
cCenter for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA
Received 
      30th April 2011
    , Accepted 16th June 2011First published on 12th July 2011Abstract
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) differ from conventional solar cells in that they rely on a large area nanoparticle network to achieve sufficient absorption of sunlight. Although highly successful to date, this approach limits the opportunities to further increase DSSC power efficiency because it necessarily restricts the choice of redox shuttles to those compatible with the long electron transit times and ample recombination opportunities inherent to the nanoparticle-based architecture. Here, we use a resonantly coupled cavity scheme to demonstrate planar, thin-film DSSCs with a polarized, monochromatic incident photon to current efficiency of 17% from a single monolayer of a conventional Ru-dye. Upon illumination on resonance we observe open-circuit voltages that reach 1 V and thereby approach the theoretical limit for open-circuit voltage set by the dye and redox shuttle energy levels. The results supply new insight into processes presently limiting DSSCs and point to novel strategies to overcome these losses.

Broader context
The increasing global demand for a sustainable and affordable energy resource has motivated the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) community to push the limits of this promising photovoltaic technology. To date, efficient DSSCs employ ∼100 quadrillion (1017) molecular dyes cm−2 to sensitize a wide bandgap semiconductor framework in order to adequately harvest visible light. This porous nanoparticle framework is utilized to obtain the ∼1000-fold surface area enhancement required to chemically bind the chromophores with monolayer coverage. Although this unique and ingenious architecture allows DSSCs to achieve power conversion efficiencies up to 11%, it is a significant barrier to further improvement. In this work, we introduce a unity roughness photoelectrode design that affords adequate light absorption under resonance conditions while dramatically reducing the parasitic dark current density. This approach enables record open-circuit voltages (VOC) using the standard (I−/I3−) redox couple under monochromatic illumination and inspires new strategies to understand and control losses in DSSCs.

Introduction

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been optimized through nearly two decades of worldwide research to reach a local optimum that enables photoconversion of nearly all incident light above the dye optical energy gap.1,2 Further increasing the power conversion efficiency of these cells thus requires either extending the dye absorption toward longer wavelengths to absorb more of the solar spectrum or reducing the loss in potential of photoexcited carriers - that is, increasing the open circuit voltage (Voc). This loss in potential is especially large in DSSCs as compared to crystalline inorganic cells: the most efficient DSSCs have Voc = 0.75 to 0.85 V, representing a ∼50% reduction from their optical bandgap of ∼1.6 eV, whereas for a GaAs cell with Voc = 1.11 V and a bandgap of 1.4 eV, the loss is only ∼25%.3–5
Nearly all of the excess voltage loss in DSSCs can be traced back to the large roughness of the photoelectrode, which usually consists of a ∼10 um thick film of sintered, wide-bandgap semiconductor nanoparticles.6,7 This porous framework is necessary to obtain the ∼1000-fold surface area enhancement required to chemically bind enough dye to absorb >90% of the incident above-bandgap sunlight.1 Although this architecture has led to DSSC power conversion efficiencies (ηp) reaching 11%,3,4 it is also the chief obstacle to improving upon the current local optimization in DSSC performance.8
In recent analyses of the loss in potential of DSSCs, two factors are found to account for the majority of losses.1,6,9 First, a significant loss could be avoided if the heterogeneity of electron injection could be reduced such that all electrons were injected at the potential at which the average electron is currently injected. This heterogeneity is due in part to energetic disorder among the different dye binding sites that stems from the nanoparticle nature of the semiconductor photoelectrode. The greatest voltage loss, however, is due to the large overpotential for dye regeneration by the I−/I3−redox couple, which amounts to roughly 0.5–0.6 eV. Although not optimal from an energy loss standpoint, this multi-electron, multi-step redox couple has proven uniquely suited to inhibiting the dark reaction across the very large liquid/solid interface. Several promising alternative redox shuttles capable of regenerating dyes with smaller overpotential have been reported. Unfortunately, to date, a significant increase in the dark current densities result in a voltage loss, as determined by the diode equation, largely offsetting the original reduction in dye regeneration overpotential.10–15
A planar, thin-film photoelectrode provides a simple path to improving performance in both of these respects by potentially narrowing the energetic distribution of dye binding sites16,17 and reducing the specific solid/liquid heterojunction area (in which recombination is roughly first order18) by several orders of magnitude. The challenge with this strategy is, of course, to maintain sufficient optical absorption with the correspondingly lower volume of surface bound dye. To this end, there has been significant effort to design a “super-chromophore” that exhibits the broadband absorption of traditional Ru-based dyes but with greater extinction. Research in this area has resulted in effective dyes with peak extinction coefficients (ε) up to 300,000 M−1 cm−1, but unfortunately, the increased ε is largely offset by a reduced packing density and lower ε in other regions of the visible spectrum such that the required roughness of the photoelectrode is of the same order (1000×) to that required of the Ru-based dye “N719” (ε ∼14,000 M−1 cm−1) used in the most efficient DSSC.19,20
An alternative approach involves optical concentration on the nanoscale. This has previously been explored using localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) supported by metal nanoparticles, which enhance the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of traditional DSSC chromophores and lead to a 7-fold improvement in the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) relative to that of a comparable photoelectrode.21,22 While this approach is promising, a route to planar DSSCs with peak IPCE > 1% has remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate a new route to improve the light harvesting efficiency of planar DSSCs by coupling monochromatic light to guided modes supported by the semiconductor thin-film photoelectrode. In coupling to guided modes, we maximize dye absorption through a resonant increase of the electromagnetic field intensity in the plane of the surface-bound dye. Using this approach, we report an IPCE of 17% from a single dye monolayer for ZnO-based cells and Voc = 1.0 V for TiO2/ZnO bilayer cells. The latter result approaches the theoretical limit for Voc set by the energetics of the N719 dye and I−/I3−redox shuttle. By dramatically reducing the interfacial area over which the dark current flows, planar electrodes provide an exciting direction for device design and new opportunities for understanding losses in DSSCs.
Results and Discussion
The DSSCs studied here are fabricated by depositing an ultra-smooth silver film several tens of nanometres in thickness on a glass substrate23 followed by a wide bandgap oxide film of sub-micron thickness. The photoelectrode stack is then completed by sensitizing with a monolayer of dye as depicted in Fig. 1. In this architecture, light is resonantly coupled across the optically dense silver film, which also serves as a highly conductive anode (RS = 1 Ω/square). This contrasts with the case for most DSSCs, which require a transparent, conducting oxide (TCO) anode to transmit light into the device.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the device and illumination geometry. The zoom circle depicts the relative thickness of the silver (40 nm), metal oxide (80 nm), and dye layer (1 nm). The field intensity calculated on resonance for λ = 543 nm illumination as a function of position within the photoelectrode overlays the illustration. A depiction of the Ru-based dye (N719) is included in which TBA = tetrabutylammonium. The right most inset is a scanning electron microscope image of a ZnO photoelectrode in cross-section, prior to dye loading. 
At normal incidence, the photoelectrode exhibits more than 90% reflectivity, however, upon prism coupling in the Kretschmann configuration (see Fig. 1), light can be efficiently coupled into the surface plasmon and higher order guided modes supported by the structure. In coupling to guided modes, we maximize dye absorption through a resonant increase of the electromagnetic field intensity in the plane of the surface-bound dye. Put differently, incident light is effectively ‘turned’ to propagate parallel to the metal/seminconductor/dye interface, enabling dye absorption over the entire propagation length (>10 um) of the mode. We note that prism coupling has been used previously in the context of DSSCs to study dye absorption kinetics24 and to investigate photocurrent enhancement in nanoparticle-based cells,25 however, there have been no such reports of photovoltaic performance nor any describing enhancement in planar, prism-coupled DSSCs.
The surface plasmon polariton and higher order transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) guided modes are accessible by tuning the thickness of each layer in the stack.26 The complex refractive indices of each layer were experimentally determined for glass, Ag, ZnO, TiO2, N719, and the conventional I−/I3−acetonitrile-based electrolyte. We use a standard transfer matrix approach27 to model the optical fields in our multilayer structure and the adjacent electrolyte. Initially, a genetic algorithm was employed to identify optimal layer thickness combinations that maximize the energy absorbed by the dye monolayer. The largest couplings occur for TE modes in photoelectrodes consisting of Ag and ZnO. This is because the TE boundary conditions and the smaller real component of the ZnO refractive index (n = 2.0), as compared to that of TiO2 (n = 2.4), lead to smaller modal overlap with the Ag anode and hence less parasitic absorption. Little difference in dye absorption is predicted among the various TE modes, however, as a practical matter we have focused on the lowest order (TE0) mode since it minimizes both the layer resistance and any potential loss due to residual color in the ZnO.
The thin oxide layers were grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and characterized using variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometery (VASE). As a “soft” and layer-by-layer deposition technique, ALD is used to deposit high quality, pinhole free materials with sub-nanometre thickness control27 without damaging the underlying Ag film. The large number of metal oxides accessible by ALD (including, but not limited to, TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, ZrO2, and NiO) makes the technique further applicable for the development of future photoelectrochemical systems. Detailed properties of the resulting polycrystalline films, including complex indices of refraction and film thickness are determined through VASE and transmission measurements, and serve as inputs for the transfer matrix modeling.
As shown in Fig. 2, we assess the quality of our structures at each stage of fabrication by measuring reflectivity (solid circles) at λ = 543 nm and comparing it with that predicted by our model (lines). We find excellent agreement, progressing from the surface plasmon mode of the bare Ag film (37°) to the TE0 mode of the photoelectrode in air (47°) and in electrolyte (74°). The reflectivity dip of the photoelectrode stack in air prior to device completion approaches zero, implying 100% coupling into the structure on resonance. Immersed in electrolyte, the reflectance of the device increases to 21% and the resonance shifts to higher angle due to the increase in effective index of the mode. On resonance, we measure an IPCE of 17.4%, which is lower than the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of 24% predicted by our model. The difference may reflect a non-unity absorbed photon to current efficiency (APCE) but more likely results from the difficulty in accurately characterizing the thickness and optical constants for a monolayer of adsorbed dye which, from a modeling standpoint, probably reflects an effective medium approximation since the semiconductor surface roughness exceeds the size of the dye molecules.
 Fig. 2  Predicted (lines) and measured (symbols) photoelectrode reflectivity at λ = 543 nm as a function of illumination angle at several stages of device fabrication: Glass/Ag (36°), glass/Ag/ZnO (47°), and glass/Ag/ZnO/dye/electrolyte (74° upper). The transverse magnetic (TM) surface plasmon polariton mode is accessible in the Ag-only film while the first transverse electric (TE) guided mode is accessible in subsequent stages. The predicted incident photon to current efficiency (74° lower line) peaks at 24% whereas the measured value (lower symbols) peaks at 17%. 
According to the model, the balance of non-reflected power (79%) that is not absorbed by the dye (55%) is lost to parasitic absorption by the adjacent Ag anode, which competes effectively as a power dissipation channel due to the low optical density of the dye. Nevertheless, the advantage of resonant coupling is significant, representing a 35-fold enhancement over the IPCE = 0.5% measured (0.6% predicted, Supplementary Figure 1†) at normal incidence (λ = 540 nm) for a control device on a TCO substrate. This enhancement is several times greater than those observed when applying similar strategies to organic28,29 and inorganic30,31 photovoltaics owing to a higher modal quality factor that results from the combination of low intrinsic absorbance by the dye monolayer and field penetration into the electrolyte which minimizes dissipation in the Ag.
As expected for a planar DSSC and demonstrated in Fig. 3, the dark current of this device is exceptionally low. Upon monochromatic illumination at λ = 543 nm with incident intensity Iinc = 18.3 mW cm−2, representing a photon flux (4.8 × 1016s−1 cm−2) lower than the AM1.5 photon flux integrated only to the illumination wavelength (6.6 × 1016s−1 cm−2), the VOC of the ZnO-based devices routinely exceeds 900 mV, which, to the best of our knowledge, surpasses that of any other ZnO-based DSSC reported to date.32,33 Flat photoelectrodes, with near unity roughness, project a specific surface area at least 1000-fold less than that of conventional nanoparticle photoelectrodes.1 As the dark current roughly scales with surface area,18 a proportional decrease in the dark reaction should occur. The high VOC measured here is attributed to a dark current density that is several 1000-fold less than that of ZnO nanoparticle-based devices.34,35
 Fig. 3  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) in the dark (black) and under illumination on resonance (solid gray) for a ZnO-based device. The J–V characteristic of a flat, ZnO control device built on a TCO under broadband illumination at normal incidence (dashed gray). Linear (a) and log of the absolute value (b) scales of current density are shown. 
Photocurrent densities at short circuit (Jsc) of 1.1 mA cm−2 were measured on resonance and would extrapolate to 3.6 mA cm−2 under an AM1.5-equivalent photon flux (integrated out to the optical bandgap of the dye). A fill factor (FF) of 0.42 results in a monochromatic power efficiency of 2.3% under TE-polarized illumination at the peak resonant condition.
Although the model suggests that the lower index of ZnO is suited to maximize optical coupling to the dye, TiO2 is the preferred material for efficient DSSCs. Nanoparticle ZnO and TiO2 devices both show JSC ∼ 18 mA cm−2 but the FF and Voc are consistently higher in TiO2 heterojunctions relative to their ZnO equivalent.4,34,36 Both pure TiO2 and ZnO/TiO2 bilayers were thus considered for use in cavity-mode-enhanced DSSCs, however, the dye optical coupling predicted for pure TiO2 devices is less than 15% due to strong modal confinement and field penetration of the Ag anode that result from the high TiO2 refractive index. This, combined with a propensity for incomplete Ag protection (i.e. pinholes) led us to pursue ZnO/TiO2 bilayer films. Ideally, a TiO2 shell would allow for increased FF and VOC while only marginally reducing the predicted maximum dye coupling to 18%. Fig. 4 shows that upon substituting a 20 nm thick TiO2 shell for the outermost 30 nm of ZnO, the IPCE peaks at 8% on resonance. This is lower than for the equivalent ZnO-based device (see Fig. 3), yet it leads to a remarkable increase in Voc up to 1.01 V. To the best our knowledge, this is the first report of a DSSC to reach this landmark with the standard (I−/I3−) redox couple. Again, the high VOC measured here is attributed to a dark current density that is several 1000-fold less than that of traditional nanoparticle-based devices. Fitting the dark current–voltage characteristic to the diode equation (Supplementary Figure 2†) confirms that the dark saturation current is many orders of magnitude lower than that of an analogous nanoparticle-based device.
 Fig. 4  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) in the dark (solid black) and under illumination on resonance (solid gray) for a bilayer-based (ZnO/TiO2) planar device. The J–V of a nanoparticle TiO2 DSSC under broadband normally incident light (dashed gray, scaled by 1/10 for clarity in (a)) and in the dark (dashed black) are plotted for comparison. Linear (a) and log of the absolute value (b) scales of current density are shown. 
The J–V curve under resonant illumination in Fig. 4a displays an atypical ‘kink’ for V > 0.8 V, which does not result from series resistance because it is not evident in the dark current. The effect is most evident upon comparing the dark and illuminated current densities at an applied bias of 900 mV. Here we note that the total current under illumination, which represents the superposition of dark and photogenerated currents, is significantly reduced despite an insignificant contribution from the dark current. The consequent reduction in photogenerated current is rationalized according to the energy level diagram in Fig. 5. Given the fixed potential of the counter electrode in contact with the redox solution, large applied potentials drive up the quasi-Fermi level in the TiO2. At 1.0 V, only a limited amount of driving force (0.1 V) remains for electron injection from the dye excited state. Accordingly, injection efficiencies have been observed to drop sharply at large applied potentials.37,38 Rapid electron recombination with the oxidized dye (parasitic pathway), which is in competition with reduction by I− (the preferred pathway) has also been observed at large applied potentials.39 The signature of one or both effects is the loss of photogenerated current at high applied potential independent of dark current. That the loss of electron injection efficiency or charge separation efficiency (or both) is dominant at large applied potentials is supported by Fig. 4a. Our data thus suggest that in the limit of greater light harvesting efficiency and lower dark current, the VOC is unlikely to ever significantly exceed 1.0 V in this particular system, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Our observations, combined with previously observed low photogenerated electron yields at high applied potentials, imply that we have approached the fundamental limit in photovoltage feasible for the most popular DSSC (I−/I3− + N719) configuration.
 Fig. 5  Relevant process under illumination in a DSSC with N719 dye (bandgap ∼ 1.6 eV) and iodide-based electrolyte at an applied potential of 1.01 V. Forward processes (solid arrows) are in kinetic competition with recombination pathways (dashed arrows). The primary dark current pathway, electrons in TiO2 scavenged by I3−, has been omitted for clarity. 
Although the strategy described herein exhibits several practical shortcomings, most prominently that the IPCE enhancement occurs over a small angle of incidence for each monochromatic illumination wavelength and applies to only half of an unpolarized light source, the benefits of a flat dye-sensitized photoelectrode are revealing. For example, there is an important kinetic competition between the electron survival time and the relatively long electron transport time through the nanoporous framework that determines charge collection efficiency.8,40 In the limit of these thin film photoelectrodes, the orders of magnitude shorter transport time renders this competition void. Similarly, the choice of redox shuttle is typically limited to highly soluble species whose high concentration sufficiently lowers the mass transport resistance to “hole” transport across the 25 micron electrode separation.41,42 By using a flat photoelectrode this span may be decreased to ∼500 nm, at which point the guided mode fields would begin to overlap with and leak into the platinized counter-electrode. In the case of such a small electrode gap, the need for preformed oxidized species in solution is minimized. As the dark current roughly scales with the oxidized species concentration, this will pay dividends on well-known redox solutions and creates the opportunity to employ new couples. Therefore, we expect our results here to dramatically expand the multivariable space over which DSSCs can be explored.
We have used conventional DSSC components (dyes, redox shuttles, spacers) here for the purpose of comparison, yet the design may benefit significantly from improved chemistries already demonstrated for use in DSSCs. For example, using high extinction dyes such as, e.g.squaraines20 at their absorbance peak, we predict on-resonance LHE > 62% due to more favorable competition with parasitic power dissipation in the Ag anode. Any practical application of this approach will, of course, require a route to broadband, polarization-independent enhancement at normal incidence, similar to solar radiation. Antennae-based approaches provide one potential solution,43 in which light is absorbed by an adjacent, optically thick absorber layer and then predominantly re-emitted into the waveguide modes of the planar DSSC analogous to that demonstrated here. Alternatively, in-plane structural periodicity or the use of metal nanoparticles could be used to efficiently scatter incident light into waveguide modes.44 More generally, the wealth of knowledge developed in the context of traditional thin-film solar cell light management is applicable to the architecture studied here, raising the prospect for efficient DSSCs with modest roughness and the benefits revealed herein. Finally, we believe the results supply new insight into processes presently limiting DSSCs and point to novel strategies to overcome these losses.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported as part of the Argonne-Northwestern Solar Energy Research (ANSER) Center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Award Number DE-SC0001059. Use of the Center for Nanoscale Materials was supported by the Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences through Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The electron microscopy was accomplished at the Electron Microscopy Center for Materials Research at Argonne National Laboratory, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science Laboratory operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357 by UChicago Argonne, LLC. The authors also thank Mike Pellin for useful discussions and Jeff Elam for use of the spectrophotometer.
References
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Cao, Y. Bai, Q. J. Yu, Y. M. Cheng, S. Liu, D. Shi, F. F. Gao and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6290 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, T. Bessho and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 84 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 13 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 CAS .
B. A. Gregg, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756 CAS .
T. C. Li, A. M. Spokoyny, C. X. She, O. K. Farha, C. A. Mirkin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4580 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, T. H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 211 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann and J. W. Ondersma, Dye-sensitized solar cell redox shuttles, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 370–381 CAS .
S. Meng and E. Kaxiras, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1238 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, H. Miura, S. Uchida, M. Takata, K. Sumioka, P. Liska, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Graetzel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5194 RSC .
T. Geiger, S. Kuster, J. H. Yum, S. J. Moon, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and F. Nuesch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2720 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hagglund, M. Zach and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vj, N. P. Kobayashi, M. S. Islam, W. Wu, P. Chaturvedi, N. X. Fang, S. Y. Wang and R. S. Williams, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 178 CrossRef .
A. Peic, D. Staff, T. Risbridger, B. Menges, L. M. Peter, A. B. Walker and P. J. Cameron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 115, 613 Search PubMed .
M. Durr, B. Menges, W. Knoll, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91 CrossRef .

          P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media, Wiley, New York,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Mapel, M. Singh, M. A. Baldo and K. Celebi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 121102 CrossRef .
K. Tvingstedt, N. K. Persson, O. Inganas, A. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113514 CrossRef .
V. E. Ferry, L. A. Sweatlock, D. Pacifici and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4391 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Yang, T. Xu, Y. S. Ito, U. Welp and W. K. Kwoko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20521 CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS .
K. Keis, E. Magnusson, H. Lindstrom, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 51 CrossRef .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, S. A. Haque, I. P. Mercer, J. E. Moser, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 7424 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6601 CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, M. Gratzel and P. P. Infelta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 405 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Kalaignan and Y. S. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 17 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Heidel, J. K. Mapel, M. Singh, K. Celebi and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093506 CrossRef .
V. E. Ferry, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4794 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental procedures, broadband light harvesting efficiency, photocurrent spectral response, and J–V fitting. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01578hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
The increasing global demand for a sustainable and affordable energy resource has motivated the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) community to push the limits of this promising photovoltaic technology. To date, efficient DSSCs employ ∼100 quadrillion (1017) molecular dyes cm−2 to sensitize a wide bandgap semiconductor framework in order to adequately harvest visible light. This porous nanoparticle framework is utilized to obtain the ∼1000-fold surface area enhancement required to chemically bind the chromophores with monolayer coverage. Although this unique and ingenious architecture allows DSSCs to achieve power conversion efficiencies up to 11%, it is a significant barrier to further improvement. In this work, we introduce a unity roughness photoelectrode design that affords adequate light absorption under resonance conditions while dramatically reducing the parasitic dark current density. This approach enables record open-circuit voltages (VOC) using the standard (I−/I3−) redox couple under monochromatic illumination and inspires new strategies to understand and control losses in DSSCs.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the device and illumination geometry. The zoom circle depicts the relative thickness of the silver (40 nm), metal oxide (80 nm), and dye layer (1 nm). The field intensity calculated on resonance for λ = 543 nm illumination as a function of position within the photoelectrode overlays the illustration. A depiction of the Ru-based dye (N719) is included in which TBA = tetrabutylammonium. The right most inset is a scanning electron microscope image of a ZnO photoelectrode in cross-section, prior to dye loading.	 

 	Fig. 2  Predicted (lines) and measured (symbols) photoelectrode reflectivity at λ = 543 nm as a function of illumination angle at several stages of device fabrication: Glass/Ag (36°), glass/Ag/ZnO (47°), and glass/Ag/ZnO/dye/electrolyte (74° upper). The transverse magnetic (TM) surface plasmon polariton mode is accessible in the Ag-only film while the first transverse electric (TE) guided mode is accessible in subsequent stages. The predicted incident photon to current efficiency (74° lower line) peaks at 24% whereas the measured value (lower symbols) peaks at 17%.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) in the dark (black) and under illumination on resonance (solid gray) for a ZnO-based device. The J–V characteristic of a flat, ZnO control device built on a TCO under broadband illumination at normal incidence (dashed gray). Linear (a) and log of the absolute value (b) scales of current density are shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) in the dark (solid black) and under illumination on resonance (solid gray) for a bilayer-based (ZnO/TiO2) planar device. The J–V of a nanoparticle TiO2 DSSC under broadband normally incident light (dashed gray, scaled by 1/10 for clarity in (a)) and in the dark (dashed black) are plotted for comparison. Linear (a) and log of the absolute value (b) scales of current density are shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  Relevant process under illumination in a DSSC with N719 dye (bandgap ∼ 1.6 eV) and iodide-based electrolyte at an applied potential of 1.01 V. Forward processes (solid arrows) are in kinetic competition with recombination pathways (dashed arrows). The primary dark current pathway, electrons in TiO2 scavenged by I3−, has been omitted for clarity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental procedures, broadband light harvesting efficiency, photocurrent spectral response, and J–V fitting. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01578h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
