Nanostructured photoelectrodes based on WO 3 : applications to photooxidation of aqueous electrolytes   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35373C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35373C
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2228-2246Nanostructured photoelectrodes based on WO3: applications to photooxidation of aqueous electrolytes†Carlo Alberto Bignozzi*a, Stefano Caramori*a, Vito Cristinoa, Roberto Argazzib, Laura Medac and Alessandra TaccacaDipartimento di Chimica dell'Università di Ferrara, Via Luigi, Borsari 46, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: g4s@unife.it; cte@unife.itbCNR Istituto per la Sintesi Organica e la Fotoreattività c/o Dipartimento di Chimica dell'Università di Ferrara, Via Luigi, Borsari 46, Ferrara, ItalycIstituto Guido Donegani per le Energie non Convenzionali, Via Fauser 4, Novara, ItalyReceived 7th September 2012First published on 7th December 2012AbstractSome recent studies mainly addressing the preparation and the modification of nanostructured thin films based on WO3 and their application to photoelectrolysis of aqueous electrolytes are reviewed with the aim of rationalizing the main factors at the basis of an efficient photoanodic response. WO3 represents one of the few materials which can achieve efficient water photo-oxidation under visible illumination, stably operating under strongly oxidizing conditions; thus the discussion of the structure-related photoelectrochemical properties of WO3 thin films and their optimization for achieving almost quantitative photon to electron conversion constitutes the core of this contribution.Carlo Alberto BignozziCarlo Alberto Bignozzi has been Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Ferrara since 2000. He was Associate Professor of Inorganic Chemistry (1985–2000) and Assistant Professor during 1977–1984. He has been Visiting Professor in several European, Japanese, South and North American Universities. His research investigates photoinduced energy and electron transfer processes in inorganic coordination compounds, in extended solids and in functional nanomaterials. Practical applications of this research include solar energy conversion, chemical sensing, photocatalysis, design of nanomaterials for environmental decontamination. He is the author of over 160 papers and review articles on international journals and of 16 patents.Stefano CaramoriStefano Caramori has been assistant professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Ferrara since 2010. His main scientific interests are the study of molecular systems and materials aimed at the conversion of solar energy into electrical or chemical energy. These activities involve spectroscopic and computational studies of charge transfer excited states in organic and inorganic moieties, the development of nanostructured semiconductor interfaces for photoelectrochemical systems and the investigation of their properties by steady state and time resolved spectrometric and electrochemical means. He is author and co-author of 35 papers and of 6 patents.Vito CristinoVito Cristino obtained his PhD in Chemistry at the University of Ferrara in 2011. He is currently working in Ferrara as a post-doctoral fellow. His main research interests are the preparation of nanostructured electrodes and surfaces by sol–gel and electrochemical techniques and the functionalization of photo-electro-active interfaces with water oxidation catalysts. He is co-author of 6 papers on international journals and of 3 patents.Roberto ArgazziRoberto Argazzi received his PhD in Chemistry in 1995 at the University of Ferrara, studying photochemical supramolecular systems applicable to solar energy conversion. His research interests concern the synthesis and the electrochemical and spectroscopic characterization of coordination compounds with organic ligands, the study of photoinduced energy and electron transfer in polynuclear metal complexes, the design of photochemical molecular devices and of heterosupramolecular systems with photochromic and electrochromic properties, the spectral sensitization of wide band gap semiconductors and the development of photoelectrochemical and photoelectrocatalytic devices for electric energy production and water splitting. He is currently a researcher at the National Research Council.Laura MedaLaura Meda graduated in Physics at the University of Milan in 1982. Her main research interests are the study of the surface of materials for electronics by various types of spectroscopy and diffraction techniques, including AES, XPS, XRD and SEM. She has been working for private and public research companies, including STMicroelectronics, ENICHEM and ENI. She is currently head of the Solar Hydrogen Production project at the Donegani Research Institute in Novara. She is author of more than 100 papers, 10 patents and one book. She is member of E-MRS and chaired the EMRS Symposium-T in 2011.Alessandra TaccaAlessandra Tacca obtained her PhD in Physical Chemistry at the University of Pavia in 2006. In 2008 she joined the Donegani Institute where she is currently involved in projects concerning solar water splitting. Her research interests include semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, solar energy conversion and electroanalytical techniques. She is author and co-author of 12 papers and 2 patents.IntroductionThe phenomenology of semiconductor/liquid interfaces represents a very interesting and important area in science and technology,1 involving principles of electrochemistry, photochemistry, solid state theory and surface and interface science. The applications are varied, but most are focused on solar energy conversion schemes, through the use of photoelectrochemical cells (PEC), which convert sunlight to electricity, or photoelectrolytic or photoelectrosynthetic cells in which solar energy is converted into chemical fuels.2 Other important applications involve the development of photocatalytic processes for selective photooxidation of organic compounds and for environmental remediation.3Semiconducting electrodes can efficiently absorb light, resulting in the creation of electron–hole pairs which can be separated with high yields, leading to the production of photocurrent and energy conversion. The most simple photoelectrochemical cell consists of a semiconducting electrode wired to a metal electrode, both immersed in an appropriate electrolyte.A central concept in the description of the thermodynamics of the semiconductor/electrolyte interface is the equilibration of the electrochemical potential (Fermi level) of the semiconductor and of the electrolyte. For example, when an n-type semiconductor is brought into contact with a redox couple, electrons (majority charge carriers) from the solid pass to the solution until the two Fermi levels are identical. Due to the relatively small charge carrier densities in the semiconductor (1016–1020 cm−3), if the crystalline domain is sufficiently large, a positive space charge layer, of a typical thickness of 10−6–10−8 m, is formed near the surface, counterbalanced by a compact “sheet” of negative charges (Helmholtz layer) whose electric potential produces an upward bending of the energy band (Fig. 1). The electric field developed inside the space charge region (depletion layer) may play a relevant role in assisting the spatial separation of the charge carriers, since holes (h+) are attracted to the surface, where the negative field is stronger; for the same reasons electrons (e−) are repelled from the surface to the bulk of the solid, where they diffuse through the external circuit to the counter electrode (Fig. 2). Thus, n-type semiconductors can be used as photoanodes, since the photogenerated holes reaching the surface drive photo-oxidation reactions. A conceptually similar situation is established for p-type semiconductors, in which the majority carriers are holes instead of electrons and in that case a space charge layer of opposite sign (negative) is created by hole transfer to the electrolyte, therefore the p-type material behaves as a photocathode. Fig. 1  Dark equilibration of an n-type semiconductor with an electrolyte containing a redox couple (A) of potential U. (a) Before equilibration; (b) after equilibration. The potential barrier height ΦB0 sets the upper limit to the energy that can be extracted from the junction.  Fig. 2  Charge separation (black arrows) and recombination (colored arrows) pathways in an n-type semiconductor in the presence of a depletion layer and a generic A/A− redox couple. Charge recombination can occur in the bulk (ibr), in the depletion layer (idr) and via surface states (iss). Electron losses by reaction with A through tunneling (it) across the potential barrier or at the surface (ite) are also represented according to ref. 4. The thermodynamic upper limit to the free energy that can be extracted by the junction in the presence of a barrier (ΦB0) is given by qΦB0 = EC − EF(1)where q is the electron charge, Ec is the conduction band edge at the surface and EF is the Fermi level at equilibrium, as indicated in Fig. 1(b). When the semiconductor is under illumination, the quantity related to the potential barrier is the open circuit photovoltage (Voc) of the junction. However, the usable free energy collected across a semiconductor/electrolyte interface is not purely limited by thermodynamic quantities, but also by kinetic factors, arising from critical competition between the favorable processes of charge separation and energy wasting charge recombination, which can occur inside and outside the depletion layer, by trapping into intraband-gap states at the surface of the solid (surface states) and also by electron tunneling to the acceptor states of the electrolyte (A) through the potential barrier4 (Fig. 2).Quantitative models which account for the photoeffects in illuminated semiconductor/electrolyte junctions have been first proposed in the 1950's by Gärtner5 and applied by Butler6 and Ginley7 to crystalline WO3 and iron titanate photoelectrodes. These models are based on the two prevailing mechanisms of charge collection of minority carriers (holes in n-type semiconductors), by migration, due to electric field inside the space charge layer, and by diffusion, when charge generation occurs outside the depletion layer. It is often assumed that minority carriers generated within a specific distance from the surface, called diffusion length L (, assuming the diffusion along a cartesian coordinate normal to the surface), dependent on their diffusion coefficient D and on their lifetime τ, can reach the surface or the border of the depletion region, from which they are successfully swept, giving rise to photocurrent and chemical reactions at the surface of the semiconductor.The optimization of the charge separation kinetics, with respect to recombination losses, is central for realizing efficient photoelectrochemical systems. This is particularly important in the case of nanostructured systems, where the small size of the nanocrystalline domains and their low doping level do not sustain a relevant depletion layer,8 and, in an electric field free regime, charge separation events are mainly determined by the chemical nature of the semiconductor surface and of the electrolyte and by the different overpotentials for the oxidation and reduction reactions taking place at the semiconductor surface.The process of photoelectrolysis of water by reaction with electrons and holes generated in a PEC cell exploiting sunlight9,10 can be summarized by the equations 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+; E0 = 1.23 V vs. NHE (at the anodic compartment of the cell)(2) 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2; E0 = 0 V vs. NHE (at the cathodic compartment of the cell)(3)and is extremely attractive for a number of reasons: (1) photoproduced hydrogen is a valuable fuel and energy carrier which can be stored more easily than electricity or heat; (2) it is nonpolluting, inexhaustible and flexible with respect to energy conversion in heat (combustion) or electricity (in fuel cells); (3) hydrogen is a valuable chemical by itself, being used in large quantities by the industry in chemical processing like ammonia synthesis and petroleum refining.Unfortunately, while the reduction of protons according to eqn (3) is relatively simple, the photooxidation of water (eqn (2)) is not an easy reaction, but a thermodynamically and kinetically demanding one, since it requires the loss of 4 electrons and 4 protons. Conceptually, this process can occur as a concerted four-electron reaction, as in some recently developed catalysts,11 or in multiple steps of one to three electrons,12 leading to intermediates that would in turn be further oxidized to molecular oxygen. One electron oxidation steps are highly demanding from the energetic point of view, since the formation of the hydroxyl intermediate according to H2O → OH˙(aq) + H+ (aq) + e−; E0 = 2.85 V(4)requires a potential of 2.85 V. Nevertheless, this is the postulated mechanism in the case of some wide band gap metal oxides, like TiO2, where the oxidizing power of photogenerated holes, lying at the top of the valence band, at ca. 3 V vs. NHE (NHE = Normal Hydrogen Electrode) and the stabilizing surface interactions of the OH˙ intermediate with oxygen atoms on top of the oxide surface may make eqn (4) thermodynamically and kinetically feasible. For example, recent accurate quantum chemical studies concerning WO3 surfaces13 have shown that the photogenerated holes at a potential of 2.97 V should provide enough overpotential for the oxygen evolution to occur at WO3 surfaces, the whole cascade of single electron transfer steps, required to oxidize water to dioxygen, being downhill starting from a potential of 2.3 V.Several approaches to photoelectrolysis are thus possible, involving a wide band gap photoactive semiconductor electrode electrically connected to a metal electrode, or photoactive anode (n-type) and cathode (p-type) acting either as separate electrodes, or coupled to form a monolithic structure called photochemical diode.14The most common and simplest photoelectrolysis configuration, useful for the general scope of our discussion, is represented by the wiring of an n-type semiconductor, acting as a photoanode (working electrode, W), to a metal counter electrode (C), both immersed in an aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 3). Fig. 3  Energy level diagrams for an n-type semiconductor (W)-metal counter electrode (C) photoelectrolysis cell: (a) no contact; (b) equilibrium in the dark; (c) high intensity irradiation; the quasi Fermi levels of the minority and majority carriers are not shown with the assumption that the quasi Fermi level of the electrons approaches the original semiconductor Fermi level while the quasi Fermi level of holes approaches the valence band edge; (d) high intensity irradiation with anodic bias. The overvoltage ηa has to be considered independent by the photocurrent, but dependent only on the Fermi level and the band gap. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.9 In Fig. 3 the Fermi level in the electrolyte has been left undefined since it depends on the initial relative concentrations of H2 and O2 in solution. Fig. 3b shows the situation at equilibrium in the dark, once the semiconductor and the metal are brought in contact with the electrolyte and a depletion layer is possibly formed near the semiconductor surface. When the semiconductor is irradiated with photons of energy corresponding to the band-gap, electron–hole pairs are created and the Fermi level in the semiconductor is raised towards the flat band potential Vfb by an amount Vph which is the photopotential generated. The maximum value the Fermi level can reach in the semiconductor is the flat band potential Vfb which, in the case shown, is lower with respect to the H+/H2 redox couple. This means that hydrogen evolution cannot take place at the metal electrode even at the highest irradiation intensity. For hydrogen evolution to occur, a positive bias must be applied to the semiconductor electrode as shown in Fig. 3d. This bias, which is usually provided by an external voltage source, should also account for the necessary cathodic (ηc) and anodic (ηa) overvoltages in order to sustain the current flow. This situation represents a condition which is frequently met with visible absorbing semiconductor metal oxides photochemically and electrochemically stable in aqueous environment, like WO3 or Fe2O3.In order to be economically viable, reasonable estimates require a Solar power To Hydrogen conversion (STH) efficiency of the order of 10% which should be comparable with the direct solar to electric power conversion efficiency achieved by the current commercial solar cells based on the silicon technology.The most reliable way to measure the STH conversion efficiency of a PEC device under simulated solar illumination (Air Mass 1.5, AM 1.5) and under 0 bias is to measure directly the rate of H2 generation and to calculate the energy conversion according to15 (5)where P is the total incident solar power density striking the electrode of geometric area A. When the faradic efficiency for hydrogen and oxygen evolution is 100%, it is also common to calculate the STH according to (6)where Jsc is the short circuit photocurrent delivered by the solar device. When a bias voltage is needed, the efficiency term must take into account the effect of the applied voltage (which should be referred to the counter electrode) by using eqn (7) where the photocurrent density (J) produced by the cell at a given voltage Vbias appears. Although in the literature eqn (7) is often used to calculate the STH of cells operating in the presence of a bias, it is not equivalent to eqn (5), in the sense that it is not a true solar to hydrogen measurement. The quantity at the left side of eqn (7) has been more rigorously called ABPE (Applied Bias Photon to current Efficiency): (7)While record conversion efficiencies (STH > 12%) have been achieved with monolithic multijunction solar devices showing limited durability in working conditions,14 this objective is still far from being achieved by using cheap, easy to manufacture and stable materials. Nevertheless, the development of photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) has generally gained considerable benefits by the exploitation of mesoporous materials, based on multiple sintered layers of nanoparticles fabricated by relatively cheap sol–gel or spray methods, which allow for a large electrochemically active surface, effective light harvesting and reasonably good charge transport and collection efficiencies, all factors contributing to enhance the overall efficiency of the photoelectrode.In the field of water splitting, mainly n-type metal oxides like TiO2,16 Fe2O317–19 and WO320–22 have attracted most of the attention due to their low cost, ease of preparation and high stability in aqueous solution under oxygen evolving conditions in a reasonably wide range of pH. More recently, phosphates like Ag3PO423 and metal oxynitrides like TaON24 have revealed very promising photoanodic response, although their preparation and stability under prolonged illumination seems to be more critical than simpler metal oxides. In this latter case, post treatments with water oxidation catalysts like colloidal IrO2 are required to improve both photoelectrochemical activity and stability.The electrochemical anodization of valve metals like titanium or tungsten is an alternative preparative route which can lead to the growth of interesting crystalline oxide nanostructures directly bound to the metal current collector, providing the basis of efficient charge collection. The comparatively high metal conductivity also allows for the production of large area photoanodes which do not suffer from the serious ohmic limitations typical of many TCO (Transparent Conductive Oxides) collectors like ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) or FTO25 (Fluorine doped Tin Oxide).In this contribution some recent studies, mainly from our laboratories, addressing both the preparation and the modification of nanostructured thin films based on WO3 and their application to water photoelectrolysis will be reviewed with the aim of rationalizing the main factors on the basis of an efficient photoanodic response and indicating the way towards possible improvements of these systems.Photoanodes based on nanostructured WO3: sol–gel routesDue to its electrochromic properties, i.e. a reversible color change upon application of a suitable electric potential, tungsten trioxide has been employed and widely used in electronic displays, smart windows, sun roofs and rear and side view mirrors.26,27 More recently, due to its chemical stability in acidic aqueous media and interesting photoelectrochemical properties, it has been proposed as a promising candidate in water photoelectrolysis processes. Due to the inherent interest in technological applications, its electronic properties have been studied in detail by ab initio methods.28 The typical monoclinic WO3 cell can be considered as a deformed perovskite structure (Fig. 4) of the type ABO3, where the ion A is missing and B is replaced by W. The band structure reveals an indirect band gap semiconductor, with a flat top of the valence band in the B → Γ direction indicating extremely high effective masses m* for the holes along the W–O–W chains in the x direction. Similar high effective mass was also found for electrons in the Γ → Z direction, indicating that conduction along this direction will be quite prohibitive. This agrees with the relatively short hole diffusion length reported for monoclinic WO3, of the order of 150 nm6. Fig. 4  Monoclinic cell of WO3 (left) and calculated band structure in the LDA-PAW approximation. The underestimation of the band gap (1.3 eV vs. experimental 2.6 eV) is a consequence of the approximation used in the calculation. Adapted with permission from the American Physical Society.28 Nanostructuring of the material should thus be advantageous, since the increased surface roughness may facilitate the penetration of the electrolyte, enhancing the photo-induced hole injection from the WO3 to the electrolyte and facilitating the interfacial charge separation. Furthermore, the higher irregularities of the film can reduce the bulk hole diffusion path, leading to a general improvement of the performances of the photoelectrode. However this statement should not be easily generalized, since in nanoparticulate films one usually loses the possibility of conventional space charge effects and intense electron–hole recombination in the illuminated regions then becomes possible.29 An efficient charge separation can thus rely only on successful interfacial kinetic competition between charge transfer and recombination events. That is why often sacrificial hole scavengers are employed to boost the efficiency in photoelectrochemical hydrogen production processes from aqueous solution.In the case of WO3 the formation of nanoparticulate films was rewarding and sol–gel routes based on the sintering of colloidal nanoparticles appeared to be a simple and viable way to produce efficient nanostructured photoanodes. Essentially these methods are based on the formation of a stable H2WO4 sol which undergoes dehydration at high temperature to form a stable, transparent WO3 thin film. To date, the most promising results with this method were achieved by Augustynski et al. who developed a preparative route based on the production of an ethanolic H2WO4 sol by ion-exchange on a cationic resin, followed by addition of polyethylene glycol (PEG) which acted as a stabilizer and as a dispersing agent for the subsequent blading on the TCO substrate.21,22 Annealing of the film at 550 °C under an oxygen atmosphere led to the best photoelectrochemical performances due to the formation of a transparent thin film composed of relatively large, polydisperse (ca. 30–100 nm) interconnected monoclinic WO3 particles showing a substantial porosity (Fig. 5). Temperature has indeed a profound influence on the morphology and on the structure-related properties of the resulting thin films, and deep changes were observed by varying the annealing temperature in the 400–600 °C range: samples heated at 400 °C consisted of a network of ca. 30 nm long needle-like particles which, at 450 °C, gradually became small (ca. 15 nm wide) plate-like particles which, by further increase of the temperature, in the 500–550 °C range, turned into larger size nanoparticles with clearly observable pores. Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of WO3 films obtained by deposition of the H2WO4/PEG precursor annealed in the 400–550 °C temperature range. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.21 Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 6) was a valuable tool for monitoring this process30 and, while at low temperature (300–350 °C) strong signals at 780 and 962 cm−1 along with medium intensity bands centered around 1336 and 1610 cm−1, did not correspond to any known crystalline form of WO3 or hydrated oxides, at higher temperatures, a band at 723 cm−1 gradually gained intensity, which, together with the characteristic weak bands at 435 and 447 cm−1, was indicative of the formation of the monoclinic WO3 structure which also features typical main bands at 803 and 271 cm−1, originated by bending and stretching of W–O–W bonds. These bands also became more intense and defined following prolonged heating, indicating a higher degree of crystallinity of the thin film. At the same time the signals at 1336 and 1610 cm−1, originated by the incomplete combustion of PEG, completely disappeared, testifying the complete removal of residual carbon contaminants. Fig. 6  Raman spectra of WO3 thin films deposited from tungstic acid/PEG precursor at 350 °C (a); 400 °C (b); 500 °C (c); 550 °C (d). The arrows indicate the main monoclinic WO3 bands. Adapted with permission from Springer.30 The photoelectrochemical tests confirmed that the best results could be obtained with porous electrodes 2.5 μm thick, featuring a good degree of crystallinity, a significant improvement in film photoactivity with increasing annealing temperature from 450 to 550 °C was indeed observed, and the best samples delivered saturation photocurrents exceeding 2–2.5 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 illumination. This confirmed that the efficient operation of the photoanode not only depends on the amount of electroactive surface but also strongly relies on the efficient electron transport along the interconnected nanoparticle network which is particularly sensitive to crystal structure and grain boundaries.Since crystal size, nanoparticle necking and thickness of the photoactive layer affect the current–voltage behaviour of the photoanode, the morphological effect of a series of different organic dispersing agents/binders (Table 1) was also explored, in order to rationalize their repercussions on the crystal size of nanostructured WO3 photoanodes prepared according to modified Santato–Augustynski procedures.31
Table 1 Organic binders/stabilizers used as densifying agents for aqueous H2WO4 sols. Adapted with permission from Elsevier31

DispersingDispersing agentEthylene glycolD-(+)-Raffinose pentahydratePEG 200, PEG 300, PEG 400, PEG 1300–1600, PEG 4000, PEG 6000, PEG 20000(Hydroxypropyl)methyl celluloseD-(+)-GlucoseBrij® 97 (Mn 709)D-SorbitolIgepal® CO520 (Mn 441)D-(+)-Maltose monohydratePEG-b-PPG-b-PEG (Mn 2800)MaltitolPolyethyleneglycol bisphenol A epichlorohydrin copolymer (PEG-BAE)In general a fine crystallite size tuning could be obtained by changing the dispersing agent. A reasonably good empirical logarithmic correlation was found between the average size of the crystal, obtained from the analysis of the coherent scattering domains in XRD, and the molecular weight of dispersing agents, indicating that the longer the alkoxy-chain of the dispersing agents, the smaller the average WO3 particle diameter. This effect could be ascribed to a stronger spacing effect of relatively high molecular weight polymers which, coupled to a slower burning during the annealing, prevents the fast coalescence of WO3 or hydrated tungsten oxides into larger nanoparticles. For example, the use of PEG-BAE 20000 led to ca. 30 nm nanoparticles composing a film of an average thickness of 500–700 nanometers, obtained with a single blading of the H2WO4/PEG-BAE precursor. The reduction in particle as well as pore size as a function of the molecular weight of the organic additive is evident from Fig. 7, where the reduced inter-nanoparticle spacing and the smaller size of the pores and channels did not hamper solvent permeation or limit the electroactive area. According to chronocoulometric results in which the proton compensated W+6 → W+5 reduction was comparatively probed, the electroactive area reached in PEG 20000 samples its maximum value in terms of exchanged charge. Fig. 7  SEM micrographs (×2 105) of WO3 electrodes obtained with: EG (a); PEG 1300–1600 (b); PEG 20000 (c). Samples annealed at 550 °C. Adapted with permission from Elsevier.31 The intimate necking of the smaller nanoparticles resulted in an improved photoanodic response over the larger sized particles obtained with low molecular weight organics. Incident Photon to current Conversion Efficiencies (IPCE) calculated according to the expression (8)where J is the photocurrent density at the wavelength λ and P is the incident radiant power, were found for these thin films on the order of 40%, extending up to 430 nm. The shuttered J–V curves in 1 M H2SO4 (Fig. 8) did not show dark transient cathodic features testifying a limited interfacial hole accumulation and small recombination via surface states, at least on the relatively long time scale (0.1 s) of the experiment. The shape and the photocurrent intensity of the voltammograms obtained by irradiating through the front (WO3/electrolyte interface) and back contact (FTO/WO3 interface) were also very similar, suggesting that the electron transport through the film was indeed quite effective, consistent with the behavior expected from thin film photoelectrodes, whose thickness is small compared to the electron diffusion length32, where D is the diffusion coefficient of the majority carriers and τ is their lifetime. Fig. 8  Shuttered J–V curves in WO3 thin films obtained in the presence of PEG-BAE 20000 binder/dispersing agent. Data recorded at an incident irradiance of 0.11 W cm−2, full Xe profile, in 0.3 M H2SO4. SCE is ∼ +0.24 V vs. NHE. Adapted with permission from Elsevier.31 Besides being a cheap and viable method, the preparation of colloidal thin WO3 films is flexible and lends itself to easy modifications of the baseline material in order to improve its photoelectrochemical response, for example by incorporating different photoactive species. A successful case is represented by the functionalisation of the semiconductor surface by appropriate metal nanoparticles allowing the exploitation of plasmonic resonance effects to increase both light harvesting and charge separation thanks to the creation of strong local electromagnetic fields in the immediate proximity of the metal nanoparticle (NP). Indeed, it was recently demonstrated33 that a 4 nm thick Ag film, actually consisting of separated nano-islands (Fig. 9A), sputtered onto the TCO back contact, prior to coating with the nanocrystalline WO3, was able to enhance (by ∼50%) and red shift (up to 450 nm) the light absorption of a ca. 1 μm thick WO3 film, resulting in an improved IPCE and current output under simulated solar illumination, being about 60% higher than that recorded with an equivalent unmodified WO3 photoelectrode. Notably, the observed photocurrent enhancement could not be explained only by nonresonant light reflection and scattering by the AgNP/WO3 interface, but it was observed to arise also from specific plasmonic effects, consistently with the relevant and peculiar IPCE enhancement (Fig. 9B) observed during short wavelength (370–400 nm) illumination of the film through the back contact. Given the strong light absorption at these wavelengths, electron–hole pairs are generated in proximity of the TCO. In these conditions the most favourable interaction between the illuminated semiconductor/electrolyte junction and the electromagnetic field generated at the TCO/AgNP interface can be attained, finally improving photon to electron conversion. Fig. 9  (A) 3 nm Ag particles sputtered on the TCO collector; (B) enhanced IPCE in the presence of 4 nm Ag layer (circles and diamonds) compared to an unmodified WO3 film (triangles) of the same thickness at 1.5 V vs. NHE in acidified NaCl. The diamonds correspond to irradiation through the collector. The inset is the magnification of the 370–400 nm interval. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.33 Given its relatively positive Fermi level (ca. 0.5 V vs. NHE at pH 0), WO3 photoelectrodes are generally characterized by low Solar power To Hydrogen conversion efficiencies (STH) since they require a rather positive potential bias (>1.2 V vs. NHE) to approach the photoanodic plateau, which is limited by the rate of diffusion and/or migration of the minority carriers at the interface. As a consequence, in the final application, i.e. a complete PEC cell splitting water without externally applied bias, WO3 photoanodes should be serially connected to p-type photoelectrodes or to other cheap solar voltage sources (either silicon solar cells or Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, DSSCs) capable of providing the appropriate voltage for the successful operation of the photoanode as schematized, for example, in Fig. 10. Fig. 10  (a) WO3 photoelectrode serially connected to a DSSC. Note that the WO3 substrate (photoanode) is connected to the cathode of the solar cells through a bipolar FTO. The photoanode of the solar cell is connected to a Pt electrode at which hydrogen evolution occurs. (b) JV characteristic of the tandem device. Note the negative shift (ca. 600 mV) of the JV characteristic due to the bias generated by the solar cell. Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.35 Bard and Park34 and Park et al.35 evaluated the photoelectrochemical behavior of colloidal WO3 photoelectrodes, obtained either by electrophoretic deposition of colloidal nanoparticles or by drop casting of PEG stabilized peroxotungstic acid colloid on FTO electrodes. These photoanodes were serially connected to a DSSC, generating an open circuit photovoltage (Voc) of about 600 mV, and the system was shown to be capable of splitting water in the absence of externally applied bias, although the maximum ABPE efficiencies, of the order of 2.5% were achieved by Bard at pH 4 in the presence of a slightly positive bias of 0.15 V, at which the photoanodic current density approached a plateau of 2.5 mA cm−2. Park reached ∼2.4 mA cm−2 at a bias of 0.4 V in 1 M H2SO4, corresponding to a maximum ABPE of ca. 2%.It should be noted that the theoretical limit to the STH expected from WO3 (regarded as a perfect absorber with a band gap of ca. 2.7 eV) is expected to be of the order of 5%36 and is still far from being achieved. Thus, in view of the realization of an efficient tandem device it is important to develop WO3 photoanodes able to deliver the highest possible photocurrents, at the appropriate operation voltage, by optimizing the kinetic competition between interfacial charge transfer and recombination. The exploitation of different types of nanostructures with optimal properties of charge transport may be instrumental in achieving high efficiencies, and alternative routes (i.e. electrochemical methods) for obtaining high interfacial contact areas with a high density of redox active sites have been explored in detail.Nanostructured WO3 films by electrochemical oxidation of metallic tungsten1. Formation and morphologyTungsten (together with Al, Ti, Zr, Bi, Ta, Nb) belongs to the group of the so-called valve metals, which passivate and show a very high corrosion resistance in most common aqueous media. The composition of naturally or anodically produced oxide films is essentially identical to the WO3. According to the electrochemical and XPS evidences, it has been proposed that the anodic oxidation of tungsten may result in the initial formation of a mixture of oxides, namely WO2, W2O5 and WO3, according to the equations W + 2H2O → WO2 + 4H+ + 4e−(9) 2WO2 + H2O → W2O5 + 2H+ + 2e−(10) W2O5 + H2O → 2WO3 + 2H+ + 2e−(11)However, at higher anodization potentials >3 V the dominating species is W6+. Impedance analysis performed by Metikos-Hukovic et al.37 during the potentiostatic anodization also suggests that the migration of oxygen vacancies is the main charge transport mechanism across the growing WO3 oxide film and that it is eventually enhanced by the accumulation of negative charges (corresponding to cation vacancies) at the film/solution interface.Thus, electrochemical anodization of metallic tungsten can be a convenient method for preparing porous photoactive substrates in which the oxide structures are tightly interconnected and strongly bound to the metal collector, both factors concurring to increase the photogenerated charge collection efficiency. The most common route for the anodic preparation of porous films involves the application of a constant potential to a metallic tungsten lamina in the presence of aqueous electrolytes containing fluoride anions which establish mild oxide dissolution conditions.38 Schmuki et al.39 also achieved a porous oxide structure (and even some small nanotubular WO3 domains) by application of a sudden overvoltage (several tens of volts) intended to reach oxide breakdown conditions in fluoride free electrolytes. Basically, in order to reach breakdown conditions, made possible by the presence of a strong applied field, a harsh treatment consisting in the application of a sudden potential step of several tens of volts has to be adopted. Electrolyte temperature and compositions are however also important for reaching reproducible results and a reasonable surface coverage.Although most literature reports deal with nanocrystalline WO3 substrates which display a high photoactivity in the UV region but give a limited response in the visible frequencies,38,40 it was found,41 by following the pioneering work of Grimes et al.,42 that efficient monoclinic WO3 substrates characterized by an extended spectral response could be obtained by potentiostatic anodization in a two W electrode cell in the 30–40 V range, by using an electrolyte comprised of N-methyl-formamide (NMF)/water 8:2 in the presence of 0.05% w/w NH4F.The electrochemical formation of a porous metal oxide can be understood in terms of at least two competing interfacial processes: oxide formation by reaction with oxygen donors, commonly water, resulting in the initial formation of a compact oxide layer and the field assisted dissolution of the oxide.43 The presence of chemical etchants, like fluorides, promotes initial localized chemical corrosion pits, from which the field assisted dissolution is accelerated due to local field inhomogeneities. Since the electric field is stronger at the metal oxide interface than at the outer oxide layers, the oxide dissolution and the subsequent re-formation is faster at the metal/oxide interface than at the outer oxide layers and one essentially obtains the progressive inward movement of the metal/oxide interface, which may result in the formation of a relatively thick (microns) photoactive oxide layer. In this context, the choice of high dielectric constant solvents, like NMF (182.4), is instrumental in stabilizing a high charge density at the electrode surface, improving the extraction of W6+ and, ultimately, favoring oxide growth and the formation of an outer porous oxide film which can reach a thickness of few microns. The fact that the current continues to maintain relevant values (∼6–10 mA cm−2) along the whole duration of the anodization process and the observation of gas bubbles evolving from the oxide surface under anodization indicate the persistence of ionic and electronic conduction through the W/WO3 interface. The SEM imaging of WO3 films obtained at progressive anodization time intervals in the NMF electrolyte provides a picture of the stages involved in the formation of the photoactive oxide (Fig. 11). After 2 hours from the beginning of the anodization a compact oxide layer with a few corrosion pits is evident. After 6 hours the number of pits is increased and thicker oxide walls are present at their borders, suggesting oxide growth and formation of deeper tubes with a circular mouth. With the progress of the anodization, the adjacent tubes grow in number, their walls grow in thickness, weld and crack, finally resulting, after 24 h, in the characteristic surface constituted by bundled up structures, ca. 300 nm wide, longitudinally crossed by cracks which give to the surface an overall meandrous and notched appearance. The AFM imaging confirmed the porous nature of the surface, revealing a maximum height difference between structure crests and valleys or pores of approximately 600 nm. These features are preserved after 48 and 72 hours of continuous anodization. Fig. 11  SEM micrographs of the WO3 surface resulting from the anodization in the NMF based electrolyte at different times at RT: 2 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 48 h. Samples annealed at 550 °C in air before SEM imaging. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.41 Although it was initially observed that slow anodization procedures, involving the application of a constant 40 V potential for 72 hours at room temperature, led to the best photoelectrodes, it was soon recognized44,45 that a relatively small increase in temperature (from ca. 20 to 40 °C) resulted in a significant acceleration of the porous oxide formation, leading to the efficient fabrication of photoanodes in a few hours. The same surface morphology observed following the R.T. process is also found in WO3 samples obtained through the accelerated anodization route at 40 °C, following which nano tubular oxide domains can also be noticed. This analogy suggests that essentially also under accelerated conditions the formation of the oxide goes through the same steps that are observed at R.T., but simply, the kinetics of both the competing interfacial processes, i.e. oxide formation and dissolution, are improved, as demonstrated by the significantly higher currents (typically 60–80 mA cm−2 at 40 °C compared to 4–6 mA cm−2 at R.T.) recorded during the accelerated anodization process. This is confirmed by SEM imaging of electrodes taken at various time intervals (Fig. 12A) which show that after a few minutes of anodization, when a very low current intensity is recorded, a compact blocking oxide layer is formed with only a few corrosion pits present on the surface. After 1 hour, when the anodic current reaches a maximum (Fig. 12C), the number of pits grows abruptly and the etching of the oxide layer is the predominant phenomenon, leading to conditions in which a continuous formation of fresh oxide at the metal/oxide interface follows the field assisted dissolution, resulting in a progressive inward movement of the interface and in the formation of a porous oxide network. In the following hours the current slowly decreases, due to thickening and consolidation of the oxide layer, and after 5–6 hours the final winding, meandrous morphology of the oxide network is complete (Fig. 12B). Fig. 12  (A) SEM micrographs of surfaces of anodic growth WO3 at increasing anodization time from 5 minutes to 6 hours. (B) Cross sectional view of the oxide films after 7 hours of accelerated anodization at 40 °C. (C) Typical current vs. time behavior observed during anodization. Samples annealed in air at 550 °C. (A, C) Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 (B) Adapted with permission from Elsevier.44 SEM imaging taken at higher magnification (80000 ×) (Fig. 13A) confirms the vertical structuring of the porous oxide building, composed of oriented columnar structures of height ca. 2 μm (Fig. 13B), resulting from the preferential etching along the direction normal to the electrode surface (Fig. 13B). It is worth noting that the XRD pattern of the anodically grown samples is consistent with a preferential orientation of the 020 and 222 crystal planes of monoclinic WO3 and that the anisotropy along 222 increases proportionally with the anodization time. A similar preferential growth in electrochemically produced WO3 was already described by Guo et al.40 in WO3 samples obtained in aqueous acidic baths; however those structures were characterized by a different morphology and bore a closer resemblance to that typical of sintered nanoparticles. According to AFM imaging analysis, which provided a relative rough evaluation of the surface area, the surface area of the oxide slowly increased to reach a maximum after 6 hours of anodization and then decreased. Thus, on the basis of the relative active surface estimates, 6 h should be the optimal duration to reach the best photoelectrochemical performance in small area electrodes (∼6 cm2). Fig. 13  A–B: SEM imaging showing the vertical orientation of the WO3 structures obtained in NMF and 20% water in the presence of 0.05% NH4F after 6 hours of accelerated anodization at 40 °C. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 Besides anodization time and temperature, the amount of water into the anodization bath controls to a large extent surface morphology, as demonstrated by a comparative study45 in which the volume of water in the NMF electrolyte was systematically increased in an interval ranging between 10 and 50% v/v, while the duration of the anodization was kept constant at 6 hours, in agreement with the previous findings. This resulted in a series of electrodes named 10–50 (Fig. 14) according to the percentage of water used in the anodizing electrolyte. It was observed that, consistently with the relatively low stationary current (∼10 mA cm−2) recorded during the anodization, when the amount of water was increased at the level of 40–50% v/v, the oxide layer tended to become thinner and less porous, indicating that the increased amount of oxygen donors (water molecules) shifted the equilibrium between oxide formation and dissolution in favor of the formation of a compact, blocking, oxide layer, which in sample type 50 showed only shallow corrosion pits and channels (Fig. 14d), the surface being very similar to that of electrodes obtained after just 1 h of anodization in the typical conditions (20% water). This type of morphology should be less suited for efficient photoelectrochemical processes since it may limit the percolation of the electrolyte into the inner oxide layers, resulting in a less efficient interfacial hole transfer (vide infra), particularly in the case of penetrating wavelengths, which create charge carriers deeper into the semiconductor. Fig. 14  SEM micrographs of surface (on the left) and cross section (on the right) of anodic growth WO3 at increasing water content from 10% (a) to 50% (d). Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 2. Photoelectrochemistry of anodically grown WO3The characteristics of the oxide layer, with regard to specific electroactive surface, electrolyte permeation, charge transport, and interfacial charge transfer dynamics, are of crucial importance for optimizing the current generation by the photoanode. The typical photoelectrochemical performances of the anodically grown oxides are relevant: under an incident power of 0.15 W cm−2 (AM 1.5 G filter) the anodized WO3 substrates obtained in the NMF based electrolyte show the highest photocurrent, which, approaching 3.5 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE), is largely superior to that produced by photoelectrodes obtained in other high dielectric constant solvents, like DMF and DMSO based electrolytes, due to a combination of fast charge transport along the interconnected oxide structures, which takes place on the time scale of a few milliseconds, and efficient interfacial hole transfer kinetics. As anticipated, we note that due to the large bias required to drive a relevant photocurrent, even the best photoelectrodes give rise to a rather poor ABPE, of the order of 0.15%, measured in a two electrode configuration in the presence of a bias of 1 V,45 confirming that WO3 photoelectrodes always require an external solar voltage source providing ∼1 V to operate efficiently. This potential could be quite easily achieved by a serial connection of two cheap solar cells each generating at least 0.5 V. If this condition is met, the best WO3 photoanodes should provide a projected STH conversion of ca. 3% according to a recent evaluation by Augustynski et al.46 based on the photocurrent generated in a highly conductive electrolyte composed of 3 M methanesulfonic acid.Interestingly, the anodized substrates in both NMF and DMSO are superior to the WO3 electrodes obtained by blade casting of a colloidal (ca. 30 nm nanoparticles) H2WO4 precursor stabilized with oxalic acid.41 A double layer colloidal electrode obtained by two subsequent blade casting, with a thickness comparable to the NMF substrate, undergoes only a marginal improvement over the single layer, suggesting that the oxide thickness or the related light harvesting alone is not entirely responsible for the different performances. The advantage of the electrochemically grown WO3 over a more conventional WO3 electrode obtained by standard sol–gel methods (colloidal), can be clearly appreciated from Fig. 15: while the performances of the two electrodes are quite similar at low power intensities, under strong illumination the anodically grown substrate does not show saturation and clearly outperforms the colloidal film by almost a factor of four. The photocurrent action spectra (Fig. 16A) recorded in sulfuric acid indicate a high photon to current conversion, approaching 70% in a broad region in the UV and extending deeply in the visible region, thanks to a secondary maximum at 400 nm (IPCEmax = 45% at 1.5 V vs. SCE) whose onset is located at 480 nm. This leads to a calculated indirect band gap of 2.66 eV, which is significantly lower (by at least 0.15–0.25 eV) than values commonly reported for other nanostructured anodically grown WO3 substrates and approaches values reported for bulk monoclinic WO3 films, obtained by exploiting high vacuum technologies like thermal evaporation or radio frequency sputtering.47 As a comparison, WO3 films electrochemically produced either in water/HF/NH4F according to the procedure described by Guo et al.,40 or in other organic solvents like DMF, or by sol–gel methods, do not show any relevant photoconversion beyond 430–440 nm. The broad photo-conversion and the secondary maximum extending in the visible region can be explained by improved light absorption of weakly absorbed frequencies, due to increased light scattering and light trapping effects induced by the nanostructured surface. This is consistent with the sharp decrease in reflected light, starting from 450 nm, as evidenced by diffuse reflectance spectra of porous electrodes (Fig. 16B). Thus the vertically oriented and porous structures encountered in these electrodes are suitable for improving light harvesting and to achieve a good electrolyte permeation of the oxide substrate, possibly leading to a shortened hole diffusional path, as demonstrated by the good photon to electron conversion in correspondence to those wavelengths which have a long penetration depth in the semiconductor (i.e. ∼7 μm at 440 nm)48 and create electron–hole pairs far from the outermost layer of the oxide. It can also be appreciated that the spectral extension reaches its maximum by prolonging the accelerated anodization to 6–7 hours, which constitute the optimal values in terms of maximization of the electroactive surface. By contrast relatively more compact oxide layers, like those obtained after short anodization intervals (e.g. 1 hour) or in the presence of high water content (type 50 samples, Fig. 16C), display a reasonable conversion only in the UV region (300–360 nm) in which the radiation has a short penetration depth (ca. 1 μm) and generates electron–hole pairs in the most external oxide layers, which have a better chance of being more effectively permeated by the electrolyte. This seems to contradict the common notion that, if the charge carriers are generated in close proximity to the electron collector then they are efficiently extracted; however, if the inner part of the oxide is scarcely accessible to the electrolyte, hole transfer to the latter cannot be efficiently achieved and electron–hole recombination occurs on a millisecond time scale, as revealed by the fast component of laser induced photovoltage decay measurements (Fig. 16D). Fig. 15  Photocurrent density taken at 1 V vs. SCE (1.24 V vs. NHE) plotted against the incident irradiance (AM 1.5 filter): (black) anodically grown; (red) sol–gel WO3 in 1 M H2SO4. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.41  Fig. 16  (A) IPCE spectra of WO3 anodized at increasing times in 1 M H2SO4 under 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE) potential bias. It can be appreciated that the visible response increases by prolonging the anodization from l to 6–7 h. (B) Diffuse reflectance spectra of WO3 electrodes 20 and 50, from which the strong absorption of electrode 20 starting at 450 nm can be appreciated. The opaque appearance of the type 20 electrode compared to 50, evident by visual inspection, originated by increased light scattering is also reported. (C) IPCE spectra of the series 10–50 under 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE) potential bias. (D) Laser induced photovoltage decay (355 nm excitation) in anodized WO3 films of the type 10, 20 and 50. The fast component is ascribed to the direct electron–hole recombination with a lifetime of ca. 4 ms. The long component which does not recover on the time scale of the measurement is ascribed to long lived electron trapping within the film. Here, for sake of clarity, the transients were recorded in ACN/1 M LiClO4 which, being a less efficient hole scavenger than water, allows us to observe a larger amplitude of the fast component. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 Electrochemical Impedance Spectrocopy (EIS) represents a powerful tool to characterize the interfacial events, and insights into the charge separation mechanism at the WO3/electrolyte interface can be obtained by comparing the response of different photoelectrodes. Various anodically grown and colloidal substrates were considered by exploring the region ranging between 0.2 to 1.2 V vs. SCE, coincident with the potential interval where the photocurrent rises, allowing thus to correlate the impedance response directly to the physical processes responsible for the photocurrent and not to passive circuit elements. In general the impedance characteristics of the electrodes (Fig. 17) could be well fitted by a Randles type circuit49 (a parallel RC simulating the electrochemical interface in series to an ohmic resistance accounting for the impedance of the electrolyte) schematized in Fig. 17D, indicating that in all cases the impedance of the photoelectrodes is dominated by the charge transfer resistance (Rct) which is usually in the range of 102–103 Ohm and reaches the lowest values in type 20 electrodes (see SEM Fig. 13), with only a negligible contribution (ca. 1 Ohm) arising from the ohmic resistances (electrolyte and wires) of the cell, given the high conductivity of the 1 M sulfuric acid solution. No electron transport impedance features were observed in the high frequencies region for any of the electrodes at any of the explored potentials and, therefore, we have to assume a negligible electron transport resistance, which agrees with the nearly instantaneous laser induced photocurrent rise (t ∼5 × 10−5 s) and subsequent electron diffusion peak (∼10−3 s) observed in transient experiments. This is also theoretically reasonable, since relatively fast (steep) conduction bands are observed along certain directions of the monoclinic reciprocal lattice (Fig. 2). Thus, the interfacial charge transfer resistance uniquely determines the shape and the size of the J–V curves, as also demonstrated by the good agreement between their derivative (slope) and the reciprocal of the charge transfer resistance obtained by EIS. Fig. 17  Nyquist plots of WO3 photoelectrodes recorded at various voltages (0.2–1.2 V vs. SCE) under 0.2 W cm−2 illumination in 1 M H2SO4. (A) Anodic type 20 (porous); (B) anodic type 50 (compact); (C) colloidal film; (D) electrical equivalent of the interface. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 Interestingly, the interfacial behavior of the anodically grown substates was consistent with the presence of a depletion region, as indicated by the relatively good linear C−2vs. V relationship50 (Fig. 18A), whereas electrodes composed of 20–30 nm nanoparticles obtained by sol–gel methods do not reveal, as expected, any clear evidence of space charge effects, rather show a behavior closer to a chemical capacitance, which exponentially depends on the applied potential51 (Fig. 18B). The Mott–Schottky plots (1/C2vs. applied voltage V) corresponding to the space charge capacitance of the WO3 layer formed in the 20 (porous) and 50 (compact) electrodes are very similar, providing in both cases flat band potentials of approximately 0.24–0.25 V vs. SCE (ca. 0.5 V vs. NHE), in good agreement with the onset potential of the photocurrent, and a donor density (ND) of 1.50–1.85 × 1020 cm3, similar to those previously reported for this material.52,53 Indeed, for such a high doping level (1020 cm−3), the depletion width should be around 5 nm, justifying the very similar values for both 20 and 50 specimens. From these values, it can be concluded that the anodic WO3 film behaves essentially as a compact layer, where the electric field in the depletion region contributes to charge separation, and that the optimization of the water concentration in the anodization solution leads to an effective surface pitting and higher WO3–electrolyte contact area. The increased surface roughness improves the penetration of the electrolyte, facilitating the hole transfer to this latter and promoting the charge separation. Thus, the realization of an intimate contact between the photoactive film and the electrolyte appears to be an important requirement for realizing WO3 systems with an efficient visible response, since at these wavelengths the penetration depth of the photons is sufficiently high to create electron–hole pairs along the entire length of a photoactive film of the thickness of a few microns. Fig. 18  Mott–Schottky plot (A) and C vs. V logarithmic plot (B) showing the good linear dependence in the case of the colloidal film (chemical capacitance behavior) not found with the anodic substrates which exhibit space charge effects. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 Since the photoelectrochemical response of WO3 is largely determined by the interfacial reactions, the choice of the electrolyte has strong repercussions on the performance and on the yield of the oxygen evolution reaction occurring on its surface. WO3 is stable under acidic conditions and has been mostly investigated in strongly acidic media (H2SO4, HClO4etc.) whereas its operation is not recommended at pH higher than 5, at which oxide dissolution can occur. Nevertheless it was found that the anodic substrates display a reasonable stability even under neutral conditions, where no degradation was observed upon several J–V cycles under intense illumination. Considering a series of 0.1 M solutions of sulfate salts where the size of the counter cation was increased from Na+ to TBA+ (TBA = tetrabutylammonium), it was found that the nature of the cation had repercussions on the photocurrent onset as well as on its saturation values (Fig. 19A), which decreased in the order TBA+ > K+ > Na+.54 In all cases the electron transport, probed by nanosecond laser excitation (Fig. 19B), was efficient, revealing instantaneous photocurrent rise, with peak times in the millisecond regime and τ1/2 usually inferior to 100 ms, that were not strongly influenced by the nature of the cation, ruling out, at least to a first approximation, the presence of large influences of the cationic mobility on the electron diffusion through the mesoporous phase. Nevertheless, compared to Na+ and K+ (Fig. 19B), a faster transient can be noted in the presence of 0.2 M TBA+, which may indicate that TBA+ is less retained at the surface with respect to the former. This could result in a slightly more efficient charge compensation and ambipolar electron transport,55 becoming comparable to that observed in the presence of H+, which, however, with respect to larger cations, is characterized by a specific conduction mechanism, possibly involving quantum effects.56 On the other hand the amount of extracted photocharge following 355 nm excitation was in all cases quite similar, about 6 × 10−4 C, allowing to exclude large differences in the apparent electron diffusion coefficient arising from variations in the charge build up in the semiconductor. Fig. 19  (A) JV curves (0.2 W cm−2, Am 1.5 filter) of anodically grown WO3 (type 20, 6 h) in neutral electrolytes containing 0.1 M sulfate salts. (B) 355 nm laser induced photocurrent transients recorded at 1 V vs. SCE (1.24 V vs. NHE) in the presence of the same concentration of different cations: TBA+, Na+, K+ and H+. From Caramori et al. manuscript in preparation. A recent study57 involving electrodeposited WO3 films also pointed out a cation dependent photocurrent density which varied in the order K+ > Na+ > Li+ and was paralleled by a decreasing yield of photo-produced oxygen. Considering that the adsorption strength of alkali metal ions on metal oxides like TiO2 and Fe2O3 varies according to K+ > Na+ > Li+, and that WO3 should give rise to similar surface interactions, it is suggested that the adsorption of high charge density cations on active sites at the surface may limit hole transfer to the electrolyte, limiting photon to current conversion. This was confirmed in diluted (10−2 M) TBAHSO4 solutions (Fig. 20A), where the partial hydrolysis of HSO4− resulted in a ∼pH 2.5 environment suitable for prolonged and stable operation of anodic WO3 films. In these conditions an interesting improvement of the photocurrent over conventional H2SO4 solutions was observed, with maximum IPCE reaching values of 80% (Fig. 20B), which indicate the achievement of a nearly complete photon to electron conversion if the usual light losses by scattering and reflection through the cell and electrode interfaces are accounted. Fig. 20  (A) JV curves in 10–2 M TBAHSO4 (red) compared to 1 M H2SO4 (black) at 0.2 W cm−2 illumination (Am 1.5 filter). (B) IPCE spectra at 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE). From Caramori et al., manuscript in preparation. The choice of the anions has also important repercussion on WO3 efficiency and durability. It was observed that during prolonged photoelectrolysis in sulfuric and perchloric acid solutions, significant amounts of persulfates (S2O82−) and H2O2 are formed, which indicate that oxygen is not the unique photooxidation product.57 A recent study58 even points out that the oxidation of anions in an acidic environment may constitute a major hole scavenging pathway, despite the fact that the first monoelectronic oxidation of water, finally leading to O2 evolution, should be thermodynamically viable at a potential of 2.3 V vs. NHE,13 much lower than the valence band edge of WO3. Oxidation byproducts can act as a surface blocking layer, reducing the amount of available electroactive surface, leading, over time, to a decreased photoanodic performance. Although this loss in performance appears to be reversible, the pristine response being easily re-established by a short cathodic reduction pulse, it was recently found that methanesulfonic acid solutions have more ideal characteristics for long term operation of WO3 photoanodes,46 avoiding the formation of blocking oxidation side products and allowing thus for a lower extent of electron–hole recombination over prolonged periods.ConclusionsIn this contribution some recent meaningful examples among photoresponsive nanostructured materials, which can find applications in the field of solar driven hydrogen evolution, have been reported.WO3 constitutes a promising material for thin layer photoelectrodes, which can be prepared by a variety of wet chemical and electrochemical techniques, giving rise, when good quality porous films are realized, to nearly quantitative photon to electron conversion. The favorable competition between hole transfer and recombination and a significant visible harvesting in the blue portion of the visible spectrum allows reaching projected efficiencies of about 3%, when coupled to bias sources capable of providing ∼1 V. This makes WO3 one of the few materials which can achieve stable and efficient operation in aqueous solution under strongly oxidizing conditions in the absence of sacrificial agents. The theoretical limits of this semiconductor in terms of STH efficiency are, however, still far from being reached and fundamental research on the properties of new WO3 nanostructures and their modification in order to enhance hole transfer to the electrolyte, together with a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of charge separation and transport within the solid phase and of the interaction between the semiconductor surface and the redox species in the electrolyte, are expected to contribute to develop more efficient photoelectrochemical systems in the near future.AcknowledgementsFunding from ENI Corporate and FIRB project No. RBAP11C58Y are gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due to Dr G. L. Marra, Mr R. Paglino (ENI-Donegani) and Dr M. Marella (ENI-VETEC), for XRD studies, SEM imaging and scaling up of the accelerated anodic WO3 process to large electrode areas. We acknowledge Dr Serena Berardi for useful discussions.ReferencesM. X. Tan, P. M. Laibnis, S. T. Nguyen, J. M. Kesselman, C. E. Stanton and N. S. Lewis, Progr. Inorg. Chem, John Wiley & Sons,  1994, pp. 21–144 Search PubMed .N. S. Lewis, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6900 CrossRef CAS .A. Maldotti and A. Molinari, Top. Curr. Chem., 2011, 303, 185 CrossRef CAS .S. Maldonado, A. G. Fitch and N. S. Lewis, in Nanostructured and Photoelectrochemical Systems for Solar Photon Conversion, ed. A. J. Nozik and M. D. Archer, Imperial College Press,  2008 Search PubMed .W. W. Gartner, Phys. Rev., 1959, 116, 84 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 1914 CrossRef CAS .D. S. Ginley and M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2019 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Gregg, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1215 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Nozik and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13061 CrossRef CAS .R. Eisenberg and G. D. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6799 CrossRef CAS .A. Sartorel, P. Mirò, E. Salvadori, S. Romain, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Di Valentin, A. Llobet, C. Bo and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16051 CrossRef CAS .W. Ruttinger and C. G. Dismukes, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1 CrossRef .A. Valdes and G.-J. Kroes, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 114701 CrossRef CAS .O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. K. Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685 CrossRef CAS .I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772 CAS .K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Graetzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, T. Lindgren, J. He, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5686 CrossRef CAS .C. Santato, M. Odziemkowski, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10639 CrossRef CAS .C. Santato, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 936 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yi, J. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. Ouyang, H. Stuart Willimas, H. Yang, J. Cao, Z. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559 CrossRef CAS .M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4138 CAS .K. P. Hanke, Z. Phys. Chem., 1999, 212, 1 CrossRef CAS .B. Reichmann and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 586 Search PubMed .A. Pennisi, F. Simone and C. M. Lampert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1992, 28, 233 CrossRef CAS .M. N. Huda, Y. Yan, C.-Y. Moon, S.-H. Wei and M. M. Al-Jassim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77(1), 195102 CrossRef .J. Augustynski, B. D. Alexander and R. Solarska, Top. Curr. Chem., 2011, 303, 1 CrossRef CAS .R. Solarska, B. D. Alexander and J. Augustynski, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2004, 8, 748 CrossRef CAS .L. Meda, G. Tozzola, A. Tacca, G. L. Marra, S. Caramori, V. Cristino and C. A. Bignozzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 788 CrossRef CAS .H. Lindstrom, H. Rensmo, S. Sodergren, A. Solbrand and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 3084 CrossRef .R. Solarska, A. Krolikowska and J. Augustynski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7980 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Park and A. J. Bard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, E5 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Kim, K. Shin, S. M. Cho, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1465 CAS .X. Liu, F. Wang and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7894 RSC .M. Metikos-Hukovic and Z. Grubac, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 556, 167 CrossRef CAS .S. Berger, H. Tsuchiya, A. Ghicov and P. Schmucki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203119 CrossRef .R. Hahn, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 947 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, X. Quan, N. L. Huimin Zao and S. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4422 CrossRef CAS .V. Cristino, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, L. Meda, G. L. Marra and C. A. Bignozzi, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7276 CrossRef CAS .M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, E. H. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B., 2006, 110, 16179 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Macack, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmucki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100 CrossRef .S. Caramori, V. Cristino, L. Meda, A. Tacca, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, Energy Procedia, 2012, 22, 127 CrossRef CAS .A. Tacca, L. Meda, G. Marra, A. Savoini, S. Caramori, V. Cristino, C. A. Bignozzi, V. Gonzalez Pedro, P. P. Boix, S. Gimenez and J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3025 CrossRef CAS .R. Solarska, R. Jurczakowski and J. Augustynski, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1553 RSC .L. Ottaviano, L. Lozzi, M. Passacantando and S. Santucci, Surf. Sci., 2001, 475, 73 CrossRef CAS .I. Gaied, S. Dabbous, T. B. Nasrallah and Y. Yacoubi, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, 214, 1 Search PubMed .A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods. Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2001 Search PubMed .N. Sato, Electrochemistry at Metal and Semiconductor Electrodes, Elsevier,  1998 Search PubMed .J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360 RSC .F. Di Quarto, V. O. Aimiuwu, S. Piazza and C. Sunseri, Electrochim. Acta, 1981, 36, 1817 CrossRef .S. R. Biaggio, R. C. Rocha-Filho, J. R. Vilche, F. E. Varela and L. M. Gassa, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 1751 CrossRef CAS .S. Caramori, et al. Search PubMed  , Manuscript in preparation.S. Kambe, S. Nakade, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2967 Search PubMed .U. W. Schmitt and G. A. Voth, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 5547 Search PubMed .J. C. Hill and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7612 Search PubMed .Q. Mi, A. Zhanaidrova, B. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5694 Search PubMed .Footnote† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Carlo Alberto Bignozzi	Carlo Alberto Bignozzi has been Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Ferrara since 2000. He was Associate Professor of Inorganic Chemistry (1985–2000) and Assistant Professor during 1977–1984. He has been Visiting Professor in several European, Japanese, South and North American Universities. His research investigates photoinduced energy and electron transfer processes in inorganic coordination compounds, in extended solids and in functional nanomaterials. Practical applications of this research include solar energy conversion, chemical sensing, photocatalysis, design of nanomaterials for environmental decontamination. He is the author of over 160 papers and review articles on international journals and of 16 patents.
Stefano Caramori	Stefano Caramori has been assistant professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Ferrara since 2010. His main scientific interests are the study of molecular systems and materials aimed at the conversion of solar energy into electrical or chemical energy. These activities involve spectroscopic and computational studies of charge transfer excited states in organic and inorganic moieties, the development of nanostructured semiconductor interfaces for photoelectrochemical systems and the investigation of their properties by steady state and time resolved spectrometric and electrochemical means. He is author and co-author of 35 papers and of 6 patents.
Vito Cristino	Vito Cristino obtained his PhD in Chemistry at the University of Ferrara in 2011. He is currently working in Ferrara as a post-doctoral fellow. His main research interests are the preparation of nanostructured electrodes and surfaces by sol–gel and electrochemical techniques and the functionalization of photo-electro-active interfaces with water oxidation catalysts. He is co-author of 6 papers on international journals and of 3 patents.
Roberto Argazzi	Roberto Argazzi received his PhD in Chemistry in 1995 at the University of Ferrara, studying photochemical supramolecular systems applicable to solar energy conversion. His research interests concern the synthesis and the electrochemical and spectroscopic characterization of coordination compounds with organic ligands, the study of photoinduced energy and electron transfer in polynuclear metal complexes, the design of photochemical molecular devices and of heterosupramolecular systems with photochromic and electrochromic properties, the spectral sensitization of wide band gap semiconductors and the development of photoelectrochemical and photoelectrocatalytic devices for electric energy production and water splitting. He is currently a researcher at the National Research Council.
Laura Meda	Laura Meda graduated in Physics at the University of Milan in 1982. Her main research interests are the study of the surface of materials for electronics by various types of spectroscopy and diffraction techniques, including AES, XPS, XRD and SEM. She has been working for private and public research companies, including STMicroelectronics, ENICHEM and ENI. She is currently head of the Solar Hydrogen Production project at the Donegani Research Institute in Novara. She is author of more than 100 papers, 10 patents and one book. She is member of E-MRS and chaired the EMRS Symposium-T in 2011.
Alessandra Tacca	Alessandra Tacca obtained her PhD in Physical Chemistry at the University of Pavia in 2006. In 2008 she joined the Donegani Institute where she is currently involved in projects concerning solar water splitting. Her research interests include semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, solar energy conversion and electroanalytical techniques. She is author and co-author of 12 papers and 2 patents.

 	Fig. 1  Dark equilibration of an n-type semiconductor with an electrolyte containing a redox couple (A) of potential U. (a) Before equilibration; (b) after equilibration. The potential barrier height ΦB0 sets the upper limit to the energy that can be extracted from the junction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge separation (black arrows) and recombination (colored arrows) pathways in an n-type semiconductor in the presence of a depletion layer and a generic A/A− redox couple. Charge recombination can occur in the bulk (ibr), in the depletion layer (idr) and via surface states (iss). Electron losses by reaction with A through tunneling (it) across the potential barrier or at the surface (ite) are also represented according to ref. 4.	 
qΦB0 = EC − EF	(1)
2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+; E0 = 1.23 V vs. NHE (at the anodic compartment of the cell)	(2)
4H+ + 4e− → 2H2; E0 = 0 V vs. NHE (at the cathodic compartment of the cell)	(3)
H2O → OH˙(aq) + H+ (aq) + e−; E0 = 2.85 V	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Energy level diagrams for an n-type semiconductor (W)-metal counter electrode (C) photoelectrolysis cell: (a) no contact; (b) equilibrium in the dark; (c) high intensity irradiation; the quasi Fermi levels of the minority and majority carriers are not shown with the assumption that the quasi Fermi level of the electrons approaches the original semiconductor Fermi level while the quasi Fermi level of holes approaches the valence band edge; (d) high intensity irradiation with anodic bias. The overvoltage ηa has to be considered independent by the photocurrent, but dependent only on the Fermi level and the band gap. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.9	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Monoclinic cell of WO3 (left) and calculated band structure in the LDA-PAW approximation. The underestimation of the band gap (1.3 eV vs. experimental 2.6 eV) is a consequence of the approximation used in the calculation. Adapted with permission from the American Physical Society.28	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of WO3 films obtained by deposition of the H2WO4/PEG precursor annealed in the 400–550 °C temperature range. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.21	 

 	Fig. 6  Raman spectra of WO3 thin films deposited from tungstic acid/PEG precursor at 350 °C (a); 400 °C (b); 500 °C (c); 550 °C (d). The arrows indicate the main monoclinic WO3 bands. Adapted with permission from Springer.30	 

Ethylene glycol		D-(+)-Raffinose pentahydrate	
PEG 200, PEG 300, PEG 400, PEG 1300–1600, PEG 4000, PEG 6000, PEG 20000		(Hydroxypropyl)methyl cellulose	
D-(+)-Glucose		Brij® 97 (Mn 709)	
D-Sorbitol		Igepal® CO520 (Mn 441)	
D-(+)-Maltose monohydrate		PEG-b-PPG-b-PEG (Mn 2800)	
Maltitol		Polyethyleneglycol bisphenol A epichlorohydrin copolymer (PEG-BAE)	

 	Fig. 7  SEM micrographs (×2 105) of WO3 electrodes obtained with: EG (a); PEG 1300–1600 (b); PEG 20000 (c). Samples annealed at 550 °C. Adapted with permission from Elsevier.31	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 8  Shuttered J–V curves in WO3 thin films obtained in the presence of PEG-BAE 20000 binder/dispersing agent. Data recorded at an incident irradiance of 0.11 W cm−2, full Xe profile, in 0.3 M H2SO4. SCE is ∼ +0.24 V vs. NHE. Adapted with permission from Elsevier.31	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) 3 nm Ag particles sputtered on the TCO collector; (B) enhanced IPCE in the presence of 4 nm Ag layer (circles and diamonds) compared to an unmodified WO3 film (triangles) of the same thickness at 1.5 V vs. NHE in acidified NaCl. The diamonds correspond to irradiation through the collector. The inset is the magnification of the 370–400 nm interval. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.33	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) WO3 photoelectrode serially connected to a DSSC. Note that the WO3 substrate (photoanode) is connected to the cathode of the solar cells through a bipolar FTO. The photoanode of the solar cell is connected to a Pt electrode at which hydrogen evolution occurs. (b) JV characteristic of the tandem device. Note the negative shift (ca. 600 mV) of the JV characteristic due to the bias generated by the solar cell. Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.35	 
W + 2H2O → WO2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(9)
2WO2 + H2O → W2O5 + 2H+ + 2e−	(10)
W2O5 + H2O → 2WO3 + 2H+ + 2e−	(11)

 	Fig. 11  SEM micrographs of the WO3 surface resulting from the anodization in the NMF based electrolyte at different times at RT: 2 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 48 h. Samples annealed at 550 °C in air before SEM imaging. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.41	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) SEM micrographs of surfaces of anodic growth WO3 at increasing anodization time from 5 minutes to 6 hours. (B) Cross sectional view of the oxide films after 7 hours of accelerated anodization at 40 °C. (C) Typical current vs. time behavior observed during anodization. Samples annealed in air at 550 °C. (A, C) Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45 (B) Adapted with permission from Elsevier.44	 

 	Fig. 13  A–B: SEM imaging showing the vertical orientation of the WO3 structures obtained in NMF and 20% water in the presence of 0.05% NH4F after 6 hours of accelerated anodization at 40 °C. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM micrographs of surface (on the left) and cross section (on the right) of anodic growth WO3 at increasing water content from 10% (a) to 50% (d). Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45	 

 	Fig. 15  Photocurrent density taken at 1 V vs. SCE (1.24 V vs. NHE) plotted against the incident irradiance (AM 1.5 filter): (black) anodically grown; (red) sol–gel WO3 in 1 M H2SO4. Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.41	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) IPCE spectra of WO3 anodized at increasing times in 1 M H2SO4 under 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE) potential bias. It can be appreciated that the visible response increases by prolonging the anodization from l to 6–7 h. (B) Diffuse reflectance spectra of WO3 electrodes 20 and 50, from which the strong absorption of electrode 20 starting at 450 nm can be appreciated. The opaque appearance of the type 20 electrode compared to 50, evident by visual inspection, originated by increased light scattering is also reported. (C) IPCE spectra of the series 10–50 under 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE) potential bias. (D) Laser induced photovoltage decay (355 nm excitation) in anodized WO3 films of the type 10, 20 and 50. The fast component is ascribed to the direct electron–hole recombination with a lifetime of ca. 4 ms. The long component which does not recover on the time scale of the measurement is ascribed to long lived electron trapping within the film. Here, for sake of clarity, the transients were recorded in ACN/1 M LiClO4 which, being a less efficient hole scavenger than water, allows us to observe a larger amplitude of the fast component. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45	 

 	Fig. 17  Nyquist plots of WO3 photoelectrodes recorded at various voltages (0.2–1.2 V vs. SCE) under 0.2 W cm−2 illumination in 1 M H2SO4. (A) Anodic type 20 (porous); (B) anodic type 50 (compact); (C) colloidal film; (D) electrical equivalent of the interface. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45	 

 	Fig. 18  Mott–Schottky plot (A) and C vs. V logarithmic plot (B) showing the good linear dependence in the case of the colloidal film (chemical capacitance behavior) not found with the anodic substrates which exhibit space charge effects. Adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons.45	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) JV curves (0.2 W cm−2, Am 1.5 filter) of anodically grown WO3 (type 20, 6 h) in neutral electrolytes containing 0.1 M sulfate salts. (B) 355 nm laser induced photocurrent transients recorded at 1 V vs. SCE (1.24 V vs. NHE) in the presence of the same concentration of different cations: TBA+, Na+, K+ and H+. From Caramori et al. manuscript in preparation.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) JV curves in 10–2 M TBAHSO4 (red) compared to 1 M H2SO4 (black) at 0.2 W cm−2 illumination (Am 1.5 filter). (B) IPCE spectra at 1.5 V vs. SCE (1.74 V vs. NHE). From Caramori et al., manuscript in preparation.	 
Footnote
† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
