Controlling cation segregation in perovskite-based electrodes for high electro-catalytic activity and durability   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00120G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00120G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6345-6378Controlling cation segregation in perovskite-based electrodes for high electro-catalytic activity and durability†

        
          
            Yifeng 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenqiang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Meilin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *c
aInstitute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET), Tsinghua University, 30 Shuang’qing Road, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: cassy_yu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-10-80194039
bGuangzhou Key Laboratory for Surface Chemistry of Energy Materials, New Energy Institute, School of Environment and Energy, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. E-mail: escheny@scut.edu.cn
cMaterials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA. E-mail: meilin.liu@mse.gatech.edu;   Tel: +1-404-894-6114
Received 
      16th February 2017
    First published on 18th September 2017AbstractSolid oxide cell (SOC) based energy conversion systems have the potential to become the cleanest and most efficient systems for reversible conversion between electricity and chemical fuels due to their high efficiency, low emission, and excellent fuel flexibility. Broad implementation of this technology is however hindered by the lack of high-performance electrode materials. While many perovskite-based materials have shown remarkable promise as electrodes for SOCs, cation enrichment or segregation near the surface or interfaces is often observed, which greatly impacts not only electrode kinetics but also their durability and operational lifespan. Since the chemical and structural variations associated with surface enrichment or segregation are typically confined to the nanoscale, advanced experimental and computational tools are required to probe the detailed composition, structure, and nanostructure of these near-surface regions in real time with high spatial and temporal resolutions. In this review article, an overview of the recent progress made in this area is presented, highlighting the thermodynamic driving forces, kinetics, and various configurations of surface enrichment and segregation in several widely studied perovskite-based material systems. A profound understanding of the correlation between the surface nanostructure and the electro-catalytic activity and stability of the electrodes is then emphasized, which is vital to achieving the rational design of more efficient SOC electrode materials with excellent durability. Furthermore, the methodology and mechanistic understanding of the surface processes are applicable to other materials systems in a wide range of applications, including thermo-chemical photo-assisted splitting of H2O/CO2 and metal–air batteries.
Yifeng Li
Yifeng Li is currently studying for a PhD degree at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, in 2015. His research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially studies on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O to produce sustainable fuels using solid oxide electrolytic cells (SOECs), as well as the degradation issues of SOEC electrode materials.
Wenqiang Zhang
Dr Wenqiang Zhang is an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University. He received his PhD from Tsinghua University in 2008. Prior to joining INET in 2010, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Tsinghua University. He is the author and coauthor of more than 20 scientific articles specifically on solid oxide electrolysis in international peer reviewed journals and holds 9 patents. Dr Zhang's research focuses on solid oxide electrolysis cells applied for hydrogen and synthetic fuel production.
Yun Zheng
Yun Zheng is currently studying for a PhD degree at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from China Three Gorges University in 2012 and Ocean University of China in 2015, respectively. His research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially studies on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O to produce sustainable fuels using solid oxide electrolytic cells (SOECs).
Bo Yu
Dr Bo Yu is an Associate Professor and PhD Supervisor of Tsinghua University, China. She received her PhD from Tsinghua University in 2004 and joined the Nuclear Science & Engineering Department at Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a visiting researcher in 2012. Dr Yu has been responsible for the research and development of nuclear hydrogen or syngas production at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology since 2005. She has published more than 100 articles and holds over 30 patents. Her research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion with a focus on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O through SOEC technologies.
Yan Chen
Dr Yan Chen is a full Professor at the School of Environment and Energy at South China University of Technology. She received her BS and ME from Peking University, China, and PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prior to her current position, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prof. Chen's research focuses on electrochemical reaction processes near the surface and interface of energy materials for fuel cells, metal air batteries, supercapacitors, etc. She is also working on the application of nuclear technology such as ion beam implantation, plasma in low dimensional materials for energy and electronics.
Meilin Liu
Meilin Liu is the B. Mifflin Hood Chair, Regents' Professor, and Associate Chair of the School of Materials Science and Engineering and Co-Director of the Center for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He received his BS from South China University of Technology and both MS and PhD from the University of California at Berkeley. His research interests include design, fabrication, in situ/operando characterization, and modeling of membranes, thin films, and nanostructured electrodes in devices for energy storage and conversion, aiming at achieving rational design of materials and structures with unique functionalities.
1. Introduction
Sustainable supply of clean, secure, and affordable energy is a challenge on the global scale. Of all the energy used presently, more than 70% is generated from fossil fuels (e.g. coal, petroleum, and natural gas) and only a small portion (∼23.7%) is derived from clean, sustainable, and renewable sources.1 It is indisputable that the conventional utilization (e.g. combustion) of fossil fuels can no longer be tolerated. Not only is it unsustainable and unable to meet future demands (due to limited resources) but also unacceptable due to the unbearable environmental consequences.2–4 Therefore, clean and efficient methods of fossil fuel utilization must be developed.5–8 Aside from this, significant efforts have been devoted to the development of renewable resources (e.g. solar, wind, and geothermal power) in order to replace the consumption of carbon-based fuels.9–12 However, the implementation of these techniques is severely hindered by the intermittent nature of the renewable sources.1,13–18 Taking all these factors into account, there is an urgent need for continuous energy storage and CO2 conversion.19–24
Solid oxide cells (SOCs) are ideally suited for these applications, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. SOCs can be reversibly operated as a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) or a solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC).25 The former is for the conversion of chemical fuels to electricity whereas the latter is for the conversion of ‘excess’ electricity to chemical fuels. SOFCs are considered to be the cleanest and most efficient systems for the conversion to electricity of a wide variety of fuels, including hydrogen, natural gas, coal gas, gasified biomass, and other renewable fuels.26–29 SOECs are also highly efficient in the production of hydrogen from water splitting or in the electro-synthesis of cleaner fuels from CO2.30–33 Therefore, SOCs are considered the most efficient systems for the load-leveling of power grids, bridging the gap between the demand and production of electricity, especially for grids with power inputs from renewable sources.19,34–39
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the cell configurations of solid oxide cells for energy storage and conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright © 2017 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. 
Electrodes are the core components of a SOC because they directly determine the performance and durability of the device. In particular, the surface chemistry of the electrode plays an important role in determining its electro-catalytic properties.40–42 To date, perovskite-based materials have been the most widely studied electrode materials for SOCs and other low-temperature electrochemical devices such as alkaline membrane fuel cells and metal–air batteries.43,44 It is well known that in perovskite-based electrode materials, specific cations (e.g. Sr2+, Ba2+, Pb2+, etc.) tend to segregate to the surface, significantly impacting the catalytic activities of the electrodes.45,46 However, microscopic details of the segregated surface and their effects on electrode performance are not fully understood. In recent years, the development of advanced surface characterization tools and computational approaches have made it possible to probe the microstructure of the near-surface region with nanometer precision,40,47–51 and tremendous efforts have been devoted to investigations into the origins, kinetics, and various configurations of cation enrichment or segregation near the surface or interface.45,49,52–55 To achieve the rational design of highly efficient and durable materials, a comprehensive understanding of, as well as the ability to control, surface cation enrichment and segregation is necessary and will have a vital impact on the enhancement of the stability and activity of perovskite-based SOC electrodes.
In this review, we will start with an introduction to several widely used perovskite-type SOC electrode materials, emphasizing their cation segregation behaviors. In Section 2, a number of advanced surface characterization techniques suitable for the characterization of surface segregation will be discussed. In Section 3, factors that critically affect the degree of cation segregation in perovskite-based oxides will be examined, including the nature of the material (cation deficiency, crystallinity, species of dopant ions and lattice strain) and the environmental conditions (temperature, gas environment and electric field). These discussions will assist in the identification of the fundamental driving forces of cation segregation and the origin of instability. In Section 4, the influences of cation segregation on electrochemical activity and durability of SOC electrodes under various operating conditions will be examined. In Section 5, several representative surface engineering approaches will be reviewed that enhance the performance of SOC electrodes by tailoring cation segregation. Finally, we will highlight the key conclusions of this review and provide critical insights into the rational design of better SOC electrode materials. Although perovskite-based SOC electrode materials are taken as examples in the discussions, the methodology and knowledge introduced here are applicable to other material systems for a wide range of applications, including alkaline fuel cells, electrolysers, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, and electricity-driven or photo-electrochemical water splitting systems.56–58
1.1. Overview of SOCs
The basic components of a SOC include an oxygen electrode, a fuel electrode, and a dense electrolyte (Fig. 1). In SOFC mode, O2 is reduced to O2− at the oxygen electrode, which then passes through the dense electrolyte to the fuel electrode zone where it electrochemically oxidizes fuels (H2, CO, or hydrocarbons) to generate H2O/CO2. In SOEC mode, electrical energy is converted into chemical energy by electrolyzing H2O and/or CO2 into fuels such as hydrogen, syngas, and methane.59–61 By switching between the two modes, highly efficient reversible energy conversion and storage can be achieved. In addition to high energy efficiency and excellent fuel flexibility, other advantages of SOCs include modularity, adaptability, and affordability, demonstrating broad application prospects in the near future.62,63
1.2. Main challenges faced by SOCs
Despite the attractive perspectives of SOCs for a clean and secure energy future, technical hurdles must be overcome before broad commercialization is possible.64–67 First, operating temperatures must be further reduced so that much less expensive materials may be used in SOC systems to significantly reduce costs while maintaining high performances.28,68 Second, more durable electrode materials must be developed to meet durability requirements and prolong operational lifespans. In particular, surface enrichment or segregation of cations along with the associated surface contamination of electrode materials is one of the major causes of degradation in cell performance, leading to shortened operational lifespans and increased costs. For instance, Bucher et al. reported that La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 (LSCF) exhibited ∼15%/1000 h degradation rate when exposed to humidified air (with ∼3% water vapor) and attributed this to surface segregation and Si poisoning.69 Mawdsley et al. claimed that for a (La1−xSrx)MnO3 (LSM) oxygen electrode under SOEC operation, the up to ∼20%/1000 h degradation rate was attributed to oxygen electrode delamination and Cr deposition.70 Although there are many potential factors contributing to the degradation of SOC oxygen electrodes (e.g. delamination,66,71–74 reaction with electrolytes or other cell components,75 Cr or Si poisoning,76–84etc.), surface cation segregation, along with surface contamination of electrode materials, is considered one of the main culprits.55,85–87 The segregation of inert cations (e.g. Sr2+ and Ba2+) was reported to dramatically degrade electrode performances.46,53,54,85,88,89 On the other hand, it was also reported however that electrode performances can be significantly enhanced by catalytically active nanoparticles (e.g. certain transition metallic particles or alloys) exsolved on the electrode surface, suggesting that controlling surface segregation can potentially lead to enhanced performances.90–94 Most importantly, it was demonstrated that the introduction of a catalyst coating on the surface of an electrode backbone can effectively suppress some detrimental segregation and improve tolerance to contaminant poisoning, dramatically enhancing the electro-catalytic activity and durability of electrodes for SOC systems.95–97
1.3. SOC electrode materials

1.3.1. Mixed ionic and electronic conductor (MIEC). 
Platinum was used as one of the earliest materials for oxygen electrodes in SOFCs.98,99 However, the high cost strongly limited its range of applications. A porous perovskite-based electronic conductor, (La,Sr)MnO3, was then proposed as the oxygen electrode for SOFCs.100,101 Such electrode materials, when their ionic conductivities are relatively low, will only allow for oxygen reduction reactions near the triple phase boundary (3PB) of the electrode, electrolyte, and gas, where the gas can simultaneously contact both the electron and ion conductive phases.98 To overcome this limitation, mixed ionic and electronic conductors (MIECs) have been used to extend the active area of oxygen electrodes. The most widely studied MIEC materials are a series of perovskite-based materials, including La1−xSrxCoO3−δ (LSC), La1−xSrxCo1−yFeyO3−δ, and Ba1−xSrxCo1−yFeyO3−δ (BSCF).
Unlike oxygen electrodes of SOCs, which are usually exposed to strong oxidizing atmospheres, fuel electrodes are typically subjected to strong reducing environments, where metallic substances are stable.102,103 Accordingly, fuel electrode materials typically consist of transition metals (serving as electrocatalysts and electronic conductors or current collectors) and ceramic electrolytes (serving as ionic conductors). The most widely used fuel electrode is composed of nickel and yttria stabilized zirconia (Ni–YSZ).104–106 However, its application is severely restricted by its inherent redox instability (oxidation of nickel). Further, nickel is susceptible to coking (or carbon deposition) when exposed to carbon-containing fuels and to poisoning of contaminants commonly encountered in a wide variety of fuels.107–109 To overcome these challenges, perovskite-based oxides have been explored as promising fuel electrode material candidates in recent years.29,109–112


1.3.2. Perovskite-based oxides used in SOC electrodes. 
Schematically shown in Fig. 2a is the crystal structure of a perovskite oxide with a chemical formula of ABO3, where “A” and “B” represent two different types of cations. In an ideal perovskite oxide (space group: Pmm), each A-site cation is surrounded by 12 oxygen anions because the size of the A-site cation is similar to that of the oxygen anion. Typical A-site cations include alkaline earth ions and rare earth metal ions. In contrast, each B-site cation is surrounded by 6 oxygen anions and B-site cations are much smaller than the oxygen anions. Typical B-site cations are transition metal ions. However, the cubic structure can be readily deformed into tetragonal, orthorhombic, and rhombohedral structures as the sizes of the A and B cations change. Also, the perovskite structure is very flexible in accommodating a wide variety of point defects: oxygen vacancies, cation vacancies and interstitials. In particular, the B-site cations of variable valences are considered the active sites for electron transfer during electrochemical reactions.90,113,114
 Fig. 2  Crystal structures of perovskite-based oxides as SOC electrodes: (a) single perovskite (ABO3−δ), (b) Ruddlesden–Popper (A2BO4+δ) and (c) double-perovskite (AA′B2O5+δ). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
In addition, many perovskite-like derivatives, such as Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phases (Fig. 2b) and double perovskite oxides (Fig. 2c), are widely investigated as potential electrode materials for SOCs because of their structural features promoting fast electron transfer associated with many chemical and energy transformation processes.115–120

1.4. Cation segregation in SOC electrode materials
Due to the breaking of symmetry, the chemical environments of cations on the surface of perovskite-based oxides can be quite different from that within the lattice.45,53,54,121 As a widely observed phenomenon, both A- and B-site cations in perovskite-based oxides can segregate to the surface region and may separate out from the initial oxides, leading to the formation of secondary phases at the surface.122 Oxygen electrode materials normally operate in strong oxidizing atmospheres at high temperatures, promoting segregation of A-site cations to the surface. For example, surface enrichment of bivalent A-site cations is widely reported in perovskite-based materials, including Sr2+ segregation in Sm1−xSrxCoO3−δ,123 La1−xSrxMnO3−δ,124–126 and La0.6Sr0.4CoyFe1−yO3−δ,40 Pb2+ segregation in (La,Pb)MnO3−δ,127 and Ba2+ segregation in LnBaCo2O5+δ systems.128,129 In contrast, B-site segregation (also referred to as exsolution) appears more favorable in reducing environments.90,93,130
Although the thickness of the segregated layer is normally small, it can have profound influences on the electrochemical performance of electrodes.49,131 For example, a Sr enriched layer in a (La1−xSrx)(Co1−yFey)O3−δ thin film is reported to be approximately 6 nm;40 however, the rate of oxygen exchange reaction can be reduced by several orders of magnitude.46,49,53 On the other hand, the exsolution of B-site metallic particles under reducing conditions was reported to significantly enhance the catalyst activity and stability of the electrodes.90 In fact, in situ exsolution of highly active B nanoparticles is proven to be a promising method for enhancing electro-catalytic activities of fuel electrodes.90,92,132,133Fig. 3 schematically illustrates several possible effects of A- and B-site cation segregation on surface chemistry and catalytic properties.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of A- and B-site segregation in a perovskite-based system and its influences on surface chemistry and catalytic properties. 
2. Characterization of surface segregation
Cation segregation on the surface has a profound impact on the electro-catalytic activity and durability of SOC electrodes. To enhance electrode performance, the correlation between the surface nanostructure, composition, morphology, and the electro-catalytic activity should be understood. Nevertheless, cation segregation typically occurs within a few nanometers in perovskite-based oxides, making the investigation of the detailed surface features a challenging task. Furthermore, cation segregation depends strongly on the service condition of the electrode, and often changes over time during the operation. These technical barriers greatly hindered the investigations of the origin of cation segregation and its impacts on electrode performance. In recent years, the development of advanced surface characterization techniques makes it possible to detect local composition and structure of segregated surfaces with very high resolution. For instance, the development of low-energy ion scattering (LEIS) spectroscopy enables the detection of chemical composition on the outmost surface (Section 2.1). Such information is crucial to the understanding of reactive sites on the surface of electrode materials. Another important progress is the capability to probe surface cation segregation in real-time. For example, the development of near ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS) allows characterization of surface composition and electronic structure at elevated temperatures in different gas environments and/or with electrical bias, which are closer to the working condition of SOCs (Section 2.3).
In this section, we will present several surface characterization techniques for probing and mapping surface cation segregation in perovskite-type oxide materials (Table 1). Schematically illustrated in Fig. 4 are some typical probing depth and the information accessible by these techniques when applied to a perovskite-based model system. For each technique, we will briefly discuss the principle of operation, unique capabilities, and specific applications in studying surface segregation. In particular, recent advancements in characterizing surface segregation under near SOC operation conditions will be highlighted.
Table 1 Representative characterization techniques for investigation of surface structure and composition of perovskite materials




Techniques
Detailed information
Related studies




Low-energy ion scattering (LEIS)
Elemental composition at the outmost layer

40, 42, 121, 128, 129 and 134–146



Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) & scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
Local elemental inhomogeneities with lateral resolution at the surface

45, 46, 93, 121, 130, 133 and 147–153



X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
Elemental composition as well as chemical environment near the surface

46, 121, 124, 127, 132 and 154–162



Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) & energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS/EDX)
Local elemental distribution with lateral resolution at the surface

78, 82, 93, 121, 130, 132, 133, 148 and 163–167



Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS)
Surface elemental distribution and compositional evolution from the outmost surface to bulk

49 and 168–178



Atomic force microscopy (AFM) & scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
Surface morphology and electronic structure

45, 54, 121, 149, 152, 162 and 179–181



X-ray diffraction (XRD)
Crystal structure and lattice parameters, as well as the generation of secondary phases

78, 130, 132, 149, 163 and 182–185





 Fig. 4  Several surface characterization techniques with different depth resolutions for probing surface segregation in perovskite-based oxide model systems. 
2.1. Low-energy ion scattering (LEIS): detecting cation segregation on the outmost surface
Low-energy ion scattering (LEIS) spectroscopy, sometimes referred to as ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS), is a technique that can be used to probe the composition and structure of the outermost surface.138,173 The probing depth of LEIS is typically one or two atomic layers of the surface due to the relatively high probability of ionic neutralization at the surface. These features make LEIS one of the most sensitive surface analysis methods.140
The principles of LEIS are to impinge the outermost surface with a primary ion beam, such as He+, Ne+, Ar+, K+, or Na+, of a certain energy of E0 (generally 20 eV–10 keV) and then recording the amount of the reflected primary ion beam with an energy of E1, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. By measuring the energy difference between E0 and E1, composition and other structural information such as elemental category and lattice arrangements can be precisely obtained.138 However, specific chemical information such as oxidation states or binding environments for elements cannot be detected.
 Fig. 5  (a) The principle of LEIS. (b) The composition of several layers at different depths in LSCF, characterized by LEIS. (c) Chemical composition in the near-surface region of LSCF with a perovskite structure, characterized by LEIS depth profiles. (d) Diagram of the distribution of elements in the near-surface region of these perovskite oxides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014. 
One representative work using LEIS to study the segregation in perovskite-based oxides (perovskite, RP-structured, and double-perovskite) was carried out by Druce et al.40 As shown in the top column of Fig. 5b, the outermost surface of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ (LSCF) is completely covered by Sr dopants with no visible signals of other cations (La,Fe or Co). Fig. 5c shows the LEIS depth profile results of the doping cation ratio of A′/(A′ + A) and the transition metal cation ratio of (B + B′)/(A′ + A) in the longitudinal direction with high depth resolutions (equal to the thickness of a single atom layer), reflecting its compositional evolution along the [001] direction. It can be seen that the elemental proportions change gradually to the normal stoichiometry of the bulk phase (A′/(A′ + A) = 0.4, A/B = 1) at a depth of ∼6 nm.
Using LEIS, Kilner's group and their collaborators conducted a systematic work to study the surface chemistry of perovskite-based materials. They found that the removal of the water-soluble Sr-rich surface layer from La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin films can significantly reduce their polarization resistance.42,136 For various LnBaCo2O5+δ systems, they reported that surface Ba segregation can take place within 15 min even at temperatures as low as 400 °C.128,135 Furthermore, they found an increased tendency of Sr segregation in the LSCF system in the presence of Ce1−xGdxO2−0.5x.143 These researchers also studied the surface reconstruction of NdGaO3 in (110) orientation in various atmospheres using LEIS, and found different segregation behaviors in various environments.140 Symianakis et al. also demonstrated that the surface of rhombohedral and orthorhombic LaMnO3 powders synthesized by glycine combustion possessed a La-rich surface.141 Based on the LEIS investigations above, the elemental distribution in the near-surface regions of these doped perovskite oxides is illustrated in Fig. 5d.40 Based on this proposed model, the outermost surface of perovskite-like materials is normally governed by substituted A-site cations (referred to as A′) after synthesis, while the subsurface is dominated by B-site cations. Such restructuring is believed to be driven by the surface segregation of A′, which leaves a subsurface region lacking A-site cations. Such cation migration can further induce the formation of oxide (A′Ox), hydroxide (A′(OH)n) or carbonate (A′CO3) secondary phases at the surface and change the surface topography.
Aside from perovskite oxides, using LEIS, Druce et al. found that RP-structured PrLaNiO4+δ has an A-rich surface with a Pr/La ratio of 1.142,146 In La2−xSrxNiO4+δ, Burriel et al. found that B-site Ni did not exist at its outermost surface.137,145 Chen et al. conducted LEIS depth profiling in (La1−xSrx)2CoO4 (LSC214) thin films and found that the surface Sr content decreased with increasing temperatures in both [001] and [100] orientations.121 Tomkiewicz et al. conducted LEIS studies on a series of Ruddlesden–Popper oxides, including LaSrCo0.5Fe0.5O4−δ (RPn1), La0.3Sr2.7CoFeO7−δ (RPn2) and LaSr3Co1.5Fe1.5O10−δ (RPn3).144 They found that all of the surfaces displayed significant Sr segregation, with Sr/La ratios of RPn2 > RPn3 > RPn1. All these results demonstrate that LEIS is a powerful characterization technique for quantitatively profiling cation distributions from the outermost surface to the near surface region in various perovskite-based systems.
2.2. Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM): mapping chemical inhomogeneity on segregated surfaces
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) is a surface analysis technique that utilizes a high-energy electron beam as the excitation source to probe the composition of material surfaces. For AES detection, the inner electrons of the atoms on material surfaces first interact with the incident electron beams and are stimulated to a higher energy level, which will then return to the inner orbit and excite other electrons to escape from the surface. These escaped electrons are referred to as Auger electrons and can be directed into an electron multiplier for analysis. Since the information from AES is an average of several atomic layers, the result is not as quantitative as that given by LEIS.138 By combining AES with depth profiling, Fulmer et al. characterized the compositional evolution of LaNi0.5Mn0.5O3 and LaNi0.75Mn0.25O3 and found La segregation in both samples.147 Using temperature dependent AES, Katsiev et al. observed the evolution of surface cation ratios at elevated temperatures on La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 thin films and found greater A-site (especially Sr) enrichment tendencies at elevated temperatures.152
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) has been widely used to characterize surface microstructures and morphologies. Using SEM, Araki et al. observed an increase of grain sizes and surface roughness caused by A-site segregation in La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ thin films.148 In addition, SEM is also widely used in probing the segregation of transition metallic nanoparticles at the surface in reducing atmospheres.93,130,133
The combination of AES and SEM provides elemental distributions and surface topographies with lateral resolutions on the nanometer scale, which is valuable for studying inhomogeneous cation segregation at the surface. For example, Newell et al. observed small islands with a rectangular base separated by a flat area on the surface of SrTiO3(001) using SEM and confirmed that these particles were segregated TiO crystals using AES.153 Another work involving AES and SEM characterization of surface inhomogeneity on La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ (LSC) surfaces was carried out by Cai et al.46Fig. 6 shows the results of SEM together with AES for the annealed LSC films. It is found that Sr mainly concentrates on the surface particles while La is enriched in the remaining surface regions that are particle-free. These results agreed with the results observed by Druce et al. (Fig. 5d).40
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image and the composition from Auger electron spectroscopy for (b) Sr, (c) La, and (d) Co for annealed LSC films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, Yildiz's group conducted systematic investigations on cation segregation behaviors of various perovskite materials including (La,Sr)CoO3, (La,Ca)MnO3, (La,Sr)MnO3, (La,Ba)MnO3,45,46,149 and RP-structured (La1−xSrx)2CoO4 by AES and SEM.121 Shao-Horn's group also conducted AES and SEM analysis on La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ thin films151 and La0.8Sr0.2MnO3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ hetero thin films186 to understand the correlation between oxygen reduction activities and surface compositions.
2.3. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS): detecting surface composition, chemical environment, and electronic structure
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), based on the photoelectric effect, is a non-destructive approach that is widely used to characterize the composition, chemical environment and electronic structure of near surface regions. By changing photoemission angles, XPS can provide information with depth resolutions in non-destructive ways (so-called angle-resolved XPS, ARXPS). For example, the evolution of cation distribution in the [001] direction as a function of probing depth in perovskite-structured La0.65Sr0.35MnO3 and La0.65Pb0.35MnO3, as well as RP-structured (La1−xSrx)2CoO4, was characterized using ARXPS.121,124,127 In another work carried out by Cai et al., angle-resolved XPS was used to estimate the ratio of Sr with different chemical environments in several annealed LSC thin films, as shown in Fig. 7a.46 Note that the double-peaks (3d3/2 and 3d5/2) for both the surface-bound Sr (Srsurface) and perovskite lattice-bound Sr (Srlattice) are caused by the coupling of orbital motions and spin motions. The peak position of Srsurface, which is from surface-bound Sr, SrO-terminated surface, Sr–OH and Sr–CO3, is slightly higher than that of Srlattice, which is from Sr in the perovskite-based lattice.
 Fig. 7  XPS results at different photon energies or emission angles provide information from the surface to varying depth into the LSC films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 and 158. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society and The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
In addition to changing emission angles, XPS possesses the capability to alter probing depths by changing photo energies. Representative studies were carried out by Crumlin et al. on the chemical environment of strontium in La1−xSrxCoO3 (LSC113) systems,158 as shown in Fig. 7b. The ratio of Srlattice/Srsurface decreases from surface to bulk through the reduction of photo energy, indicating that the SrO-like secondary phase is basically at the outermost surface.158
The oxidation states of B-site cations in perovskite oxides can also be probed by XPS.160 For example, the oxidation state of Co can be determined by analyzing the peak position and shape of Co 2p spectra, as demonstrated in ref. 46 and 162. Du et al. examined the evolution of oxidation states of elements in reduced Sr2FeMo0.65Ni0.35O6−δ thin films using XPS and observed the exsolution of nanoparticle transition metals (Ni0 and Fe0) to the surface.132
Conventional XPS detection is typically implemented at room temperature in a vacuum, which is still far from SOC operating conditions. In recent years, significant progress has been made to XPS for it to function at elevated temperatures, in different gas environments and/or with electrical bias.47 Such capabilities can facilitate the study of how surfaces evolve under the working conditions of SOCs and other energy devices. The schematic diagram of in situ XPS, sometimes referred to as ambient pressure XPS (APXPS), is illustrated in Fig. 8.156
 Fig. 8  Schematic of ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Using in situ XPS, Tsvetkov et al. systematically studied the surface chemistry of surface-decorated LSC films.149 Shao-Horn's group characterized the evolution of surface Sr 3d peaks of La1−xSrxCoO3−δ thin films in several heating and cooling cycles and demonstrated that the surface structure and chemistry are sensitive to the temperature.151,156 In addition, they observed the presence of absorbed oxygen on La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ films that correspond to molecular O2.158 The evolution of Sr and O peaks on Sr2Co2O5 thin films was also studied by Hong et al. at temperatures ranging from 300 to 600 °C.157 Furthermore, Crumlin et al. carried out in situ detections in LSC113 and/or LSC214 systems under varying electrical potentials (0 to 800 mV) at high temperatures (∼500 to 800 °C) and observed shifts of the top of the valence band edge and changes in the Sr 3d and O 1s spectra upon applying bias.155 Similarly, Nenning et al.154 and Opitz et al.161 investigated exsolution of transition metals in LSCF systems as well as their water-splitting reactivity under extrinsic electrochemical polarization.
2.4. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS/EDX): detecting the local crystal structure and atomic arrangements
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is used to obtain the local crystal structure and atomic arrangements of materials with atomic resolutions and can distinguish the generated secondary phase caused by cation segregation, while scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) using an electron beam as an incident source can even provide more fine structure information. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS/EDX) is used to detect compositions with ppm detection accuracy and can be used to probe the compositional evolution aroused by cation segregation.148,187 The combination of TEM/STEM and EDS can provide the local structure and compositions of near surface and bulk with both depth and lateral resolution, which are of great value in the study of cation segregation.
Using STEM and EDS, Baqué et al. found evidence for surface heterogeneities of porous La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ cathodes.131 In the study of RP-structured (La1−xSrx)2CoO4, Chen et al. revealed the structure and chemistry of the Sr-rich layers at the segregated surfaces by the same approach.121 Similarly, Rahmati et al. obtained the micrograph of surface islands by TEM and found evidence for Sr segregation with partly strong Ti depletion at the surface of polycrystalline SrTi1−xNbxO3 by EDS.165 Using TEM, Oh et al. investigated the annealed La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 cathode and found that there is a transition region between the segregated particles on the top surface and the bulk.167 By TEM cross-section on Fe- and Nb-doped STO films, Lenser et al. demonstrated that the compositional changes caused by cation segregation were not limited to the surface, but can spread to as deep as dozens of nanometers.166 In the case of B-site segregation, TEM/STEM with EDS also demonstrated significant advantages in the characterization of the island-distributed transition metal substances exsolved from the initial perovskite-based lattice.93,130,132,133 EDS can also be combined with SEM to provide local inhomogeneity at the surface. Using EDS mapping in (La,Sr)(Co,Fe)O3 and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ porous electrodes, Jiang et al. and their collaborators observed evident A-site cation segregation in the presence of volatile Cr2O3.78,163,164 Sr/Ba segregation was found to be strongly related to Cr enrichment, while Cr deposition was found to be negligible on surface Co-containing particles.
Recent development of environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) allowed researchers to probe the dynamics of structure change for catalysis at elevated temperatures and in gas environment.188 As shown in Fig. 9, Xin et al. observed the fast segregation of Co in Pt–Co bimetallic nanoparticles in oxidizing environments.189 Han et al. observed nanoscale structural oscillations during an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) process within BSCF particles using ETEM.190
 Fig. 9  Tracking of Co segregation in Pt0.5Co0.5 nanoparticles in an oxidizing environment, characterized by ETEM in 0.1 mbar O2 at 250 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. 
2.5. Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS): probing the three-dimensional cation distribution
Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) is an extremely sensitive surface analysis technique that provides compositional information of solid materials. First, focused primary ion beams are used to sputter the sample surface, which produces secondary ions. These ejected secondary ions are then collected and analyzed using a mass spectrometer (including sector, quadrupole, and time-of-flight).19 The combination of SIMS with depth profiling can probe composition profiles from surface to bulk, and reproduce the three-dimensional cation distribution in electrode materials.169,171,172
Using SIMS, Kubicek et al. probed the surface composition of the as-prepared/annealed La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and observed temperature-dependent Sr segregation behaviors.49 Ravella et al. detected the distribution of cations near the interface of La2Mo2O9 (electrolyte) and La0.8Sr0.2MnO3−δ (electrode) and observed Sr segregation near the interface.177
Huber et al. reported that La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3±δ (LSCrM) and (La0.8Sr0.2)0.92MnO3 (LSM) exhibited significant performance improvements after cathodic polarization.168,178 To understand the origins of the enhanced activity, they applied different electrical potentials on LSCrM electrodes and studied the evolution of their surface compositions using in situ SIMS at 500 °C.168 As shown in Fig. 10, with cathodic bias, both Sr and Mn migrated away from the surface and diffused into the bulk of the electrode (and electrolyte). For anodic polarization, the diffusion of Sr/Mn cations is in the opposite direction. Such diffusion may be responsible for an improvement or degradation of oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity under cathodic or anodic bias respectively. More information about SIMS can be found in ref. 173.
 Fig. 10  
In situ SIMS images at the LSCrM/YSZ interface at various bias, measured at 10−6 mbar oxygen partial pressure and 500 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2012 the Owner Societies 2012. 
2.6. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM): probing and mapping surface morphology and the local electronic structure
Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) is a type of scanning probe microscopy that is normally used to detect the morphologies of materials with nanoscale resolution. AFM has no special requirements for sample conductivity, making it a practical technique to characterize various materials, and even those with insulating surface features.45,121,149,179 Using AFM, Lee et al. investigated the surface topographies of La0.8Ca0.2MnO3 (LCM), La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 (LSM) and La0.8Ba0.2MnO3 (LBM) thin films at various temperatures and observed the highest segregation level in the LBM film with the largest A-site dopants (especially at elevated temperatures).45
Scanning tunneling microscopy/scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STM/STS), based on the tunneling effect, can provide both surface microscopy and local electronic structure information. Unlike AFM, STM/STS measurements require the samples to be conductive enough to collect tunneling currents. Using STM/STS, Liang et al. studied the surface topography and electronic structure of annealed SrTiO3.181 They identified the particles and particle-free regions of annealed SrTiO3 to be Sr-rich islands and SrTiO3 surface respectively, based on their different electronic structures (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  (a) Surface morphologies of SrTiO3 films. (b) The electronic structure difference between the areas on island and areas off island. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 1994 Elsevier. 
In recent studies, Yildiz's group have carried out STM/STS at elevated temperatures and in oxygen gas environments to reveal surface topographies and electronic structure under environments that are more relevant to the functional conditions of SOCs.54,152,162,180,191 Katsiev et al. observed a decrease in the tunneling conductance in STS on the Sr-rich surface of La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM), suggesting that the surface secondary phase was more inactive for electron transfer as compared to the perovskite components.152 Cai et al.162 and Jalili et al.180 also investigated the influence of lattice strains on the surface electronic structure of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 and La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 thin films. Using in situ STM/STS, Chen et al. systematically characterized the surface electronic structure of SrTi1−xFexO3 thin films as a function of Fe content.54 Furthermore, they combined in situ STM/STS with focus ion beam milling to probe the local electronic structure near the (La,Sr)CoO3/(La,Sr)2CoO4 hetero-interface at elevated temperatures and in an oxygen gas environment.191
2.7. X-ray diffraction (XRD): detecting phase separation due to segregation
X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a primary technique for structural analysis based on diffraction effects. For the study of perovskite-based materials, XRD can be used to characterize the generation of secondary phases caused by segregation. It should be noted that the probing depth of the conventional XRD is several microns, so it mainly provides information on the bulk composition. Such information is normally combined with other approaches such as SEM and TEM to confirm whether the newly formed secondary phases are located at the surface. For instance, Yang et al. observed the evolution of XRD peaks that correspond to lattice transformations (from perovskite to RP structure) and formation of Co–Fe nanoparticles in highly reduced Pr0.8Sr1.2(Co,Fe)0.8Nb0.2O4+δ at 900 °C.182 Using SEM and EDS analysis, they further demonstrated that these nanoparticles (∼50 nm) segregated to the surface during such a reduction process. By using XRD, STEM and EDS, Du et al. confirmed that after reducing a Sr2FeMo0.65Ni0.35O6−δ matrix at 850 °C in pure H2, it can partially transform into RP phase Sr3FeMoO7−δ and perovskite Sr(FeMo)O3−δ with the exsolved Fe3Ni alloys.132 Similarly, Sun et al. observed the formation of Ni nanoparticles on Ni-doped (La0.7Sr0.3)CrO3 perovskites when it was reduced at high temperatures.130 These Ni nanoparticles were then found to transform back into perovskites without generating impurities after exposure to an oxidizing atmosphere, indicating the reversibility of B-site segregation during redox cycling. Using XRD and SEM, Zhao et al. observed the generation of several mixed oxides (such as SrO–Cr2O3 and SrO–Co3O4–Cr2O3) at the surface of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ porous electrodes after calcining at 800 °C for 2 h.163
There are also a number of in situ XRD research studies focusing on the evolution of surface chemistry and structure under near operando conditions. Using in situ XRD, Kim et al. observed SrO and/or BaO segregation along with the generation of SrCrO4 at the surface of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF) at elevated temperatures.78 In another in situ XRD study of LSCF, Hardy et al. found the expansion of the perovskite lattice as well as the formation of the secondary phase due to cation segregation.184 They also found it possible to estimate the cation segregation rate by lattice expansion degree.
To directly detect the crystal structure of the outermost surface of materials, grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) or ultra small angle X-ray scattering (USAXS) is needed.192 Using in situ GISAXS, Richard et al. analyzed the growth of Ge superlattices on Si(001) surfaces as a function of deposited Ge thickness at elevated growth temperatures.185 Chang et al. tracked the surface evolution of tartaric acid based LSCF infiltrated on a YSZ backbone under annealing conditions and found that the nucleation began at 600 °C.183 It should be mentioned that research specifically focusing on cation segregation using small angle X-ray measurements is scarce. The most commonly used approach for studying segregation is still conventional XRD combined with SEM or TEM.
The application of several other in situ approaches, including X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF),48,70,193 Raman spectra194–197 and resonant anomalous X-ray reflectivity (RAXR),198,199 in studying cation segregation is shown in the ESI.†
The characterization techniques, particularly these in situ approaches introduced in this section, have greatly enhanced the ability to investigate the origin of cation segregation in various material systems under different conditions. These approaches lay a solid foundation to further reveal how cation segregation is affected by its intrinsic nature and environmental conditions, as well as to conclude the driving forces for cation segregation.
3. Factors influencing the degree of segregation in perovskite-based oxides
Cation segregation is a heterogeneous process that is impacted by combined factors including the nature of the materials (e.g. cation non-stoichiometry, dopant species, crystallinity, lattice strain, etc.) and environmental conditions (e.g. gas environment, temperature and thermal history, electrical polarization, etc.) as summarized in Fig. 12 and Table 2. In this section, we will emphasize the specific factors that may influence the degree of cation segregation in perovskite-based oxides, together with the underlying mechanisms of the segregation processes.
 Fig. 12  Factors influencing the degree of cation segregation in perovskite oxides: cation deficiency, dopant size, crystallinity, lattice strain, gas environment, temperature, and electrical polarization. The green balls represent A-site cations, the red balls represent B-site cations, and the size of segregated species reflects the tendency of cation segregation. 
Table 2 Factors influencing cation segregation behavior in perovskite-based systems




Influencing factors
Impacts on cation segregation and possible reasons
Related studies




Cation non-stoichiometry
A-site deficiency suppresses A-site segregation by allowing for more free space in lattice and reducing elastic energy, promoting B-site segregation.

122, 179 and 200–203



B-site deficiency typically promotes A-site segregation.

201



Cation species
Cations with larger radii tend to segregate to the surface to reduce elastic energy in perovskite systems.

45, 50, 200 and 204–207



Crystallinity
High crystallinity degree leads to a more orderly arrangement and less free space in the lattice, driving the larger cations to the surface.

46 and 49



Lattice strain
Materials with more tensile surface (relative to bulk) can accommodate more cations with larger radii, therefore promoting surface cation segregation.

96, 148, 180, 187 and 208–210



Temperature and thermal history
Cation segregation is significantly favored at elevated temperatures and dependant on annealing time.

128, 129, 135, 149, 151, 152, 162, 176, 208 and 211–213



Gas environment
Reducing atmosphere: transition metal ions exhibit low oxidation states with larger sizes, leading to B-site segregation.

90, 93, 132, 133, 200 and 214



Oxidizing atmospheres: B-site cations exhibit high oxidation states with smaller sizes, driving A-site cations with fewer positive charges and greater radii towards the surface.

45, 48, 208 and 215



Reactive gas environment typically reacts with segregated cations, driving more A-site cations to the surface.

69, 149, 197, 205, 216 and 217



Electrical polarization
Cathodic polarization generally suppresses A-site surface concentrations while anodic polarization facilitates A-site accumulation.

84, 89, 92, 154, 161, 168, 178 and 218–223





3.1. The effect of cation non-stoichiometry
For perovskite-based materials, cation deficiency has profound influences on segregation behaviors as well as electrode performances.224 Jin et al. investigated cation segregation behaviors in several (La0.8Sr0.2)xMnO3 model systems (x = 0.95, 1, and 1.05, corresponding to A-deficient, non-deficient, and B-deficient states, respectively) and confirmed that surface Sr enrichment decreased as a function of x after annealing at 500 °C for 5 h.201 Similarly, (La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ with A-site deficiency was reported by Lee et al., Abernathy et al., and Davis et al. to show less Sr segregation on the surface.179,202,203
To systematically investigate the relationship between cation non-stoichiometry and segregation behaviors, Neagu et al. synthesized perovskite-structured (La1−xSrx)yNi0.06Ti0.94O3+δ materials with and without B-site enrichment which displayed different surface chemistry after annealing at high temperatures in reducing atmospheres.122 As seen in Fig. 13, Ni nanoparticles were found to exsolve at the surface of A-deficient (and B-rich) La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 thin films, while no obvious surface particles were found on the surface of A-site stoichiometric La0.3Sr0.7Ni0.06Ti0.94O3.09. They also observed the exsolution of transition metal substances in B-rich La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.97 and La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97 thin films.200 These results demonstrate that both A- or B-site deficiencies can suppress the corresponding cation segregation, while the over-stoichiometry can promote cation segregation.
 Fig. 13  Comparison of B-site segregation behaviors in initial A-deficient La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 (a) and A-stoichiometric La0.3Sr0.7Ni0.06Ti0.94O3.09 (b) samples after reducing at 930 °C in 5% H2/Ar for 20 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The impact of cation non-stoichiometry on cation segregation can be summarized by the following mechanisms. In the case of A-site deficiency, which can also be regarded as B-site excess, the A-site segregation may be suppressed by allowing for more free space in the lattice and reducing the elastic energy.179 Meanwhile, it can promote B-site segregation and reestablish stoichiometry by secluding the B-site dopants from the main perovskite framework into an incipient phase;122vice versa in the case of A-site excess (B-site deficiency).
3.2. The effect of the cation species
Perovskite-based oxides used as SOC electrodes are usually doped with various cations. The segregation behavior therefore depends on the characteristics of the host material systems and cation species. Dopants with less charge and larger radius are more preferential to segregate out, as reported by Yildiz's group.45 Based on first principles calculations, Lee et al. confirmed that bivalent dopants (Ca, Sr and Ba) in (La,D)MnO3 (D represents dopants) possess a tendency to segregate to the surface, and this tendency becomes stronger as a function of increased dopant sizes (the radius of Ca, Sr and Ba is 1.34, 1.44 and 1.61 Å respectively).45 Based on their results, Kwon et al. demonstrated that on various LaBO3(001) surfaces (B = Cr0.50Mn0.50, Mn, Fe, Co0.25Fe0.75, Co, and Ni), the introduction of Ba on A-site can significantly decrease the surface segregation enthalpy based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations.50 Similar results were reported by Sharma et al., who also simulated cation segregation behaviors of alkaline earth metal doped LaMnO3.205,206
Besides theoretical simulations, Lee et al. also provided experimental evidence to demonstrate that the segregation tendency depends on dopant size.45 Using AFM, XPS, and AES analysis, they confirmed that a smaller size mismatch between the host and dopant cations can hinder the segregation of dopants and suppress the formation of the secondary phase in (La,D)MnO3 (D = Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+) systems. Similarly, coupling XRD, SEM with energy-dispersive X-ray detection, Galvez et al. found greater A-site segregation tendency in porous La1−xSrxMnO3−δ than that in La1−xCaxMnO3−δ in the presence of CO2.207
When B-site dopants prefer to segregate to the surface, their characteristics also greatly influence the segregation level. Tsekouras et al. studied the segregation of Ni2+ and Fe3+-doped La0.4Sr0.4D0.06Ti0.94O2.97 systems (D represents the doped transition metals).200 They found that Ni2+ with a larger ion size (the radius of Ni2+ is 0.69 Å, while that of Fe3+ is 0.645 Å) and higher reducibility exhibited a greater tendency to segregate to the surface after annealing at 900 °C in a wet 5% H2/Ar atmosphere. In addition, the exsolved Ni0 metallic particles on the surface of La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.94 are found to be larger (∼60 to 90 nm) and denser than the exsolved Fe0 metallic particles (∼30 to 60 nm) on the surface of La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97, as shown in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97 and (b) La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.94 cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013. 
The mechanisms of different segregation behaviors of A-site dopants are explained by Lee et al., as shown in Fig. 15.45 In the proposed model system, they summarized that lattice mismatches and electrostatic interactions are the main origins of cation segregation in perovskite-based oxides. By replacing trivalent A3+ with bivalent D2+ in perovskites (and therefore generating negative  defects), more surface oxygen vacancies ( with positive formal charges) are formed to maintain electrical neutrality. The electrostatic interaction between  defects and  can then drive the substitutional D2+ cations towards the surface. Based on the variational phase-field approach, Mebane et al. also confirmed that in perovskite materials, dopant cation segregation is more favored at the oxygen vacancy sites for the free surface.225 On the other hand, the lattice mismatch, caused by replacing A3+ ions with D2+ ions of larger ionic radii, can also drive the dopant D2+ cations to the surface to reduce the elastic energy in perovskite systems.45 Similar explanations can be applied to the different segregation behaviors of B-site dopants.
 Fig. 15  Driving forces for A-site segregation in a perovskite LaMnO3 system as a case study. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.3. The effect of crystallinity
Beyond compositional factors, the crystallinity level of materials is also reported to greatly affect segregation behaviors. Materials with higher crystallinity are reported to exhibit a higher segregation level at the surface. Tzoumanekas et al. observed a significant suppression of phase separation in amorphous Si–Ge alloys compared to crystalline ones.226 As for perovskite-based materials, Kubicek et al. reported that doped La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin-film electrodes prepared by PLD at reduced deposition temperatures showed low crystallinity, and presented higher surface oxygen exchange rates compared to those grown at high temperatures.49 Cai et al. further found that such differences were due to the different Sr segregation levels.46 Using AFM, AES and XPS, they found that higher crystallinity was related to increased surface Sr segregation tendency, which further led to lower oxygen exchange kinetics. To explain the results, Cai et al. proposed that compared to disordered crystalline perovskites, materials with a higher crystallinity level present a more orderly arrangement with less free space in the lattice, driving the dopants with larger radii (such as Sr2+) to the surface.46
3.4. The effect of lattice strain
Strain effects play an important role in determining the cation segregation level. Using epitaxial thin films as model systems, it was found that materials with a relatively tensile surface (compared to bulk) generally provide more surface space to accommodate larger dopants with larger radii, thereby corresponding to a greater surface segregation tendency for larger cations.180 Tuning surface strain states of materials by changing substrates,180,209 mechanical compressing,148,187,208 or cation doping96,210 was reported to effectively impact surface segregation behaviors. For instance, Jalili et al.180 and Han et al.209 reported higher surface Sr enrichment in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 deposited on a SrTiO3 substrate with in-plane tensile strain than that deposited on a LaAlO3 substrate with in-plane compressive strain. This is attributed to the fact that an expansive surface can accommodate more Sr cations with relatively larger radii. Using AFM characterization, Szot et al. also found massive Sr segregation in SrTiO3 with tensile strain.208 Similar to the results above, Araki et al. found fewer segregated particles on compressive LaxSr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ surfaces than on stress-free surfaces.148,187
Lattice strain can also be introduced by cation doping. Ding et al. carried out first principles based simulations on LSCF systems and found that introducing Co to replace Fe induced tensile strain, therefore leading to enhanced surface Sr segregation.96 By changing the photon energy of XPS measurements, Lee et al. conducted a partial substitution of A-site La3+ in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 with smaller Gd3+ (the radius is 122 pm for Gd3+, and 136 pm for La3+) and found that the surface Sr content increased as a function of Gd content.210 This may be attributed to the decreasing lattice volume with increasing Gd content, which reduces free space for accommodating larger Sr2+ in the bulk. Consequently, the elastic interactions will drive it to free surfaces to minimize the elastic energy. It is needed to note that investigations of strain effect introduced above are confined to epitaxial thin films. However, we believe that the strain effect is also effective in many practical devices. For instance, the lattice mismatch between the electrode and electrolyte in SOCs may have a significant impact on the interfacial properties.
3.5. The effect of the temperature and thermal history
Generally, elevated temperatures and extended annealing time should enhance the segregation level. Téllez et al. applied LEIS to investigate the evolution of surface compositions and morphologies of several double-perovskite type materials and found that the outermost surface of LnBaCo2O5+δ significantly changed when the samples were annealed at 400 °C.128,135 The surface (Ba + Ln) intensity was found to increase to an extremely high level in the first 15 min, and then increase slowly in the subsequent 8 h. Using an isotope labeled method, Kubicek et al. estimated Sr diffusion kinetics in La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin films at various temperatures and found that Sr mobility was high enough for such segregation within a short time even below 600 °C.176 There were many in situ investigations indicating that A-site segregation did not occur until high enough temperatures were reached. Using an in situ AES measurement, Katsiev et al. found that the surface (Sr + La)/Mn ratio in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 thin films remained perovskite–stoichiometric below 400 °C, but obviously increased at higher temperatures.152 Through in situ XPS, Tsvetkov et al. observed that the surface Sr content significantly increased with increasing temperature in several surface-modified LSC thin films.149 In other ex situ research studies, Caillol et al. found that in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 powders, Sr-rich surface particles were generated when temperatures were as high as 1200 °C.212 Xie et al. found that the surface roughness of La1−xSrxMnO3 thin films increased from 973 to 1023 K as measured by AFM, suggesting an enhanced segregation level.213 All these results above indicate that segregation tends to occur at higher temperatures where the kinetics of cation migration is fast enough.
Feng et al. investigated the surface chemistry evolution of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ perovskite thin films during several thermodynamic cycles.151 As shown in Fig. 16a and c, during the first thermal cycling, the Srsurface/Srlattice ratio, a descriptor for the extent of Sr segregation, is found to decrease with increased temperatures, and vice versa. As shown in Fig. 16b and d, after subsequent thermal cycling, surface Sr-rich particles (mainly RP-phased LSC214) are found to accumulate on the surface of LSC113. This study demonstrates that thermal history has a strong impact on cation segregation.
 Fig. 16  Evolution in surface chemistry of LSC113 during several heating and cooling cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.6. The effect of gas environment
Besides temperature, gas atmospheres, such as oxygen partial pressure and the presence of small molecules, also greatly influence cation segregation behaviors. A-site segregation is typically more preferred in oxidizing environments, while B-site segregation generally occurs in reducing environments. For example, Szot et al. reported that an oxidizing environment caused the formation of SrO-rich particles with a RP structure (Sr2TiO4) on SiTiO3 crystal surfaces at elevated temperatures, while a reducing environment led to the generation of a Ti-rich phase of TiO and/or Ti2O.208 Liu et al. synthesized a (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7 double-layered perovskite where they observed the segregation of Co–Fe alloys after being reduced in a 5% H2/N2 atmosphere at 850 °C for 2 h.227 They further found that these segregated metallic particles on the surface can be removed by annealing in an air flow.
Lee et al. studied the effects of oxygen partial pressure on the surface chemistry of A-site segregation in three doped perovskite materials, La0.8Ca0.2MnO3 (LCM), La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 (LSM) and La0.8Ba0.2MnO3 (LBM) after annealing in 760 Torr, 1 × 10−6 Torr, and 1 × 10−9 Torr O2.45 They found that higher oxygen pressures drove A-site cations toward the surface, which facilitated cation segregation and secondary phase formation. After annealing in 1 × 10−6 Torr oxygen, LBM films exhibited visible chemical and structural changes at the surface. In contrast, LSM films did not show any evident changes below 1 × 10−6 Torr oxygen, but generated the secondary phase in 760 Torr oxygen. Using ARXPS measurements on La5/8Ca3/8MnO3 thin films, Tselev et al. found that surface Ca segregation decreased with reduced environmental oxygen pressures.215 These works suggested that A-site segregation can be accelerated in oxidizing environments. In contrast to these results, by TXRF, Fister et al. found a decreased tendency for Sr segregation in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 thin films with increased oxygen pressures.48
Although there are no unified theories to explain the dependence of segregation behaviors on oxygen gas environments, it may be attributed to a combination of electrostatic interactions and lattice strains, as proposed by Lee et al.45 It is known that different oxygen partial pressures correspond to different oxygen gas chemical potentials, which further causes loss or gain of oxygen and the redox of transition metal cations in the bulk. According to Lee et al., increasing oxygen pressures may have complex effects on the segregation behaviors of A-site dopants.45 On the one hand, higher oxygen pressures can facilitate oxygen incorporation into the lattice, leading to increased oxidation states of transition metals. Since transition metal ions with higher valence possess smaller radii, higher oxygen pressures may therefore lead to a contraction of the lattice.228,229 The smaller lattice may then lead to greater size mismatches with the substitutional ions, which will drive them towards the surface. On the other hand, a large amount of oxygen ions incorporated into the lattice decreases the concentration of oxygen vacancies () at the surface. Because oxygen vacancies have opposite formal charges to the divalent substitutional ion defects (), the lack of oxygen vacancies can therefore suppress the segregation of A-site dopants introduced by electrostatic interactions.45 With respect to B-site segregation, the lower oxygen partial pressures or reducing environments lead to the reduction of B-site cations and the formation of crystal defects such as oxygen vacancies at the surface. According to Irvine et al.90 and Neagu et al.,214 these defects lower surface nucleation barriers and may drain reducible transition metal cations from the perovskite lattice, which will eventually lead to B-site exsolution.
In addition to redox environments and oxygen partial pressures, small molecules and impurities in the surrounding environment can also influence cation segregation behaviors. Bucher et al. found that after a treatment of La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ films below 600 °C for 1000 h in a dry 1% O2/Ar atmosphere, there were only moderate enrichments of La and Sr within the first 30–35 nm of the surface.69 However, after an additional treatment of 1000 h in a humid atmosphere (30% relative humidity at 25 °C), Sr was strongly enriched within the first 5 nm with a depletion of La at the surface, demonstrating the obvious promotion effects of H2O. Using DFT calculations together with atomic force microscopy measurements, Sharma et al. found evidence for increased A-site cation segregation tendencies in the presence of moisture in several doped (La,A)MnO3 (A = Ca, Sr and Ba) systems.205 CO2 was also able to accelerate Sr segregation in (La0.8Sr0.2)0.98MnO3±δ systems, as proposed by Darvish et al.216 Chromium is an impurity that is commonly present in SOCs during operation. Jiang's group found that the presence of Cr components (such as Cr2O3) can significantly promote Sr segregation and lead to the generation of a SrCrO4 phase in perovskite-based systems.197,217 Similarly, Jin et al. reported that in (La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3 systems, surface Sr segregation was significantly accelerated by Cr deposition.201
Although there are no concrete explanations for these promoting effects, they may be attributed to the reaction between small molecules/impurities and segregated Sr-containing particles at the surface which transforms surface Sr into new forms (e.g. Sr(OH)2, SrCO3, SrCrO4, etc.).
3.7. The effect of electrical polarization
SOC electrode materials usually perform under external polarization, which is reported to impact surface segregation as well. Using in situ SIMS and XPS, Huber et al. and Chen et al. reported that cathodic polarization decreased Sr concentration on the (La0.8Sr0.2)xMnO3 surface, while anodic polarization generally led to the accumulation of Sr at the surface (Fig. 17).84,168,178 These processes were found to be reversible by switching extrinsic electrochemical potentials.89,218 Thus, applying external polarization is a potential strategy to control surface chemistry and cation segregation behaviors. As for La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ and PrBaCo2O5+δ electrodes, cathodic polarization was found to suppress inactive SrO/BaO segregation on the electrode surface and activate electrochemical performances.89,219,220
 Fig. 17  Defect chemistry of the (La0.8Sr0.2)xMnO3 phase during the electrochemical polarization experiments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier. 
In addition, bias was also used to adjust B-site segregation, leading to improved catalytic performances. For example, Nenning et al.154 and Opitz et al.161 implemented cathodic polarization on various perovskite-based thin film electrodes such as La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ (LSC), SrTi0.7Fe0.3O3−δ (STF), and La0.6Sr0.4FeO3−δ (LSF). Using in situ XPS measurements, they found evidence for the generation of metallic Fe0 at the surface of LSF, which was related to the significant enhancement of activity for electrochemical water splitting. Myung et al. also observed segregated Ni metallic particles on the surface of La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3−δ electrodes after applying an electrochemical field for 150 s.92 These surface particles remained active and stable during the subsequent 150 h of testing. Although the mechanisms of electrochemically induced B-site segregation are still unclear, the effects of extrinsic polarization may be similar to those of redox atmospheres.92 By studying the surface chemistry of SrTiO3 nanoparticles, Lin et al. observed the formation of TiO and Ti islands on the surface after intense electron irradiation.221 Such a phenomenon is similar to the case of annealing under reducing conditions.208 Chen et al. also proposed that adding a cathodic and anodic bias to the electrode at high temperatures had similar effects on the oxygen defect concentration to those under oxidizing and reducing conditions, respectively.222,223
Based on the discussions in this section, one can find that cation segregation is not just determined by a simple driving force, rather it is a synthesized process determined by various materials and environmental conditions. So far, there has been no unified theory for explaining all these segregation behaviors in these systems. Nevertheless, the development of in situ characterization methods is expected to be of great importance to advance our insights into the origin of cation segregation in various perovskite-based systems, as well as to determine the main driving forces for cation segregation under various conditions. By taking advantage of this, it is possible to control cation segregation behaviors in perovskite-based materials to create new functionalities.
4. Effect of cation segregation on the electrochemical activity of SOC electrodes
Cation segregation is known to greatly impact the surface reaction mechanisms of ORR/OER (including surface absorption/exchange, electron transfer, molecular dissociation, and ion incorporation/migration, etc.) and strongly influence the activity of electrodes. Before the discussion in this section, it is necessary to first define several descriptors that reflect the electrochemical properties of electrodes. Such descriptors widely used for representing electrode ORR/OER activity in the literature include surface polarization resistance, conductivity, and surface exchange coefficient, etc. Correspondingly, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS),46,49,86,149,230 4-point dc-measurements,69,82,231 and 18O isotope exchange depth profiling with ToF-SIMS174,232 are some of the most commonly used approaches for determining the activity for SOC electrodes.
This section will discuss how cation segregation influences surface activities. The effects of both A-site and B-site segregation on ORR/OER activity in perovskite-based materials will be discussed in detail. Generally, B-site segregation improves surface conductivity and enhances catalytic activity, while the influence of A-site segregation is more complex. As one of the most common A-site dopants, Sr segregation generally occurs on SOC electrode surfaces after synthesis and in oxidizing atmospheres. Therefore, for A-site cations, the influence of Sr segregation on ORR/OER activity for Sr-doped materials will be introduced in detail as a case study. Because Sr segregation generally occurs in strong oxidizing atmospheres, its influence on oxygen electrode materials for SOCs will be discussed in detail. Specifically, the separation of surface secondary phases is thought to be harmful to electrode performance. However, in certain cases surface Sr enrichment may enhance oxygen surface kinetics. In addition, the influence of cation segregation in Sr-free electrode materials will also be reviewed here.
4.1. Influence of Sr segregation

4.1.1. Influence of Sr segregation on the electrochemical performance of SOC electrodes. 
Many studies have demonstrated that Sr segregation and phase separation can increase surface polarization resistance and has detrimental effects on ORR or OER activity for oxygen electrodes. Some typical studies focusing on how Sr segregation impacts the surface polarization resistance of SOC electrode materials (LSC) were carried out by Kubicek et al. and Cai et al.46,49 They found that surface Sr segregation led to the formation of a secondary phase on La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin films (Fig. 18a). As a result, the surface polarization resistance of La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ films deposited at 650 °C (LSC_650 °C) and 450 °C (LSC_450 °C) increased with annealing time, indicating obvious performance degradation. LSC_650 °C with a higher Sr segregation level exhibited much larger resistance and faster degradation rates than LSC_450 °C with a lower segregation level. After HCl etching (0.14 mol L−1 for 10 s) of both annealed films, the surface particles or the Sr-enrichment layer is removed, and nearly stoichiometric surfaces are left for both samples. As seen in Fig. 18a, further annealing again leads to Sr segregation and performance degradation of LSC electrodes. This research demonstrates that the polarization resistance can increase with the generation of surface segregated SrO-like particles during annealing.
 Fig. 18  (a) Surface polarization resistance, Rs, of LSC films measured by impedance spectroscopy at 600 °C in air, as well as the possible degradation mechanism for both films. (b) Further evolution of Rs of LSC films after HCl etching measured at 600 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In agreement with Markus and Cai's results, Pan et al. proposed that the resistance variation of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ half-cells may be attributed to the surface segregation of Sr-rich species.55 Jiang's group confirmed that the decrease of surface exchange coefficients in La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ electrodes was accompanied by Sr segregation and formation of SrCrO4 phases.76,197 To eliminate the negative effects of Sr segregation, Jung et al. treated the surface of SrTi1−xFexO3−δ with a 10% diluted buffered HF solution for 20 s, and they found an obvious decrease in resistance after the removal of Sr-containing species.53 Using in situ SIMS, Huber et al. demonstrated that surface segregation of (La0.8Sr0.2)0.92MnO3 or La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3−δ thin films prepared by PLD can be recovered by applying cathodic polarization, accompanied by significant performance activation.168,178 Furthermore, Tsvetkov et al. found that surface modifications using several typical B-site cations can significantly reduce the segregation level as well as enhance oxygen surface exchange kinetics.52,149
Although many of the researchers regarded Sr segregation as a detrimental process, in certain cases, positive effects of Sr enrichment on electrode performance have also been reported in the literature. Baumann et al. observed strong electrochemical activation of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8Fe0.2O3 electrodes accompanied by surface Sr enrichment after cathodic polarization using a repetition of short bias pulses.220 la O' et al. carried out cathodic polarization on La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 thin-films, which was found to increase Sr and Mn concentrations at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte as well as increase electrode performances.233


4.1.2. The mechanism behind Sr segregation's influence on electrode performance. 
According to the discussion in Section 4.1.1, Sr segregation has significant influences on the electrochemical performances of SOC electrodes. To rationally design electrode materials with high activity and stability, it is crucial to understand the mechanisms behind such influences. Based on this, it is possible to enhance the activity of Sr-containing electrodes by controlling Sr segregation behaviors.


(1) Passivated mechanisms. 
There are many studies which indicate that Sr segregation can lead to the generation of some inert secondary phases (such as SrO, Sr(OH)2, and SrCO3, etc.),46,49,53 which are insulated with a broad energy gap.54 As will be shown in the following section, this may increase the energy barrier for surface oxygen exchange and oxygen ion conduction, therefore leading to the degradation of SOC electrodes.42,234 In addition, the SrO-like surface precipitates may have a greater tendency to react with volatile species in the environment, thus resulting in more severe poisoning effects (such as chromium deposition) and performance degradation.76,78,235
Mechanism 1: blocking effects. 
Combining EIS measurements with surface analysis, researchers attribute the performance degradation of SOC electrodes to the blocking effects of the charge transfer process due to surface-bound SrO-like components.46,55,85,86,158 For example, the energy gap of SrO is as high as 6 eV,54 which is much larger than those of perovskite-based electrodes. Representative studies focusing on the blocking effects of Sr segregation on ORR activity were carried out in SrTi1−xFexO3 (STFx) systems by Jung et al. and Chen et al.53,54 By XPS analyses for various STFx systems, they found that the increasing Fe content in the bulk led to the increase of surface Sr content as well as segregation level (Fig. 19a). Due to the insulating nature of surface segregated Sr, the increase of Sr segregation with Fe content led to an increased band gap. Such dependency of the surface electronic structure on Fe content is contrary to that in the bulk (Fig. 19b), indicating that the surface is a completely different material compared to the bulk.236 After removing the Sr-rich phase through chemical etching, the polarization of ORR quantified by EIS significantly decreases (Fig. 19c and d), indicating a recovery of surface activity.
 Fig. 19  (a and b) The alternation of surface elemental composition and band gap as a function of Fe doping content in STFx systems. (c and d) The evolution of surface composition and polarization resistance before and after etching with a 10% diluted buffered HF solution for 20 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 and 53. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
Chen et al. explained the degradation mechanisms of Sr segregation.54 They proposed that in an ORR process, several successive steps involving electron transfer were likely to take place at the surface during oxygen exchange:O2_ads → 2Oads; 2Oads + 2e− → 2Oads−or2Oads → 2e− → O2_ads2− → 2Oads−  
Based on the surface chemistry detected by ARXPS analysis and the large band gap measured by STS, Chen et al. concluded that the Sr-rich layer was more likely to be in the form of SrOx on the surface of STF films,54 which may degrade the oxygen reduction kinetics by blocking electron transfer from the STF bulk to the adsorbed oxygen species on the surface (Fig. 20a and b). Similar to Jung et al. and Chen et al.'s work,53,54 Oh et al. proposed that the separated SrO-like phases on the surface acted as an insulating layer that led to an increase in the ohmic resistance of La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ thin films.237 This suggested that the SrO coverage at the surface can block the contact between oxygen and activated B-site metals in perovskite materials.90,227,238 It should also be mentioned that in Chen et al.'s work, the downshift of the O 2p band relative to the Fermi level at the surface was observed in STM/STS and XPS measurements.54 According to Suntivich et al. and Lee et al.'s study,239,240 such downshifts can cause an increase of oxygen vacancy formation energies, hence leading to a decrease of oxygen vacancy content on the surface as well as surface inactivation (Fig. 20c).
 Fig. 20  (a and b) Surface SrO segregation layer blocks the contact and electron transfer between absorbed oxygen and activated sites in STFx systems. (c) The downshift of the O 2p state relative to the Fermi level caused by the Sr segregation layer coverage. All these factors contribute to the degradation of electrochemical performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53 and 54. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
Mechanism 2: inducing harmful side reactions. 
There are several investigations indicating that Sr segregation and the formation of SrO particles at the surface may be related to chromium poisoning, and have combined effects on performance degradation. Using in situ XRD, Kim et al. indicated that SrO and/or BaO segregation on the surface of BSCF cathodes can intensify the deposition of chromium.78 Through XRD and XPS analyses, the deposition of SrCrO4, CrO2.5 and Cr2O3 phases was observed by Wei et al. in LSCF anodes under SOEC conditions.76 In further studies on LSC and LSM oxygen electrodes under SOFC working conditions, Chen et al.84 and Zhao et al.163,197 pointed out that chromium deposition preferentially occurred on the segregated SrO particles rather than on transition metal oxides (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Scheme of (a) segregation of Co3O4 and SrO particles and (b) the selective deposition of volatile Cr species on SrO sites on the surface of LSCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014. 
In addition to volatile Cr-containing species, small molecules, such as H2O or CO2, are also thought to be attracted by surface SrO-like segregated particles, further leading to the generation of insulation phases (e.g. Sr(OH)2 and SrCO3) and performance degradation. Bucher et al. investigated the long-term stability of La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ and La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ in dry and humid atmospheres at 600 °C and 800 °C, respectively.69,82 Using surface elemental analysis (e.g. SEM, TEM, XPS and EDS) and electrochemical testing (dc-conductivity relaxation measurements) for thousands of hours, they concluded that electrodes in humid environments not only exhibited more severe Sr segregation, but also promoted Si and Cr poisoning in the presence of Si- and Cr-sources. Using XRD, Hu et al. also found that in (La0.8Sr0.2)0.98MnO3 electrodes, surface segregated SrO can react with H2O upon cooling in humidified air.241 Sharma et al. proposed that in (La,A)MnO3 (“A” represents an alkaline earth metal ion) systems, the surface terminal oxygen can attract H2O in the atmosphere via H-bonds.205 This interaction enhanced cation segregation tendency and caused catalytic activity degradation, leading to a drop in conductivity. In a study performed by Darvish et al., CO2 was found to have similar effects (forming SrCO3 and reducing electrical conductivity) on (La0.8Sr0.2)0.98MnO3±δ systems.216 These side reactions typically accelerate Sr segregation and synergistically lead to increased degradation rates in perovskite-based electrodes.


(2) Activated mechanisms. 
Although numerous studies have reported the detrimental effects of Sr segregation on ORR/OER activity in SOC electrodes, in certain cases Sr enrichment was shown to improve electrode performances.220,242,243 Such improvements were thought to be related to the generation of activated but non-equilibrium surfaces, as well as the formation of high-performance hetero-interfaces.220,242
la O' et al. investigated cation enrichment behaviors in La1−xSrxMnO3 thin films.233 They found that Sr/La exchange may occur in the presence of cathodic polarization, which caused the formation of new compositions in the near surface region. According to AES and XPS analysis, Sr and Mn enrichment together with La depletion was observed on the surface (compared to their average contents in the edge regions of the electrode), suggesting that its composition can be approximately referred to as SrxMnyOz. Similarly, in a study on La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ thin film electrodes, Baumann et al. confirmed the enrichment of Sr and Co after applying cathodic polarization.220 Using XRD and in situ XPS analysis for La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ systems, Mutoro et al. proposed that RP-phased (La,Sr)2CoO4+δ and other Sr-enriched particles may be generated on the LSC surface.242 Feng et al. also demonstrated the accumulation of (La,Sr)2CoO4+δ at the surface during several thermodynamic cycles, seemingly because LSC214 was more stable than LSC113 at elevated temperatures.151 These generated secondary phases seemed to be activated but unstable, which can explain the significant performance enhancements,220 and the formation of these hetero-structure may further contribute to the enhancement of surface exchange kinetics as well as decreased polarization resistances.233,244,245
To summarize the influence of Sr segregation on the performance of (La,Sr)CoO3 and other Sr-doped materials with similar characteristics, a “critical point of phase separation” hypothesis is proposed as shown in Fig. 22. As Sr initially segregates to the surface, the impact of the Sr segregation appears to be similar to increasing the Sr2+ dopant level in bulk LaCoO3. At this stage, the electrode properties increase with surface Sr content due to the increase of oxygen vacancies and change in the electronic structure. As the Sr content at the surface further increases, surface Sr concentrations will eventually reach a critical point (so-called “critical point of phase separation”). As a result, inert SrO-like particles will separate out to block the reaction between oxygen and electrode surfaces or form insulting phases, leading to the decrease of electrode performance. Therefore, Sr segregation is beneficial to electrode performances before the critical point and harmful after that.
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of “critical point of phase separation” hypothesis about the correlation between Sr segregation and electrode performance for Sr doped LaCoO3. 

4.2. A-site segregation on Sr-free electrode materials
In addition to commonly used Sr-containing electrode materials, Sr-free composites for oxygen electrodes are also widely studied. Chen et al. introduced several of such materials with promising electrochemical properties, such as LaNiO3, La2NiO4, CoFe2O4 and their derivatives in their review.44 Despite the absence of Sr, cation segregation is still generally observed in these systems.
LaNi1−xFexO3 (LNF) and its derivatives are a series of state-of-the-art perovskites that possess good catalytic activity and high electrical conductivity.246–251 Due to the lack of A-site Sr, significant performance degradation via A-site segregation (mechanism 1 in Section 4.1.2) is not observed. Nevertheless, their performances were still reported to suffer from Cr poisoning, related to the segregation of B-site Ni (mechanism 2 in Section 4.1.2).77,252 The separated NiO phase was reported to further react with Cr-species to generate a Ni-substituted secondary phase.83 Using XRD, Komatsu et al. found that in LNF systems, the residual NiO at the surface can further lead to the formation of a NiCr2O4 phase in the presence of Cr2O3 powder.252
Another typical Sr-free material with promising performances as a SOC oxygen electrode is RP-structured La2NiO4.253–255 Using LEIS depth profiling, Druce et al. found its surface to be dominated by A-site La.40 In another study of PrLaNiO4+δ, a derivative of La2NiO4, Druce et al. observed surface enrichments of both Pr and La with no obvious priority.142 For these materials, the electrode performance seems to be less affected by cation segregation compared with that of Sr-containing materials. Zhou et al. compared the performance degradation rates in several common electrode materials, and their results are shown in Fig. 23.256 Although the as-prepared BSCF and LSCF electrodes exhibit promising performances, serious degradation occurs after continuous operation due to Sr segregation under electrochemical polarization. In contrast, Pr2NiO4 electrodes demonstrate considerably better stability during the operation for 1000 hours.
 Fig. 23  Electrochemical performance of cells with LSM, LSCF, Pr2NiO4, and BSCF cathodes as a function of time at 750 °C and 0.8 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier. 
4.3. Influence of B-site segregation
B-site segregation under reducing conditions is also referred to as exsolution. To generate metallic particle coverage, both reducing agents and cathodic polarization are available approaches.90,92,214 Since these exsolved metallic particles are thermally stable against reunion under operating conditions, exsolution is proposed to be a promising approach that can be applied in various energy devices such as SOFCs, SOECs, and other catalytic applications.257–259 Some of the reported perovskite-based systems that were used for growing exsolved metallic particles are listed in Table 3.
Table 3 Representative perovskite-based materials with exsolved metallic particles and their performances




Exsolved species
Perovskite-based matrix
Performance
Ref.




Fe
La0.6Sr0.3Cr0.85Fe0.15O3−δ (A-LSCFe)
∼330 mW cm−2 power density in an LSM–YSZ/YSZ/A-LSCFe fuel cell in pure H2 at 700 °C

260



(Sr0.95)0.9(Ti0.8Nb0.1Mn0.1)0.9Fe0.1O3−δ (STNMFO)
330.2 mA cm−2 current density at 2.0 V, 800 °C in a STNMFO/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ–Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ cell for direct CO2 electrolysis

261



(La0.2Sr0.8)0.9Ti0.9Fe0.1O3−δ (LSTFO)
175 mA cm−2 current density in a LSTFO–SDC/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell for steam electrolysis at 2 V, 800 °C in 3% H2O/Ar

259



La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97
1.5 Ω cm2 polarized impedance (compared to 1.7 Ω cm2 for La0.4Sr0.4TiO3) in a La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3 electrolysis cell in 47% H2O/53% N2 at 900 °C at 1.5 V

200



Co
Co-Doped Pr0.5Ba0.5MnOx (PBMCo)
2.5, 1.6, and 0.85 A cm−2 cathodic current densities at 900, 850, and 800 °C at 1.5 V in a PBMCo/YSZ/LSM–GDC cell for CO2 electrolysis

262



La0.8Sr1.2Fe0.9Co0.1O4±δ
0.21 Ω cm2 and 0.93 Ω cm2 polarization resistance in air and in 5% H2/N2 at 800 °C

263



Ni
(La0.2Sr0.8)0.95Ti0.85Mn0.1Ni0.05O3+δ (LSTMNA)
99.9% Faradaic efficiency, 6.08 ml min−1 cm−2 CO production, 0.87 A cm−2 current density with 2 V bias at 850 °C in a LSTMNA/YSZ/LSM cell for CO2 electrolysis

264



(La0.3Sr0.7)0.9Ti0.95Ni0.05O3−δ (LSTNO)
318.1 mA cm−2 current density with 90% Faradaic efficiency for direct CO2 electrolysis at 2 V and 1073 K in a LSTNO–SDC/YSZ/LSMO–SDC cell

265



(La0.3Sr0.6Ce0.1)(Ni0.1Ti0.9)O3−δ (LSCNT)
660 mW cm−2 maximum power density and 2600 mA cm−2 current density at 900 °C in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNT–YSZ using 5000 ppm H2S/H2 as fuel

266



(Sr0.94)0.9(Ti0.9Nb0.1)0.9Ni0.1O3 (STNNO)
0.78 ml min−1 cm−2 maximum H2 production at 1.6 V in 5% H2O/5% H2/Ar atmosphere in a STNNO–SDC/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell

267



La0.5Sr0.5Ti0.75Ni0.25O3
0.55 Ω cm2 polarization resistance at 800 °C under 3% H2O/H2 and 0.46 Ω cm2 polarization resistance after a subsequent thermal treatment in air

268



La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.69Ni0.31O3−δ (LSCrNi)
∼125 mW cm−2 maximum power density at the first ∼15 min in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrNi–GDC fuel cell in humidified H2 at 750 °C, and increased continuously with time, reaching 180 mW cm−2 at 49 h

269



La0.4Sr0.4Sc0.9Ni0.1O3−δ
0.055 Ω cm2 area specific resistance at 800 °C in humid H2

91



La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3−δ
La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3−δ (∼10 μm)/Zr0.89Sc0.1Ce0.01O2−δ (∼80–140 μm)/Zr0.89Sc0.1Ce0.01O2−δ–(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ (∼20 μm) cell

92



FC mode: 0.37 W cm−2 and 1.97 W cm−2 maximum power densities at 700 °C and 900 °C


EC mode: 0.22 and 2.75 A cm−2 at 1.3 V (the thermo-neutral voltage for steam electrolysis) at 700 °C and 900 °C


(La0.6Sr0.3)(Cr0.85Ni0.15)O3−δ (LSCNi)
460 mW cm−2 maximum power density in 5000 ppm H2S/H2 in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNi–YSZ fuel cell at 800 °C

130



La0.2Sr0.8Ti0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTN)
∼130 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3–Gd0.1Ce0.9O2/Sc2O3–CeO2–ZrO2/LSTN fuel cell under air/wet H2 after 100 h at 800 °C

270



(La0.2Sr0.8)(Ti0.9Mn0.1)O3−δ (LSTMN)
200 mA cm−2 current density in a LSTMN–YSZ/YSZ/LSM–YSZ cell at 800 °C, 2.0 V for direct high temperature CO2 electrolysis

271



NbTi0.5Ni0.5O4
91 and 282 mA cm−2 current density at 1.3 and 2.0 V in a NbTi0.5Ni0.5O4/YSZ/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3+δ–Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ cell for CO2/H2O co-electrolysis at 800 °C

272



La0.2Sr0.8Ti1−xNixO3−δ, (x = 0–0.2, LSTN)
∼150 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3–Gd0.1Ce0.9O2/Sc2O3–CeO2–ZrO2/LSTN fuel cell at 800 °C in H2/3% H2O

273



(La0.3Sr0.7)0.9Ti0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTNO)
90% and 94% current efficiencies in a LSTNO/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell under the applied voltage of 2.0 V at 800 °C for direct H2O electrolysis

274



La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.94
1.2 Ω cm2 cathodic polarized impedance in a La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3 electrolysis cell in 47% H2O/53% N2 at 900 °C at 1.5 V

200



(La0.75Sr0.25)0.97Cr0.5Mn0.5O3 (LSCM) with Ni nitrate solution
0.38 and 1.37 Ω cm2 anode polarization resistance in a (La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3/YSZ/LSCM–Ce0.9Gd0.1O2−δ–Ni2+ fuel cell under 50 ml min−1 wet H2 flow at 900 °C and 700 °C

275



(La0.75Sr0.25)(Cr0.5Mn0.3Ni0.2)O2.8
1 × 10−3 mmol m−2 s−1 CO2 production rate when exposed to 60 pulses of 10 seconds of 20 vol% CH4/He flow at 30 ml min−1 and 800 °C

258



NiO
SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05O3−δ (SFTNi)
1650, 1420, 1100, 684, and 340 mW cm−2 peak power densities at 80 ml min−1 H2 flow rate in a SFTNi/YSZ/Ni–YSZ fuel cell at 750, 700, 650, 600, and 550 °C, respectively

93



Cu
(La0.75Sr0.25)0.9(Cr0.5Mn0.5)0.9Cu0.1O3−δ (LSCMC)
0.477 A cm−2 current density in a LSCMC–SDC/YSZ/La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3−δ–SDC cell for direct CO2 electrolysis at 2.0 V and 800 °C

276



(La0.2Sr0.8)0.9Ti0.9Cu0.1O3−δ (LSTCO)
0.15 A cm−2 current density and 0.9785 ml min−1 cm−2 maximum hydrogen production in a LSTCO/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell in 5% H2O/5% H2/Ar at 2.0 V and 800 °C for direct steam electrolysis

277



Ni–Fe alloy
Sr2FeMo0.65Ni0.35O6−δ (SFMNi)
390, 590, 792, and 960 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/SFMNi fuel cell in wet H2 (40 ml min−1) at 700, 750, 800, and 850 °C, respectively

132



(La0.7Sr0.3)(Cr0.85Ni0.1125Fe0.0375)O3−δ (LSCNi–Fe)
560 mW cm−2 maximum power density and ∼1700 mA cm−2 maximum current density in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNi–Fe fuel cell in 5000 ppm H2S/H2 at 800 °C

278



La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ (LSFN)
0.272 Ω cm2 cathodic polarization resistance, 1.78 A cm−2 current density, along with a high Faradaic efficiency (∼98.8%) in a LSFN–GDC/YSZ/(La0.60Sr0.40)0.95Co0.20Fe0.80O3−δ–Gd0.2Ce0.8O2−δ cell for CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 850 °C

279



Sr2Fe1.3Ni0.2Mo0.5O6 (SFMNi)
269, 511, 838 and 1257 mA cm−2 current density and 112, 213, 350 and 525 ml cm−2 h−1 hydrogen production rate in a SFMNi–SDC/La0.5Ce0.5O1.5/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.87Mg0.13O3/La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–SDC cell for H2O electrolysis under 42% H2O/58% H2 at an applied voltage of 1.3 V at 700, 750, 800 and 850 °C, respectively

280



Ni–Cu alloy
NbTi0.5(Ni0.75Cu0.25)0.5O4
0.1629 ml min−1 cm−2 at CO production rate in a NbTi0.5(Ni0.75Cu0.25)0.5O4/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ cell for direct CO2 electrolysis at 1.4 V and 800 °C

281



Ni–Co alloy
NiCo(Ni4Co)/PrBaMn2O5+δ–BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3−δ
2.10 W cm−2 peak power density in humidified H2 at 700 °C as an anode for SOFC

133



Fe–Cu alloy
SrFe0.8Cu0.1Nb0.1O3−δ (SFCN)
423 mW cm−2 power density in a La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−δ/YSZ–ZrO2/SFCN fuel cell in H2 flow at 700 °C

282



Co–Fe alloy
Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ (PPSCFM)
496.2 and 348.84 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a (La0.60Sr0.40)0.95Co0.20Fe0.80O3−δ/BaCe0.7Zr0.1Y0.2O3−δ/PPSCFM fuel cell in H2 and C2H6 at 750 °C

283



Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ (PSCFM)
1.01 A cm−2 current density and 0.455 Ω cm2 cathodic polarization area-specific resistance in a PSCFM/YSZ/LSM cell for CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 850 °C

227



(Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Nb0.15)2O7 (RP-PSFN)
0.59 and 0.92 W cm−2 maximum power out puts in a Ba0.9Co0.7Fe0.2Nb0.1O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.83Mg0.17O3−δ/RP-PSFN fuel cell in wet 3% H2O/C3H8 at 800 and 850 °C

284



Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ (K-PSCFN)
0.96, 0.92 and 0.89 W cm−2 maximum power density in a Ba0.9Co0.7Fe0.2Nb0.1O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.83Mg0.17O3−δ/K-PSCFN fuel cell in H2, H2/50 ppm H2S, H2/100 ppm H2S at 850 °C

182



Ag
Sr0.95Ag0.05Nb0.1Co0.9O3−δ (SANC)
1116 mW cm−2 peak power density in a SANC/SDC/NiO–SDC fuel cell with 80 ml min−1 anode H2 flow rate at 500 °C and stable operation for 140 h at a current density of 625 mA cm−2

94



Pd
La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.8Pd0.2O3−δ (LSCrPd)
Initial performance: 508 mW cm−2 power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Co0.2O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrP–GDC fuel cell in 3% H2O/H2 at 0.7 V and 800 °C, RP = 0.22 Ω cm2; final performance (after 353 h): 390 mW cm−2 power density at 0.7 V, RP = 0.33 Ω cm2

285



Ru
La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.82Ru0.18O3−δ (LSCrRu)
The maximum power density increased from 250 mW cm−2 (15 min) to 400 mW cm−2 (100 h) in humidified H2 at 800 °C in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrRu–GDC fuel cell

269



La0.8Sr0.2Cr1−yRuyO3−δ (LSCrRu)
∼0.13 Ω cm2 anodic polarization resistance in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrRu–GDC fuel cell at 800 °C and OCV

257





As reviewed by Irvine et al., B-site exsolution is an effective approach to improve the electrochemical performances of SOC electrode materials.90 Li et al. found that with exsolved Ni nanocrystals on the surface of (La0.2Sr0.8)(Ti0.9Mn0.1)O3−δ (LSTM), it exhibited enhanced catalytic activities for CO2 electrolysis (Fig. 24a).271 Yang et al. proposed that the exsolved NiO particles can significantly reduce the area specific resistance (ASR) of SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05O3−δ (STFNi) anodes (Fig. 24b).93
 Fig. 24  (a) Current–voltage curves of SOEC with cathodes based on (La0.2Sr0.8)(Ti0.9Mn0.1)O3−δ (LSTM) and (La0.2Sr0.8)0.9(Ti0.9Mn0.1)0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTMN) with exsolved Ni at 800 °C. (b) ASR of the SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05O3−δ (STFNi) cathode and that decorated with NiO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93 and 271. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier and 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to improving the electrochemical activity, B-site exsolution can also enhance the stability of hydrogen electrodes in both SOFC and SOEC modes. According to Neagu et al., exsolved particles generally behave as if pinned to their original locations, showing special stability compared to metal-oxide hetero-systems produced by conventional means.214 It was reported that the surface morphology of La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 remained unchanged after being exposed to 20% CH4/H2 at 800 °C for 4 h, demonstrating good structural stability (Fig. 25a).214 In another study of Co/Fe exsolved (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7 systems, Liu et al. found that no graphite was generated during polarization for 10 h, indicating excellent anti-coking properties (Fig. 25b).227 In addition, many studies confirmed that the surface compositions and electrochemical performances of these systems with exsolved particles exhibited no significant decrease after several redox cycles, indicating considerable operational stability.92,272,277,279,281
 Fig. 25  (a) Ni particles exsolved from La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 (5% H2/Ar, 1000 °C, 6 h) after coking; scale bars, 1 mm (overview); 100 nm (detail). (b) Raman spectra collected from the cathode surface of Ni/GDC, Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ/GDC and exsolved Co–Fe–(Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7/GDC after testing in CO2 electrolysis cell at a constant applied potential of 0.4 V (vs. OCV) at 850 °C for 10 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214 and 227. Copyright © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited and The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016. 
The generation of B-site exsolution is proposed to be driven by chemical/electrochemical reductions and controlled by bulk/surface defects as well as external conditions.90,122,214 When the lattice is reduced, surface defects such as oxygen vacancy formation becomes more preferred, which destabilizes the lattice stoichiometry. Meanwhile, the generation of oxygen vacancies accompanied by the reduction of B-site transition metals can further lead to metal nucleation at the surface, where the nucleation barrier is lowered by crystal defects. These processes will eventually drive B-site cations to the surface from the inside bulk continuously and will cause the growth of exsolved particles until an equilibrium is reached.90,122
5. Surface engineering that promotes ORR/OER activity for perovskite electrodes
As reviewed in previous sections, surface segregation plays an essential role in determining the performance of SOC electrodes. Therefore, many existing studies focus on the suppression of detrimental segregation or promotion of beneficial segregation to enhance the reactivity of SOC electrodes. This section will review representative studies which use surface engineering to control surface segregation and enhance the activity and stability of SOC electrodes. The most widely used approach is to decorate or cover existing materials with a new phase. In the following sections, these studies will be introduced in detail.
5.1. Surface decoration with alkaline earth metal oxides
Alkaline earth metals are widely used as A-site cations of perovskite like electrode materials. As reviewed in Section 4, the segregation of these cations, particularly Sr, may lead to the degradation of SOCs. However, it is also reported that the intentional decoration of alkaline earth metal oxides on perovskite like oxides increases their ORR activity. Wagner et al. reported that the alkaline earth metal oxides (e.g. BaO or CaO) at the surface led to faster oxygen exchange kinetics in SrTiO3.243 Using 18O isotope exchange depth profiling with ToF-SIMS, they observed that the surface exchange coefficient of SrTiO3 films decorated with alkaline earth metal layers with 20–100 nm thicknesses was nearly an order of magnitude higher than that of the bare surface. Using EIS measurements, Mutoro et al. reported that by covering the surface with nanoscale “Sr coverage” (48% Sr(OH)2, 35% SrO, and 17% SrCO3), the ORR activity of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ increases by an order of magnitude, as shown in Fig. 26a and c.242 They proposed that such enhanced performances can be attributed to the generation of a surface RP phase and the formation of highly activated hetero-interface (SrxOy/LSC113 or LSC113/LSC214), as shown in Fig. 26b.124,151 Lee et al. reported that in LSM–YSZ systems, modifications with Sr-nitrate can decrease its polarization resistance.286 Moreover, Bidrawn et al. observed that the decoration of K2O and CaO decreased the electrode impedance of LSM and LSF.287
 Fig. 26  (a) Surface morphology of SrO decorated La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ films after EIS testing. (b) Possible mechanism of electrochemical activity enhancement by surface “Sr” decoration. (c) Comparison of surface exchange values for different La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ based samples in the range of 510 to 550 °C at various oxygen pressures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011. 
Although the literature above illustrates that decorating SOC electrode surfaces with alkaline earth metal oxides may improve performance, it should be mentioned that with increasing thickness or extended operation time, the new surface phase can eventually turn to hindering the activity of the electrodes. According to Mutoro et al., in SrO-decorated LSC thin films, the activated decoration layer will eventually change into a completely inert phase with increasing SrO amounts.242 In another in situ investigation of La1−xSrxCoO3−δ thin films, Rupp et al. reported that tiny amounts of SrO (such as 4% of a monolayer) deposited on the surface can lead to severe deactivation effects.85
5.2. Surface decoration of transition metal cations
B-site cations in perovskite-based oxides are normally considered to be the active sites for ORR/OER reactions. The decoration of transition metal cations on electrode materials therefore can potentially enhance their catalytic performance. Tsvetkov et al. implemented TiCl4 solution to deposit Ti4+ onto the surface of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 (LSC) thin films.52 Using EIS measurements, they found much lower Sr segregation level together with higher surface exchange kinetics and higher stability on Ti modified films than bare LSC films at 530 °C. Such activation effects became more obvious when surface Ti contents increased from 2% (∼2 times) to 10% (∼8 times). However, if the Ti content was further increased to higher than 10%, it turned to hindering surface activity. In further studies on LSC systems, they found that the concentration of oxygen vacancies () will decrease by introducing less reducible B-site cations (e.g. Hf4+, Ti4+, Zr4+, Nb5+ or Al3+, etc.).149 Since oxygen vacancies have opposite charges with substitutional Sr defects (), less oxygen vacancies on the surface leads to the suppression of Sr migration towards the surface by weakened electronic attractions. As shown in Fig. 27, there is a ‘volcano’ relationship between the surface oxygen exchange coefficient (represented by kq) and ΔHVf(MeOx)–ΔHVf(LSC), which is equivalent to the oxygen vacancy formation enthalpy of the substituted cations. As the difference between ΔHVf(MeOx) and ΔHVf(LSC) increases, the enhancement of kq reaches up to 1–2 orders of magnitude. Such improvements can be attributed to enhanced surface stability against Sr segregation. However, if this value continues to increase, the decoration layer will start to block surface activities due to low concentration of oxygen vacancies, which are also crucial for the oxygen exchange process on the surface.240,288–290
 Fig. 27  Surface exchange coefficient (represented by kq) varies with the difference of ΔHVf(MeOx) and ΔHVf(LSC) in V, Nb, Ti, Zr, Hf and Al modified LSC systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Zhang et al. found that La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ electrodes decorated with Ni using a plasma glow discharge exhibited much faster oxygen surface exchange kinetics than that of an untreated one.291 They attributed this improvement to the increase in surface areas and the formation of a NiFe2O4 phase. Imanishi et al. reported that infiltrated Co particles on LSM–YSZ electrodes drastically enhanced their performance in the temperature range of 600 to 800 °C.292 Likewise, in another study of porous La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−δ (LSF) electrodes, Li et al. found that surface infiltration by Co(NO3)2 solution significantly suppressed Sr segregation.293 Using in situ impedance spectroscopy during pulsed laser deposition, Rupp et al. demonstrated that depositing Co3O4 on La1−xSrxCoO3−δ can lead to surface (re)activation.85 This effect may be attributed to the exposure of B-site Co42,288 as well as the elimination of surface segregated Sr,42,46 as illustrated in Fig. 28.
 Fig. 28  Illustration of the model of inhomogeneously active LSC surfaces for ORR. Four surface statuses including bare surface (a), Sr-decorated surface (b), Co-decorated surface (c), and surface covered with Sr and reactivated by Co (d) are illustrated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Although the works introduced above show that the decoration of B-site cations can improve electrode performances, there are other studies that provide contradicting results. For example, Huang et al. found that the addition of 10 wt% CoOx on a LSM–YSZ composite displayed no obvious effects on electrode performance under SOFC conditions.294 Similarly, Cox-Galhotra et al. reported that La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ electrodes modified with cobalt nitrate solution via spray deposition exhibited no observable changes in surface exchange coefficients and bulk diffusion coefficients when compared to the unmodified ones.295 Choi et al. modified La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 (LSC) electrodes with CoOxvia atomic layer deposition.296 They found that after annealing at 600 °C for 4 hours in air, the CoOx-treated films even showed lower power density than those of the bare cells. They attributed this to the transformation of CoOx into Co3O4, which blocked O2 adsorption and dissociation.
5.3. Surface decoration by secondary perovskite-based phases
The formation of hetero-interfaces by depositing secondary perovskite-based phases is reported to cause significantly improved catalytic activities as well as higher structural stability for SOC electrodes.90 One representative example of such a system is the A2BO4/ABO3 hetero-structure.191,244,245,297–301 Sase et al. reported that the deposition of (La,Sr)2CoO4 (LSC214) onto PLD-layered (La,Sr)CoO3 (LSC113) films led to 3 orders of magnitude enhancement in oxygen exchange coefficients compared to the single LSC113 (Fig. 29a).244 This enhancement was found to be also effective at the hetero-interface of LSC113/LSC214 in composite ceramics.298 Similar improved performances in the LSC214/LSC113 structure were observed later by Crumlin et al.,299 Yashiro et al.,300 Lee et al.,245,301 and Hayd et al.302 in their EIS measurements (Fig. 29b).
 Fig. 29  (a) 18O intensity at the interface of La1.5Sr0.5CoO4/La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 after the diffusion annealing at 773 K for 180 s, in 0.2 bar 18O2. Much higher 18O intensity is presented at the interfacial region. (b) Surface exchange coefficients kq as a function of oxygen partial pressure in various LSC113/LSC214 films and single LSC113. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244 and 299. Copyright © 2008 The Electrochemical Society and 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Using ab initial calculations, Han et al. showed that the lattice strain near the interface of LSC113 and LSC214 and the anisotropic oxygen transport path are possible reasons leading to the fast oxygen exchange kinetics near the interface.297 Using in situ STM, Chen et al. observed the electronic activation effects near the hetero-interface of LSC214 and LSC113 and believed that such effects can potentially lead to greatly enhanced performances of the hetero-structure (Fig. 30a).191 Lee et al., on the other hand, attributed the high performance of the LSC214/113 hetero-structure to the stabilization of RP-phased decorations against decomposition into secondary phases in single perovskite materials as well as the extremely high Sr segregation level at the interfacial region.245,301 In addition, they reported similar performance improvements on La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3−δ hetero-structured films prepared by PLD.150 Based on DFT simulations, Gadre et al. found that Sr tended to replace La at the interface of LSC113 and LSC214.303 Combining first principles based simulations with coherent Bragg rod analysis (COBRA), Feng et al. found anomalous Sr enrichment at the interface of LSC113/LSC214, which they believed was the reason for the extremely enhanced oxygen surface exchange rate (Fig. 30b).47,304
 Fig. 30  (a) Electronic structure alternation at the interface of LSC113 and LSC214 correlates with the creation of oxygen vacancies and electron injection from LSC113 to LSC214. (b) Sr enrichment at the interface of LSC113 and LSC214 corresponds to strong enhancement of activity and stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 and 191. Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Aside from these studies above, Liu's group reported that through the infiltration of secondary perovskite-based phases, such as La0.85Sr0.15MnO3−δ (LSM)305 or Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ306 into La1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3−δ (LSCF) electrodes, the electrochemical performance can be enhanced. Compared to the bare electrodes, LSM-infiltrated electrodes were found to exhibit apparently high power densities as well as enhanced stability at elevated temperatures (Fig. 31). This difference can be explained by the fact that a favorable hybrid phase of LSM was formed at the interfacial region between LSM and LSCF after long-term operation, which will suppress surface Sr segregation, thus enhancing their activity and stability under operating conditions.186
 Fig. 31  LSM-infiltrated LSCF cathodes demonstrated apparently high power density (under 750 °C) as well as enhanced stability (under 650 °C, 750 °C and 850 °C) relative to LSCF without infiltration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright © 2013, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. 
In another study of porous La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 (LSCF) electrodes, Chen et al. modified their surface with Pr2(Ni,Mn)O4 decoration, which contained a conforming perovskite Pr(Ni,Mn)O3 (PNM) layer and PrOx nanoparticles using a one-step infiltration process.307 The anode-supported cells with this hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF cathode demonstrated remarkable peak power densities while maintaining excellent durability. Near ambient X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) analysis, together with DFT based simulations showed that the perovskite PNM layer can significantly suppress Sr segregation and prevent performance degradation. Moreover, the PrOx nanoparticles on the surface can greatly accelerate the rate of electron transfer in ORR, as shown in Fig. 32. Some other studies using infiltration to improve performance and stability can be found in a previous review by Ding et al.95
 Fig. 32  (a) Illustration of an LSCF electrode decorated with a PNM coating and exsolved PrOx nanoparticles. (b) A high-resolution TEM image showing two PrOx particles on a PNM coating deposited on an LSCF grain. (c) Schematic representation of the lowest energy pathway for ORR on the hybrid catalyst (PrOx/PNM) decorated LSC electrode and the enhanced bulk diffusion of oxygen vacancies in PNM by introducing Pr deficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
5.4. Surface decoration by a less electro-catalytically active phase
There are also investigations focusing on inhibiting detrimental segregation and enhancing surface stability of SOC electrodes by decorating the electrode surface with a less electro-catalytically active material. For example, Gong et al. modified the surface of La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ (LSC) with ZrO2 overcoats via atomic layer deposition (ALD).308 Under the operating conditions, ZrO2 alone is less catalytically active than LSC for ORR. According to EIS measurements and XPS characterization, however, the performance degradation rates (represented by the changes in polarization resistance) of the ZrO2-decorated LSC cathode were much lower than those of the bare LSC cathode during the 4000 h of operation. In another ALD study on La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Co0.2O3−δ–Gd0.2Ce0.8O1.9 porous electrodes, they reported that a pristine electrode degraded approximately 4 times faster than a ZrO2-overcoated one.309 They proposed that the Zr dopant on the surface of LSCF introduced point defects with positive charges (e.g.) that can suppress surface Sr-segregation by reducing electronic attraction. Nevertheless, Kim et al. reported that in La0.6Sr0.4CoO3-based electrodes modified with Al2O3via atomic layer deposition, the apparent open-cell voltages and power densities decreased with increasing thickness of the Al2O3 layer.310 Such decreases were due to the inert nature of Al2O3, which further led to blocking effects when the overcoated layer is too thick. These results show that modifying the surface with less active materials can be a potential approach to achieve a balance between activity and stability for electrode materials.
6. Conclusion and outlook
Under typical SOC operating conditions, variations in specific cation concentrations are often observed near the surfaces or interfaces of electrodes due to the accumulation (or depletion) of other charged defects such as oxygen vacancies or cation vacancies/interstitials; this compositional variation is further exacerbated by extreme electrical polarization or exposure to active/corrosive contaminants. In many cases, cation enrichment or depletion may lead to cation segregation or the formation of secondary phases on electrode surfaces or interfaces. Further, surface chemistry plays a vital role in determining the electro-catalytic activity and durability of many widely studied perovskite-based electrode materials for SOCs. Recent advancements in surface characterization techniques (especially in situ/operando tools) make it possible to probe the origins of cation segregation and the detailed chemical and structural features of electrodes associated with the process under operating conditions. According to existing investigations, the main driving forces for A-site cation enrichment or segregation are largely electrostatic and elastic interactions. Specifically, the degree of cation segregation is determined by both the nature of materials (such as cation deficiency, species of dopant ions, crystallinity, and lattice strain) and the environmental conditions (such as temperature and thermal history, atmosphere, and electrical polarization).
In general, a high operating temperature and a strong oxidizing atmosphere promote A-site cation segregation in electrode materials, facilitating the formation of oxide particles on electrode surfaces. In contrast, a strong reducing atmosphere promotes B-site cation segregation, stimulating the formation of metallic particles on electrode surfaces. The different segregation modes have profound impacts on the electro-catalytic activity and stability of electrode materials. For example, Sr enrichment creates more oxygen vacancies, thus leading to considerable performance enhancements. However, when Sr segregation occurs due to excessive Sr enrichment (e.g. beyond the solubility limit of Sr), the formation of SrO (an inert compound) can degrade electrode performance. Furthermore, SrO may be more vulnerable to poisoning by contaminants or impurities such as H2O, CO2, or Cr (from Cr-containing interconnect), further degrading the electro-catalytic activity and durability of the electrodes. Still, studies have shown positive effects of some segregated AOx oxides (such as PrOx). In contrast, B-site cation segregation under reducing conditions often results in the formation of highly active transition metal particles, generally enhancing surface conductivity, electro-catalytic activity, and stability of the electrodes under operating conditions.
A profound understanding of cation enrichment and segregation mechanisms and the correlation between the surface features (structure, chemistry, and nanostructure) and the electrochemical properties of SOC electrode materials provide guidance for the rational design of improved electrodes with enhanced electro-catalytic activity and stability. Since the electrochemical properties of electrodes depend sensitively on both A-site and B-site cation enrichment and segregation, it is critical to exert precise control of the synthesis processes in order to obtain electrodes with desired properties. Alternatively, the surface of the electrode may be modified using a thin, conformal coating of catalysts to minimize or eliminate the detrimental effect of cation enrichment and segregation of the electrode materials. The specific methods of surface modification include vapour phase deposition and solution infiltration of various catalyst materials. In addition, to enhance long-term stability against detrimental segregation or contaminant poisoning, surface decoration with nanoparticles of some materials that are less electro-catalytically active is also proven effective.
Nevertheless, there is still much to learn about cation segregation. Some of the specific open questions to be addressed include how to track in real time the evolution of surface chemistry and structure and correlate these microscopic features with electrode performances under SOC operating conditions; how to enhance desired positive effects while suppressing negative effects associated with cation segregation under operating conditions; and finally, how to achieve enhancing electro-catalytic activity while maintaining long-term durability for various perovskite-electrode systems. To address these scientific questions, powerful surface characterization tools (e.g. secondary ion mass spectrometry, high-temperature scanning probe microscopy, and high-sensitivity low-energy ion scattering, etc.) must be used; either under well-controlled conditions or under operando conditions, to enhance our ability to study the origin and pin-point the impact of surface cation segregation on electrode performance. These studies may provide critical insights into the mechanisms of cation segregation. In addition, advanced theoretical modelling and simulation of surface and interfacial processes are equally important. New theories and predictive models for the origin and overall impact of cation segregation must be developed and validated via carefully designed experiments. Once corroborated, these theories and models can, in turn, be used for the rational design of better electrode materials for various applications.
Nomenclature and acronyms

3PBTriple phase boundary
AESAuger electron spectroscopy
AFMAtomic force microscope
ALDAtomic layer deposition
APXPSAmbient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ARXPSAngle-resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ASRArea specific resistance
BSCFBa1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3±δ
COBRACoherent Bragg rod analysis
DFTDensity functional theory
EDS/EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ETEMEnvironmental transmission electron microscope
GISAXSGrazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
ISSIon scattering spectroscopy
LBMLa1−xBaxMnO3±δ
LCMLa1−xCaxMnO3±δ
LEISLow-energy ion scattering
LNFLaNi1−xFexO3±δ
LNOLaNiO3±δ
LSCLa1−xSrxCoO3±δ
LSC214La2−xSrxCoO4±δ
LSCFLa1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3±δ
LSFLa1−xSrxFeO3±δ
LSMLa1−xSrxMnO3±δ
MIECMixed ionic and electronic conductor
NEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structure
OCVOpen circuit voltage
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
OlatticeOxygen ion (lattice-bound)
OsurfaceOxygen ion (surface-bound)
PLDPulsed laser deposition
PNMPrNi1−xMnxO3±δ
RAXRResonant anomalous X-ray reflectivity

R
p
Polarization resistance
RPRuddlesden–Popper
RXRResonant soft X-ray reflectivity
SEMScanning electron microscope
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectroscopy
SOCSolid oxide cell
SOECSolid oxide electrolysis cell
SOFCSolid oxide fuel cell
SrlatticeStrontium ion (lattice-bound)
SrsurfaceStrontium ion (surface-bound)
STEMScanning transmission electron microscope
STF/STFxSrTi1−xFexO3−δ
STMScanning tunneling microscope
STOSrTiO3
STSScanning tunneling spectroscopy
USAXSUltra small angle X-ray scattering
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence spectrometry
YSZYttria stabilized zirconia

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91645126, 21273128, 51202123, and 11605063), the ‘Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University’ (IRT13026), Guangdong Innovative and Entrepreneurial Research Team Program (No. 2014ZT05N200), Guangzhou Science and Technology Program General Projects (No. 201707010146), the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts, the US National Science Foundation (under award number DMR-1742828), and the ‘Tsinghua-MIT-Cambridge’ Low Carbon Energy University Alliance Seed Fund Program (201LC004).
References
A. Hussain, S. M. Arif and M. Aslam, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 71, 12–28 CrossRef .
M. van den Oever and K. Molenveld, New Biotechnol., 2017, 37, 48–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 768–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fiorani, W. Guo and A. W. Kleij, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1375–1389 RSC .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Banerjee, G. R. Dick, T. Yoshino and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2016, 531, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
D. Elliott, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15003 CrossRef .
M. Yekini Suberu, M. Wazir Mustafa and N. Bashir, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 35, 499–514 CrossRef .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
C. Koroneos, T. Spachos and N. Moussiopoulos, Renewable Energy, 2003, 28, 295–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Marques, J. A. Fuinhas and A. N. Menegaki, Appl. Energy, 2014, 132, 34–46 CrossRef .
C. Karakaya and R. J. Kee, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2016, 55, 60–97 CrossRef .
A. Odukoya, G. F. Naterer, M. Roeb, C. Mansilla, J. Mougin, B. Yu, J. Kupecki, I. Iordache and J. Milewski, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7878–7891 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Martin and A. Chebak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 21036–21046 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
C. Liu, B. C. Colon, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Pan, L. Zhuang and W. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1972–1975 RSC .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. H. Chan and Q. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8663–8683 RSC .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Liu, N. Ai, M. Koyama and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31308–31315 RSC .
M. Liu, Y. Choi, L. Yang, K. Blinn, W. Qin, P. Liu and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 448–455 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Choi, W. Qin, H. Chen, K. Blinn, M. Liu, P. Liu, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 357 CrossRef PubMed .
E. D. Wachsman and K. T. Lee, Science, 2011, 334, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Wang, K. Blinn, M. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, Science, 2009, 326, 126–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tsuchiya, B. Lai and S. Ramanathan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Zhang, Y. Zheng, B. Yu, J. Wang and J. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy,  2017, in press Search PubMed.
L. Chen, F. Chen and C. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4018–4022 CAS .
K. Xie, Y. Zhang, G. Meng and J. Irvine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2218–2222 CAS .
L. Bi, S. Boulfrad and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8255–8270 RSC .
S. D. Ebbesen, C. Graves and M. Mogensen, Int. J. Green Energy, 2009, 6, 646–660 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Hansen, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 9–48 RSC .
Z. Gao, L. V. Mogni, E. C. Miller, J. G. Railsback and S. A. Barnett, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1602–1644 CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 4–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Gómez and D. Hotza, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 155–174 CrossRef .
J. Druce, H. Téllez, M. Burriel, M. D. Sharp, L. J. Fawcett, S. N. Cook, D. S. McPhail, T. Ishihara, H. H. Brongersmac and J. A. Kilner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3593–3599 CAS .
Z. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Rupp, H. Téllez, J. Druce, A. Limbeck, T. Ishihara, J. Kilnerbc and J. U. Fleiga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22759–22769 CAS .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Zhou, D. Ding, M. Liu, F. Ciucci, M. Tade and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500537 CrossRef .
W. Lee, J. W. Han, Y. Chen, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7909–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, M. Kubicek, J. Fleig and B. Yildiz, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1116–1127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Feng, W. T. Hong, D. D. Fong, Y. Lee, Y. Yacoby, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 966–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Fister, D. D. Fong, J. A. Eastman, P. M. Baldo, M. J. Highland, P. H. Fuoss, K. R. Balasubramaniam, J. C. Meador and P. A. Salvador, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 151904 CrossRef .
M. Kubicek, A. Limbeck, T. F. Mling, H. Hutter and J. R. Fleig, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 6, B727–B734 CrossRef .
H. Kwon, W. Lee and J. W. Han, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 69782–69789 RSC .
Y. Orikasa, E. J. Crumlin, S. Sako, K. Amezawa, T. Uruga, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, Y. Uchimoto and Y. Shao-Horn, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, F23–F26 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu and B. Yildiz, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 257–269 RSC .
W. C. Jung and H. L. Tuller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 5, 5370–5378 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Jung, Z. Cai, J. J. Kim, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7979 CAS .
Z. Pan, Q. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Zhang and S. H. Chan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1316–F1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, J. Wang, Y. Lyu, K. Lam and F. Ciucci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6399–6404 CAS .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita and J. Montoya, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lam, Y. Gao, J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 244, 139–145 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alenazey, Y. Alyousef, O. Almisned, G. Almutairi, M. Ghouse, D. Montinaro and F. Ghigliazza, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 10274–10280 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Ebbesen, R. Knibbe and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F482–F489 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhan and L. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7250–7254 CrossRef CAS .
N. Q. Minh and M. B. Mogensen, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2013, 22, 55–62 CrossRef .
E. D. Wachsman, C. A. Marlowe and T. L. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5498–5509 Search PubMed .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, S. B. Simonsen and M. B. Mogensen, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 239–244 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Jiang, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 11, 386–391 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Virkar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9527–9543 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen, S. Ramousse and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1741–A1747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. E. Lynch, K. Blinn, F. M. Alamgir and Y. Choi, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 534–546 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bucher, W. Sitte, F. Klauser and E. Bertel, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 191, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Mawdsley, J. David Carter, A. Jeremy Kropf, B. Yildiz and V. A. Maroni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4198–4207 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, M. Keane, M. K. Mahapatra and P. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6298–6303 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Rashkeev and M. V. Glazoff, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 1280–1291 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, N. Ai and S. P. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10517–10525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Ji, H. P. Dasari, D. Shin, H. Song, J. Lee, B. Kim, H. Je, H. Lee and K. J. Yoon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1225–1235 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Lee, F. B. Prinz and W. Cai, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 3872–3887 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wei, K. Chen, L. Zhao, Z. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1601–1609 RSC .
M. K. Stodolny, B. A. Boukamp, D. H. A. Blank and F. P. F. van Berkel, J. Power Sources, 2012, 209, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, X. Chen, S. P. Jiang and J. Bae, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 4, B41–B45 CrossRef .
C. Chatzichristodoulou, M. Chen, P. V. Hendriksen, T. Jacobsen and M. B. Mogensen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 189, 265–282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu and C. Jiao, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen, J. Bilde-Sorensen and M. B. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A619–A626 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bucher, C. Gspan, T. Höschen, F. Hofer and W. Sitte, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 299, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Stodolny, B. A. Boukamp, D. H. A. Blank and F. P. F. van Berkel, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9290–9298 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. Hyodo, A. Dodd, N. Ai, T. Ishihara, L. Jian and S. P. Jiang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 457–476 RSC .
G. M. Rupp, A. K. Opitz, A. Nenning, A. Limbeck and J. Fleig, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 640–645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, K. J. Yakal-Kremski, T. Yeh, G. M. Rupp, A. Limbeck, J. Fleig and S. A. Barnett, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F581–F585 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Rupp, A. Limbeck, M. Kubicek, A. Penn, M. S. Oger-Pollach, G. Friedbachera and J. Fleig, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7099–7108 CAS .
S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1119–F1128 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, B. Wei, Z. Wang, K. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Huang and Z. Lü, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2443–2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. S. Irvine, D. Neagu, M. C. Verbraeken, C. Chatzichristodoulou, C. Graves and M. B. Mogensen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15014 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, D. Chen, M. Saccoccio, Z. Lu and F. Ciucci, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 499–508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Myung, D. Neagu, D. N. Miller and J. T. S. Irvine, Nature, 2016, 537, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, W. Zhou, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35308–35314 CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, R. Ran, Y. Chen, Z. Shao and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 512–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, X. Li, S. Y. Lai, K. Gerdes and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 552–575 CAS .
H. Ding, A. V. Virkar, M. Liu and F. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 489–496 RSC .
D. Ding, M. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Li, K. Blinn, X. Zhu and M. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4791–4844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Jiang and S. H. Chan, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 4405–4439 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, A. R. Hanifi, T. H. Etsell, P. Sarkar and V. M. Orera, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5469–5474 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Huang, S. Jung, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2066–A2070 CrossRef CAS .
H. Monzon and M. A. Laguna-Bercero, ECS Trans., 2015, 68, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
V. Podhurska, B. Vasyliv, O. Ostash, Y. Brodnikovskyi and O. Vasylyev, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 93 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Keane, H. Fan, M. Han and P. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18718–18726 CrossRef CAS .
F. Usseglio-Viretta, J. Laurencin, G. Delette, J. Villanova, P. Cloetens and D. Leguillon, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 394–403 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, H. Moon, H. W. Lee, J. Kim, J. D. Kim and K. H. Yoon, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pihlatie, A. Kaiser and M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1100–1112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pihlatie, T. Ramos and A. Kaiser, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 320–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sengodan, S. Choi, A. Jun, T. H. Shin, Y. Ju, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, J. T. S. Irvine and G. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 205–209 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, R. I. Dass, Z. Xing and J. B. Goodenough, Science, 2006, 312, 254–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, J. Canales-Vázquez, C. Savaniu, D. Marrero-López, W. Zhou and J. T. S. Irvine, Nature, 2006, 439, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grimaud, W. T. Hong, Y. Shao-Horn and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 121–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Mueller, M. L. Machala, H. Bluhm and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, M. Liu, C. Yuan, Y. Zhou, X. Ye, Z. Zhan, C. Xia and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
A. Perrichon, A. Piovano, M. Boehm, M. Zbiri, M. Johnson, H. Schober, M. Ceretti and W. Paulus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1557–1564 CAS .
A. Montenegro-Hernández, J. Vega-Castillo, L. Mogni and A. Caneiro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15704–15714 CrossRef .
S. Yoo, A. Jun, Y. Ju, D. Odkhuu, J. Hyodo, H. Y. Jeong, N. Park, J. Shin, T. Ishihara and G. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13064–13067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Zhen, S. Yoo, Y. Ding, D. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. Doyle, X. Xiong and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Téllez, M. Burriel, F. Yang, N. Tsvetkov, Z. Cai, D. W. McComb, J. A. Kilner and B. Yildiz, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5436–5450 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Fuilarton, J. P. Jacobs, H. E. van Benthem, J. A. Kilner, H. H. Brongersma, P. J. Scanlon and B. C. H. Steele, Ionics, 1995, 1, 51–58 CrossRef .
H. Dulli, P. A. Dowben, S. H. Liou and E. W. Plummer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 14629–14632 CrossRef .
S. Ponce, M. A. Peña and J. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2000, 24, 193–205 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bertacco, J. P. Contour, A. Barthélemy and J. Olivier, Surf. Sci., 2002, 511, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Borca, B. Xu, T. Komesu, H. K. Jeong, M. T. Liu, S. H. Liou and P. A. Dowben, Surf. Sci., 2002, 512, L346–L352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Téllez, J. Druce, J. A. Kilnerac and T. Ishihara, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 145–157 RSC .
H. Téllez, J. Druce, Y. Ju, J. Kilner and T. Ishihara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20856–20863 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, J. Li, Y. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz, M. Wang, Y. Behnamian and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11048–11056 CAS .
L. C. Baqué, A. L. Soldati, E. Teixeira-Neto, H. E. Troiani, A. Schreiber and A. C. Serquis, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 166–172 CrossRef .
Z. Du, H. Zhao, S. Yi, Q. Xia, Y. Gong, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Gu and K. Świerczek, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8660–8669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hua, N. Yan, M. Li, Y. F. Sun and Y. Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8922–8926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Druce, H. Téllez, N. Simrick, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20850–20855 CrossRef CAS .
H. Téllez, J. Druce, Y. Ju, J. Kilner and T. Ishihara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20856–20863 CrossRef .
A. Limbeck, G. M. Rupp, M. Kubicek, H. Téllez, J. Druce, T. Ishihara, J. A. Kilner and J. Fleig, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 1638–1646 RSC .
M. Burriel, H. Téllez, R. J. Chater, R. Castaing, P. Veber, M. Zaghrioui, T. Ishihara, J. A. Kilner and J. Bassat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17927–17938 CAS .
C. V. Cushman, P. Brüner, J. Zakel, G. H. Major, B. M. Lunt, N. J. Smith, T. Grehl and M. R. Linford, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 3419–3439 RSC .
J. Druce, N. Simrick, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2014, 332, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cavallaro, G. F. Harrington, S. J. Skinner and J. A. Kilner, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7263–7273 RSC .
E. Symianakis, D. Malko, E. Ahmad, A. Mamede, J. Paul, N. Harrison and A. Kucernak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12209–12217 CAS .
J. Druce, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
J. Druce, H. Téllez, T. Ishihara and J. A. Kilner, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 271–288 RSC .
A. C. Tomkiewicz, M. A. Tamimi, A. Huq and S. McIntosh, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 113–127 RSC .
M. Burriel, S. Wilkins, J. P. Hill, M. A. Muñoz-Márquez, H. H. Brongersma, J. A. Kilner, M. P. Ryan and S. J. Skinner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 311–316 CAS .
J. Druce, J. A. Kilner and T. Ishihara, ECS Trans., 2013, 57, 3269–3276 CrossRef .
A. T. Fulmer, J. Dondlinger and M. A. Langell, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 544–553 CrossRef CAS .
W. Araki, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Arai and J. Malzbender, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu, L. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, Y. Lee, A. Grimaud, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14326–14334 CAS .
Z. Feng, E. J. Crumlin, W. T. Hong, D. Lee, E. Mutoro, M. D. Biegalski, H. Zhou, H. Bluhm, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1512–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Katsiev, B. Yildiz, K. Balasubramaniam and P. A. Salvador, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 92106 CrossRef .
D. T. Newell, A. Harrison, F. Silly and M. R. Castell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 205429 CrossRef .
A. Nenning, A. K. Opitz, C. Rameshan, R. Rameshan, R. Blume, M. Hävecker, A. Knop-Gericke, G. Rupprechter, B. Klötzer and J. Fleig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1461–1471 CAS .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, Z. Liu, H. Bluhm and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16087–16094 CAS .
K. A. Stoerzinger, W. T. Hong, E. J. Crumlin, H. Bluhm and Y. Shao-Horn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2976–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Hong, K. A. Stoerzinger, E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, H. Jeen, H. N. Lee and Y. Shao-Horn, Top. Catal., 2016, 59, 574–582 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, L. Zhi, M. E. Grass and M. D. Biegalski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6081–6088 CAS .
G. Vovk, X. Chen and C. A. Mims, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2445–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, M. Liu and W. Jaegermann, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 1980–1983 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Opitz, A. Nenning, C. Rameshan, R. Rameshan, R. Blume, M. Hävecker, A. Knop-Gericke, G. Rupprechter, J. Fleig and B. Klötzer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2628–2632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Y. Kuru, J. W. Han, Y. Chen and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17696–17704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, J. Drennan, C. Kong, S. Amarasinghe and S. P. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11114–11123 CAS .
S. P. Jiang, S. Zhang and Y. D. Zhen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 1, A127–A134 CrossRef .
B. Rahmati, J. Fleig, W. Sigle, E. Bischoff, J. Maier and M. Rühle, Surf. Sci., 2005, 595, 115–126 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lenser, A. Koehl, I. Slipukhina, H. Du, M. Patt, V. Feyer, C. M. Schneider, M. Lezaic, R. Waser and R. Dittmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6360–6368 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oh, D. Gostovic and E. D. Wachsman, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 1992–1999 CrossRef CAS .
A. Huber, M. Falk, M. Rohnke, B. Luerßen, L. Gregoratti, M. Amatib and J. R. Janek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 751–758 RSC .
J. Lu, X. Hua and Y. Long, Analyst, 2017, 142, 691–699 RSC .
H. Téllez, A. Aguadero, J. Druce, M. Burriel, S. Fearn, T. Ishihara, D. S. McPhail and J. A. Kilner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2014, 29, 1137–1361 RSC .
K. Norrman, K. V. Hansen and M. Mogensen, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 967–980 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guerquin-Kern, T. Wu, C. Quintana and A. Croisy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj., 2005, 1724, 228–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Kilner, S. J. Skinner and H. H. Brongersma, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 861–876 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kubicek, Z. Cai, W. Ma, B. Yildiz, H. Hutter and J. Fleig, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3276–3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kessel, R. A. De Souza and M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12587–12597 RSC .
M. Kubicek, G. M. Rupp, S. Huber, A. Penn, A. K. Opitz, J. Bernardi, M. S. Ger-Pollach, H. Hutter and J. R. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2715–2726 RSC .
U. K. Ravella, J. Liu, G. Corbel, S. J. Skinner and P. Lacorre, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2182–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Huber, M. Falk, M. Rohnke, B. Luerssen, M. Amati, L. Gregoratti, D. Hesse and J. Janek, J. Catal., 2012, 294, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee and B. Yildiz, ECS Trans., 2013, 57, 2115–2123 CrossRef .
H. Jalili, J. W. Han, Y. Kuru, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 801–807 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and D. A. Bonnell, Surf. Sci., 1994, 310, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Yang, C. Jin, G. Xiao, F. Chen and M. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1439–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Chang, B. Ingram, M. Hopper, J. Ilavsky and H. You, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 111–115 CrossRef .
J. S. Hardy, J. W. Templeton, D. J. Edwards, Z. Lu and J. W. Stevenson, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Richard, T. U. Schülli, G. Renaud, E. Wintersberger, G. Chen, G. Bauer and V. Holý, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 45313 CrossRef .
M. E. Lynch, L. Yang, W. Qin, J. Choi, M. Liu, K. Blinn and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2249–2258 CAS .
W. Araki, M. Miyashita and Y. Arai, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 290, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, B. Zhang and S. Robert, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2818–2882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Xin, S. Alayoglu, R. Tao, A. Genc, C. Wang, L. Kovarik, E. A. Stach, L. Wang, M. Salmeron, G. A. Somorjai and H. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3203–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, K. A. Stoerzinger, V. Tileli, A. D. Gamalski, E. A. Stach and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 121–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Cai, Y. Kuru, W. Ma, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1221–1229 CrossRef CAS .
G. Renaud, R. Lazzari and F. Leroy, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2009, 64, 255–380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, A. Y. Nikiforov, T. C. Kaspar, J. C. Woicik, K. F. Ludwig, S. Gopalan, U. B. Pal and S. N. Basu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. McIntyre, D. M. Neuburger and R. A. Walker, ECS Trans., 2015, 66, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Lee, K. S. Blinn, D. Chen, S. Yoo, B. Kang, L. A. Bottomley, M. A. El-Sayed, S. Park and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 306–310 CAS .
M. B. Pomfret, J. Marda, G. S. Jackson, B. W. Eichhorn, A. M. Dean and R. A. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5232–5240 CAS .
L. Zhao, I. Zhang, T. Becker and S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F687–F693 CrossRef CAS .
E. Perret, C. Park, D. D. Fong, K. Chang, B. J. Ingram, J. A. Eastman, P. M. Baldo and P. H. Fuoss, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 76–87 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fenter, C. Park, K. L. Nagy and N. C. Sturchio, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5654–5659 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tsekouras, D. Neagu and J. T. S. Irvine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 256–266 CAS .
T. Jin and K. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8331–8339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abernathy, H. O. Finklea, D. S. Mebane, X. Song, Y. Chen and K. Gerdes, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 272, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Davis, L. J. Miara, L. Saraf, T. C. Kaspar, S. Gopalan, U. B. Pal, J. C. Woicik, S. N. Basu and K. F. Ludwig, ECS Trans., 2012, 41, 19–24 CAS .
S. Estradé, J. M. Rebled, J. Arbiol, F. Peiró, I. C. Infante, G. Herranz, F. Sánchez, J. Fontcuberta, R. Córdoba, B. G. Mendis and A. L. Bleloch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 72507 CrossRef .
V. Sharma, M. K. Mahapatra, S. Krishnan, Z. Thatcher, B. D. Huey, P. Singhac and R. Ramprasad, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5605–5615 CAS .
V. Sharma, M. K. Mahapatra, P. Singh and R. Ramprasad, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 3051–3056 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Galvez, R. Jacot, J. Scheffe, T. Cooper, G. Patzke and A. Steinfeld, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 6629–6634 RSC .
K. Szot and W. Speier, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 5909–5926 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Han, H. Jalili, Y. Kuru, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 2097–2104 CAS .
H. Lee, C. Park and H. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 191604 CrossRef .
O. Ravkina, A. Yaremchenko and A. Feldhoff, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 520, 76–88 CrossRef CAS .
N. Caillol, M. Pijolat and E. Siebert, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 4641–4648 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, H. Huang, N. Cao, C. Zhou, D. Niu and Y. Gao, Physica B, 2015, 477, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neagu, T. Oh, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard, S. M. Bukhari, S. R. Gamble, R. J. Gorte, J. M. Vohs and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8120 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Tselev, R. K. Vasudevan, A. G. Gianfrancesco, L. Qiao, P. Ganesh, T. L. Meyer, H. N. Lee, M. D. Biegalski, A. P. Baddorf and S. V. Kalinin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4316–4327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Darvish, M. Asadikiya, B. Hu, P. Singh and Y. Zhong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10239–10248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen and S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3070–F3083 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mutoro, E. J. Crumlin, H. Pöpke, B. Luerssen, M. Amati, M. K. Abyaneh, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, L. Gregoratti, J. Janek and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, Q. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Zhang and S. H. Chan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Baumann, J. Fleig, M. Konuma, U. Starke, H. Habermeier and J. Maier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2074–A2079 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wen, L. Hu, J. A. McCarthy, S. Wang, K. R. Poeppelmeier and L. D. Marks, Micron, 2015, 68, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, S. R. Bishop and H. L. Tuller, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6622–6627 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen and H. L. Tuller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7638–7644 CrossRef CAS .
D. Waller, J. A. Lane, J. A. Kilner and B. C. H. Steele, Mater. Lett., 1996, 27, 225–228 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mebane, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2015, 103, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tzoumanekas and P. C. Kelires, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 266, 670–674 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Q. Liu and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17521–17528 CAS .
P. Murugavel, J. H. Lee, K. Lee, J. H. Park, J. Chung, J. Yoon and T. W. Noh, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, 3166–3170 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, G. Gao, Z. Huang, X. Jiao, Q. Liu and W. Wu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 125002 CrossRef .
W. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1361–1369 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ohly, S. Hoffmann-Eifert, K. Szot and R. Waser, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 21, 1673–1676 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Ridder, A. G. J. Vervoort, R. G. V. Welzenis and H. H. Brongersma, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 156, 255–262 CrossRef .
G. J. la O', R. F. Savinell and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B771–B781 CrossRef .
N. Perry and T. Ishihara, Materials, 2016, 9, 858 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Tucker, H. Kurokawa, C. P. Jacobson, L. C. De Jonghe and S. J. Visco, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rothschild, W. Menesklou, H. L. Tuller and E. Ivers-Tiffée, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3651–3659 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oh and D. Gostovic, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 1992–1999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Z. Lü, S. Xu, D. Xu and B. Wei, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 21497–21502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Lee, J. Kleis, J. Rossmeisl, S. H. Yang and D. Morgan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3966–3970 CAS .
B. Hu, M. Keane, M. K. Mahapatra and P. Singh, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mutoro, E. J. Crumlin, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and S. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3689–3696 CAS .
S. F. Wagner, C. Warnke, W. Menesklou, C. Argirusis, T. Damjanović, G. Borchardt and E. Ivers-Tiffée, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1607–1612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sase, F. Hermes, K. Yashiro, K. Sato, J. Mizusaki, T. Kawada, N. Sakai and H. Yokokawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B793–B797 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. Lee, X. R. Wang, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, MRS Commun., 2016, 6, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Qian, Z. Wang, J. Dang and W. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 581, 832–835 CrossRef CAS .
E. Niwa, C. Uematsu, E. Miyashita, T. Ohzeki and T. Hashimoto, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 201, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Kiselev and V. A. Cherepanov, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 1992–1997 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sugita, Y. Yoshida, H. Orui, K. Nozawa, M. Arakawa and H. Arai, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 932–936 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chiba, F. Yoshimura and Y. Sakurai, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 124, 281–288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Falcón, A. E. Goeta, G. Punte and R. E. Carbonio, J. Solid State Chem., 1997, 133, 379–385 CrossRef .
T. Komatsu, H. Arai, R. Chiba, K. Nozawa and M. Arakawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B379–B382 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Escudero, A. Fuerte and L. Daza, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7245–7250 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pérez-Coll, A. Aguadero, M. J. Escudero and L. Daza, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 2–13 CrossRef .
G. T. Kim, S. Wang, A. J. Jacobson, Z. Yuan and C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1316–1320 RSC .
X. D. Zhou, J. W. Templeton, Z. Nie, H. Chen, J. W. Stevenson and L. R. Pederson, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kobsiriphat, B. D. Madsen, Y. Wang, M. Shah, L. D. Marks and S. A. Barnett, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B279 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jardiel, M. T. Caldes, F. Moser, J. Hamon, G. Gauthier and O. Joubert, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 894–901 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, G. Wu, S. Chen, W. Doherty, K. Xie and Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 215–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Li, M. Wang, B. Hua, J. Li and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14625–14630 CAS .
J. Zhang, K. Xie, Y. Zhang, L. Yang, G. Wu, Q. Qin, Y. Li and Y. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 22697–22709 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Li, Y. Zhu, Y. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz, J. Li, B. Hua and J. Luo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5303–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, T. Shin, C. Ni, G. Chen, K. Wu, Y. Cheng and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2981–2993 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, M. Zhang, P. Huang, G. Guo, M. Hong, C. Li, J. T. S. Irvine and K. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gan, L. Ye, S. Tao and K. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3137–3143 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Zhou, Y. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz, M. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Hua, J. Li, J. Li and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22830–22838 CAS .
L. Yang, K. Xie, S. Xu, T. Wu, Q. Zhou, T. Xie and Y. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14147–14157 RSC .
C. Arrivé, T. Delahaye, O. Joubert and G. Gauthier, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 341–348 CrossRef .
B. D. Madsen, W. Kobsiriphat, L. D. M. Y. Wang and S. A. Barnett, ECS Trans., 2007, 7, 1339–1348 CAS .
B. H. Park and G. M. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 684–691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Xie, S. Chen, H. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Xu, B. Ding, G. Wu, T. Xie and Y. Wu, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 1036–1045 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Park and G. M. Choi, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 345–348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, K. Xie, Y. Gan, G. Wu and B. Ding, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 3434–3442 RSC .
S. Boulfrad, M. Cassidy, E. Djurado, J. T. S. Irvine and G. Jabbour, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9519–9524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Sun, K. Xie, W. Qi, Q. Qin, H. Wei, S. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and Y. Wu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20888–20897 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qi, C. Ruan, G. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Xie and Y. Wu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 5485–5496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Li, L. Cui, B. Hua, S. Cui, J. Li and J. Luo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11173–11181 RSC .
S. Liu, Q. Liu and J. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6219–6228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Liu, M. Li, C. Xia, B. Zhou and F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14163–14169 CAS .
H. Wei, K. Xie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Qin, J. Cui, J. Yan and Y. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 5156 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lan, P. I. Cowin, S. Sengodan and S. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, K. T. Chuang and J. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 760–768 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Li, Y. Lin, J. Liu, F. Chen and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Bierschenk, E. Potter-Nelson, C. Hoel, Y. Liao, L. Marks, K. R. Poeppelmeier and S. A. Barnett, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3089–3094 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Lee, I. Kim, H. Moon, J. Park, C. P. Jacobson and S. J. Visco, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bidrawn, G. Kim, N. Aramrueang, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 720–728 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavone, A. M. Ritzmann and E. A. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4933–4937 CAS .
Y. Lee, D. Lee, X. R. Wang, H. N. Lee, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 244–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Feng, F. El Gabaly, X. Ye, Z. Shen and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4374 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Ma, M. Li, Y. Chen, M. Yan and C. Xia, Energies, 2016, 9, 786 CrossRef .
N. Imanishi, R. Ohno, K. Murata, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and K. Yamahara, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 215–221 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, M. Zheng, B. Hu, Y. Zhang and C. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A951–A955 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Cox-Galhotra and S. McIntosh, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1429–1436 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Choi, K. Bae, D. Y. Jang, J. W. Kim and J. H. Shim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F622–F626 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Han and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8598–8607 CAS .
M. Sase, K. Yashiro, K. Sato, J. Mizusaki, T. Kawada, N. Sakai, K. Yamaji, T. Horita and H. Yokokawa, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1843–1852 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, S. Ahn, G. J. la O', D. N. Leonard, A. Borisevich, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3149–3155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yashiro, T. Nakamura, M. Sase, F. Hermes, K. Sato, T. Kawada and J. Mizusaki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, B135–B137 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. Lee, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2144–2157 CAS .
J. Hayd, H. Yokokawa and E. Ivers-Tiffée, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F351–F359 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Gadre, Y. L. Lee and D. Morgan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2606–2616 RSC .
Z. Feng, Y. Yacoby, M. J. Gadre, Y. Lee, W. T. Hong, H. Zhou, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, S. B. Adler, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, M. Liu, Y. Lei and M. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 555–559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lou, S. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Yang and M. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1285–1289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Chen, D. Ding, Y. Ding, Y. Choi, L. Zhang, S. Yoo, D. Chen, B. DeGlee, H. Xu, Q. Lu, B. Zhao, G. Vardar, J. Wang, H. Bluhm, E. J. Crumlin, C. Yang, J. Liu, B. Yildiz and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 964–971 CAS .
Y. Gong, D. Palacio, X. Song, R. L. Patel, X. Liang, X. Zhao, J. B. Goodenough and K. Huang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4340–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, R. L. Patel, X. Liang, D. Palacio, X. Song, J. B. Goodenough and K. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4224–4231 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, H. Jung, K. An, J. Park, J. Lee, I. Hwang, J. Kim, M. Lee, Y. Kwon and J. Hwang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 7817–7822 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00120gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Yifeng Li
	Yifeng Li is currently studying for a PhD degree at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, in 2015. His research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially studies on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O to produce sustainable fuels using solid oxide electrolytic cells (SOECs), as well as the degradation issues of SOEC electrode materials.

Wenqiang Zhang
	Dr Wenqiang Zhang is an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University. He received his PhD from Tsinghua University in 2008. Prior to joining INET in 2010, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Tsinghua University. He is the author and coauthor of more than 20 scientific articles specifically on solid oxide electrolysis in international peer reviewed journals and holds 9 patents. Dr Zhang's research focuses on solid oxide electrolysis cells applied for hydrogen and synthetic fuel production.

Yun Zheng
	Yun Zheng is currently studying for a PhD degree at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from China Three Gorges University in 2012 and Ocean University of China in 2015, respectively. His research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially studies on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O to produce sustainable fuels using solid oxide electrolytic cells (SOECs).

Bo Yu
	Dr Bo Yu is an Associate Professor and PhD Supervisor of Tsinghua University, China. She received her PhD from Tsinghua University in 2004 and joined the Nuclear Science & Engineering Department at Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a visiting researcher in 2012. Dr Yu has been responsible for the research and development of nuclear hydrogen or syngas production at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology since 2005. She has published more than 100 articles and holds over 30 patents. Her research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion with a focus on high temperature electrolysis of CO2/H2O through SOEC technologies.

Yan Chen
	Dr Yan Chen is a full Professor at the School of Environment and Energy at South China University of Technology. She received her BS and ME from Peking University, China, and PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prior to her current position, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prof. Chen's research focuses on electrochemical reaction processes near the surface and interface of energy materials for fuel cells, metal air batteries, supercapacitors, etc. She is also working on the application of nuclear technology such as ion beam implantation, plasma in low dimensional materials for energy and electronics.

Meilin Liu
	Meilin Liu is the B. Mifflin Hood Chair, Regents' Professor, and Associate Chair of the School of Materials Science and Engineering and Co-Director of the Center for Innovative Fuel Cell and Battery Technologies at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He received his BS from South China University of Technology and both MS and PhD from the University of California at Berkeley. His research interests include design, fabrication, in situ/operando characterization, and modeling of membranes, thin films, and nanostructured electrodes in devices for energy storage and conversion, aiming at achieving rational design of materials and structures with unique functionalities.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the cell configurations of solid oxide cells for energy storage and conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright © 2017 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structures of perovskite-based oxides as SOC electrodes: (a) single perovskite (ABO3−δ), (b) Ruddlesden–Popper (A2BO4+δ) and (c) double-perovskite (AA′B2O5+δ). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of A- and B-site segregation in a perovskite-based system and its influences on surface chemistry and catalytic properties.	 

Low-energy ion scattering (LEIS)	Elemental composition at the outmost layer	
40, 42, 121, 128, 129 and 134–146

Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) & scanning electron microscopy (SEM)	Local elemental inhomogeneities with lateral resolution at the surface	
45, 46, 93, 121, 130, 133 and 147–153

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)	Elemental composition as well as chemical environment near the surface	
46, 121, 124, 127, 132 and 154–162

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) & energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS/EDX)	Local elemental distribution with lateral resolution at the surface	
78, 82, 93, 121, 130, 132, 133, 148 and 163–167

Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS)	Surface elemental distribution and compositional evolution from the outmost surface to bulk	
49 and 168–178

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) & scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)	Surface morphology and electronic structure	
45, 54, 121, 149, 152, 162 and 179–181

X-ray diffraction (XRD)	Crystal structure and lattice parameters, as well as the generation of secondary phases	
78, 130, 132, 149, 163 and 182–185


 	Fig. 4  Several surface characterization techniques with different depth resolutions for probing surface segregation in perovskite-based oxide model systems.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The principle of LEIS. (b) The composition of several layers at different depths in LSCF, characterized by LEIS. (c) Chemical composition in the near-surface region of LSCF with a perovskite structure, characterized by LEIS depth profiles. (d) Diagram of the distribution of elements in the near-surface region of these perovskite oxides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image and the composition from Auger electron spectroscopy for (b) Sr, (c) La, and (d) Co for annealed LSC films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  XPS results at different photon energies or emission angles provide information from the surface to varying depth into the LSC films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 and 158. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society and The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Tracking of Co segregation in Pt0.5Co0.5 nanoparticles in an oxidizing environment, characterized by ETEM in 0.1 mbar O2 at 250 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  
In situ SIMS images at the LSCrM/YSZ interface at various bias, measured at 10−6 mbar oxygen partial pressure and 500 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2012 the Owner Societies 2012.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Surface morphologies of SrTiO3 films. (b) The electronic structure difference between the areas on island and areas off island. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 1994 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Factors influencing the degree of cation segregation in perovskite oxides: cation deficiency, dopant size, crystallinity, lattice strain, gas environment, temperature, and electrical polarization. The green balls represent A-site cations, the red balls represent B-site cations, and the size of segregated species reflects the tendency of cation segregation.	 

Cation non-stoichiometry	A-site deficiency suppresses A-site segregation by allowing for more free space in lattice and reducing elastic energy, promoting B-site segregation.	
122, 179 and 200–203

B-site deficiency typically promotes A-site segregation.	
201

Cation species	Cations with larger radii tend to segregate to the surface to reduce elastic energy in perovskite systems.	
45, 50, 200 and 204–207

Crystallinity	High crystallinity degree leads to a more orderly arrangement and less free space in the lattice, driving the larger cations to the surface.	
46 and 49

Lattice strain	Materials with more tensile surface (relative to bulk) can accommodate more cations with larger radii, therefore promoting surface cation segregation.	
96, 148, 180, 187 and 208–210

Temperature and thermal history	Cation segregation is significantly favored at elevated temperatures and dependant on annealing time.	
128, 129, 135, 149, 151, 152, 162, 176, 208 and 211–213

Gas environment	Reducing atmosphere: transition metal ions exhibit low oxidation states with larger sizes, leading to B-site segregation.	
90, 93, 132, 133, 200 and 214

Oxidizing atmospheres: B-site cations exhibit high oxidation states with smaller sizes, driving A-site cations with fewer positive charges and greater radii towards the surface.	
45, 48, 208 and 215

Reactive gas environment typically reacts with segregated cations, driving more A-site cations to the surface.	
69, 149, 197, 205, 216 and 217

Electrical polarization	Cathodic polarization generally suppresses A-site surface concentrations while anodic polarization facilitates A-site accumulation.	
84, 89, 92, 154, 161, 168, 178 and 218–223


 	Fig. 13  Comparison of B-site segregation behaviors in initial A-deficient La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 (a) and A-stoichiometric La0.3Sr0.7Ni0.06Ti0.94O3.09 (b) samples after reducing at 930 °C in 5% H2/Ar for 20 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97 and (b) La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.94 cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013.	 

 	Fig. 15  Driving forces for A-site segregation in a perovskite LaMnO3 system as a case study. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Evolution in surface chemistry of LSC113 during several heating and cooling cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Defect chemistry of the (La0.8Sr0.2)xMnO3 phase during the electrochemical polarization experiments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Surface polarization resistance, Rs, of LSC films measured by impedance spectroscopy at 600 °C in air, as well as the possible degradation mechanism for both films. (b) Further evolution of Rs of LSC films after HCl etching measured at 600 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) The alternation of surface elemental composition and band gap as a function of Fe doping content in STFx systems. (c and d) The evolution of surface composition and polarization resistance before and after etching with a 10% diluted buffered HF solution for 20 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 and 53. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 
O2_ads → 2Oads; 2Oads + 2e− → 2Oads−
2Oads → 2e− → O2_ads2− → 2Oads−

 		 

 	Fig. 20  (a and b) Surface SrO segregation layer blocks the contact and electron transfer between absorbed oxygen and activated sites in STFx systems. (c) The downshift of the O 2p state relative to the Fermi level caused by the Sr segregation layer coverage. All these factors contribute to the degradation of electrochemical performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53 and 54. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 21  Scheme of (a) segregation of Co3O4 and SrO particles and (b) the selective deposition of volatile Cr species on SrO sites on the surface of LSCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of “critical point of phase separation” hypothesis about the correlation between Sr segregation and electrode performance for Sr doped LaCoO3.	 

 	Fig. 23  Electrochemical performance of cells with LSM, LSCF, Pr2NiO4, and BSCF cathodes as a function of time at 750 °C and 0.8 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier.	 

Fe	La0.6Sr0.3Cr0.85Fe0.15O3−δ (A-LSCFe)	∼330 mW cm−2 power density in an LSM–YSZ/YSZ/A-LSCFe fuel cell in pure H2 at 700 °C	
260

(Sr0.95)0.9(Ti0.8Nb0.1Mn0.1)0.9Fe0.1O3−δ (STNMFO)	330.2 mA cm−2 current density at 2.0 V, 800 °C in a STNMFO/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ–Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ cell for direct CO2 electrolysis	
261

(La0.2Sr0.8)0.9Ti0.9Fe0.1O3−δ (LSTFO)	175 mA cm−2 current density in a LSTFO–SDC/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell for steam electrolysis at 2 V, 800 °C in 3% H2O/Ar	
259

La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97	1.5 Ω cm2 polarized impedance (compared to 1.7 Ω cm2 for La0.4Sr0.4TiO3) in a La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3 electrolysis cell in 47% H2O/53% N2 at 900 °C at 1.5 V	
200

Co	Co-Doped Pr0.5Ba0.5MnOx (PBMCo)	2.5, 1.6, and 0.85 A cm−2 cathodic current densities at 900, 850, and 800 °C at 1.5 V in a PBMCo/YSZ/LSM–GDC cell for CO2 electrolysis	
262

La0.8Sr1.2Fe0.9Co0.1O4±δ	0.21 Ω cm2 and 0.93 Ω cm2 polarization resistance in air and in 5% H2/N2 at 800 °C	
263

Ni	(La0.2Sr0.8)0.95Ti0.85Mn0.1Ni0.05O3+δ (LSTMNA)	99.9% Faradaic efficiency, 6.08 ml min−1 cm−2 CO production, 0.87 A cm−2 current density with 2 V bias at 850 °C in a LSTMNA/YSZ/LSM cell for CO2 electrolysis	
264

(La0.3Sr0.7)0.9Ti0.95Ni0.05O3−δ (LSTNO)	318.1 mA cm−2 current density with 90% Faradaic efficiency for direct CO2 electrolysis at 2 V and 1073 K in a LSTNO–SDC/YSZ/LSMO–SDC cell	
265

(La0.3Sr0.6Ce0.1)(Ni0.1Ti0.9)O3−δ (LSCNT)	660 mW cm−2 maximum power density and 2600 mA cm−2 current density at 900 °C in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNT–YSZ using 5000 ppm H2S/H2 as fuel	
266

(Sr0.94)0.9(Ti0.9Nb0.1)0.9Ni0.1O3 (STNNO)	0.78 ml min−1 cm−2 maximum H2 production at 1.6 V in 5% H2O/5% H2/Ar atmosphere in a STNNO–SDC/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell	
267

La0.5Sr0.5Ti0.75Ni0.25O3	0.55 Ω cm2 polarization resistance at 800 °C under 3% H2O/H2 and 0.46 Ω cm2 polarization resistance after a subsequent thermal treatment in air	
268

La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.69Ni0.31O3−δ (LSCrNi)	∼125 mW cm−2 maximum power density at the first ∼15 min in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrNi–GDC fuel cell in humidified H2 at 750 °C, and increased continuously with time, reaching 180 mW cm−2 at 49 h	
269

La0.4Sr0.4Sc0.9Ni0.1O3−δ	0.055 Ω cm2 area specific resistance at 800 °C in humid H2	
91

La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3−δ	La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3−δ (∼10 μm)/Zr0.89Sc0.1Ce0.01O2−δ (∼80–140 μm)/Zr0.89Sc0.1Ce0.01O2−δ–(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ (∼20 μm) cell	
92

FC mode: 0.37 W cm−2 and 1.97 W cm−2 maximum power densities at 700 °C and 900 °C
EC mode: 0.22 and 2.75 A cm−2 at 1.3 V (the thermo-neutral voltage for steam electrolysis) at 700 °C and 900 °C
(La0.6Sr0.3)(Cr0.85Ni0.15)O3−δ (LSCNi)	460 mW cm−2 maximum power density in 5000 ppm H2S/H2 in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNi–YSZ fuel cell at 800 °C	
130

La0.2Sr0.8Ti0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTN)	∼130 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3–Gd0.1Ce0.9O2/Sc2O3–CeO2–ZrO2/LSTN fuel cell under air/wet H2 after 100 h at 800 °C	
270

(La0.2Sr0.8)(Ti0.9Mn0.1)O3−δ (LSTMN)	200 mA cm−2 current density in a LSTMN–YSZ/YSZ/LSM–YSZ cell at 800 °C, 2.0 V for direct high temperature CO2 electrolysis	
271

NbTi0.5Ni0.5O4	91 and 282 mA cm−2 current density at 1.3 and 2.0 V in a NbTi0.5Ni0.5O4/YSZ/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3+δ–Ce0.8Sm0.2O2−δ cell for CO2/H2O co-electrolysis at 800 °C	
272

La0.2Sr0.8Ti1−xNixO3−δ, (x = 0–0.2, LSTN)	∼150 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3–Gd0.1Ce0.9O2/Sc2O3–CeO2–ZrO2/LSTN fuel cell at 800 °C in H2/3% H2O	
273

(La0.3Sr0.7)0.9Ti0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTNO)	90% and 94% current efficiencies in a LSTNO/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell under the applied voltage of 2.0 V at 800 °C for direct H2O electrolysis	
274

La0.4Sr0.4Ni0.06Ti0.94O2.94	1.2 Ω cm2 cathodic polarized impedance in a La0.4Sr0.4Fe0.06Ti0.94O2.97/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3 electrolysis cell in 47% H2O/53% N2 at 900 °C at 1.5 V	
200

(La0.75Sr0.25)0.97Cr0.5Mn0.5O3 (LSCM) with Ni nitrate solution	0.38 and 1.37 Ω cm2 anode polarization resistance in a (La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3/YSZ/LSCM–Ce0.9Gd0.1O2−δ–Ni2+ fuel cell under 50 ml min−1 wet H2 flow at 900 °C and 700 °C	
275

(La0.75Sr0.25)(Cr0.5Mn0.3Ni0.2)O2.8	1 × 10−3 mmol m−2 s−1 CO2 production rate when exposed to 60 pulses of 10 seconds of 20 vol% CH4/He flow at 30 ml min−1 and 800 °C	
258

NiO	SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05O3−δ (SFTNi)	1650, 1420, 1100, 684, and 340 mW cm−2 peak power densities at 80 ml min−1 H2 flow rate in a SFTNi/YSZ/Ni–YSZ fuel cell at 750, 700, 650, 600, and 550 °C, respectively	
93

Cu	(La0.75Sr0.25)0.9(Cr0.5Mn0.5)0.9Cu0.1O3−δ (LSCMC)	0.477 A cm−2 current density in a LSCMC–SDC/YSZ/La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3−δ–SDC cell for direct CO2 electrolysis at 2.0 V and 800 °C	
276

(La0.2Sr0.8)0.9Ti0.9Cu0.1O3−δ (LSTCO)	0.15 A cm−2 current density and 0.9785 ml min−1 cm−2 maximum hydrogen production in a LSTCO/YSZ/LSM–SDC cell in 5% H2O/5% H2/Ar at 2.0 V and 800 °C for direct steam electrolysis	
277

Ni–Fe alloy	Sr2FeMo0.65Ni0.35O6−δ (SFMNi)	390, 590, 792, and 960 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/SFMNi fuel cell in wet H2 (40 ml min−1) at 700, 750, 800, and 850 °C, respectively	
132

(La0.7Sr0.3)(Cr0.85Ni0.1125Fe0.0375)O3−δ (LSCNi–Fe)	560 mW cm−2 maximum power density and ∼1700 mA cm−2 maximum current density in a LSM–YSZ/YSZ/LSCNi–Fe fuel cell in 5000 ppm H2S/H2 at 800 °C	
278

La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ (LSFN)	0.272 Ω cm2 cathodic polarization resistance, 1.78 A cm−2 current density, along with a high Faradaic efficiency (∼98.8%) in a LSFN–GDC/YSZ/(La0.60Sr0.40)0.95Co0.20Fe0.80O3−δ–Gd0.2Ce0.8O2−δ cell for CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 850 °C	
279

Sr2Fe1.3Ni0.2Mo0.5O6 (SFMNi)	269, 511, 838 and 1257 mA cm−2 current density and 112, 213, 350 and 525 ml cm−2 h−1 hydrogen production rate in a SFMNi–SDC/La0.5Ce0.5O1.5/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.87Mg0.13O3/La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–SDC cell for H2O electrolysis under 42% H2O/58% H2 at an applied voltage of 1.3 V at 700, 750, 800 and 850 °C, respectively	
280

Ni–Cu alloy	NbTi0.5(Ni0.75Cu0.25)0.5O4	0.1629 ml min−1 cm−2 at CO production rate in a NbTi0.5(Ni0.75Cu0.25)0.5O4/YSZ/(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3−δ cell for direct CO2 electrolysis at 1.4 V and 800 °C	
281

Ni–Co alloy	NiCo(Ni4Co)/PrBaMn2O5+δ–BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3−δ	2.10 W cm−2 peak power density in humidified H2 at 700 °C as an anode for SOFC	
133

Fe–Cu alloy	SrFe0.8Cu0.1Nb0.1O3−δ (SFCN)	423 mW cm−2 power density in a La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−δ/YSZ–ZrO2/SFCN fuel cell in H2 flow at 700 °C	
282

Co–Fe alloy	Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ (PPSCFM)	496.2 and 348.84 mW cm−2 maximum power density in a (La0.60Sr0.40)0.95Co0.20Fe0.80O3−δ/BaCe0.7Zr0.1Y0.2O3−δ/PPSCFM fuel cell in H2 and C2H6 at 750 °C	
283

Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ (PSCFM)	1.01 A cm−2 current density and 0.455 Ω cm2 cathodic polarization area-specific resistance in a PSCFM/YSZ/LSM cell for CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 850 °C	
227

(Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Nb0.15)2O7 (RP-PSFN)	0.59 and 0.92 W cm−2 maximum power out puts in a Ba0.9Co0.7Fe0.2Nb0.1O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.83Mg0.17O3−δ/RP-PSFN fuel cell in wet 3% H2O/C3H8 at 800 and 850 °C	
284

Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ (K-PSCFN)	0.96, 0.92 and 0.89 W cm−2 maximum power density in a Ba0.9Co0.7Fe0.2Nb0.1O3−δ/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.83Mg0.17O3−δ/K-PSCFN fuel cell in H2, H2/50 ppm H2S, H2/100 ppm H2S at 850 °C	
182

Ag	Sr0.95Ag0.05Nb0.1Co0.9O3−δ (SANC)	1116 mW cm−2 peak power density in a SANC/SDC/NiO–SDC fuel cell with 80 ml min−1 anode H2 flow rate at 500 °C and stable operation for 140 h at a current density of 625 mA cm−2	
94

Pd	La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.8Pd0.2O3−δ (LSCrPd)	Initial performance: 508 mW cm−2 power density in a La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Co0.2O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrP–GDC fuel cell in 3% H2O/H2 at 0.7 V and 800 °C, RP = 0.22 Ω cm2; final performance (after 353 h): 390 mW cm−2 power density at 0.7 V, RP = 0.33 Ω cm2	
285

Ru	La0.8Sr0.2Cr0.82Ru0.18O3−δ (LSCrRu)	The maximum power density increased from 250 mW cm−2 (15 min) to 400 mW cm−2 (100 h) in humidified H2 at 800 °C in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrRu–GDC fuel cell	
269

La0.8Sr0.2Cr1−yRuyO3−δ (LSCrRu)	∼0.13 Ω cm2 anodic polarization resistance in a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC/La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ/LSCrRu–GDC fuel cell at 800 °C and OCV	
257


 	Fig. 24  (a) Current–voltage curves of SOEC with cathodes based on (La0.2Sr0.8)(Ti0.9Mn0.1)O3−δ (LSTM) and (La0.2Sr0.8)0.9(Ti0.9Mn0.1)0.9Ni0.1O3−δ (LSTMN) with exsolved Ni at 800 °C. (b) ASR of the SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05O3−δ (STFNi) cathode and that decorated with NiO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93 and 271. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier and 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Ni particles exsolved from La0.52Sr0.28Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 (5% H2/Ar, 1000 °C, 6 h) after coking; scale bars, 1 mm (overview); 100 nm (detail). (b) Raman spectra collected from the cathode surface of Ni/GDC, Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ/GDC and exsolved Co–Fe–(Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7/GDC after testing in CO2 electrolysis cell at a constant applied potential of 0.4 V (vs. OCV) at 850 °C for 10 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214 and 227. Copyright © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited and The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Surface morphology of SrO decorated La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ films after EIS testing. (b) Possible mechanism of electrochemical activity enhancement by surface “Sr” decoration. (c) Comparison of surface exchange values for different La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ based samples in the range of 510 to 550 °C at various oxygen pressures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011.	 

 	Fig. 27  Surface exchange coefficient (represented by kq) varies with the difference of ΔHVf(MeOx) and ΔHVf(LSC) in V, Nb, Ti, Zr, Hf and Al modified LSC systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 28  Illustration of the model of inhomogeneously active LSC surfaces for ORR. Four surface statuses including bare surface (a), Sr-decorated surface (b), Co-decorated surface (c), and surface covered with Sr and reactivated by Co (d) are illustrated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) 18O intensity at the interface of La1.5Sr0.5CoO4/La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 after the diffusion annealing at 773 K for 180 s, in 0.2 bar 18O2. Much higher 18O intensity is presented at the interfacial region. (b) Surface exchange coefficients kq as a function of oxygen partial pressure in various LSC113/LSC214 films and single LSC113. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244 and 299. Copyright © 2008 The Electrochemical Society and 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Electronic structure alternation at the interface of LSC113 and LSC214 correlates with the creation of oxygen vacancies and electron injection from LSC113 to LSC214. (b) Sr enrichment at the interface of LSC113 and LSC214 corresponds to strong enhancement of activity and stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 and 191. Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  LSM-infiltrated LSCF cathodes demonstrated apparently high power density (under 750 °C) as well as enhanced stability (under 650 °C, 750 °C and 850 °C) relative to LSCF without infiltration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright © 2013, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Illustration of an LSCF electrode decorated with a PNM coating and exsolved PrOx nanoparticles. (b) A high-resolution TEM image showing two PrOx particles on a PNM coating deposited on an LSCF grain. (c) Schematic representation of the lowest energy pathway for ORR on the hybrid catalyst (PrOx/PNM) decorated LSC electrode and the enhanced bulk diffusion of oxygen vacancies in PNM by introducing Pr deficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 
3PB	Triple phase boundary
AES	Auger electron spectroscopy
AFM	Atomic force microscope
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
APXPS	Ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ARXPS	Angle-resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ASR	Area specific resistance
BSCF	Ba1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3±δ
COBRA	Coherent Bragg rod analysis
DFT	Density functional theory
EDS/EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ETEM	Environmental transmission electron microscope
GISAXS	Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
ISS	Ion scattering spectroscopy
LBM	La1−xBaxMnO3±δ
LCM	La1−xCaxMnO3±δ
LEIS	Low-energy ion scattering
LNF	LaNi1−xFexO3±δ
LNO	LaNiO3±δ
LSC	La1−xSrxCoO3±δ
LSC214	La2−xSrxCoO4±δ
LSCF	La1−xSrxCoyFe1−yO3±δ
LSF	La1−xSrxFeO3±δ
LSM	La1−xSrxMnO3±δ
MIEC	Mixed ionic and electronic conductor
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
OCV	Open circuit voltage
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
Olattice	Oxygen ion (lattice-bound)
Osurface	Oxygen ion (surface-bound)
PLD	Pulsed laser deposition
PNM	PrNi1−xMnxO3±δ
RAXR	Resonant anomalous X-ray reflectivity

R
p
	Polarization resistance
RP	Ruddlesden–Popper
RXR	Resonant soft X-ray reflectivity
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectroscopy
SOC	Solid oxide cell
SOEC	Solid oxide electrolysis cell
SOFC	Solid oxide fuel cell
Srlattice	Strontium ion (lattice-bound)
Srsurface	Strontium ion (surface-bound)
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscope
STF/STFx	SrTi1−xFexO3−δ
STM	Scanning tunneling microscope
STO	SrTiO3
STS	Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
USAXS	Ultra small angle X-ray scattering
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
YSZ	Yttria stabilized zirconia
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00120g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
