Impact of contact evolution on the shelf life of organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B910213B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B910213B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7638-7642Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsImpact of contact evolution on the shelf life of organic solar cells†

        
          
            Matthew T. 
            Lloyd‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Dana C. 
            Olson
          
        
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ping 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Erica 
            Fang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Diana L. 
            Moore
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Matthew S. 
            White
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matthew O. 
            Reese
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David S. 
            Ginley
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Julia W. P. 
            Hsu
          
        
      a
aPO Box 5800, MS-1415, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185, USA. E-mail: mtlloyd@sandia.gov
bNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA
Received 
      26th May 2009
    , Accepted 28th August 2009First published on 24th September 2009AbstractFor organic photovoltaics (OPVs) to become a truly viable technology, it is critical to correctly identify their degradation mechanism(s) and pave the way for strategies to improve device lifetime. Changes in the active organic component are often cited as the leading degradation pathway in OPVs. In this shelf life study, we monitor device performance after storage in the dark at ambient conditions to show that decay behavior is dominated by changes at the top metal electrode and/or the metal–organic interface. Cross-sectional TEM reveals extensive void formation to be the primary degradation mechanism for Ca/Al contacts. Kelvin probe measurements show the work function of Ag contacts increases over time, consistent with silver oxide formation detected by TOF-SIMS depth profiles. The evolution of the work function is found to be advantageous for Ag as a hole-extracting contact, but unsuitable for electron-extraction. The combination of Ag positive contacts (to collect holes) and ITO/ZnO negative contacts (to collect electrons) yields devices that are stable up to one year when stored in ambient conditions.
Introduction
As the efficiency of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) approaches commercial viability, identifying factors that limit device lifetime and reliability becomes critical in advancing these devices to practical applications. To date, OPV devices comprising poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blends garner high power conversion efficiencies (4.0–4.5%), though the fabrication, testing, and storage for these devices are typically carried out in an inert atmosphere.1–3 Rapid degradation in performance is known to take place upon air exposure and, as reported in a recent detailed review, primary decay mechanisms are poorly understood and methods for limiting degradation are still in early stages of development.4 It is commonly believed that organic semiconductors are inherently unstable materials,5,6 and device degradation is often attributed to chemical degradation and oxidation of the active organic layers.4,7 To mitigate the degradation of devices, encapsulation is used to scavenge oxygen and moisture,7,8 or to hermetically seal the active organic components from ambient atmosphere.9 For OPVs to become a viable technology, however, a deeper understanding of specific degradation mechanisms is necessary to facilitate judicious choice of materials and proper design of devices. By performing structural and chemical analyses, we find that changes in the metal electrode and/or metal–organic interface over time are the primary cause for the observed device degradation. This marks an important departure from conventional wisdom, which holds that the active organic layer is subject to instabilities and rapid degradation from air exposure. We focus on P3HT based devices because P3HT is the primary absorber employed in current commercial OPV technologies.
Device lifetimes are measured in several ways, including storage in various environments, prolonged light soaking,8 operation under high relative humidity or elevated temperature.10,11 Some of these testing protocols activate multiple decay mechanisms, such as polymer photo-bleaching7,12 and detrimental phase separation caused by PCBM diffusion.13,14 In this work, we focus on the key factors that determine the shelf life and degradation behavior of OPVs when unencapsulated devices are stored in ambient environment. In agreement with the results of Reese et al.,15 we find that the device degradation depends on the metals used as the negative electrodes, with Ag showing dramatically faster degradation than Ca/Al. Similar to previously published results,16,17 we observe that unencapsulated inverted devices using ZnO as the negative electrode (to collect electrons) and Ag as the positive electrode (to collect holes) show little to no degradation over time after aging in the dark, and in some cases they actually improve. However, previous works only report on pure empirical observation of device behavior and do not pinpoint the cause of the degradation or improvement.
In this communication, we elucidate the degradation in air of conventional P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction (BHJ) cells with either Ag or Ca/Al negative electrodes (to collect electrons), with and without a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) hole-transport layer. The degradation behavior of these devices is compared to two types of inverted devices: a P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction and a P3HT/ZnO bilayer device, in both cases ZnO coated indium tin oxide (ITO) serves as the electron-extracting contact and Ag extracts holes. In addition to monitoring device performance over time in ambient conditions, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies were performed to investigate structural and chemical changes that can occur inside a device. Auger and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) depth profiles were collected to detect subtle chemical changes. Device I–V behavior and Kelvin probe measurements were used to infer changes in work function of Ag over time. This is the first comprehensive study on understanding the degradation mechanisms in air for BHJ or hybrid cells.
Experimental
Conventional BHJ devices,15 inverted BHJ devices,18ZnO/P3HT bilayer devices,19 and ZnO-nanorod array devices20 were fabricated according to previously published experimental procedures. Between photovoltaic characterization sessions, the devices were stored in the dark, at room temperature under ambient atmosphere. Temperature and relative humidity were not controlled. During I–V measurements the samples were exposed to a KG5 filtered tungsten–halogen lamp with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 for approximately 3 min at room temperature, resulting in an integrated light exposure of approximately 24 min over 40 days. No UV cut-off filters were used during illumination. A Keithley 2400 source-measure unit and a LabView automated data acquisition program recorded the I–V behavior. EQE measurements were performed using a Jobin-Yvon Triax monochromator coupled to a tungsten–halogen lamp, where monochromatic light was focused to a spot within the perimeter of the device area (0.1 cm2). Photocurrent for the EQE was monitored with a Stanford lock-in amplifier and an NREL calibrated UV-enhanced photodiode was used to determine the incident light intensity. The contact potential difference for Ag and Au films was measured using an isoprobe electrostatic voltmeter, Monroe Electronics (model 244). The work function was calculated based on an Inconel metal reference, which was determined to have a work function of 4.3 eV by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy measurements. An elemental analysis depth profile was conducted by intermittent Auger spectroscopy quantifying the composition of significant components followed by Xe sputtering from the outermost surface of the device electrode. Similarly, a TOF-SIMS depth profile was performed by alternating analysis with Bi+ (25 kV, 50 × 50 µm2 area) followed by material removal by O2+sputtering (500 eV, 90 nA, 300 × 300 µm2 area). Cross-sectional TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) techniques. A CM30 transmission electron microscope operated at 300 keV was used for TEM observation. The microscope was equipped with a Gatan GIF system for EELS.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a and b schematically illustrate typical inverted and conventional device architectures, respectively, indicating the appropriate sense or electronic polarity. Table 1 shows the photovoltaic performance parameters recorded immediately after device fabrication for each device tested in this study. To compare the relative behavior of these devices over time, Fig. 1c shows the normalized power conversion efficiency (PCE) recorded over the course of 40 days. (Trends in short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) over time are included in the ESI†.) Between measurements, the samples were stored in the dark at room temperature in ambient conditions. For conventional BHJ devices, those utilizing Ca/Al electrodes showed better air stability over those with Ag contacts, i.e.Ag and Ca/Al electrodes display a half-life of <3 and <19 days, respectively. The ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al devices showed less than 20% degradation in FF and Voc. However, a rapid fall-off of the Jsc resulted in a PCE decay of more than 66% after day 40. Compared to published results for similar Ca/Al devices stored in inert atmosphere (11% PCE decay after day 40), the rate of degradation we observe in air is higher.15 In contrast, inverted devices (utilizing Ag as a hole collector) show an initial increase in device performance (67% PCE increase after day 9) and maintained a PCE higher than the initial value throughout the duration of the study.
Table 1 Solar cell performance parameters measured immediately after fabrication




Device

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV

                  FF (%)

η (%)




ITO/BHJ/Ag
10.7
429
27
1.2


ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al
11.4
517
40
2.4


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/Ag
10.7
452
47
2.3


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/Ca/Al
9.6
588
67
3.8


ITO/ZnO/BHJ/Ag
7.2
313
32
0.7


ITO/ZnO/P3HT/Ag
0.2
565
52
0.1




 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for an inverted device, where electrons are extracted by the sol–gel ZnO layer and holes are extracted by the Ag electrode. (b) Schematic for a conventional device, where electrons are extracted via the top contact (either Ca/Al or Ag) and holes are extracted via the bottom contact (PEDOT:PSS or bare ITO). (c) Normalized power conversion efficiency (PCE) over time for each device geometry. 
Since PEDOT:PSS is often employed as a hole-transport layer in OPVs, we investigate its effect in device shelf life. In general, the degradation rate is not significantly affected by the incorporation of the PEDOT:PSS layer for a given negative electrode (compare black/blue and red/green in Fig. 1). This finding, combined with the dependence on the choice of metal for the negative electrode, indicates that the changes at metal–organic interface or in the metal electrodes are largely responsible for the observed device degradation. Below we will explain the degradation mechanisms of conventional devices with Ca/Al or Ag negative electrodes and the initial improvement in the inverted devices using Ag as the hole-collecting electrode.
To investigate structural changes in the devices upon exposure to air, we performed cross-sectional TEM for a ∼50 nm thick slice taken from the center of a freshly prepared versus aged ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al sample, shown in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. In all samples, the P3HT:PCBM blend layer (labeled “BHJ”) does not show any contrast that would indicate phase segregation. Eight testing sessions under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 filtered illumination at room temperature did not activate long-range phase segregation as observed by TEM after the processing of BHJ films at elevated temperatures.13,14 In bright field TEM imaging, regions appearing white indicate no electron scatter or regions that are indistinguishable from the vacuum background, i.e. voids. Thus, the TEM images show that small voids (bold arrows) exist at the Ca/Al interface in freshly fabricated devices. As the devices age, the voids proceed to grow into the Ca layer resulting in extensive void formation that makes the previously dense Ca layer porous. Since no porous layer was found on the external surface of the Al electrode, these voids are related to Ca rather than Al. Ultimately, a large volume fraction of the interface between Ca and Al comprises voids, which clearly diminishes physical contact and reduces the efficiency of the Ca as a low work function electron collecting contact.
 Fig. 2  
          TEM images for (a) freshly prepared and (b) aged ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al devices. The active organic region is labeled BHJ, the aluminum layer of the electrode is identified as Al, and the calcium layer, which likely contains a significant fraction of calcium oxide, is labeled Ca + CaO. Bold arrows indicate regions of void formation at the Ca/Al interface that enlarge as the devices age. Remnant metallization from the FIB sectioning procedure is apparent as dark regions on the exterior surface of the electrodes. (c) Elemental analysis depth profile as determined by Auger spectroscopy for the same device in the aged condition. The time scale cannot be converted directly to length due to the unknown material removal rate for the various layers. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) for the same device as (solid line) freshly prepared and (dashed line) after aging, and (inset) a plot of the normalized EQE (fresh and aged curves are indistinguishable). 

Fig. 2c shows a depth profile performed by material removal with Xe bombardment and intermittent chemical composition characterization viaAuger spectroscopy. This profile maps an aged ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al sample starting from the external surface of the Al electrode (0 sputtering time) to a high carbon signal indicating a final position within the BHJ layer (15 min sputter). These results indicate a thin (∼5 nm, visible in Fig. 2b) Al2O3 layer and carbon contamination on the external surface of the electrode. Beneath the Al layer, at the midpoint between the fall of the Al and rise of the Ca signals, we see a peak in the elemental oxygen concentration that is slightly less intense than the oxygen concentration on the surface. This corresponds to the location of the highest void density in the TEM images. After the oxygen signal begins to decay, we see a peak in the Ca signal and a relatively long tail extending into the organic layer, indicating mixing or reaction of Ca with the organics. Element maps by EELS (ESI†) collected for cross-sections of these samples show considerable overlap between the Ca and oxygen profiles, again pointing to the oxidation of Ca at the Ca/Al interface. Overall, we see very good agreement between the TEM images, EELS element maps, and Auger elemental analysis, all pointing to oxide formation at the Ca/Al interface. An Auger profile for a freshly prepared sample (ESI†) also shows oxygen at the Ca/Al interface, indicating oxide formation occurred during or immediately after vacuum deposition of the electrodes. The salient difference between freshly prepared and aged samples is the extensive void formation observed in Fig. 2b.
The time dependence of ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al devices shows a relatively stable Voc and a comparatively sharp drop in Jsc (ESI†). This behavior, combined with the TEM observation of void formation at the Ca/Al electrode, suggests a reduction in the contact areas of the metal–organic interface. This is confirmed by a marked increase in series resistance changing from 4.6 ± 0.6 Ω cm2 initially to 11.6 ± 2.6 Ω cm2 upon aging. Fig. 2d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for a representative device tested immediately after fabrication and after day 40, clearly demonstrating a significant decrease in current density upon aging. However, normalized EQE plots (Fig. 2d, inset) for the aged and freshly prepared devices prove to be indistinguishable. The behavior of the normalized EQE, which is unaffected by the tripling of device contact resistance, provides strong evidence that device degradation in air is not caused by active layer morphological changes or polymer oxidation, which would have resulted in a change in the shape of the spectral response.7,21 The bi-continuous network of the donor and acceptor materials appears to be intact under our testing conditions, pointing to the relative stability of the BHJ microstructure. Hence, the degradation in conventional BHJ devices with Ca/Al negative electrodes is due in large part to oxidation and extensive void formation at the Ca/Al electrode. It was shown that oxygen22 and water23 can diffuse through Al grain boundaries and pinholes to cause reaction between Al and organics. It is possible the same mechanism is in operation here and results in void formation in the Ca.
In contrast to the Ca/Al devices, the Ag–organic interface is abrupt with a conspicuous absence of void formation or imperfections and does not show any change over time (Fig. 3a). Fig. 3b shows Auger depth profiling for the aged Ag–organic interface, which also displays a much sharper metal–organic transition compared to the BHJ/Ca/Al interface (compare Fig. 2c). However, we find that the work function of the Ag electrode in the presence of air increases 0.23 eV after day 6 (Fig. 3c). This is within the 0.17–0.40 eV range of work function increase reported for Ag2O formation on Ag films.24 Hence, oxidation of the Ag electrode in air results in a work function increase. Since the work function measurement is performed on the Ag surface exposed to air, it brings into question whether similar oxidation, and an accompanying work function increase, would occur at the buried Ag–organic interface. Due to the lack of oxygen and sulfur sensitivity for EELS and Auger spectroscopic techniques, we employed TOF-SIMS to detect AgO, Ag2O, AgS, and Ag2S fragments in fresh and aged Ag devices. The depth profiles (ESI†) indicate peaks in the Ag sulfide and oxide concentration at the Ag–organic interface. Fig. 3d compares the relative intensity of the sulfide and oxide concentration before and after aging. The sulfide compositions at the interface are unchanged upon aging. This indicates that Ag reacts with sulfur sites on P3HT during the deposition process, as suggested by Lachkar et al.25 Upon air exposure, there is a pronounced increase of AgO and Ag2O signals at the Ag–organic interface (Fig. 3d). Oxygen must diffuse from the sides of the Ag electrodes rather than through the Ag layer because we only observe silver oxides at the top surface and Ag–organic interface in the TOF-SIMS profiles (ESI†). The presence of an oxide layer at the Ag–organic interface in the aged sample indicates a work function increase similar to the external Ag surface.24 Below, we discuss the observed degradation and improvement in device performance over time for conventional and inverted devices, respectively, with the knowledge that the work function of the Ag electrode increases.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image for an aged Ag–organic interface. (b) Elemental analysis depth profile as determined by Auger spectroscopy for an aged ITO/BHJ/Ag device. (c) Work function (determined by Kelvin probe using an Inconel metal reference) over time after storage in air for a 100 nm film of Ag deposited on a P3HT/ITO substrate. The average work function increases by 0.23 eV over time. (d) Relative concentration of oxide and sulfide fragments at the Ag–organic interface as determined by TOF-SIMS for (black) freshly prepared and (white) aged samples. The intensity is calculated as the integrated peak intensity of the oxide (sulfide) divided by the elemental Ag signal. 
Compared to Ca/Al devices, the performance of devices utilizing Ag as the electron-extracting contact degraded at an accelerated rate. Specifically, after day 11, the polarity of the ITO/BHJ/Ag devices changes sign, i.e. electrons now transfer to ITO and holes transfer to Ag, while still maintaining a small photocurrent and photovoltage (1.7 mA cm−2 and 30 mV, respectively) (see ESI†). Thus, we conclude that the work function of Ag must have increased beyond that of ITO. The EQE spectra recorded immediately after fabrication and after day 40 have an essentially identical shape, but with approximately 20% of the initial signal for the aged device in agreement with a substantial loss in photocurrent (ESI†). These results further confirm that device degradation emanates from changes in the energy levels of the electrode, not morphological or chemical changes to the active polymer layer. This conclusion is also supported by the fact that the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/Ag devices do not change polarity since the work function of PEDOT:PSS is still larger than that of aged Ag.
In contrast to the degradation found in conventional devices, inverted devices (utilizing ITO/ZnO to extract electrons and Ag to extract holes) are found to benefit from the Ag work function increase upon aging. For the ITO/ZnO/BHJ/Ag device, the Jsc, Voc, and FF all increase during the first ∼10 days yielding a peak PCE that represents a 67% improvement compared to the initial value (Fig. 1). From the peak value, the FF and Jsc decay following the behavior of conventional devices, but still yield a PCE ∼ 30% higher than the initial value at the end of 40 days. Also, normalized EQE spectra (ESI†) display no discernible difference between the initial and final measurements. This implies that a negligible change in the polymer morphology occurs after aging and indicates photocurrent generation in the active layer is not compromised. Our observation of an initial increase in performance is in contrast to results reported for an otherwise identical device with the exception of a PEDOT:PSS hole-transport layer employed at the Ag anode.16 In that case, only the FF increased, Voc remained unchanged, while the Jsc and PCE decreased over time. The initial increase in performance in our devices is attributed to the work function increase of Ag. When the value of the work function is constrained by inserting a PEDOT:PSS hole-transport layer (as in ref. 16), such initial improvements in performance are not observed.
To specifically test the influence of the work function change on device performance, we fabricated ITO/ZnO/P3HT/metal devices, comparing the effect of Agvs.Au as the hole-extracting contact. Fig. 4a depicts the PCE of identical devices employing either Ag or Au electrodes recorded over the course of 28 days, storing the devices in the dark under ambient conditions between testing sessions. We observed a significant increase in PCE for the device with Ag electrodes between the initial test and day 3, whereas the device utilizing Au electrodes showed relatively stable behavior over the same time period. Thus, the device performance documented here is, again, consistent with the work function increase of the Ag electrode (Fig. 3c) and the stability of the Au device is explained by the fact that the work function of Au remains relatively unchanged after deposition (ESI†). While others have reported increases in efficiency when ZnO-hybrid devices are exposed to air after vacuum metal deposition,12,17,20,26 from this Auvs.Ag comparison it is clear that our sol–gel derived ZnO does not require air exposure for optimized performance. This is evidenced by the behavior of the devices with Au electrodes, and the improvement over days observed in inverted devices with Ag electrodes arises from contact evolution.
 Fig. 4  (a) Efficiency over time for ITO/ZnO sol–gel/P3HT/metal devices utilizing either (open circles) Au or (open squares) Ag electrodes. (b) Long-term behavior for (solid squares) ITO/ZnO sol–gel/P3HT/Ag devices and (solid circles) ITO/ZnO-nanorod array (NRA)/P3HT/Ag devices. 
We also document the PV performance of many unencapsulated ZnO/P3HT devices fabricated in our lab over the course of almost two years. Fig. 4b shows the PCE over time for unencapsulated ZnO/P3HT bilayer and P3HT:ZnO-nanorod devices20 measured intermittently over the course of 600 days. Generally, these devices remain at or above the initially evaluated efficiency, and we find that when stored in the dark under ambient conditions these devices are stable for a period of one year. Stable shelf lives for a time period of six months have also been noted for other hybrid devices comprising a ZnO-nanoparticle acceptor and thermocleavable conjugated polymer, poly(3-(2-methylhexan-2-yl)-oxy-carbonyldithiophene).27
Conclusions
In summary, we have shown that the shelf life of unencapsulated BHJ devices stored in ambient environment in the dark is largely determined by changes in the metal contact, where no detectable degradation of the active organic component was observed. We find that the combination of Ag positive contacts (to collect holes) and ITO/ZnO negative contacts (to collect electrons) yields devices with very good long-term stability in air. While changes in the active organic component are often cited as the leading degradation pathway, in this shelf-life study, we find the decay behavior is dominated by the electrode selection and changes taking place at the electrode or the electrode–organic interface.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank J. Berry, Y.-J. Lee, R. J. Davis, and M. Brumbach for fruitful discussion. We also acknowledge William O. Wallace for collection of the Auger depth profiles, James A. Ohlhausen for TOF-SIMS profiles, and Michael J. Rye for performing FIB cross-sections. The work is supported by Sandia LDRD program, and by funding from the AOP PV Program through the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) under the Department of Energy (DOE). Sandia is a multiprogram laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed Martin Company, for the United States Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.
References
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. Tuladhar, S. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. Durrant, D. Bradley, M. Giles, I. Mcculloch, C. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef  , and references therein.
K. Z. Xing, M. Fahlman, M. Logdlund, D. A. dosSantos, V. Parente, R. Lazzaroni, J. L. Bredas, R. W. Gymer and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 971–974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. Xing, N. Johansson, G. Beamson, D. T. Clark, J. L. Bredas and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 1027 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayakawa, O. Yoshiawa, T. Fujieda, K. Uehara and S. Yoshikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163517 CrossRef .
K. Lee, J. Kim, S. Park, S. Kim, S. Cho and A. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2445–2449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hauch, P. Schilinsky, S. Choulis, R. Childers, M. Biele and C. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 727 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schuller, P. Schilinsky, J. Hauch and C. Brabec, Appl. Phys. A: Solid Surf., 2004, 79, 37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reese, A. Morfa, M. White, N. Kopidakis, S. Shaheen, G. Rumbles and D. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liracantu and F. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2076–2086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bertho, G. Janssen, T. Cleij, B. Conings, W. Moons, A. Gadisa, J. Dhaen, E. Goovaerts, L. Lutsen and J. Manca, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 753–760 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2151–2158 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reese, M. S. White, G. Rumbles, D. S. Ginley and S. E. Shaheen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053307 CrossRef .
S. Hau, H. Yip, N. Baek, J. Zou, K. O'malley and A. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253301 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 715 CrossRef CAS .
M. White, D. Olson, S. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef .
T. Monson, M. Lloyd, D. Olson, Y. Lee and J. Hsu, Adv.
Mater., 2008, 20, 4755–4759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16670–16678 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chawdhury, A. Kohler, M. G. Harrison, D. H. Hwang, A. B. Holmes and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 871 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman and F. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 213–227 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 102 Search PubMed .
U. K. Barik, S. Srinivasan, C. L. Nagendra and A. Subrahmanyam, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 429, 129–134 CrossRef .
A. Lachkar, A. Selmani, E. Sacher, M. Leclerc and R. Mokhliss, Synth. Met., 1994, 66, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krebs, Y. Thomann, R. Thomann and J. Andreasen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424013 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solar cell performance parameters vs. time; EELS mapping; Auger depth profile; I-V and EQE behavior for ITO/BHJ/Ag devices; TOF-SIMS depth profiles; EQE for ITO/ZnO/BHJ/Ag devices; work function change for Auvs.Ag. See DOI: 10.1039/b910213b‡ 
Current address: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

ITO/BHJ/Ag	10.7	429	27	1.2
ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al	11.4	517	40	2.4
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/Ag	10.7	452	47	2.3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/Ca/Al	9.6	588	67	3.8
ITO/ZnO/BHJ/Ag	7.2	313	32	0.7
ITO/ZnO/P3HT/Ag	0.2	565	52	0.1

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for an inverted device, where electrons are extracted by the sol–gel ZnO layer and holes are extracted by the Ag electrode. (b) Schematic for a conventional device, where electrons are extracted via the top contact (either Ca/Al or Ag) and holes are extracted via the bottom contact (PEDOT:PSS or bare ITO). (c) Normalized power conversion efficiency (PCE) over time for each device geometry.	 

 	Fig. 2  
          TEM images for (a) freshly prepared and (b) aged ITO/BHJ/Ca/Al devices. The active organic region is labeled BHJ, the aluminum layer of the electrode is identified as Al, and the calcium layer, which likely contains a significant fraction of calcium oxide, is labeled Ca + CaO. Bold arrows indicate regions of void formation at the Ca/Al interface that enlarge as the devices age. Remnant metallization from the FIB sectioning procedure is apparent as dark regions on the exterior surface of the electrodes. (c) Elemental analysis depth profile as determined by Auger spectroscopy for the same device in the aged condition. The time scale cannot be converted directly to length due to the unknown material removal rate for the various layers. (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) for the same device as (solid line) freshly prepared and (dashed line) after aging, and (inset) a plot of the normalized EQE (fresh and aged curves are indistinguishable).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image for an aged Ag–organic interface. (b) Elemental analysis depth profile as determined by Auger spectroscopy for an aged ITO/BHJ/Ag device. (c) Work function (determined by Kelvin probe using an Inconel metal reference) over time after storage in air for a 100 nm film of Ag deposited on a P3HT/ITO substrate. The average work function increases by 0.23 eV over time. (d) Relative concentration of oxide and sulfide fragments at the Ag–organic interface as determined by TOF-SIMS for (black) freshly prepared and (white) aged samples. The intensity is calculated as the integrated peak intensity of the oxide (sulfide) divided by the elemental Ag signal.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Efficiency over time for ITO/ZnO sol–gel/P3HT/metal devices utilizing either (open circles) Au or (open squares) Ag electrodes. (b) Long-term behavior for (solid squares) ITO/ZnO sol–gel/P3HT/Ag devices and (solid circles) ITO/ZnO-nanorod array (NRA)/P3HT/Ag devices.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solar cell performance parameters vs. time; EELS mapping; Auger depth profile; I-V and EQE behavior for ITO/BHJ/Ag devices; TOF-SIMS depth profiles; EQE for ITO/ZnO/BHJ/Ag devices; work function change for Auvs.Ag. See DOI: 10.1039/b910213b
‡ 
Current address: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
