Recent advances of computational chemistry in organic solar cell research  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03709E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03709E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15920-15939Recent advances of computational chemistry in organic solar cell research

        
          
            Yongjie 
            Cui†
a, 
      
        
          
            Peipei 
            Zhu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Xunfan 
            Liao
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yiwang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials & College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering/Institute of Advanced Scientific Research (iASR), Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China. E-mail: xfliao@jxnu.edu.cn; ywchen@ncu.edu.cn
Received 
      5th August 2020
    , Accepted 18th September 2020First published on 24th September 2020AbstractThe precise design of organic photovoltaic materials and the control of morphology in the active layer are crucial for achieving high-performance organic solar cells (OSCs). However, it still remains difficult to fully obtain the intrinsic properties of organic photovoltaic materials, as well as the details of molecular stacking in disordered films and the evolution of the specific morphology of active layers, using traditional characterization methods, which hinders the screening of organic photovoltaic materials and understanding the structure–property relationship. Accordingly, computational chemistry provides a good method and plays a vital role in current scientific research. In this review, we first introduce the theoretical methods used in the recent study of OSCs, including density functional theory (DFT), time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT), all atomic molecular dynamics (AAMD) and coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD). Then, the effects of the molecular structure on its conformation, frontier molecular orbital, ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectrum, dipole moment, electrostatic potential, binding energy, stacking, and morphological evolution are discussed and analyzed. In addition, the application of machine learning (ML) in materials screening is briefly summarized. Finally, the intrinsic properties of OSCs are summarized based on the molecular structure and the future development and prospects of OSCs are analyzed to accelerate the efficiency over 20% in the near future.
Yongjie Cui
Yongjie Cui is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen and Xunfan Liao at College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. His research interest is focused on developing novel polymers and theoretical simulations for organic solar cells.
Xunfan Liao
Prof. Dr Xunfan Liao received his PhD degree from Nanchang University under the supervision of Prof. Yiwang Chen and Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen in 2018 and worked as a visiting researcher at University of Washington during the period 2017–2018. From 2018 to 2020, he worked at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University as an associate professor. In 2020, he joined Jiangxi Normal University as professor. His current research interests focus on organic photovoltaic materials and devices.
Yiwang Chen
Prof. Dr Yiwang Chen is a full professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University and Jiangxi Normal University. He received his PhD from Peking University in 1999 and conducted his postdoctoral work at Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz and Philipps-Universität Marburg in Germany on receiving an Alexander von Humboldt fellowship. He joined Nanchang University in 2004. He was honored by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2014. Since 2019, he has been serving as the Vice-president of Jiangxi Normal University and since 2004 he has been the director of Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC) at Nanchang University. He was the Dean of the College of Chemistry at Nanchang University during the period 2009–2019. His research interests include polymer solar cells, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis for zinc-air batteries, and intelligent elastomers. He has published more than 400 research papers and 30 invention patents as well as 4 books. His research project has been awarded the “second class prize of science and technology in universities of China” in 2019.
1. Introduction
OSCs are considered to be one of the most promising photovoltaic technologies for achieving low-cost solar energy conversion because of their attractive properties of light weight and mechanical flexibility and their capability for large-area fabrication using the roll-to-roll print method.1–6 At present, the device structure of OSCs is mainly divided into three types, namely, the single-layer Schottky junction, bilayer and bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs (Fig. 1). The basic structure of these three devices is the same and mainly includes four parts from the bottom to the top, the glass substrate, the anode electrode material, the organic active layer material, and the cathode electrode material.7–9 The organic active layer material is placed between the cathode and anode to form a device with a special “sandwich” structure. The main difference between the three structured devices is the morphology of the active layer. Because of the structure of the BHJ, the interface contact area of the donor (D)/acceptor (A) materials in the active layer is greatly increased. Meanwhile, a good cross-network structure can be formed in the blend films, which is conducive to the carrier transport in the active layer films. Therefore, the BHJ has become the commonly used structure for OSCs.10 Recently, great efforts have been dedicated to the development of efficient polymer donors and fused ring electron acceptors for active layer materials, increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the state-of-the-art single junction OSC up to 18%.11 Nevertheless, the efficiency is still much lower than that of inorganic and perovskite solar cells. In order to further improve the performance of OSCs, we need to start from the structural design of the OSC materials and optimize their molecular structures.
 Fig. 1  Typical device structure diagrams of organic solar cells: Schottky junction, bilayer, and bulk heterojunction device. 
The active layer in OSCs is an important factor that determines the performance of the device, so the design of photovoltaic materials is particularly important. The design requirements for the active layer obtained via experiments are: (1) maintaining a sufficient energy level difference between the donor and the acceptor to ensure enough driving force for charge separation; (2) there should be a complementary spectral absorption range between the donor and the acceptor, and a wide and strong absorption in the visible-near infrared region to ensure a large short-circuit current (Jsc); (3) the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor should be large enough to ensure a large open-circuit voltage (Voc) while maintaining a high Jsc, simultaneously; (4) the active layer materials should possess suitable solubility for solution-processing; and (5) the active layer materials should exhibit suitable aggregation properties to form nanoscale phase separation and interpenetrating networks. A certain amount of knowledge on the design strategy of photovoltaic materials has been gained through the continuous exploration of synthesis experiments and a summary of scientific research studies is available. Regarding the most widely used BDT-based polymer donors, the best candidates are obtained through screening for suitable A units or π units and through modification of the side chains (such as fluorination, chlorination, alkyl side chains, and ester side chains) to develop high-performance materials.12–14 For the most successful small acceptor molecules of the A–D–A and A–DA′D–A types, the commonly used design strategies mainly include three types: (1) the intermediate core is often used to expand the conjugate length, adjusted to be an asymmetric structure and supplemented with an electron-deficient unit;15–23 (2) fluorination or chlorination of the terminal unit is often performed24–28 to down-shift the energy level and increase the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect and (3) side chain processing, that is, modifying the length and position of the alkyl chain and selecting other side chain units.29–36 At present, these design strategies have helped to achieve certain research progress in the construction of high-performance and high-efficiency OSCs. However, although these design strategies that have been continuously explored through experiments can help broaden the scope of materials, the specific relationship between the structure and properties of photovoltaic materials and how it affects the final device performance are still unclear.
In recent years, rapid development in the commercialization, industrialization and practicability of OSCs has been achieved. In order to promote the large-scale production of OSCs, further research on developing new material systems and improving PCE is required.37,38 Based on the design strategy mentioned in the previous paragraph, researchers have repeatedly experimented and developed improved organic photovoltaic materials. However, this method not only involves a large workload, but also consumes time and consumables. In addition, it is difficult for traditional characterization techniques to fully obtain the structural information at the electronic level of materials, which hinders the research progress of novel materials. Compared to the method of experimental trial and error, computational chemistry, as a computer-based tool, is based on quantum mechanics, molecular mechanics, and statistical mechanics; it is an emerging discipline that uses computational software to solve chemistry-related problems and can be used to bridge the structure and properties of photovoltaic materials. In the field of computational chemistry, a large number of screening experiments can be carried out by means of computational simulation, which greatly accelerates the progress of this research. With the enhancement of computer performance and the improvement of various computational chemistry methods, computational chemistry has gradually matured and developed into a new tool for researchers to conduct scientific research. It is playing an increasingly vital role in basic research in the field of OSCs, and at the same time it can provide new opportunities for the development of OSCs.
In the following “Computational chemistry” section, we will introduce the theoretical methods applied to the design of photovoltaic materials, and the purpose is to use related software based on theory to perform simulation calculations of molecules or blend structures. Different from the conventional characterization methods, the intrinsic properties of a single molecule or dimer can be directly obtained by calculating the ground state or excited state of their optimal geometric structures. In addition, intermolecular interactions and nanomorphology evolution can be obtained by performing molecular dynamics (MD) calculations on their blend structures.39–42 Therefore, it is possible to better understand the structural information of photovoltaic materials and make up for the deficiencies of conventional characterization methods. Computational simulation studies on OSCs in the past few decades have shown that multi-scale methods combing density functional theory (DFT), time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT), all atomic molecular dynamics (AAMD) and coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) are very useful for constructing the structure–property relationship.43 Computational simulation studies that concentrate on the effects of conformation, frontier molecular orbitals, UV-Vis spectra, dipole moment, electrostatic potential, intermolecular binding energy, intermolecular interaction and nanomorphology on photovoltaic performance will then be systematically summarized with the purpose to provide some useful design principles for new high-efficiency photovoltaic materials. On these bases, machine learning (ML) is expected to become a powerful assistant in screening high-performance photovoltaic materials.
2. Computational chemistry
Computational chemistry is a branch of theoretical chemistry and has become a powerful assistant for modern scientific research. It is used to establish chemical models from microscale to mesoscale and perform simulation analysis to discover the relationship between the molecular structures and properties of materials, thus providing better guidance for experimental research. At present, the computational theoretical methods applied in the study of OSC materials are mainly based on DFT,44 TD-DFT,45 AAMD46 and CGMD,47 as shown in Fig. 2. Since 1990, DFT calculation has been widely used in the research fields of chemistry and materials science. It is a quantum mechanics method that can be used to calculate the ground state properties of multi-particle systems using the electron density distribution n(r) of the system as the fundamental variable.48 Compared with the classical methods of electronic structure theory, such as the Hartree–Fock method, DFT transforms the multi-dimensional electron wave function problem into a three-dimensional problem, thereby more concisely describing the atom and molecular quantum behavior. B3LYP is a widely used hybrid functional in the geometric optimization of organic molecules, and it has the advantages of a fast calculation speed and low dependence on integral lattice points. However, the B3LYP functional is unable to describe the van der Waals effect and the calculation error for charge transfer excitation is large. In this case, a long-range correction functional including the dispersion effect, such as ωB97XD, can ensure calculation accuracy and save calculation cost. When DFT contains time-related parts, TD-DFT can be used to deal with the electronic transition of the system and further extract various parameters of the excited state.40 The PBE0 hybrid functional can be used to estimate reasonable UV-Vis spectra for most organic materials in TD-DFT. AAMD mainly relies on Newtonian mechanics to simulate and analyze the motion of molecular systems, thereby obtaining the thermodynamic parameters and other dynamic properties of the system, while its own time and space scales have some limitations.49 The properties and functions of polymer materials not only depend on the chemical structure and molecular properties, but also to a large extent on the molecular aggregation state, that is, the phase structure. However, AAMD cannot simulate the phase behavior, phase state and phase properties of a research system due to its multiple degrees of freedom. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a connection from the micro to the mesoscopic, and build a CG model that can perform effective MD simulation calculations on the mesoscopic scale. CGMD describes a polymer molecule as a chain of coarsely grained particles (or beads) connected by different flexible springs by integrating a large number of microscopic details on the chain, and it describes the interaction between beads with a simple form of the empirical potential or accurate potential effect. Then, the mesoscale system is simulated on a larger time and space scale, which makes up for the deficiency of AAMD.50–52
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of typical theoretical methods and the applications of computational chemistry in organic solar cell research. 
With the enhancement of calculation capabilities and the improvement of simulation software, computational chemistry based on basic theoretical chemistry has developed rapidly. Today, computational chemistry is widely used in the fields of chemistry and materials science. Researchers can perform computational simulation analysis, which has become a powerful tool for theoretical analysis in scientific research. Occasionally, due to the limitations of the traditional characterization methods, it is impossible to accurately obtain the structure–property relationship of the materials. Thus, computational chemistry becomes the preferred method. In addition, thanks to the ability of artificial intelligence to generate large amounts of simulation data, the application fields are constantly being broadened; especially, ML provides a new opportunity for computational chemistry.53 ML can be used to construct the relationship between structure and device parameters, which lays a foundation for screening high-performance photovoltaic materials.
Based on the discussion of the above calculation methods, here, the specific applications of computational chemistry in OSC research are divided into four aspects: (1) the conformation of molecular ground state structure. (2) The intrinsic properties of molecules, including frontier molecular orbitals (i.e., HOMO/LUMO), dipole moment, electrostatic potential, and UV-Vis spectra. (3) Arrangement states of blending active layers, including intermolecular binding energy and radial distribution function (RDF) for quantitative analysis. (4) The evolution of micro-morphology in the BHJ active layers, including phase separation and phase size (Fig. 2). Overall, computational chemistry can provide a good theoretical basis for the design of photovoltaic materials and help to deeply understand the morphology changes of BHJ structures. Ultimately, it helps to obtain the structure–property correlation of OSC materials and to further improve device performance.
3. Density functional theory and time-dependent DFT
3.1. Conformation
The development of novel conjugated polymers has played a very important role in improving the performance of OSCs.54 One widely used design strategy for designing a low bandgap polymer is the polymerization of an electron rich D unit with an electron deficient A unit along the backbone of a conjugated polymer. The D–A strategy enables strong electronic interaction in the copolymer, which leads to a low bandgap and a strong intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect, thereby effectively broadening its spectral absorption.55 The coplanarity of the D–A copolymer determines the charge mobility.56 A better theoretical quantification method to study its coplanarity is one-dimensional potential energy surface scanning. Another important design strategy is the design of A–D–A non-fullerene acceptor molecules. The middle D nucleus is a fused ring with an electron-rich structure and the terminals are electron-deficient structures.57,58 A change of the torsion angle between terminal A and intermediate core D causes the energy of the system to change accordingly, thus providing a better method for screening the optimal conformation of the A–D–A system. Similarly, for the change trend of the potential energy of the A–D–A system with the twist angle, a scanning calculation method can also be used. In quantum chemical calculations, scans are divided into a rigid scan and relaxed scan. The rigid scan lets the program change the geometry of the system in sequence according to the set scanning requirements. At the same time, each time the structure is changed, a single point of energy can be counted. Those geometric variables that are not scanned remain at the values of the original structure. In the relaxed scan, each time a specific geometric parameter is changed according to requirements, a single point calculation is not performed, but a restricted optimization is performed. That is, variables that are not scanned are optimized to make the system energy as low as possible, which is equivalent to allowing these variables to relax spontaneously. The relaxed scan is generally used in the design of photovoltaic materials for OSCs.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the conjugated polymers with zigzag backbones often show a weaker crystalline structure compared to those with straight backbones in the aggregation state.59,60 Hou and co-workers61 employed DFT methods at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level to reveal that the optimized structure of PBTBT–TT has a zigzag backbone. However, the results reported in the literature demonstrate that PBT4T is highly crystalline in solid films, which means that the optimal zigzagged geometry of PDTBT–TT is likely to be thermodynamically stable in the aggregated state. Hence, the total energy scan calculation of adjacent conjugated units in the two polymers was used to perform a more detailed study, as shown in Fig. 3a. The total energy of the rotamers of the TT–Tm unit is almost the same as the total energy of the rotamers of the T–Tm unit, which indicates that the steric hindrance in their intramolecular units is similar. However, TT is a rigid block unit and T–T is rotatable, so PCDTBT–TT has fewer conformation isomers than PBT4T. Therefore, PBT4T has better thermodynamic stability, which is consistent with the experimental results. Hou's group also took a polythiophene derivative (PBDD4T) as the initial polymer and tried to stabilize the backbone by introducing a fluorine atom at the β- and β′-positions of the α-linked bithiophene segment to increase the rotation barrier and then prepare a novel polymer, PBDD4T-2F. The potential energy surface scan calculation was used to study the thermodynamic stability of the rotational conformation of 2,2′-bithiophene (T–T) and 3,3-difluoro-2,2-bithiophene (T–T-2F), as shown in Fig. 3b. The geometry of T–T-2F tends to have more planarity relative to T–T, and the optimal geometry of T–T-2F is more stable than T–T in PBDD4T. Therefore, PBDD4T-2F will exhibit stronger interchain interactions and have higher crystallinity relative to PBDD4T in the aggregated state.62 In addition, the dihedral angle between the two adjacent conjugated units in a conjugated polymer is one of the principal factors affecting the polymer aggregation effect. Hou and co-workers63 calculated the torsional potential energy surface scan between thiophene and BDT in BDT–T-2F and BDT–T-2Cl using the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) basis set and the DFT method. The scanning curve of the potential energy surface of BDT–T-2Cl is almost to the same that of BDT–T-2F, which has the same optimal dihedral angle and torsion barrier. In order to further study the influence of the backbone conformation, potential energy surface scans were carried out on other torsion conjugated fragments containing fluorine and chlorine on the backbone. It was found that when fluorine is replaced by chlorine, the optimal conformation and rotation barrier are significantly different, which will affect the aggregation behavior of the target polymer.
 Fig. 3  (a) The total energy scan of the rotamers of the adjacent conjugated units in PBT4T and PBTBT–TT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Torsional energy profiles for the bithiophene segments in PBDD4T and PBDD4T-2F. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Theoretical simulation of optimal N-alkyl chain conformations by potential energy surface scanning for (c) DTP-C8 and (d) DTP-BO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For the star acceptor molecules ITIC and Y6 currently used in OSCs, potential energy surface scanning can also be applied to the design of these molecules and some research progress has been made. Molecular conformation, especially the geometry of the terminal group, has a direct impact on the molecular stacking, morphology, and charge transport. Chen and co-workers64 designed and synthesized the acceptor molecule 3TT-OCIC with an alkyl chain introduced into the 3TT-CIC backbone. The potential energy surface scan calculation was performed using the DFT method to evaluate the molecular conformation. From the relationship between the energy curve of the end group and the twist angle, it was found that 3TT-OCIC tends to maintain a very favorable conformation at zero twist angle. This conformation difference should impact the stacking and photovoltaic performance. Bo and co-workers reported a series of alkyl, alkoxy and alkylthio substituted A–π–D–π–A type non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) named IDTCN-C, IDTCN-O and IDTCN-S.65 The effect of the side chain substituent of the π-bridge thiophene unit on the molecular conformations of the terminal groups was studied using the ωB97XD/6-31G(d,p) basis set and DFT method. The results show that among the molecular conformations with different lateral substituents, the 0° geometry is the only favorable conformation under the influence of steric hindrance. In addition, the hexyloxy chain in IDTCN-O tends to be in the same plane as that of the conjugated backbones and a more coplanar terminal group is obtained than the optimal geometry of the other three molecules. However, such tiny changes in the molecular backbone may also affect the stacking of terminal groups. The experimental results of this study show that the IDTCN-O-based device shows better photovoltaic performance, which is consistent with the theoretical simulation prediction. The dual molecular engineering of asymmetric fused ring acceptors by alkyl side chain adjustment and terminal halogenation modification has been proposed to control aggregation for optimizing OSC devices.66–68 Asymmetric IPT-4F/Cl with a linear octyl (C8)-DTP based core (IPT) and IPTBO-4F/Cl with a branched 2-butyl-1-octyl chain (BO)-DTP-based core (IPTBO) were reported by Zhang and coworkers.69 Fluorination or chlorination at the terminal groups and C8 or BO substitution at the electron-rich core were explored in this study. The intrinsic characteristics of larger Cl atoms and longer C–Cl bonds significantly extend the main chain stacking region, which enhances molecular aggregation. Introduction of the BO chain to the fused-ring acceptor backbone is one of the simplest and most accessible methods to suppress aggregation. The potential energy surface scanning calculations of DTP-C8 and DTP-BO were applied to verify this effect, as shown in Fig. 3c and d. It was found that one arm of the BO chain arranged above the conjugate plane, which significantly hindered the aggregation and accumulation of the conjugate plane. The C8 chain has almost no such steric effect. Therefore, the molecular aggregation and miscibility are balanced by this method to obtain high-efficiency OSCs.
3.2. Frontier molecular orbitals and UV-Vis absorption
In the OSC active layers, the acceptor needs to have suitable HOMO/LUMO levels to match with the donor in order to ensure sufficient exciton dissociation and charge separation at the interface and a high Voc.70 In addition, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and energy gaps have a close relationship with the electronic properties and optical properties, which affect the performance of OSCs.71,72 The HOMO/LUMO energy levels were measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV), and the energy gap was used to predict the maximum absorption edge of the material. In order to quickly predict the HOMO/LUMO of designed molecules for accelerating the experimental process, computational simulation is the preferred method. The calculated HOMO–LUMO gap is approximate to the fundamental gap that is determined by the difference between the ionization potential (IP) and the affinity energy (EA), and its accuracy depends on the selected calculation method. The optical band gap corresponds to the lowest electron transition energy of organic photovoltaic materials. The difference between the fundamental gap and the optical band gap is defined as the exciton binding energy (EB).73 In the process of exciton dissociation of OSCs, the existence of EB will cause energy loss of the system. In order to clarify the relationship between molecular structure and Eb, Wei and coworkers calculated a series of EB values based on ITIC derivatives. These results indicated that the formation of a three-dimensional stacking structure of small molecule acceptors was very important for reducing EB.74 A lot of studies on OSCs show that absorbing photons is a key step to improve the Jsc in a device. The absorption spectrum of organic photovoltaic materials should match with the solar radiation spectrum as much as possible. Therefore, in order to better understand the photophysical process, it is important to theoretically predict and deeply understand the photoexcitation characteristics of organic photovoltaic materials. Optical parameters including the maximum absorption wavelength, oscillator strength (f), and molecular orbital (MO) transition contribution will be discussed and analyzed.
The UV-Vis absorption spectrum range of OSC active layers largely determines the output value of the photocurrent of the materials, thus it is particularly important to study the relationship between the molecular structure and the absorption spectrum. In recent years, many researchers have generally used quantum computing to predict the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of active layer materials, and they have analyzed in detail the attribution of electronic transitions and the contribution of orbital transitions. Fréchet and co-workers75 designed and synthesized symmetrical dinuclear platinum(II) oligomers (BTD-Pt-T(n)) based on thienyl-benzothiadiazole-thienyl (BTD). The absorption spectra of the oligomer donor films were classified using absorption spectroscopy and TD-DFT simulation calculation (Fig. 4a). The absorption peak at a short wavelength corresponding to the π–π* transition was assigned to the HOMO → LUMO+1 transition. The long wavelength peak was contributed by intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), and it was assigned to the HOMO → LUMO transition. This was the unique absorption peak of the D–A structure with a narrow band gap. It has been reported in the recent literature that energy level hybridization of the donor and acceptor units results in a particularly low HOMO–LUMO separation in the D–A systems. If the donor's HOMO energy levels and the acceptor's LUMO energy levels approach each other in energy, the resulting energy band structure will show a low energy gap, as shown in Fig. 4b. It can be seen from Fig. 4b that the copolymerized D–A structure has three characteristic absorption peaks: π → π*, the transition of the donor and acceptor units, and the ICT absorption band obtained by copolymerization.76 Meng and co-workers designed and synthesized two D–A structure molecules with different π-electron conjugative units, which are 1-((10-methyl-10H-phenothiazin-3-yl)ethynyl)anthracene-9,10-dione (AqMp) and 1,1′-(10-methyl-10H-phenothiazine-3,7-diyl)bis(ethyne-2,1-diyl)dianthracene-9,10-dione (Aq2Mp).77 Both compounds AqMp and Aq2Mp show ICT and π → π* transitions in the UV-Vis range in solution, and Aq2Mp shows a red shift and a higher absorption oscillation intensity, which has been confirmed using TD-DFT calculation. Hou and co-workers78 reported three kinds of D–A conjugated polymers, PDB-1, PDB-2 and PDB-3, in which the conjugation lengths of the D units in their backbones are different. It was found that the absorption extinction coefficient of the D–A copolymer with a longer D-unit when the A-unit length was certain was significantly higher using the calculation results based on TD-DFT. What's more, the length of the D-unit has a small impact on the optical band gap of the polymers, but it shows a positive correlation with the interchain π–π stacking and hole mobility in neat polymer films. These theoretical calculation results provide certain guiding significance for the design of novel D–A structure copolymers.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure, film absorption spectrum and absorption peak assignment of heavy metal donor oligomers Pt-BTD-T2, Pt-BTD-T3 and Pt-BTD-T4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) The D/A energy level matching requirements in the D–A structure system and the assignment of three possible transitions in the absorption spectrum. (c) Chemical structure of quad-rotor-shaped molecules (BFTT-N and BFTT–TN). Molar absorption coefficient of ITIC, BFTT-N and BFTT–TN in chloroform. Details of the contribution of electron transitions to the absorption spectra of ITIC, BFTT-N and BFTT–TN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The UV-Vis absorption simulation of OSC active layer materials is not limited to the donor materials, it is also applicable to the acceptor materials. The structural properties of designed acceptor molecules have been predicted using calculation, thereby accelerating our experimental progress and saving experimental costs. Hou and co-workers24 reported a chlorinated low bandgap acceptor, BTP-4Cl, obtained by replacing the halogen atoms of the fluorinated non-fullerene acceptor BTP-4F. The theoretical simulation of the absorption spectra of BTP-4X revealed that the maximum absorption peak of BTP-4Cl was red-shifted compared to that of BTP-4F, which was consistent with the experimental test and proved the rationality of the molecular design. Two quad-rotor-shaped molecules, BFTT-N and BFTT-TN, were constructed using a two-dimensional fused ring core combined with four IC-2F groups as the terminal units.79 The LUMO delocalization of FTT-N and BFTT-TN is from core to terminal, which helps to increase the intermolecular LUMO–LUMO overlap and improve the intermolecular charge transfer. The electron absorption spectra of BFTT-N and BFTT-TN relative to ITIC80 in chloroform solution were studied, as shown in Fig. 4c. BFTT-N and BFTT-TN have higher absorption intensity attributed to the larger sum of f during the transition processes, and the maximum absorption peak of BFTT-TN undergoes a red shift compared with ITIC, which indicates that the strong absorption of quad-rotor-shaped fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs) can improve the device performance. The calculation results based on the above discussion provide a theoretical basis for establishing the relationship between the structures and properties of acceptor molecules, and thus provide a certain guiding significance for the design of high-performance acceptor molecules in the future.
3.3. Dipole moment
D–A copolymers consisting of electron-rich donor and electron-deficient acceptor units have been widely used in the field of OSCs and field effect transistors (OFETs) because of their ability to be individually fine-tuned to meet their purposes.54,81 It is generally considered that the internal dipole moment along the D–A copolymer chain plays a very important role in retaining the pseudo charge transfer characteristics of these systems.82,83 In addition, a weaker donor helps maintain a lower HOMO energy level, and a stronger acceptor can help reduce the band gap by promoting intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) in the D–A copolymerization system.84,85 The intensity of light-induced ICT is related to the dipole moment difference between the ground state and excited state (Δμge). The overall change between the ground state and the excited state dipole Δμge is determined by considering the changes of the dipole in each direction along the X, Y, and Z axes: (1)Yu and co-workers synthesized and characterized the PBB3 and PTB7 polymers and concluded that the existence of local dipole moments in the repeating units of low-bandgap polymers is very important, as shown in Fig. 5a.82 Compared with PBB3, the local change of dipole moment in a single TT unit of the PTB7 polymer is large, making its excited state highly polarized. Therefore, negative charges tend to focus on the TT unit while the positive charges tend to focus on the electron-rich BDT unit, which will facilitate electron transfer to the PCBM acceptor. Later, Yu and coworkers further studied the relationship between structure and properties of PTB7 and found that a higher dipole moment is positively correlated with better photovoltaic performance.86
 Fig. 5  (a) The chemical structure and dipole structural calculations of PBB3 and PTB7. The ground (black arrow) and excited (red arrow) state dipole moments of the PBB and PTB monomer units. The axes (dotted lines) represent the center of mass in the x, y, and z directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) The chemical structure and optimized geometries with dipole moments for the asymmetric molecules α-IT-2F and α-IT-2OM; dipole moments for the regional parts (Th-IC, Th-2F-IC, and Th-2OM-IC) in the asymmetric molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A–D–A type non-fullerene acceptor small molecules, such as ITIC, are widely used in the field of OSCs, and their UV-Vis spectrum absorption edges are limited to about 850 nm. As we all know, enhancement of the ICT effect will increase the maximum absorption peak of the UV-Vis spectrum of organic photovoltaic materials, and the permanent dipole moment of a molecule with D/A moieties is often positively related to the ICT effect. Good symmetry in these small molecules renders the structural overall dipole moments especially small, so researchers introduced a half-molecular model into the calculation to compare the dipole effects. Hou and coworkers87 proposed that introducing alkoxyl groups and fluorine atoms onto the D and A moieties of IEIC, respectively, can significantly promote the ICT effect. The half-molecular dipole moments of IEIC and IEICO-4F were calculated as 8.65 D and 9.19 D, respectively, exhibiting an enhancement of the ICT effect from the electron-rich core unit to the electron-deficient unit when modified. Hou and coworkers88 prepared IT-M and IT-4F by introducing methyl and fluorine at the end of the terminal IC group, and found a stronger push–pull effect in IT-4F than that in IT-M. Moreover, with the stronger component of dipole moment vector alongside the backbone, IT-4F may obtain a high surface tension. Subsequently, halogen elements such as chlorine and fluorine were introduced at the end of the terminal IC group, and it was found that the dipole moment of C–Cl containing chlorine with a greater atomic number was larger than that of C–F. In addition, the dipole moment has a vital part in modulating the molecular energy level over the electronegativity and is beneficial for charge separation in D–A blends.24,26 In recent years, asymmetrical acceptor molecules with large permanent dipoles have attracted the interest of researchers. Bo and coworkers assembled a novel IDT-based FREA with asymmetric side chains, which resulted in the structure being destroyed and a tiny dipole moment being induced along the entire molecule.66 This asymmetric structure reduced the crystallinity of the film without sacrificing close molecular contact. Subsequently, Yang and coworkers proposed and tested a novel asymmetric donor core by combining IDT and IDTT with the disadvantages of a high synthesis cost and complicated steps.89 In order to overcome the abovementioned disadvantages, Bo's group reported a method of adding a dipole moment to a FREA backbone via attaching terminal groups with various polarities.90 The star molecule ITIC was selected as the prototype molecule.80 Two asymmetric FREAs (α-IT-2OM and α-IT-2F) were developed by combining three different kinds of IC groups (IC, 2F-IC and 2OM-IC). DFT calculations were applied for understanding the differences of the molecular level between α-IT-2OM and α-IT-2F, as shown in Fig. 5b. The calculated results suggested that the two asymmetric acceptors with planar structures had permanent dipole moments (μ) of 3.28 D and 3.07 D, respectively. In contrast, ITIC exhibited a relatively weaker dipole of 0.0 D. It can be seen that the fluorine- and methoxy-modified segments had better polarity values of 5.42 D and 5.36 D, respectively. In addition, methoxy substitution tuned the dipole moment to be almost parallel (6°) along the y-axis for Th-2OM-IC. This alignment can be beneficial for terminal stacking with no blocking from the side chains in the intermediate donor core. However, the fluorine substitution had the opposite effect and led to a larger angle of 47° (Th-2F-IC) compared to 30° (Th-IC), which might impede the terminal stacking. Therefore, this method is a promisingly effective approach for adjusting molecular aggregation in active layers, which may affect the electron mobilities and the device performance of OSCs. The quadrupole moment, which is higher than the first order dipole moment in electric multistage expansion, can reflect the degree of the charge distribution deviating from spherical symmetry. The charge–quadrupole interaction can induce a large electrostatic shift in the electron energy level of a crystalline film, and then regulate the IP and EA energy of the system.91,92 Leo and coworkers found that the ionization energy of zinc-phthalocyanine and its derivatives varies with the molecular orientation of the pure film or the mixing ratio in the blend film, and it is positively correlated with the quadrupole moment perpendicular to the π–π stacking direction.93 When these findings were applied to OSCs, it was found that the energy of the charge transfer state at the donor–acceptor interface depends on the quadrupole moment of π–π stacking direction, and the driving force for generating free charge carriers can be tuned by adjusting the component of quadrupole moment, which can be used to optimize non-fullerene acceptor molecules and achieve high-performance OSC devices.
3.4. Electrostatic potential
The nuclei and electrons of a molecule create an electrostatic potential (ESP, V(r)) at each point r in the surrounding space, which can be used to analyze charge generation, intermolecular electrostatic interaction, reaction sites and molecular properties, given rigorously by eqn (2):94–98 (2)where ZA represents the charge on nucleus A, located at RA, and ρ(r) is the electronic density. ZA and RA in eqn (2) represent the contributions of the nuclei and electrons, respectively. The former is positive in sign, while the latter is negative, so the sign of V(r) in any particular region of space depends on which of ZA or RA is dominant there. Regions of positive V(r) will tend overall to interact favorably with nucleophiles (e.g., negative sites) and regions of negative V(r) will tend overall to interact favorably with electrophiles (e.g., positive sites). The electronic density, as a real physical property, can be determined by diffraction tests and theoretical calculation. V(r) is now usually mapped onto a van der Waals surface with an electronic density at 0.001 a.u. (electrons Bohr−3), which reflects the specific characteristics of the particular molecule, such as π electrons, lone pairs, and atomic anisotropy.99
In the early stage of OSC research mainly taking fullerene and its derivatives as acceptors, a driving force that originated from the energy offset between the donor and acceptor materials was needed to ensure efficient charge generation in the system.100 Whereas, there is a certain difference between the charge transfer state energy (ECT) and the bandgap energy (Eg) of OSC devices, which results in a large voltage loss.101 In the past few years, a growing number of research works have demonstrated that efficient charge generation is possible in material systems with negligible driving force, especially in the non-fullerene-based OSCs.102–104 The molecular ESP was used to reveal the charge generation mechanisms in OSCs by Hou and coworkers.105 It is well known that the π-electrons and holes in organic photovoltaic materials are delocalized in their π-orbits, and the exciton dissociation in the blend system occurs through the orbital overlap at the interface of donor and acceptor, as shown in Fig. 6a. The ESP distributions of the simplified polymer donor (DCBT-2F)2 and the non-fullerene acceptor IT-4F′ were calculated, and the average ESP of each atom in the two models was statistically analyzed, as shown in Fig. 6a. The ESP on most of the molecular surface of IT-4F′ is high and positive, while the molecular surface of (DCBT-2F)2 is mostly negative, so the intermolecular electric field (IEF) formed at the interface between IT-4F′ and (DCBT-2F)2 may facilitate exciton dissociation and promote the transfer of electrons from the donor to the acceptor. Moreover, in order to fully understand the difference of energetic offset between fullerene and non-fullerene systems, the average ESP of fullerene C60 was calculated for comparison. The simulation results show that the ESP of C60 is distributed over the entire spherical surface, and the average ESP value is lower than that of IT-4F′. Therefore, the IEF at the interface between the donor and fullerene is weaker compared to that between the donor and IT-4F′, which may be the reason why the non-fullerene system maintains high efficiency with negligible energy offset. In order to further verify that non-fullerene OSCs generate charge with negligible energy offset as the driving force, Hou and coworkers took PTO2, IT-4F and PC71BM as donors and acceptors, respectively, and then carried out relevant calculations from the perspective of chemical structure,106 as shown in Fig. 6b. The molecular surface of PC71BM shows a positive ESP, but its value is much lower than that of IT-4F. Therefore, the IEF at the molecular interface of PTO2:IT-4F is significantly greater than that at PTO2:PC71BM. In order to prove the effect of IEF on exciton separation, the charge density distributions of the lowest excited state of the two systems were simulated and analyzed with a fixed face-to-face distance, as shown in Fig. 6b. It can be seen that the electrons and holes are mainly distributed on PC71BM and highly overlap in the PTO2:PC71BM composite. However, it can be clearly seen that holes are distributed on the donor PTO2 in the PTO2:IT-4F system, which indicates that the acceptor has undergone charge transfer after excitation. Therefore, the increased charge density delocalization may be related to a larger average ESP on the surface of the acceptor. In the PBDB-TF:IO-4Cl system of non-fullerene OSCs, a larger ESP difference is also found than that of the PBDB-TF:ITIC system, thus the PBDB-TF:IO-4Cl system shows better electron transfer performance.107 In order to improve the ESP difference of non-fullerene-based OSCs, Hou and co-workers studied D–A conjugated polymer donors with different conjugated lengths of the D-units in their backbones. It turns out that the backbones of these three polymers show similar planar zigzag structures, and the proportion of contributing negative ESP parts increases with the extension of the D unit, which improves the donor/acceptor orbital overlap to facilitate charge transport.78
 Fig. 6  (a) The exciton dissociation process occurs at the donor/acceptor interface, and the ESP difference can form an intermolecular IEF. ESP distributions on the polymer donor (DCBT-2F)2 model and the non-fullerene acceptor model IT-4F′. Average ESP statistics of each atom on the polymer and acceptor models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Chemical structures of the polymer donor, fullerene, and nonfullerene acceptors. ESP distributions of the donor and acceptors. The electron/hole density distributions of the lowest excited states without/with the additional electric field between PTO2 and PC71BM, as well as PTO2 and IT-4F; red and blue represent hole and electron densities, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
With the continuous development of new materials and device processes, the ternary OSCs with better stability, insensitive film thickness and complementary light absorption ranges have become the most promising candidates for industrial manufacturing. In order to obtain high-performance ternary OSCs, many technological studies have been completed but the understanding of the interaction mechanism within the system is still lacking. Intermolecular interaction plays a vital role in molecular distribution, oriented aggregation and phase separation.108,109 In this respect, hydrogen bonds have better directionality and selectivity compared to π–π valence and van der Waals force and can adjust the crystallinity of polymers and inhibit the excessive aggregation of fullerenes in OSCs.110,111 Zhan and co-workers112 introduced an additive of 4,4′-biphenol as a “molecular lock” in polymer/small molecule and fullerene OSCs. In this way, hydrogen bonds can form to improve the efficiency of OSCs by promoting the crystallinity of the donor and modulating the morphology of blend films. Subsequently, Tao and co-workers113 introduced a small molecule, DIBC, into the polymer/fullerene system to form hydrogen bond interaction with PC71BM via N–H⋯OC. Moreover, it was found that the charge transferred between DIBC and PC71BM through hydrogen bonds by calculating the surface ESP of the molecules. Finally, it is pointed out that there is an opposite ESP between the donor and the acceptor, and this larger ESP difference in the ternary OSCs facilitates exciton dissociation and charge transport. In addition, the problem of aggregation and stacking of molecules in OSCs can also be analyzed using ESP. Zhang and co-workers developed a series of fused-ring electron acceptors with an asymmetric core of DTP and electron-withdrawing terminal groups of IC-2F and IC-2Cl.69 As we all know, the van der Waals radius of the Cl atom is significantly larger than that of the F atom, and the C–Cl bond is longer than the C–F bond.114 Therefore, the acceptor molecules based on IC-2Cl show a larger molecular surface area than those that are based on IC-2F, thereby providing a larger plane to enhance the aggregation and stacking of molecules. In order to quantitatively analyze the size of the visualized acceptor, the simulation calculation of molecular size and ESP was carried out for DTP-T-4F and DTP-T-4Cl. The distance between the two opposing halogen atoms in the DTP-T-4Cl molecule is significantly larger than that of DTP-T-4F. The calculated surface area of the backbone of DTP-T-4Cl is 7 percent larger than that of DTP-T-4F. These molecular size differences can illustrate the lower solubility and stronger aggregation of FREAs based on IC-2Cl.
3.5. Intermolecular binding energy
Accurately proving the existence and role of intermolecular non-covalent interactions in a blend system is crucial for understanding and predicting the structure–property relationship of OSCs.90,106,113,115–117 The intermolecular non-covalent interactions mainly include electrostatic dominated (hydrogen bonding), dispersion dominated and mixed (electrostatic/dispersion) interactions in OSCs. The types of hydrogen bonding can be subdivided into cyclic hydrogen bonds and single hydrogen bonds. The dispersion category is divided into the π–π interaction, aliphatic–aliphatic interactions and π–aliphatic interactions.118,119 In principle, the intermolecular noncovalent interaction between two molecules A and B can be described through the calculation of the binding energy. The binding energy can be calculated using the following formula (3):120 ΔE = E(AB) − E(A) − E(B).(3)This formula is the result of using electron energy and it is not corrected for thermodynamics. The decrease of E(AB) relative to E(A) + E(B) consists of two aspects. One is the actual interaction energy between A and B molecules, and the other derives from the basis functions of the A and B molecules that overlap each other in the complex system, which is equal to increasing the basis set of the complex and thus lowering E(AB), so the error caused by this overlap (basis set superposition error, BSSE) should be removed. Accurate complex binding energies were acquired using the counterpoise correction to correct for BSSE, so the calculation formula is ΔE = E(AB) − E(A) − E(B) + E(BSSE).121 In addition, the molecular surface ESP was mentioned in the previous section, including that the donor has an average negative potential and the acceptor has an average positive potential. The strength of intermolecular noncovalent interaction is positively correlated with the magnitude of the ESP difference between donor and acceptor.122 Hou and co-workers106 proposed to fix the face-to-face distance between the terminal of IT-4F/PC71BM and the PTO2 backbone to 3.5 Å, and to calculate the intermolecular binding energy changes by moving IT-4F/PC71BM along the PTO2 backbone. The calculation results suggest that IT-4F forms strong intermolecular noncovalent interaction with PTO2 relative to PC71BM, which is consistent with the result of a larger ESP difference between IT-4F and PTO2.
Owing to the steric hindrance effect of the side chain at the central core of a symmetric small molecule acceptor (SSMA) and asymmetric small molecule acceptor (ASMA) with the A–D–A structure, dominant charge transport channels of the SSMA and ASMA can be formed by local intermolecular π–π stacking between the end electron-withdrawing groups.123–128 Hou and co-workers designed and synthesized an A–D–A structured SSMA ITCC based on ITIC via simple end-group modification.127 The optimized geometric structure of the dimer molecules was used to compare the strength of the intermolecular noncovalent interaction during the self-assembly of the molecules, and the calculated intermolecular binding energies of ITIC and ITCC based on the optimal dimers were −24.06 and −26.65 kcal mol−1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7a. Compared with ITIC, the binding energy of ITCC is reduced by 2.59 kcal mol−1, indicating that ITCC molecules have a stronger tendency of intermolecular packing, which can enhance their crystal properties and improve the charge carrier mobility. A novel asymmetric non-fullerene acceptor, TPTT-IC, consisting of the ladder-type thiophene-phenylene-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-fused intermediate core TPTT and terminal group IC, was reported by Sun and co-workers,116 which has three different kinds of stacking mode according to the π–π stacking of end units due to its asymmetric structure, as shown in Fig. 7b. The binding energy of TPTT-IC dimers is smaller compared to that of the symmetric molecule ITIC dimers with much stronger intermolecular interactions, which suggests that the electron mobility of TPTT-IC will be higher than that of ITIC. Bo and co-workers used three types of electron-withdrawing units based on IC as the terminal groups and selected IDTT as the molecule core to design two asymmetric FREAs (α-IT-2OM and α-IT-2F).90 The optimal dimer geometries were used to calculate the intermolecular binding energy corrected by the correction of BSSE, as shown in Fig. 7c. Calculation results proves that fluorine modification at the terminal electron-withdrawing units seems to slightly weaken the interactions and the much stronger intermolecular interactions of α-IT-2OM with the homo-interaction of 2OM-IC. Therefore, the results show that modification of the terminal electron-withdrawing unit can effectively regulate the local molecular interaction, which may influence the charge transfer between molecules. Through the calculation of the binding energy of non-fullerene small molecules with an asymmetric structure, it was found that the interaction is much stronger in the antiparallel stacking arrangement of the same terminal group than that of different terminal groups. This may provide a better strategy in acceptor selection for designing high-performance ternary OSCs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Optimized geometries and binding energies of ITIC and ITCC dimers obtained using DFT-D. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Optimized geometries of TPTT-IC dimers and the corresponding intermolecular binding energies obtained using DFT-D calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Optimized geometries of possible combinations of asymmetric acceptor dimers and corresponding intermolecular binding energies for α-IT-2F and α-IT-2OM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. All atomic molecular dynamics (AAMD)
BHJ OSCs based on electron donating polymers and electron accepting fullerene/non-fullerene derivatives have become more and more popular in recent years.129,130 In order to improve the photovoltaic performance of BHJ OSCs, many molecular modification strategies have been carried out. Even a tiny variation in the chemical structure of molecules can cause substantial changes in the molecular stacking as well as device performance.24,31,81,131–133 In addition, the effect of the third component on the D–A interface is still also unclear in ternary OSCs, particularly the microscopic intermolecular structures in the mixing areas. Therefore, understanding the molecular stacking at the donor/acceptor interfaces is essential to further investigate how the interface structure influences charge generation and transport in OSCs. At present, the latest X-ray-based techniques can only measure the intermolecular stacking structures of single crystals, and they cannot probe the details of molecular stacking in disordered films with accuracy experimentally.134,135 In terms of theoretical calculations, AAMD was used for in-depth simulation research. In addition, the intermolecular interaction movements were further traced using the RDF  (Nα and Nβ stand for the amount of α and β components in the system, respectively. ij is the distance between the centers of mass of the i-th unit in the α components and the j-th unit in the β components), which is an important structural property and exhibits spatial relevance among components in the molecular stacking. For example, at a long distance (or large r), RDF reaches 1, implying that no correlation exists between two components. With r becoming smaller, RDF begins to form a peak and valley, which correspond to positive and negative correlations, respectively.136
An OSC device based on BTID-0F was designed and prepared by Wei and coworkers.137 MD simulation was used to explain the intrinsic working mechanism. The results showed that the center-of-mass RDF of the terminal acceptor unit had a distinct peak (0.38 Å), indicating local π–π stacking among the end units. In addition, there is a small exciton binding energy between molecules, which is conducive to exciton dissociation. In order to better understand the reason why Y6 is used in high-performance OSCs, Cao and coworkers studied the molecular stacking in pristine and blend films using the MD method.138 The results showed that the RDF data of Y6 pristine films were similar to those of the blend films, indicating that the molecular stacking in Y6 pristine films was preserved in the blends. In addition, RDF data also showed that the first high peak of all molecular fragments was lower than 4 Å, indicating that there was a strong π–π interaction between Y6 molecular segments. Yi and coworkers123 systematically studied the stacking morphology of an ITIC single crystal and thin film via experiments and theoretical simulation. It was found that the ITIC crystal showed an edge–face stacking mode, while the ITIC film showed local π–π stacking formed by terminal IC groups. Therefore, the electron transport in the ITIC film is isotropic and even better than that in the crystal. The results indicate that appropriate modification of the acceptor terminal unit can improve the charge transport. Brédas and coworkers selected two ITIC derivatives, FNIC1 and FNIC2, to study the energy disorder of small molecule acceptors relative to PC71BM.139 The MD results revealed that the total disorder of FNIC1 and FNIC2 is only two-thirds that in PC71BM, which is mainly due to the reduction of static disorder. Small energy disorder in small molecule acceptors is related to the coplanarity and rigidity, and it helps to reduce voltage loss. Brédas and coworkers140 chose three typical BHJ devices: PBT4T-2OD:PC71BM, PffBT4T-2OD:PC71BM, and PT2-FTAZ:PC71BM with tiny modifications in the polymer backbone, but the device performance was significantly different. AAMD was used to elucidate the effect of varying chemical structure at the polymer backbone on the polymer aggregation in the mixing areas. Firstly, the RDF of the polymer backbone in the three model systems demonstrated that the g(r) values of the polymer backbones increase over the whole range of distance, meaning an increase in polymer aggregation from PBT4T-2OD to PffBT4T-2OD to PT2-FTAZ. This increase in polymer aggregation suggests that the amount of polymer backbones interacting with the PC71BM molecules can be reduced though the analysis of the RDF of the polymer backbones and PC71BM molecules. Therefore, the theoretical calculation results reveal the effect of slight modification of the polymer backbone on system aggregation. Yang and coworkers141 developed two ITIC-based isomeric acceptors, named o-F-ITIC and m-F-ITIC, with fluorine atoms at the ortho and meta positions among the side chains, which show a significant variation in the PCE in OSCs. To study the effects of molecular interactions and arrangement between donor and acceptor on performance, a deep level simulation study, based on AAMD, was performed, as shown in Fig. 8a–g. The stacking structure between PBDB-T and o-F-ITIC exhibited a closer interaction as compared to PBDB-T and m-F-ITIC. Moreover, there is strong interaction between the BDT unit of PBDB-T and the DCI units of o-F-ITIC, but more interaction between the BDD of PBDB-T and DCI units of m-F-ITIC was discovered. Note also that they observed face-to-face alignment between DCI of o-F-ITIC and BDT molecular planes (angle = ∼97°) in comparison with the DCI of m-F-ITIC and BDD cases (angle = ∼70°). It is the difference in molecular interactions and arrangement that causes the difference in the performance of the OSCs. To fully understand the role of the third donor or acceptor in ternary OSCs, two categories of ternary devices incorporating PTB7-Th (second donor, D2) or ITIC-Th (second acceptor, A2) in the PBDB-T:PC71BM (D1:A1) blend to form 2D:1A (PBDBT:PTB7-Th:PC71BM) or 1D:2A (PBDB-T:ITIC-Th:PC71BM) ternary OSCs were designed for an in-depth investigation by Ko and coworkers.136 AAMD was performed to assess the location of PTB7-Th and ITIC-Th molecules in the 2D:1A and 1D:2A ternary systems, and the gα,β(r) of the two systems and the to obtain snapshots of atoms within 5 Å of a PBDB-T polymer after complete solvent evaporation for the 1D:2A system, as shown in Fig. 8h. The gBDB-T,ITIC-Th(r) system exhibited a zero correlation peak before solvent evaporation while a peak was exhibited at a distance of ≈4 Å after solvent evaporation, strongly indicating that ITIC-Th molecules had been in the area between PBDB-T and PC71BM for the formation of cascade ternary junctions. In addition, ITIC-Th is embedded between PBDB-T and PC71BM, in which the ITIC-Th molecule is wrapped around the PBDB-T polymer, as shown in Fig. 8I. However, no significant variations in gα,β(r) were observed with solvent evaporation in the 2D:1A system. The gBDB-T,PC71BM(r) and gTB7-Th,PC71BM(r) results implied that PC71BM molecules exhibited a tendency to locate in the region between the two polymer donors, hindering the formation of band alignment and facilitating charge transport in the 2D:1A system. These results are consistent with a previous study by Fahlman's group that proposed a cascade junction system designed with self-organizing NFA molecules at the interfaces of polymer:fullerene, which is effectively able to suppress charge recombination and increase Voc as well as PCE, exceeding the values of binary OSCs.142
 Fig. 8  Final configurations of (a) PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC and (b) PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC. Stacked DCI and BDT are shown in yellow. (c) Division into two constituent components of the electron-rich donor and electron-deficient acceptor moieties of PBDB-T, o-F-ITIC and m-F-ITIC. RDF between the backbone of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of (d) o-F-ITIC and (e) m-F-ITIC. Stacking states of PBDB-T and F-ITICs are shown and black arrows indicate the stacking sites. Stacking states between (f) the BDT unit of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of o-F-ITIC and (g) the BDD unit of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of m-F-ITIC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. gα,β(r) between system components before and after solvent evaporation for (h) 1D:2A and 2D:1A ternary systems. (i) A snapshot of atoms for the ternary 1D:2A system, in which PBDB-T, PC71BM, and ITIC-Th molecules are marked using red, blue, and green colors, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD)
Controlling the morphology of the active layer is vital for the development of high-efficiency devices in BHJ OSCs. Numerous ideas and designs have been utilized to achieve the measurement of structural information of active layers. Atomic force microscopy,143 transmission microscopy144 and scanning electron microscopy145 have been employed to characterize active layers, providing limited information on the nature of the interpenetrating network. Hence, there is a rising need for employing electron tomography to explore the 3D morphology. However, the inherently weak contrast because of the poor electron scattering of organic materials results in a limited and complicated interpretation of the 3D-reconstructed morphology. To characterize the crystallinity of active layers, several techniques are utilized, such as grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction146 (GIXD) and grazing-incidence small-/wide-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS/GIWAXS).147–149 The valuable information provided by these techniques represents, however, averages over the irradiated area of the sample, thus preventing real space localization of nanocrystallites. In comparison, computational tools have been employed to provide atomistic detail and therefore exhibited potential to remove the gap between experimental scales and molecular length scales. Particularly, CGMD is often employed to model the active layer of BHJ OSCs, enabling the capture of morphology while keeping molecular descriptions (opposite to Monte Carlo simulated annealing150 or mean field151 methods where these are lost). However, the CG models currently used in the force field usually describe the donor and acceptor molecules too simply, which greatly hinders the distinction between various donor/acceptor structures. Therefore, these models cannot exhibit a proper reflection of the morphological evolution occurring during the solution processing of active layers in BHJ OSCs, hence creating relevance between experiments and simulations is of great significance. Vries and coworkers47 proposed an enhanced and expanded version of CG models, named the Martini force field. In this new version of the CG models, an average of 4 atoms are mapped to one CG particle, while bond, angle, and dihedral potentials are utilized to obtain the CG models for reproducing the structure and flexibility of the corresponding atomistic models. Moreover, a method was employed by Lee and Pao51 to produce morphologies that remedy this: within a standard MD simulation, the removal of solvent is slow to simulate the experimental evaporation process. Therefore, the evolution process of the active layer morphology during solution processing could be explored, and direct connections to experiment could be found. Marrink and coworkers152 also proposed an approach to produce atom-resolved morphologies of active layers, which was utilized to simulate large-scale morphological organization during solution processing.
A BHJ active layer comprising a nanoscale interpenetrating network structure of electron donor/acceptor phases is essential for OSC photovoltaic performance. Thus, characterization of the active layer structure is critical to link various processing conditions to the final photovoltaic performance.153–156 To explore the influence of the weight ratio of P3HT:PCBM on the resultant morphologies of the blends, Chu and co-workers conducted CGMD simulations at the P3HT:PCBM weight ratios of 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 at 423K and 1 atm, as shown in Fig. 9a and b.157 For the weight ratio of 2:1 (1:2 and 1:3), the P3HT (PCBM) phase occupied most of the simulation model. However, when the weight ratio was 1:1, an interpenetrating network structure formed between the two phases, with a morphology resembling “column-like” structures from both cross sectional and energy-filtered TEM.158,159 This morphological structure is conducive to balancing carrier transportation. The CG morphology in this research work was obtained by simulated annealing, but this method cannot reveal the morphological evolution occurring during the solution treatment of BHJ active layers and completely make the connection between experimental and computational results. In order to make up for the defects of this annealing simulation, Pao and Lee proposed a new method whereby the solvent is slowly removed during a standard MD simulation.51 Based on this method, Marrink and co-workers studied the morphological evolution of a P3HT:PCBM mixture during solution processing using CGMD, as shown in Fig. 9c. The influences of drying velocity, P3HT molecular weight and thermal annealing were explored in detail, providing trends mimicking experimental findings.152 The evolution of the BHJ active layer morphology during solution processing is well-researched, hence a direct connect to experimental conditions can be drawn as well. To acquire insights into the morphological details and stacking of the active layers, methods of quantifying all relevant morphological quantities will be significant to study the performance of BHJ OSCs. Yang and coworkers141 investigated the macroscopic morphology of PBDB-T:F-ITIC complexes through CGMD using the Martini force field, as shown in Fig. 9d–h. The amount densities of both stacked structures representing the amount of CG beads projected on the x–y plane within each unit area, as shown in Fig. 9d and e, indicated that PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC formed wider interfacial regions with higher density in comparison with PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC. PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC has a greater value of average surface area of 178.1 nm2 compared to PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC (Fig. 9f), and the PBDB-T backbone is slightly folded in PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC, which is evidenced by comparing the end-to-end distance of PBDB-T in the stacking structures (Fig. 9g). What's more, the CGMD-derived RDF result in Fig. 9h offers deeper confirmation of a stronger DCI–BDT interaction in PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC established via the AAMD analysis. The simulation result shows that varying the position of the fluorine atom in the side chain of the acceptor will significantly affect the stacking arrangement between molecules when blended with the counterpart donor polymer, resulting in a significant difference in the performance of BHJ OSCs. Thus, CGMD can be employed to conduct annealing simulation and subsequent morphological analysis, which may help to develop BHJ OSCs with excellent performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of P3HT and PCBM. Red beads denote the CG representation of P3HT monomers; a blue bead denotes the CG representation of a PCBM molecule. The intramolecular degrees of freedom between the CG particles of P3HT monomers are highlighted using the green line. (b) Morphologies of blends with the P3HT: PCBM weight ratios of 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3. P3HT domains are colored in red and PCBM domains are colored in blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The morphological evolution of the P3HT-PCBM mixture during solution-processing (P3HT chains are rendered in red while PCBM molecules are rendered in blue). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. The 2-dimensional number density and morphology of thin films of (d) PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC and (e) PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC from CGMD simulation. The thickness of the thin films was 5.5 nm. (f) Solvent-accessible surface area between the backbones of PBDB-T and F-ITICs. (g) End-to-end distance of PBDB-T in the thin film with F-ITICs. (h) RDF of DCI of F-ITICs and BDT of PBDB-T in thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6. Machine learning
In recent years, with the continuous development of artificial intelligence, machine learning (ML) has also played an important role in the field of OSCs. At present, a large number of studies have focused on the prediction and screening of high-performance organic photovoltaic materials based on some relevant descriptors, such as frontier molecular orbital, conformation, and excited state properties.160–163 This large-scale screening aims to establish the relationship between molecular descriptors and device parameters. Harvard clean energy computing established a precedent for virtual screening of organic photovoltaic molecules.164 A promising molecule is proposed by combining a large number of molecular fragments based on DFT calculation. However, the machine model used in this method is not accurate enough to predict device PCEs mainly because it is only based on frontier molecular orbitals.165 Furthermore, the model is limited to fullerene systems, and a universal model containing structure and electronic property descriptors and covering non-fullerene systems is necessary. By repeatedly training a ML model, Sun and coworkers obtained a reasonable structure–property relationship,166 so as to quickly screen materials. The target donor materials based on the model were verified in experiments, which saved time and resources and guided the experiment better. Ma and coworkers performed high-throughput virtual screening based on several new ML models using new descriptors.167 The important components of the model were determined, and new design rules were introduced to screen high-efficiency molecules, thus revealing the key molecular properties needed for high efficiency. Therefore, ML is a powerful tool to screen new photovoltaic materials and accelerate the rapid development of the OSC field.
7. Conclusion and outlook
In this review, we have systematically summarized recent advances of computational chemistry in the field of OSCs, which range from DFT calculations of optimal conformation, energy level, dipole moment, eletrostatic potential and intermolecular binding energy to TD-DFT calculated UV-Vis absorbance to active layer structure information simulated using AAMD and CGMD. The main conclusions are summarized as follows: (1) the lower the potential energy difference between the molecular fragments at zero twist angle, the better the coplanarity of the molecules, thereby changing the molecular aggregation structure. (2) Frontier molecular orbital theory can theoretically calculate the HOMO, LUMO, and HOMO–LUMO gap of a molecular ground state, which lays the foundation for the matching of donor/acceptor energy levels. (3) The maximum absorption peak of a UV-Vis spectrum of a D–A donor is attributed to the ICT effect, and the orbital composition as well as the orbital transition contribution of the molecular excited state can be specifically analyzed. For A–D–A type acceptor molecules, the red or blue shift of the maximum absorption peak can be well predicted, thus providing a basis for screening materials within a specific light absorption range. (4) For D–A donors, a large variation between the ground state of the optimal structure and the dipole moment of the excited state is more conducive to intermolecular charge transfer. For A–D–A symmetrical acceptors, the larger the dipole moment of the terminal group, the more favorable the charge transfer in the molecules, which is conducive to broadening the spectral absorption range. Compared to the symmetric A–D–A small molecules, the asymmetric molecules have a permanent dipole moment, which can effectively adjust the intermolecular interactions, crystallization characteristics and micro-morphology of the blend films and is more conducive to charge transfer and photovoltaic performance. (5) A large ESP difference between the donor and the acceptor is beneficial to enhancing the intermolecular charge transfer effect. (6) A larger non-covalent interaction between molecules is conducive to improving the electron mobility. In addition, for asymmetric small molecules, antiparallel stacking with the same terminal group has greater intermolecular binding energy, which may provide some theoretical support for the screening of ternary acceptor molecules. (7) The side chain of a small acceptor molecule has a strong influence on its charge transport, generation, and recombination loss. Tight parallel stacking between the donor and the acceptor enables stronger intermolecular interactions, leading to a larger interface area and higher density. The overview shows that the method of combining DFT, TD-DFT, AAMD and CGMD can provide an in-depth understanding of the structure–property relationship, and is beneficial for designing and screening organic photovoltaic molecules and promoting the development of high-performance OSCs.
At present, there is a lack of general principles of molecular design in the synthesis of new photovoltaic materials, which makes the selection of target molecules more difficult. Therefore, computational chemistry can be a powerful assistant in the construction of molecular structure–property relationships, and can be used in ML models for rapidly screening photovoltaic materials, which can reduce the need for experimental trial and error and effectively save resources and time. In order to speed up the research and development of new materials, future research work should go in the following research directions: (1) theoretical simulation of electronic properties, molecular stacking and charge transfer characteristics of Y-series asymmetric small molecular acceptors, so as to deepen the understanding of the nature of the asymmetric structure. (2) The establishment of the relationship between the non-fullerene small molecular acceptors and non-radiation energy loss will be helpful to improve the precise regulation of voltage loss. (3) The theoretical study on the intrinsic driving force of morphology evolution in the blend system will be helpful to optimize the device process parameters. (4) Research on the design principle of polymerization of Y-series small molecular acceptors can broaden the types of acceptors and accelerate the continuous improvement of the efficiency of all-polymer OSCs. As a result, computational chemistry has gradually become a useful assistant in the scientific research of OSCs, which can guide us to develop more efficient novel donor/acceptor materials and push the efficiency over 20%.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
X. L. acknowledges the support from “Chenguang Program” supported by Shanghai Education Development Foundation and Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (19CG36), Shanghai Sailing Program (19YF1401000), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51973032 and 21905043). Y. C. acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51673091 and 51833004).
References
Y. Han, X. Chen, J. Wei, G. Ji, C. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Lai, W. Zha, Z. Li, L. Yan, H. Gu, Q. Luo, Q. Chen, L. Chen, J. Hou, W. Su and C. Q. Ma, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901490 CAS .
J. Lee, Y. H. Seo, S. N. Kwon, D. H. Kim, S. Jang, H. Jung, Y. Lee, H. Weerasinghe, T. Kim, J. Y. Kim, D. Vak and S. I. Na, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901805 CrossRef .
R. Sun, J. Guo, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang, W. Yang, J. Guo, M. Shi, Y. Zhang, S. Kahmann, L. Ye, X. Jiao, M. A. Loi, Q. Shen, H. Ade, W. Tang, C. J. Brabec and J. Min, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3118 RSC .
B. Fan, Z. Zeng, W. Zhong, L. Ying, D. Zhang, M. Li, F. Peng, N. Li, F. Huang and Y. Cao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2466 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, W. Zhong, L. Ying, D. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Lin, R. Xia, F. Liu, H.-L. Yip, N. Li, Y. Ma, C. J. Brabec, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4100 CrossRef .
X. Li, F. Pan, C. Sun, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Du, J. Wang, M. Xiao, L. Xue, Z.-G. Zhang, C. Zhang, F. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 519 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10416 RSC .
H. J. Son, F. He, B. Carsten and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18934 RSC .
J. Wan, L. Zhang, Q. He, S. Liu, B. Huang, L. Hu, W. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909760 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, J. Wang, S. Chen, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2016, 34, 491 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, Z. Yao, K. Gao, X. Shi, L. Zuo, Z. Zhu, L. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801214 CrossRef .
X. Liao, F. Wu, Y. An, Q. Xie, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1600556 CrossRef .
X. Liao, X. Shi, M. Zhang, K. Gao, L. Zuo, F. Liu, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8258 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, W. Liu, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, D. Qian, J. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Xu, C. Yang, F. Gao, H. Zhu, F. Liu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1906324 CrossRef .
X. Chen, B. Kan, Y. Kan, M. Zhang, S. B. Jo, K. Gao, F. Lin, F. Liu, X. Peng, Y. Cao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909535 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. Yan, T. K. Lau, J. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701308 CrossRef .
T. Li, S. Dai, Z. Ke, L. Yang, J. Wang, C. Yan, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705969 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Ke, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Dai, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, Y. Lin, W. Ma, W. You and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704713 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xiao, T. Xiao, R. Zhu, C. Yan, Y. Fu, G. Lu, X. Lu, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9140 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jia, J. Wang, Y. Wu, M. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Tang, T. P. Russell and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef .
T. J. Aldrich, M. Matta, W. Zhu, S. M. Swick, C. L. Stern, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti, F. S. Melkonyan and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3274 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Hou, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li, R. Yu, B. Gao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800613 CrossRef .
X. Liao, Y. Cui, X. Shi, Z. Yao, H. Zhao, Y. An, P. Zhu, Y. Guo, X. Fei, L. Zuo, K. Gao, F. Lin, Q. Xie, L. Chen, W. Ma, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1507 RSC .
S. Dai, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, T. K. Lau, T. Li, K. Liu, Q. Ling, C. Wang, X. Lu, W. You and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1336 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, Q. Wei, J. Y. L. Lai, Z. Peng, H. K. Kim, J. Yuan, L. Ye, H. Ade, Y. Zou and H. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 3020 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Huang, I. Angunawela, J. Zhou, J. Du, A. Liebman-Pelaez, C. Zhu, Z. Zhang, L. Meng, Z. Xie, H. Ade and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906855 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, W. Gao, Y. Wang, T. Yang, R. Ma, G. Zhang, C. Zhong, W. Ma, H. Yan and C. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902155 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, J. Wang, Y. Yao, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 610 RSC .
Y. Lin, Q. He, F. Zhao, L. Huo, J. Mai, X. Lu, C.-J. Su, T. Li, J. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Wang and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Q. He, L. Huo, Y. Wu, T. C. Parker, W. Ma, Y. Sun, C. Wang, D. Zhu, A. J. Heeger, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4955 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Ma, W. You and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702125 CrossRef .
S. Dai, J. Zhou, S. Chandrabose, Y. Shi, G. Han, K. Chen, J. Xin, K. Liu, Z. Chen, Z. Xie, W. Ma, Y. Yi, L. Jiang, J. M. Hodgkiss and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Jiao, L. Huang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 28 RSC .
C. Li, H. Fu, T. Xia and Y. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900999 CrossRef .
J.-L. Bredas and K. N. Houk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, J. Romero, J. P. Olson, M. Degroote, P. D. Johnson, M. Kieferová, I. D. Kivlichan, T. Menke, B. Peropadre, N. P. D. Sawaya, S. Sim, L. Veis and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 10856 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Butler, G. Sai Gautam and P. Canepa, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 19 CrossRef .
M.-Y. Sui, Z.-R. Yang, Y. Geng, G.-Y. Sun, L. Hu and Z.-M. Su, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900258 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brückner, F. Würthner, K. Meerholz and B. Engels, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4 CrossRef .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sanchez and W. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kurth, G. Stefanucci, C. O. Almbladh, A. Rubio and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 035308 CrossRef .
D. Rigby, H. Sun and B. E. Eichinger, Polym. Int., 1997, 44, 311 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Marrink, H. J. Risselada, S. Yefimov, D. P. Tieleman and A. H. D. Vries, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7812 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Jones, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2015, 87, 897 CrossRef .
S. J. Marrink and A. E. Mark, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6122 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Marrink and D. P. Tieleman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6801 RSC .
C.-K. Lee and C.-W. Pao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11224 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peter and K. Kremer, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4357 RSC .
O. A. von Lilienfeld, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4164 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, S. U. Ryu, S. A. Park, K. Choi, T. Kim, D. Chung and T. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904545 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leventis, T. N. Chmovzh, E. A. Knyazeva, Y. Han, M. J. Heeney, O. A. Rakitin and H. Bronstein, Polym. Chem., 2019, 11, 581–585 RSC .
Y.-J. Cheng, C.-H. Chen, Y.-J. Ho, S.-W. Chang, H. A. Witek and C.-S. Hsu, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5484 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, A. Marks, M. S. Little, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 48, 1596 RSC .
G. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Z. Li, W. Ma, Y. Huang, L. Huo, X. Guo, M. Zhang, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3449 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nketia-Yawson, H. S. Lee, D. Seo, Y. Yoon, W. T. Park, K. Kwak, H. J. Son, B. Kim and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3045 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, B. Yang, D. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, Q. Wang, C. He and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2015, 49, 120 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. A. Uddin, B. Jang, W. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 2993 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800868 CrossRef .
H. H. Gao, Y. Sun, Y. Cai, X. Wan, L. Meng, X. Ke, S. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Xia, N. Zheng, Z. Xie, C. Li, M. Zhang, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901024 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Li, J. Yang, W. Xue, S. Feng, J. Song, Z. Tang, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901280 CrossRef .
S. Feng, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Bi, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703527 CrossRef .
R. Geng, X. Song, H. Feng, J. Yu, M. Zhang, N. Gasparini, Z. Zhang, F. Liu, D. Baran and W. Tang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, C. Zhang, Z. Bi, Y. Liu, P. Jiang, S. Ming, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3098 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, L. Yang, Z. Hu, Z. Zhang, J. Cao, H. Wang, J. Yu and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5458 RSC .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Geng, G.-Y. Sun and Z.-M. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2125 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Janssen and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1847 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Bredas, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 17 RSC .
L. Zhu, Z. Tu, Y. Yi and Z. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4888 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. Piliego, B. Kim, D. A. Poulsen, B. Ma, D. A. Unruh and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2325 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 181 RSC .
W.-W. Zhang, W.-L. Mao, Y.-X. Hu, Z.-Q. Tian, Z.-L. Wang and Q.-J. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9997 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Ma, L. Ye, Y. Qin, Y. Xu, X. Liu, Y. Wu, W. Zhao, H. Ade, H. Yao and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 7929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, Y. Yang, L. Li, M. Bo, C. Peng and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18150 RSC .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin and H. Ade, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef .
B. Carsten, J. M. Szarko, H. J. Son, W. Wang, L. Lu, F. He, B. S. Rolczynski, S. J. Lou, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20468 CrossRef CAS .
M. Svensson, F. Zhang, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. C. Hummelen, J. M. Kroon, O. Inganäs and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 988 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan and B. R. Saunders, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 43286 RSC .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, S. Stoneking and W. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4413 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Ye, S. Li, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707170 CrossRef .
W. Gao, M. Zhang, T. Liu, R. Ming, Q. An, K. Wu, D. Xie, Z. Luo, C. Zhong, F. Liu, F. Zhang, H. Yan and C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800052 CrossRef .
M. Lia, Y. Zhoua, J. Zhangc, J. Songa and Z. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 1, 8889 RSC .
C. Poelking, M. Tietze, C. Elschner, S. Olthof, D. Hertel, B. Baumeier, F. Wurthner, K. Meerholz, K. Leo and D. Andrienko, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, K. Yamada, J. y. Tsutsumi and N. Sato, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075145 CrossRef .
M. Schwarze, K. S. Schellhammer, K. Ortstein, J. Benduhn, C. Gaul, A. Hinderhofer, L. Perdigon Toro, R. Scholz, J. Kublitski, S. Roland, M. Lau, C. Poelking, D. Andrienko, G. Cuniberti, F. Schreiber, D. Neher, K. Vandewal, F. Ortmann and K. Leo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2466 CrossRef .
P. Politzer and J. S. Murray, Rev. Comput. Chem., 1991, 2, 273 CAS .
J. S. Murray and P. Politzer, Comput. Mol. Sci., 2017, 7, 1326 Search PubMed .
R. G. Surbella, L. C. Ducati, K. L. Pellegrini, B. K. McNamara, J. Autschbach, J. M. Schwantes and C. L. Cahill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10843 CrossRef CAS .
K.
H. Kim, S. Lee, C. K. Moon, S. Y. Kim, Y. S. Park, J. H. Lee, J. Woo Lee, J. Huh, Y. You and J. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4769 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Dou, Y.-Q. Zheng, Z.-F. Yao, Z.-A. Yu, T. Lei, X. Shen, X.-Y. Luo, J. Sun, S.-D. Zhang, Y.-F. Ding, G. Han, Y. Yi, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15947 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. W. Bader, M. T. Carroll, J. R. Cheeseman and C. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 7968 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganäs, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, Y. Dong, C. Sun, Y. Wu, H. Yang, C. Cui and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4222 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Ran, J. A. Love, C. J. Takacs, A. Sadhanala, J. K. Beavers, S. D. Collins, Y. Huang, M. Wang, R. H. Friend, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, D. Qian, H. Zhang, Y. Qin, B. Xu, Y. Cui, Y. Yu, F. Gao and J. Hou, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 491 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, D. Qian, C. S. Ponseca, A. Honarfar, Y. Xu, J. Xin, Z. Chen, L. Hong, B. Gao, R. Yu, Y. Zu, W. Ma, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, F. Gao and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Bergqvist, H. Yao, Y. Xu, B. Gao, C. Yang, S. Zhang, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 768 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, C. Yan, Y. Wu, J. Wang, M. Qin, Q. An, J. Cao, L. Huo, F. Zhang, L. Ding, Y. Sun, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8021 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gasparini, M. Salvador, S. Strohm, T. Heumueller, I. Levchuk, A. Wadsworth, J. H. Bannock, J. C. de Mello, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. Baran, I. McCulloch and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700770 CrossRef .
B. M. Schulze, N. T. Shewmon, J. Zhang, D. L. Watkins, J. P. Mudrick, W. Cao, R. Bou Zerdan, A. J. Quartararo, I. Ghiviriga, J. Xue and R. K. Castellano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1541 RSC .
T. Aytun, L. Barreda, A. Ruiz-Carretero, J. A. Lehrman and S. I. Stupp, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1201 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, C. Yan, T.-K. Lau, J. Mai, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5822 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, X. Lu, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, X. Li, H. Lin, C. Zheng and S. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902078 CrossRef .
G. P. Kini, S. J. Jeon and D. K. Moon, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Q. Liao, G. Wang, Z. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and X. Guo, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3874 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Xie, B. Fan, G. Han, Y. Yi and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4873 RSC .
T. Kharandiuk, E. J. Hussien, J. Cameron, R. Petrina, N. J. Findlay, R. Naumov, W. T. Klooster, S. J. Coles, Q. Ai, S. Goodlett, C. Risko and P. J. Skabara, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Řezáč, K. E. Riley and P. Hobza, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 3466 CrossRef .
J. Řezáč, K. E. Riley and P. Hobza, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 2427 CrossRef .
S. F. Boys and F. Bernardi, Mol. Phys., 2006, 19, 553 CrossRef .
K. E. Riley, J. A. Platts, J. Řezáč, P. Hobza and J. G. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 4159 CrossRef CAS .
G. D’Avino, S. Duhm, R. G. Della Valle, G. Heimel, M. Oehzelt, S. Kera, N. Ueno, D. Beljonne and I. Salzmann, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1261 CrossRef .
G. Han, Y. Guo, X. Song, Y. Wangc and Y. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4852 RSC .
A. Irfan, A. Mahmood, A. G. Al-Sehemi and F. Ahmad, J. Mol. Struct., 2019, 1196, 169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Feng, M. Li, L. Wu, R. Hou, X. Xu, X. Chen and Z. Bo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3356 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mai, Y. Xiao, G. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Zhu, N. Zhao, X. Zhan and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802888 CrossRef .
H. Yao, L. Ye, J. Hou, B. Jang, G. Han, Y. Cui, G. M. Su, C. Wang, B. Gao, R. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Yi, H. Y. Woo, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700254 CrossRef .
S. Feng, M. Li, N. Tang, X. Wang, H. Huang, G. Ran, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, W. Zhang and Z. Bo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7006 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudi and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jo, S. Bae, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, D. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, N. Zheng, H. Lai, T. Liu, Z. Xie and F. He, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8044 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wadsworth, H. Bristow, Z. Hamid, M. Babics, N. Gasparini, C. W. Boyle, W. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. J. Thorley, M. Neophytou, R. S. Ashraf, J. R. Durrant, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808429 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Miller, E. Cho, M. J. Junk, R. Gysel, C. Risko, D. Kim, S. Sweetnam, C. E. Miller, L. J. Richter, R. J. Kline, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, A. Amassian, D. Acevedo-Feliz, C. Knox, M. R. Hansen, D. Dudenko, B. F. Chmelka, M. F. Toney, J. L. Bredas and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6071 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7692 CrossRef .
M. Nam, J. h. Kang, J. Shin, J. Na, Y. Park, J. Cho, B. Kim, H. H. Lee, R. Chang and D. H. Ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901856 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, D. Deng, Q. Wu, Y. Mi, C. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Zou, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. Zhou, X. Liu and Z. Wei, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900580 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. K. Chen, J. Xiao, P. C. Y. Chow, M. Ren, G. Kupgan, X. Jiao, C. C. S. Chan, X. Du, R. Xia, Z. Chen, J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zou, H. Yan, K. S. Wong, V. Coropceanu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, J. L. Bredas, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3943 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kupgan, X.-K. Chen and J.-L. Brédas, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 350 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, X.-K. Chen, A. Ashokan, Z. Zheng, M. K. Ravva and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705868 CrossRef .
J. Lee, E. M. Go, S. Dharmapurikar, J. Xu, S. M. Lee, M. Jeong, K. C. Lee, J. Oh, Y. Cho, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, S. K. Kwak and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18468 RSC .
C. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, S. B. Dkhil, X. Meng, X. Liu, O. Margeat, A. Yartsev, W. Ma, J. Ackermann, E. Wang and M. Fahlman, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 24 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chirvase, J. Parisi, J. C. Hummelen and V. Dyakonov, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1317 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. v. Bavel, E. Sourty, G. d. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
W.-R. Wu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-J. Su, K.-H. Wei, M.-S. Su, M.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Chen, W.-B. Su, C.-H. Su and A.-C. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, M. Zhang, M. Yuan, Y. Qian, Y. Sun and F. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700229 CrossRef .
T. Moench, P. Friederich, F. Holzmueller, B. Rutkowski, J. Benduhn, T. Strunk, C. Koerner, K. Vandewal, A. Czyrska-Filemonowicz, W. Wenzel and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501280 CrossRef .
S. Kouijzer, J. J. Michels, M. van den Berg, V. S. Gevaerts, M. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12057 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alessandri, J. J. Uusitalo, A. H. de Vries, R. W. A. Havenith and S. J. Marrink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3697 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, X. Jiao, Y. Yan, Z. Xie, G. Lu, J. Liu and Y. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807591 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Bin, X. Jiao, M. M. Wienk, H. Yan and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, R. Devine, C. Mayberry, B. Lei, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Borchert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1682 RSC .
C.-K. Lee, C.-W. Pao and C.-W. Chu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4124 RSC .
L. F. Drummy, R. J. Davis, D. L. Moore, M. Durstock, R. A. Vaia and J. W. P. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 907 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641 RSC .
M. H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900891 CrossRef .
D. Padula and A. Troisi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902463 CrossRef CAS .
D. Padula, J. D. Simpson and A. Troisi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 343 RSC .
W. Sun, M. Li, Y. Li, Z. Wu, Y. Sun, S. Lu, Z. Xiao, B. Zhao and K. Sun, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 2, 1800116 CrossRef .
J. Hachmann, R. Olivares-Amaya, A. Jinich, A. L. Appleton, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, L. R. Seress, C. Román-Salgado, K. Trepte, S. Atahan-Evrenk, S. Er, S. Shrestha, R. Mondal, A. Sokolov, Z. Bao and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 698 RSC .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Zheng, K. Yang, Q. Zhang, A. A. Shah, Z. Wu, Y. Sun, L. Feng, D. Chen, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, Y. Li and K. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay4275 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sahu, F. Yang, X. Ye, J. Ma, W. Fang and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17480 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed to this work equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yongjie Cui
	Yongjie Cui is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen and Xunfan Liao at College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. His research interest is focused on developing novel polymers and theoretical simulations for organic solar cells.

Xunfan Liao
	Prof. Dr Xunfan Liao received his PhD degree from Nanchang University under the supervision of Prof. Yiwang Chen and Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen in 2018 and worked as a visiting researcher at University of Washington during the period 2017–2018. From 2018 to 2020, he worked at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University as an associate professor. In 2020, he joined Jiangxi Normal University as professor. His current research interests focus on organic photovoltaic materials and devices.

Yiwang Chen
	Prof. Dr Yiwang Chen is a full professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University and Jiangxi Normal University. He received his PhD from Peking University in 1999 and conducted his postdoctoral work at Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz and Philipps-Universität Marburg in Germany on receiving an Alexander von Humboldt fellowship. He joined Nanchang University in 2004. He was honored by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2014. Since 2019, he has been serving as the Vice-president of Jiangxi Normal University and since 2004 he has been the director of Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC) at Nanchang University. He was the Dean of the College of Chemistry at Nanchang University during the period 2009–2019. His research interests include polymer solar cells, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis for zinc-air batteries, and intelligent elastomers. He has published more than 400 research papers and 30 invention patents as well as 4 books. His research project has been awarded the “second class prize of science and technology in universities of China” in 2019.

 	Fig. 1  Typical device structure diagrams of organic solar cells: Schottky junction, bilayer, and bulk heterojunction device.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of typical theoretical methods and the applications of computational chemistry in organic solar cell research.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The total energy scan of the rotamers of the adjacent conjugated units in PBT4T and PBTBT–TT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Torsional energy profiles for the bithiophene segments in PBDD4T and PBDD4T-2F. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Theoretical simulation of optimal N-alkyl chain conformations by potential energy surface scanning for (c) DTP-C8 and (d) DTP-BO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure, film absorption spectrum and absorption peak assignment of heavy metal donor oligomers Pt-BTD-T2, Pt-BTD-T3 and Pt-BTD-T4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) The D/A energy level matching requirements in the D–A structure system and the assignment of three possible transitions in the absorption spectrum. (c) Chemical structure of quad-rotor-shaped molecules (BFTT-N and BFTT–TN). Molar absorption coefficient of ITIC, BFTT-N and BFTT–TN in chloroform. Details of the contribution of electron transitions to the absorption spectra of ITIC, BFTT-N and BFTT–TN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The chemical structure and dipole structural calculations of PBB3 and PTB7. The ground (black arrow) and excited (red arrow) state dipole moments of the PBB and PTB monomer units. The axes (dotted lines) represent the center of mass in the x, y, and z directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) The chemical structure and optimized geometries with dipole moments for the asymmetric molecules α-IT-2F and α-IT-2OM; dipole moments for the regional parts (Th-IC, Th-2F-IC, and Th-2OM-IC) in the asymmetric molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (a) The exciton dissociation process occurs at the donor/acceptor interface, and the ESP difference can form an intermolecular IEF. ESP distributions on the polymer donor (DCBT-2F)2 model and the non-fullerene acceptor model IT-4F′. Average ESP statistics of each atom on the polymer and acceptor models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Chemical structures of the polymer donor, fullerene, and nonfullerene acceptors. ESP distributions of the donor and acceptors. The electron/hole density distributions of the lowest excited states without/with the additional electric field between PTO2 and PC71BM, as well as PTO2 and IT-4F; red and blue represent hole and electron densities, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
ΔE = E(AB) − E(A) − E(B).	(3)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Optimized geometries and binding energies of ITIC and ITCC dimers obtained using DFT-D. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Optimized geometries of TPTT-IC dimers and the corresponding intermolecular binding energies obtained using DFT-D calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Optimized geometries of possible combinations of asymmetric acceptor dimers and corresponding intermolecular binding energies for α-IT-2F and α-IT-2OM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Final configurations of (a) PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC and (b) PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC. Stacked DCI and BDT are shown in yellow. (c) Division into two constituent components of the electron-rich donor and electron-deficient acceptor moieties of PBDB-T, o-F-ITIC and m-F-ITIC. RDF between the backbone of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of (d) o-F-ITIC and (e) m-F-ITIC. Stacking states of PBDB-T and F-ITICs are shown and black arrows indicate the stacking sites. Stacking states between (f) the BDT unit of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of o-F-ITIC and (g) the BDD unit of PBDB-T and the DCI unit of m-F-ITIC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. gα,β(r) between system components before and after solvent evaporation for (h) 1D:2A and 2D:1A ternary systems. (i) A snapshot of atoms for the ternary 1D:2A system, in which PBDB-T, PC71BM, and ITIC-Th molecules are marked using red, blue, and green colors, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of P3HT and PCBM. Red beads denote the CG representation of P3HT monomers; a blue bead denotes the CG representation of a PCBM molecule. The intramolecular degrees of freedom between the CG particles of P3HT monomers are highlighted using the green line. (b) Morphologies of blends with the P3HT: PCBM weight ratios of 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3. P3HT domains are colored in red and PCBM domains are colored in blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The morphological evolution of the P3HT-PCBM mixture during solution-processing (P3HT chains are rendered in red while PCBM molecules are rendered in blue). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. The 2-dimensional number density and morphology of thin films of (d) PBDB-T:o-F-ITIC and (e) PBDB-T:m-F-ITIC from CGMD simulation. The thickness of the thin films was 5.5 nm. (f) Solvent-accessible surface area between the backbones of PBDB-T and F-ITICs. (g) End-to-end distance of PBDB-T in the thin film with F-ITICs. (h) RDF of DCI of F-ITICs and BDT of PBDB-T in thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed to this work equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
