Laser synthesized super-hydrophobic conducting carbon with broccoli-type morphology as a counter-electrode for dye sensitized solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR32082G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR32082G
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6730-6734Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLaser synthesized super-hydrophobic conducting carbon with broccoli-type morphology as a counter-electrode for dye sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Rohan 
            Gokhale
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shruti 
            Agarkar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joyashish 
            Debgupta
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Deodatta 
            Shinde
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Benoit 
            Lefez
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Abhik 
            Banerjee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jyoti 
            Jog
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mahendra 
            More
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Beatrice 
            Hannoyer
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Satishchandra 
            Ogale
          
        
      *a
aNational Chemical Laboratory, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr Homi Bhabha Road, Pune 411008, India
bCentre for Advanced Studies in Materials Science and Condensed Matter Physics, Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune 411008, India
cUniversité de Rouen, GPM UMR 6634 CNRS – BP 12, 76801, Etienne du Rouvray Cedex, France
Received 
      31st July 2012
    , Accepted 14th September 2012First published on 18th September 2012AbstractA laser photochemical process is introduced to realize superhydrophobic conducting carbon coatings with broccoli-type hierarchical morphology for use as a metal-free counter electrode in a dye sensitized solar cell. The process involves pulsed excimer laser irradiation of a thin layer of liquid haloaromatic organic solvent o-dichlorobenzene (DCB). The coating reflects a carbon nanoparticle-self assembled and process-controlled morphology that yields solar to electric power conversion efficiency of 5.1% as opposed to 6.2% obtained with the conventional Pt-based electrode.
Introduction
Owing to the diversity of functional forms and a commensurately broad range of physical properties, carbon is now beginning to make inroads into the domain of advanced device systems. Indeed it holds great promise as a material replacement for the currently used rare and expensive materials in the context of the emergent and next generation technologies. In recent years functional nanostructured carbon films have been examined for applications such as smart windows, sensitized solar cells, super-hydrophobic coatings, porous charge-storing networks in ultracapacitors, etc.1–4 Such films are grown by several techniques such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and arc discharge, as well as solution processing methods such as drop casting, electrophoretic deposition, spraying, etc.2,5–9 Most of these methods necessitate the use of graphitic carbon precursors, high temperatures and chemicals such as binders and surfactants.
In the present work we apply the recently introduced concept of UV-laser photochemical stitching to obtain conducting superhydrophobic carbon coatings on FTO-coated glass substrates with unique, hierarchical and process-tunable broccoli-type morphology. We demonstrate that these unique features and properties yield excellent results for solar conversion efficiency in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with such laser grown metal-free carbon films as a counter electrode.
Experimental
Synthesis of the carbon films
The synthetic experimental process involves a uniform spreading of a few drops (∼0.125 ml) of liquid DCB with the help of a Pasteur pipette on a clean glass (0.5 × 0.5 cm area) or FTO coated glass substrates (2 × 2 cm area) followed by irradiation of the liquid film by UV laser pulses (KrF excimer, λ = 248 nm, energy density ∼ 170 mJ cm−2, pulse duration 20 ns, pulse repetition rate = 10 Hz) for specific time periods up to 15 minutes. The film growth and formation process are studied at periodic intervals ranging from 15 seconds to 5 minutes. Fig. 1a depicts the photographic images of the process. The film morphology evolution was monitored by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), thickness measurement (Talystep) and Raman spectroscopy. The films were subsequently washed with acetone and dried in a warm air flow. The carbon films were studied for their hydrophobic properties. The films grown on FTO-coated glass were used as counter electrodes in DSSCs. The details of materials and equipment and solar cell fabrication protocol are given in ESI-I.†
 Fig. 1  (a) Photographic images of the synthesis steps, (b) mechanism and (c) time-dependent thickness measurement. 
Results and discussions
Growth of carbon broccoli forest-like morphology
Liquid halobenzenes (e.g., chlorobenzene and o-dichlorobenzene) when irradiated by UV laser pulses show a unique ability to generate pure carbon nanostructures. The 248 nm photons possess enough energy to homolytically cleave the carbon–halogen bonds in such compounds generating free radicals in the process. These free radicals are then “stitched up” together to form carbon nanoparticles by a process which we term as Pulsed Laser-induced Photochemical Stitching (PLPS).10
When the liquid coated substrates are irradiated by UV laser pulses the excess liquid is initially ablated and immediately decomposed. A bottom-up growth of the carbon film is then observed with an increased time of irradiation. The mechanism is depicted in Fig. 1b. With the substrate offering a solid support, a network of self-assembled carbon nanoparticles is gradually observed to grow into unique broccoli-like carbon morphology. The UV laser substrate surface excitation apparently provides the adequate adhesion of the carbon film to the glass or FTO:glass substrate surface (the usual role played by binders and chemicals in films). The thickness evolution of the carbon film as a function of irradiation time is shown in Fig. 1c. It is observed that there is an increase in the film thickness up to 3 minutes of laser irradiation after which its growth saturates. This can be attributed to the exhausted supply of the reactant (dichlorobenzene molecules) which could be trapped in the developing solid architecture. However morphological changes continue to appear with time. This sequence of events is summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Time evolving growth and morphology of carbon films: (a) 15 seconds, (b) 30 seconds, (c) 1 min, (d) 3 min, (e) 5 min (inset broccoli) and (f) a cross-section image of a 3 min film. 

Fig. 2a shows the morphology features of the initial formation of the carbon film after UV irradiation for 15 seconds. We observe that primarily carbon sheet like structures are formed as a result of the initial free radical photochemical stitching10 obtained by primary irradiation of a very thin layer of dichlorobenzene molecules supported on the substrate. As may be noted, this primary process is also accompanied by nucleation of small carbon nanoparticles. Further laser irradiation up to 30 seconds results in a significant increase in the thickness of the film and a patterned growth of carbon nanoparticles is observed (Fig. 2b).
Irradiation up to 1 minute is accompanied not only by an increase in the thickness of the film and the amount of carbon content, but also by a change in the morphology.
Interestingly, the carbon nanoparticles agglomerate into sponge like carbon balls (Fig. 2c). Continued laser irradiation of the film up to 3 minutes results in a phenomenal increase in its thickness (4.5–5 micron). This certainly appears to be due to an increasingly ordered vertical growth of the carbon microballs. A rapid reaction of the dichlorobenzene wetted surface leads to the buildup of this carbon assembly during the initial time period of the laser irradiation process. Interestingly the thickness growth of carbon saturates at this stage, because the supply of the reactant molecules is now depleted. The entire organization of the film gives it an appearance of a carbon broccoli-like structure (Fig. 2d). Further irradiation up to 5 minutes yields a film with similar thickness but a modified morphology that clearly resembles a denser broccoli (Fig. 2e). Fig. 2e reveals a more ordered and denser arrangement in the carbon assembly. This broccoli-like film morphology is formed by an arrangement of numerous units (highlighted in Fig. 2e). Each unit of the carbon broccoli-like arrangement has an approximate size of 2–3 μm. The nanoparticles that comprise each such unit of the broccoli-like structure have an approximate size of 40–50 nm [Fig. S1 (ESI-II†)]. Additional evidence of the vertical alignment of these carbon forests was obtained by focused ion beam (FIB) images of the cross-section (Fig. 2f and Fig. S3b and d†).
X-ray photoelectron measurements (XPS) demonstrate an increased oxygen content in the carbon film that is laser irradiated for a longer time interval (Fig. S4, ESI III†). It is also observed that exposure of the carbon film to excessive laser photons beyond the 15 minutes window results in a gradual loss of carbon by laser ablation. (Additional detailed discussion is provided in ESI-III.†)
Raman spectroscopy data (Fig. 3) for all the film growth cases exhibit the usual D (defect) band (∼1335 cm−1), which arises due to the breathing mode of κ-point phonons of A1g symmetry and the G band (∼1580 cm−1) that can be assigned to the E2g phonon mode of sp2 carbon atoms.11 The ID:IG ratio (around ∼1.1) does not appear to show a considerable change in its value with the time of laser irradiation i.e. it remains somewhat comparable during the entire growth process. The overall defect distribution remains constant over the entire range of processes. This clearly indicates that there is no basic structural change in the character of the carbon material which contributes to the process of film growth. The 2D peak obtained at ∼2680 cm−1 arises in graphitic carbons due to the second order overtones.
 Fig. 3  Raman spectroscopy data of carbon films obtained by irradiation for 15 s, 30 s, 1 min, 3 min, 5 min and 15 min. 
Importantly, the laser synthesized carbon films are electronically conducting in nature with respect to the carbon structures formed, rendering them functional in the device context. A detailed study of the electronic properties of these films was also carried out (ESI-IV†).
Having synthesized the films with a unique nano-assembled hierarchical morphology of pure and conducting carbon, we set out to explore its applicability in the domain of energy studies. There is considerable interest in replacing platinum and other precious metals from electrode systems of energy devices such as dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Carbon is considered to be a possible replacement material. We therefore decided to explore our coating for DSSC counter electrode application. The DSSC counter electrode must contact the electrolyte in organic solvent, hence it was necessary to first explore the properties of our coating for hydrophobicity and establish its expected superhydrophobic character based on the forest-like morphology. Needless to mention that such superhydrophobic conducting carbon coatings can find use in several other application domains as well.
There are several prior reports of superhydrophobic carbon coatings.12–14 Some of the best surfaces are generated on vertically aligned carbon nanotube forests which are grown by CVD.3,15 Since pure carbon systems do not show the desired nature under many circumstances, a fluorine containing compound/polymer (e.g. PTFE) or a semiconductor like ZnO are coated on such rough carbon surfaces.3,16,17 Such hybrid systems offer very good results in this context. It must however be noted that most of the superhydrophobic systems reported to date have been prepared by fairly tedious procedures. The photochemically generated carbon films highlighted in our work exhibit remarkable superhydrophobicity with contact angle reaching up to a high value of 167 ± 2°. Interestingly, as shown, the laser provides us with a tool to manipulate the hydrophobic character of this system.
As seen in Fig. 4, the hydrophobicity of the films increases initially with the time of irradiation because of the gradual formation of the carbon forest morphology and an accompanying increase in the surface roughness. However, with increasing time of irradiation the vertical alignment begins to breakdown.
 Fig. 4  Plot of the contact angle vs. the time of laser irradiation of the films. In the last case (15 + 3) the film was prepared by adding DCB and irradiating for 3 min on the original film that was irradiated for 15 min. This process resets the hydrophobicity. 
This leads to a systematic decrease in the hydrophobicity. The best superhydrophobic behavior is shown by the 3 min irradiated film (contact angle = 167 ± 2°) with a very low sliding angle (<4°) which implies the slippery nature of the surface according to the Cassie–Baxter model.18 Again, the 5 min irradiated film also shows superhydrophobicity (contact angle = 152 ± 2°), but the extent of hydrophobicity is less as compared to the 3 min film, as also revealed by a higher sliding angle (>40°). This higher tilt angle can be attributed to the partial filling of pores on the sample surface by the water droplet according to the Wenzel model. Additional details are discussed in ESI-V.†
Application as counter-electrodes in solar cells
One of the most important parameters of the cost and functioning of a DSSC is the counter electrode which is usually platinum (Pt) coated on FTO-glass. However the high cost of Pt and the high temperature treatment necessitated by its use act as a barrier to the cost effective implementation of the DSSC technology. Since carbon possesses the required properties of low production cost, good electronic conductivity and chemical stability, there have been several reports of the use of graphene, N-doped graphene, CNTs, and amorphous carbon, which show good conversion efficiency.19–30 In view of the interesting properties of our carbon films we examined their performance as counter electrodes for DSSCs. We studied herein laser-formed films with an irradiation time of 15 seconds (minimum) to 15 minutes (maximum). Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) (ESI-VI, Fig. S5†) was performed on all the carbon electrodes and compared with a Pt/FTO electrode to study the electrochemical catalytic activity of these electrodes. CV was measured using a conventional three electrode system which consisted of Pt as a counter electrode, Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode and the synthesized carbon films or Pt/FTO as a working electrode. Lithium perchlorate was used as a supporting electrolyte and acetonitrile as a solvent. Two pairs of peaks are observed for both materials, similar to what has been reported for comparable systems in the literature. The first pair of peaks represents the oxidation–reduction of I2/I3− and the second present at a more negative side represents oxidation–reduction of I−/I3−.26 The counter electrode in dye sensitized solar cells is responsible for catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−, hence the rate of this reaction is of prime importance in obtaining high efficiency in DSSCs. Carbon counter electrodes (prepared by varying the irradiation time) show catalytic activity comparable to that of a Pt counter electrode. The catalytic activity shows a systematically increasing trend with the increase in irradiation time. The electrochemical stability of the carbon film (best case-15 min) was measured by CV over several cycles. A reasonable stability was exhibited by the carbon film (Fig. S6, ESI-VI†).

Fig. 5 compares the I–V characteristics of a Pt/FTO counter electrode and those of laser formed carbon counter electrodes for different irradiation times. From the graph it is clear that as the irradiation time increases the fill factor of the DSSCs also increases. This can be attributed to the decrease in catalytic charge transfer resistance (Rct), which improves with irradiation time.20 This was studied using electrochemical impedance measurements (ESI-VII, Fig. S7†). Table 1 gives the photovoltaic performance of the carbon counter-electrodes.
 Fig. 5  
I–V curves for a laser formed carbon counter electrode and the conventional Pt electrode. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance using a laser formed carbon counter electrode compared with a conventional Pt electrode




Name

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)




Pt CE
0.76
14.7
55.6
6.2


15 s
0.77
14.11
25.39
2.8


1 min
0.78
12.82
37.7
3.8


3 min
0.75
12.22
42.5
3.9


5 min
0.77
13.14
41.4
4.2


10 min
0.77
13.02
44.3
4.4


15 min
0.79
13.86
46.1
5.1


20 min
0.66
8.37
53.7
2.9




An increasing porosity obtained with laser irradiation for higher irradiation time, as described before (ESI-III†), contributes to greater interaction between the electrolyte and the carbon. Evidence of the increasing access of the surface morphology of laser synthesized films to the electrolyte can be obtained from the spreading time evaluation with acetonitrile (an electrolyte used in DSSCs). Fig. 6 shows that the spreading time of the electrolyte shows a systematic decline for films exposed to UV pulses for greater time durations. This increased wettability in less time allows the electrolyte to access the pores easily and rapidly resulting in facile charge transfer kinetics and supporting the improved efficiency for the 15 min film. Simultaneously, the ruptures created in the carbon forest structures (Fig. S2†) due to excess photons may create defects or catalytic sites, which result in the gradually increasing efficiency with time of irradiation. Furthermore, as discussed previously, the XPS data reveal an increased oxygen content in films with a higher laser irradiation time. These oxygenated sites contribute to added catalytic centers in the carbon system additionally contributing to the systematically increasing efficiency.
 Fig. 6  Decreasing time of spreading of an electrolyte over the carbon film over an increasing time of irradiation. 
The efficiency for a carbon film prepared by irradiation for 20 minutes however decreases to 2.9%. This occurs due to loss of the generated carbon by laser ablation. Since the amount of carbon in the 20 min film is much less, there is a direct impact on its performance in the device.
To summarize the various properties of the carbon films, mainly electronic conductivity, hydrophobicity and photovoltaic performance, it would be useful to relate the three properties to the time dependent morphology evolution of the laser synthesized carbon films. It is quite clear that the carbon morphology does not completely take its form in the initial time period of formation, namely the 15 s case. Hence the conductivity, hydrophobicity and photovoltaic performance are all properties that exhibit low values at the beginning. With evolution of carbon film with irradiation time, the thickness of the film increases and conductivity values proportionally ascend. As the vertical orientation and thickness grows, the surface becomes rough, contributing to the increasing hydrophobicity. The hydrophobic behavior of the surface peaks at the 3 min case. With further irradiation, the surface morphology breaks down and the surface becomes more porous and accessible. However, the carbon density in the bottom layer of the electrode remains high, as confirmed by the increasing conductivity of the films. Finally the contribution of the film to solar conversion efficiency depends on conductivity and the catalytic activity of the carbon. The former increases systematically resulting in a corresponding rise in power conversion efficiency of the cells. The catalytic activity depends on the catalytic sites and access of the electrolyte. As we have discussed previously, the number of catalytic sites gradually increases (defects, oxygen content, etc.) and as the film surface becomes more porous and accessible to the electrolyte, the photovoltaic performance also shows an upward trend with time. The 15 min case shows higher performance in spite of the slightly less conductivity as compared to the 10 min case. This could be due to a higher degree of catalytic sites in this film.
We also investigated the films for their field emission properties and the preliminary results (discussed in ESI-IX†) are encouraging. We believe that the process can be fine tuned with added elemental inclusions to enhance these properties as well.
Before we conclude it is fruitful to comment on the possible technological utilization of such a process of making carbon film and the related cost issues. Towards this end, it is important to note that laser processes are now fairly common in the semiconductor and device industries, and methods such as laser scribing, laser etching, laser patterning and even laser CVD are a common place. CW and pulsed lasers of different wavelengths are used for these tasks. An interesting aspect of lasers is that they can deliver on different processing needs in an industry; hence, their evaluation in terms of cost issues is somewhat complicated and depends on the specifics of the total processing involved. Even in the solar cell industry lasers are used for scribing and patterning. Hence a process such as the one presented here could facilitate fabrication by direct writing in addition to the other functions a UV laser could perform. At this stage the work presented here emphasizes the science of growth and related possibilities. A full cost analysis and comparison with the ongoing use of precious metals is outside the scope of this paper. Finally, it is also useful to state that given the localized character of the method, it should not be too complicated to control the dispensation of the products by suitable rapid evacuation protocols with chemical pumping to limit any environmental issues.
Conclusions
Unique vertically aligned and hierarchically carbon nanoparticle-self assembled film morphology of conducting carbon with a broccoli-like structure is realized by a facile pulsed laser process involving irradiation of a supported haloaromatic organic film. Such films exhibit remarkable superhydrophobicity that can be easily process-tuned. Given the electronically conducting and porous nature of the carbon films, we explored their application as counter electrodes in dye sensitized solar cells. The laser generated carbon on FTO-glass surfaces demonstrates excellent catalytic activity, which is almost comparable to the established Pt-coated FTO counter electrodes. Furthermore, this new laser induced photochemical deposition process can be implemented on several substrates to generate different morphologies of carbon.
Acknowledgements
Rohan Gokhale would like to thank CSIR/UGC for fellowships. Thanks are due to Meenal Deo and Dattakumar Mhamane for their valuable help in the experimentation. S. Ogale acknowledges the UK-India APEX program for funding. The authors acknowledge the support of Dr B. B. Kale and S. Warule for FE-SEM of the samples at C-MET, Pune.
Notes and references
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, L. Pan, T. Lu, T. Xu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14869 RSC .
K. K. S. Lau, J. Bico, K. B. K. Teo, M. Chhowalla, G. A. J. Amaratunga, W. I. Milne, G. McKinley and K. Gleason, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1701–1705 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
T. Friedmann, K. McCarty, J. Barbour, M. Siegal and D. Dibble, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 1643 CrossRef CAS .
C. Journet, W. Maser, P. Bernier, A. Loiseau, M. Lamyde la Chapelle, S. Lefrant, P. Deniard, R. Leek and J. Fischerk, Nature, 1997, 388, 756 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bardecker, A. Afzali, G. Tulevski, T. Graham, J. B. Hannon and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7226–7227 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pham, T. Cuong, S. Hur, E. Shin, J. Kim, J. Chung and E. Kim, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1945–1951 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gokhale, V. Thakare, S. Warule, B. Lefez, B. Hannoyer, J. Jog and S. Ogale, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 022130 CrossRef .
A. Ferrari and J. Robertson, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2004, 362, 2477 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Z. Yang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Yang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., 2003, 115, 4349–4352 CrossRef .
S. Li, H. Li, X. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9274–9276 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and D. Resasco, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 4792–4798 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, B. Tay, M. Shakerzadeh and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223106 CrossRef .
C. T. Hsieh, W. Y. Chen and F. L. Wu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1218–1224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, S. Lau, H. Yang, E. Leong, S. Yu and S. Prawer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7746–7748 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marmur, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8343–8348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, K. Li, Y. Luo, X. Guo, D. Li, M. Deng, S. Huang and Q. Meng, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2704–2708 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brennan, M. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. Gun'ko, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CAS .
E. Ramasamy, W. Lee, D. Lee and J. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173103 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, X. Liu, K. Li, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Li, W. Song, L. Chen and Q. Meng, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 596–598 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, X. Lin, T. Wang, J. Qiu and T. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2308–2315 CAS .
A. Kay and M. Gratzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roy-Mayhew, D. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203 CrossRef CAS .
K. Imoto, K. Takahashi, T. Yamaguchi, T. Komura, J. Nakamura and K. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 459–469 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, Y. Wang, R. Dong, W. C. Tsai, K. W. Tsai, C. C. Wang, Y. H. Chen, R. Vittal, J. J. Lin and K. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4067–4073 RSC .
G. Wang, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 568–573 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Luo, Z. Yu, M. Deng, D. Li and Q. Meng, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yen, C. Hsieh, C. Teng, M. Hsiao, P. Liu, C. Ma, M. Tsai, C. Tsai, Y. Lin and T. Chou, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2725–2728 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and equipment details, solar cell fabrication protocol, electrolyte spreading time measurement details, XPS spectra, electronic study, film adhesion test detailed analysis and field emission results. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr32082gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photographic images of the synthesis steps, (b) mechanism and (c) time-dependent thickness measurement.	 

 	Fig. 2  Time evolving growth and morphology of carbon films: (a) 15 seconds, (b) 30 seconds, (c) 1 min, (d) 3 min, (e) 5 min (inset broccoli) and (f) a cross-section image of a 3 min film.	 

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectroscopy data of carbon films obtained by irradiation for 15 s, 30 s, 1 min, 3 min, 5 min and 15 min.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plot of the contact angle vs. the time of laser irradiation of the films. In the last case (15 + 3) the film was prepared by adding DCB and irradiating for 3 min on the original film that was irradiated for 15 min. This process resets the hydrophobicity.	 

 	Fig. 5  
I–V curves for a laser formed carbon counter electrode and the conventional Pt electrode.	 

Pt CE	0.76	14.7	55.6	6.2
15 s	0.77	14.11	25.39	2.8
1 min	0.78	12.82	37.7	3.8
3 min	0.75	12.22	42.5	3.9
5 min	0.77	13.14	41.4	4.2
10 min	0.77	13.02	44.3	4.4
15 min	0.79	13.86	46.1	5.1
20 min	0.66	8.37	53.7	2.9

 	Fig. 6  Decreasing time of spreading of an electrolyte over the carbon film over an increasing time of irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and equipment details, solar cell fabrication protocol, electrolyte spreading time measurement details, XPS spectra, electronic study, film adhesion test detailed analysis and field emission results. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr32082g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
