Intercalation and exfoliation chemistries of transition metal dichalcogenides  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03727C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03727C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15417-15444Intercalation and exfoliation chemistries of transition metal dichalcogenides

        
          
            Qingyong 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Mei†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiehong 
            Cao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuxin 
            Tang
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zhiyuan 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, P. R. China. E-mail: zhiyzeng@cityu.edu.hk; zyzeng08@gmail.com;  Web: http://https://zenglabcityu.weebly.com/ Fax: +852-34420892;   Tel: +852-34422318
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, 18 Chaowang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014, P. R. China
cInstitute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering, University of Macau, 999078, P. R. China
Received 
      4th April 2020
    , Accepted 19th May 2020First published on 19th May 2020AbstractLarge-scale preparation of single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) is significant due to their potential applications, such as catalysis, electronics, energy storage and conversion. In order to meet the application requirements, TMD nanosheets need to be mass-produced with a high yield, uniform size, and good quality. Several strategies have been developed to prepare 2D TMDs, such as mechanical exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition, and liquid exfoliation. Liquid exfoliation, which can be categorized into direct exfoliation and intercalation-based exfoliation, is a promising method since it can be employed for mass production, structural modification, and fabrication of 2D TMD composites. Intercalation can expand the interlayer spacing, weaken the van der Waals force, and change the structure of the host materials. Exfoliation can break the van der Waals force between the adjacent layers by exerting certain external strengths. However, the detailed mechanisms of both intercalation and exfoliation are not clear; this limits their potential applications. This review aims to provide a comprehensive summary about the intercalation and exfoliation processes of layered materials as well as their properties and applications. Our main attention is the underlying reaction mechanism during chemical or electrochemical intercalation in addition to the exfoliation process. The applications of 2D TMDs fabricated from exfoliation are also introduced in this review. In the last part, we provide some perspectives on the fundamental research and practical applications of TMDs.Qingyong ZhangQingyong Zhang received his BS and MS from Harbin Institute of Technology in 2014 and 2016, respectively. Then, he worked for China Aviation Lithium Battery Co., Ltd. and Shenzhen BAK Battery Co., Ltd. from 2016 to 2019, focusing on the analysis of lithium-ion batteries. Currently, he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Asst. Prof. Zhiyuan Zeng. He is focusing on the electrochemical intercalation strategy for the preparation and applications of transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets.Liang MeiLiang Mei received his BE in Jianghan University in 2014. After receiving his MS from South China University of Technology in 2017, he worked as a Research Assistant in Prof. Xiao-Ming Chen's group in Sun Yat-sen University. Then, he moved to the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the City University of Hong Kong in 2019 to pursue his PhD under the supervision of Asst. Prof. Zhiyuan Zeng. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and their composites.Xiehong CaoDr Xiehong Cao received his BE from Zhejiang University, China (2008). He completed his PhD under Prof. Hua Zhang and then worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013–2015). He joined the Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT, China) in 2015. He is now the director of 2D Functional Materials Lab, Institute of Advanced Materials Research Center, ZJUT. He was selected as a “Highly Cited Researcher” in 2018 and 2019. His current research interests include the synthesis of two-dimensional nanomaterials for metal–air batteries, Zn-ion batteries, and water desalination via capacitive deionization.Yuxin TangDr Tang Yuxin is an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering (IAPME) at the University of Macau. He obtained his BS and MS at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and graduated from Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) with a PhD in Materials Science (2013). After his postdoctoral fellow training at NTU, he joined IAPME as an Assistant Professor in 2018. His research interests include solid-state and fast-charging energy storage devices and the development of real-time electrochemical-reaction-monitoring techniques.Zhiyuan ZengDr Zhiyuan Zeng obtained his BE and ME from Central South University, Zhejiang University, in 2006 and 2008, respectively. He completed his PhD under Prof. Hua Zhang at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013). He joined Dr Haimei Zheng's group as a Postdoctoral Fellow at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2013–2017). After working for Applied Materials Inc. in Silicon Valley (2017–2019), he joined the City University of Hong Kong as an Assistant Professor in 2019. His current research interest focuses on battery intercalation strategies involving the preparation of single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and their applications in energy storage, catalysis, etc.
1. Introduction
Since graphene was first isolated from graphite by means of Scotch tape in 2004,1 many excellent electronic, optical, mechanical, and thermal properties have been discovered for this novel single-layer material with a thickness of only one carbon atom.2 However, the lack of an obvious bandgap structure has limited its applications in optical and electronic devices. Hence, a large family of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) materials has been developed in the past decade;3 as typical inorganic graphene-analogous 2D nanomaterials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted significant research interests ranging from synthesis to applications.4–8 Each TMDs layer is composed of a single layer of a transition metal atom sandwiched between two layers of chalcogen atoms (S, Se, or Te). Similar to graphene, TMD layers are combined together by van der Waals forces, thereby allowing the bulk material to be exfoliated into single or few layers. Many methods have been reported to date for the fabrication of 2D TMDs with atomic thickness, such as micromechanical cleavage using Scotch tape to cleave thin flakes from bulk layer materials. Many devices fabricated using this simple technique have shown excellent performance,9 but the low yields and nonuniformity hamper its practical applications in industries. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is another well-known method to prepare high-quality single- or few-layer TMDs, however, the harsh experimental conditions (high temperatures and vacuum) with complicated operations increase the cost by a large amount. Nevertheless, liquid intercalation and exfoliation are promising due to the doping of various species,10 tunable properties,11–14 controllable process,15–17 simple operation and high yield,18,19 which can be employed for mass production20 as well as structural modification of the prepared 2D TMDs under milder conditions. Exfoliated TMD nanosheets show unconventional optical,8,21,22 electronic,23 energy conversion and storage properties,24–26 which promote their potential applications in semiconductor devices, catalysis, and metal-ion batteries.7,27 In order to meet the application requirements, TMD nanosheets should be capable of mass production with a high yield, uniform size, and good quality. However, the detailed mechanism during intercalation and exfoliation is not clear, which limits their potential development and applicability. Here, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview that summarizes the recent progress made in liquid intercalation and exfoliation technologies, as shown in Fig. 1. From the schematic outlook of intercalation and exfoliation involving TMDs, foreign species can be intercalated into the TMDs by chemical or electrochemical intercalation, the intercalants include ions, inorganic molecules, organic molecules and metal atoms. First, we will discuss the mechanism and controlling factors during chemical or electrochemical intercalation processes in solution, a detailed comparison and analysis of each method will be described. Second, we shall analyze the process of exfoliation, such as the effects of the exfoliating solvent, selection of ultrasonic power, etc. Third, the morphology of the exfoliated TMDs, structural changes during intercalation and exfoliation processes, and state-of-the-art applications using these exfoliated 2D materials will be reviewed. Finally, insight into the challenges faced by exfoliated 2D TMD materials will be presented, and an outlook for future opportunities will be given.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the intercalation and exfoliation with the intercalation method and a summary of the species. 
2. Intercalation
Intercalation is the reversible inclusion or insertion of a molecule (or ion) into materials with layered structures. In this process, the layered material is the host and the species that intercalate into the host are guests or intercalants. Some TMDs are used as electrode materials to store energy due to the intercalation of intercalants, particularly when the intercalants are alkali metal ions (such as Li+, Na+, or K+). On the other hand, bulk TMDs can be exfoliated more easily right after intercalation, which is because intercalation-induced expansion can weaken the van der Waals force between the two adjacent layers. Intercalation has several advantages such as modifying the properties of TMDs as well as inducing structural changes. In order to prepare 2D nanosheets by exfoliation, intensive attention has been devoted toward structural changes occurring during intercalation. Correlation between the interlayer space and intercalant size/amount, phase transition during intercalation, and chemical reaction during intercalation are reviewed in this section.
2.1 Mechanism of intercalation
Intercalation has two main categories: chemical intercalation and electrochemical intercalation.

2.1.1 Chemical intercalation. 
The schematic of chemical intercalation is shown in Fig. 2, it can be simply expressed using eqn (1). Here, I represents the intercalant, which can be a molecule, cation, or anion. T is a transition metal and X is a chalcogen atom. Further, n is the number of intercalants. After the reaction, the intercalants migrate from the edge of TX2 particles toward the center.28 nI + TX2 → InTX2(1)
 Fig. 2  Schematic of chemical intercalation, which can be assisted by sonication or heating, thereby significantly reducing the reaction time. 
There are many types of chemical intercalations: the guest intercalates directly into the host,29 the guest intercalates into restacked TMDs,30–32 the guest intercalates into the host after solvent intercalation,28 and the guest and solvent cointercalate into the host.33
In general, chemists are interested in the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of a reaction, since they are the key factors that control reactions. Evans et al.34 conducted a detailed research on the kinetic properties of cobaltocene intercalation into TMDs (ZrS2, 2H SnS2, 2H SnSe2, 2H TaS2, 2H NbSe2, and TiS2). They determined the rate constant by fitting the extent of the reaction to the Avrami–Erofeev equation (eqn (2)) and estimated the “order” of the reaction by using the Sharp–Hancock plot (eqn (3)). Here, α is the extent of the reaction, t is the reaction time, and k and m are related to the rate of nucleation and dimensionality of nuclei growth, respectively. α(t) = 1 − exp(−(kt)m)(2) ln(−ln(1 − α(t))) = mln(kt)(3)
They also explored the effects of temperature, solvent, guest concentration, and size of the host lattice on the rate constant; they found that the rate constant is independent of the guest concentration. Mortazavi et al.35 found that the octahedral and tetrahedral sites were the intercalation sites of 2H and 1T MX2 for Li+/Na+. Here, the letters H and T stand for hexagonal and trigonal, respectively; further, the numbers before the letters indicate the number of layers in the unit cell.36 The octahedral site was more favorable for lithiation than the tetrahedral site in MoS2. Fan et al.37 investigated the migration barrier of Li+/Na+ from one octahedral site to an adjacent one through a tetrahedrally coordinated intermediate site. It should be noted that Li+ has a higher migration rate than Na+ in TMDs.38,39 When the interlayer spacing is increased by about 35% from its equilibrium value, the diffusion of Na+ and Mg2+ becomes more facile than the diffusion of Li+, since the interlayer distance is a critical factor that affects the diffusion process.40


2.1.2 Electrochemical intercalation. 
Electrochemical intercalation is a process occurring in metal-ion batteries when the anode is discharged or the cathode is charged. Several published works have investigated the electrochemical properties of TMDs as electrode materials with specific attention paid to the specific capacity, rate capability, and cycle performance; however, only a few studies have focused on the intercalation process utilized for exfoliation. Zeng et al. introduced the electrochemical intercalation method for the exfoliation of TMD nanosheets,15,16,41 and it has been widely followed. It should be noted that electrochemical intercalation consists of guest intercalation into the host only as well as guest and solvent cointercalation into the host.42 With regard to the cycle performance and reversibility of the battery, cointercalation is a disadvantage. However, cointercalation becomes an advantage for exfoliation; this is because a large size of cointercalation solvent can expand the interlayer space and weaken the van der Waals interaction.
There are three types of electrochemical intercalation species, as shown in Fig. 3. The first one is graphite, which is popular as an anode in baterries.43–46 As shown in Fig. 3a, the intercalants travel in the electrolyte via diffusion and electromigration; the former is induced by a concentration gradient and the latter, an electric field. Intercalants get transported from the electrolyte to the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer on which the electrochemical reaction occurs, according to which charge transfer occurs; this process is driven by the overpotential that follows the Butler–Volmer law. Eventually, the intercalants lose or gain some electrons and subsequently enter the interlayer space; then, they diffuse from the edge to the center of the active particle. Electrochemical intercalation can be explained using an electrochemical model.47,48 Undoubtedly, the electrochemical model is suitable for electrochemical intercalation into bulk TMDs and graphite-like materials. The advantage of electrochemical intercalation is that its reaction rate and extent of reaction can be controlled by the current and discharge capacities. However, the intercalation of alkali metal ions comprises two stages, as shown in eqn (4) and (5). Here, eqn (4) stands for stage one, at which the variations in the cutoff voltage depend on the TMD species; eqn (5) stands for stage two, at which the normal cutoff voltage is ∼0.05 V. If TS2 (where T is a transition metal and S is sulfur) is discharged to ∼0.05 V, the overall process of discharge and charge becomes irreversible, which will be comprehensively discussed in Section 2.2. These two equations fit MoS2 (ref. 49) and TiS2 (ref. 50) very well, but may not apply to other TMDs, because NbS2 and ZrS2 can maintain their layered structures instead of dissociating when the voltage discharge goes to ∼0.05 V.51 TS2 + xLi+ +xe− → LixTS2(4) LixTS2 + (4 − x)Li+ + (4 − x)e− → Li2S + T(5)
 Fig. 3  Schematic of electrochemical intercalation into TMDs. (a) Intercalation of metal ions (such as Li+, Na+, and K+). (b) Intercalation of anions and radicals (such as SO42−, OH˙, and O˙). (c) Intercalation of ammonium ion. 
The second electrochemical intercalation species, in which the radicals or anions can intercalate into TS2, comprise two steps. First, a low voltage can produce OH˙ and O˙ radicals by oxidizing H2O in the H2SO4 solution. Second, the radicals or SO42− intercalate into TS2,52,53 as shown in Fig. 3b. The third electrochemical intercalation species is ammonium ion (Fig. 3c). In summary, there are several problems that persist in TMD intercalation, such as establishing the rate-determining step and determining the diffusion path in the TMDs. All these problems need to be resolved in the future.

2.2 Intercalation of alkali metal ions
Examples of alkali metal ions are Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+, and Fr+. Among them, Li+, Na+, and K+ are usually used as the intercalants to intercalate into bulk TMDs or even multilayer TMDs. Alkali metal ions can not only expand the interlayer spacing and weaken the van der Waals force (facilitating TMD exfoliation), but also convert electrical energy into chemical energy during electrochemical intercalation. This is because as current flows from an external circuit into the battery, alkali metal ions are driven to migrate and intercalate into the TMDs, which corresponds to conversion of electrical energy into chemical energy.
Lithium intercalation via n-butyllithium (n-BuLi) has been extensively studied.29,54–58 In brief, TS2 powder was soaked in an excess amount of n-BuLi in hexane. The reaction mixture was filtered, and the residual solid was washed with dry hexane to remove the residual n-BuLi. Most reports have compared the properties of TMDs before and after intercalation, and only a few reports have investigated the in situ characterization of n-BuLi inserted into bulk TMDs. Researchers have attempted to understand the reaction mechanism by theoretical calculations. Fan et al.37 calculated the formation enthalpy of Li+ inserted into TMDs (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2, NbS2, NbSe2, TaS2, and TaSe2) with the formation of LixTX2. The obtained results show that when additional ions are inserted into the TMDs, LixTX2 becomes more stable. For 0 < x < 0.5, the phase transition of AxTS2 (A = Li/Na; T = Mo/W) from 2H to 1T usually occurs when x = ∼0.3 to 0.4. Even though the 2H phase is more stable than the 1T phase in the normal state, the 2H phase can get converted into the 1T phase if excess charge is added,59 which implies that the structure of the unit cell changes from trigonal prismatic (2H) to octahedral (1T).
In general, n-BuLi-intercalated LixTS2 is used to exfoliate and produce 2D TMD nanosheets. In order to easily exfoliate the TMDs, the amount of lithium inserted should exceed a certain value. Dines et al.29 realized the saturated Li content in bulk TMDs at room temperature and found that it took several days to fully intercalate n-BuLi in MoS2; however, the content of lithium in LixMoS2 was difficult to determine. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that upon intercalation, the (002) peaks downshifted from the 2θ value of 14.24° to 14.06°, which corresponded to d-spacings of 0.62 and 0.63 nm, respectively. It is well known that ultrasound can accelerate the reactions by acoustic cavitation, which locally induces high temperatures and high pressures.60 These effects can increase the rate of reaction between n-BuLi and MoS2 and induce phase transformation as well as electrochemical intercalation.58,61 Sonication-assisted intercalation can shorten the intercalation time into several hours,58 as well as produce 2D MoS2 with the same quality and morphology as compared to that obtained from the conventional intercalation of lithium. However, prolonged sonication can drastically decrease the lateral size of the TMD nanosheets. In order to exfoliate LixWS2, the value of x must be greater than 1. However, at room temperature, the lithium content is only 0.3 even when WS2 gets fully intercalated; hence, intercalation should be conducted at elevated temperatures.57 After intercalation (x = 0.35), LixWS2 maintains its 2H structure with lattice parameters a = 0.315 nm and c = 0.617 nm. However, for MoS2, the molybdenum coordination changed from 2H to 1T with lattice parameters a = 0.332 nm and c = 0.6312 nm for intercalation amount of x = 1.45.
As compared to Li+, Na+ and K+ are less frequently used in exfoliation chemistry, because the ionic radii of Na+ (0.102 nm) and K+ (0.138 nm) are larger than that of Li+ (0.076 nm). Shuai et al.40 reported that Na+ and K+ intercalations are more difficult than Li+ unless the interlayer spacing of TMDs is increased. Na+/K+ intercalation can expand the lattice along the c-axis direction to a large extent. Because NaxTS2 and KxTS2 interact more actively with H2O than LixTS2, both NaxTS2 and KxTS2 can be exfoliated more facilely than LixTS2. In order to match the interlayer spacing and ionic radius of Na+ and K+, a two-step intercalation process is employed: first, MoS2 is pre-exfoliated by N2H2 and then pre-exfoliated MoS2 is intercalated by A+C10H8− (A = Li, Na, or K) (Fig. 4).62 The (002) peaks of the intercalated samples shift toward lower angles as compared to those of pristine MoS2, indicating the expansion of the lattice along the c-axis. The c values of the Li+-, Na+-, and K+-intercalated samples are 0.618, 0.705, and 0.792 nm, respectively. The intercalation of electrochemical alkali metal ions employs TMDs as the working electrode and alkali metal foil as the counter electrode; here, alkali metal ions diffuse from the counter electrode toward the working electrode during intercalation. The products from the electrochemical intercalation of lithium into TMDs are determined by the cutoff voltage.49,51,63 If MoS2 as the anode is discharged to 0.9 V, eqn (4) can be used to represent the lithiation reaction. Theoretically speaking, this reaction is a reversible reaction in which MoS2 can achieve its original state after delithiation; however, normally, it is only partially reversible since the initial coulombic efficiency can hardly reach 100%.50,64 When the cutoff voltage is ∼0.05 V, eqn (5) represents the lithiation reaction. After the reaction, Li2S/sulfur becomes the main redox couple. It is evident that when MoS2 is lithiated to ∼0.05 V, LixMoS2 is already decomposed and therefore the following exfoliation cannot be realized. Therefore, MoS2 lithiated to nearly 0.9 V (ref. 15) in the intercalation-based exfoliation.
Lithium intercalation induces the phase transformation of MoS2. Upon intercalation, the intensity of the (002) peak in the XRD pattern monotonically varies as a function of x and its position remains unchanged; this implies that the MoS2 host lattice undergoes a first-order phase transition, where the Mo coordination changes from the 2H to 1T structure.61 The driving mechanism for this structural change was discussed in terms of charge transfer from lithium to the host. Phase transition from 2H to 1T was also observed by in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM)38 and Raman techniques.65,66 Further transition can occur from the 1T phase to the distorted octahedral symmetry (dT) with gradual Li+ intercalation. Theoretical calculations performed by using the nudged elastic band (NEB) method revealed that the stability of monolayer LiMoS2 is in the following order: 2H < 1T < 1dT. This order for monolayer MoS2 is 1T < 2H < 1dT. This can explain why 1T MoS2 is a metastable phase.65 Electrochemical intercalation of lithium into TiS2 was studied by operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and theoretical calculations in the voltage ranges of ∼3.0 to 1.4 V (stage one) and ∼3.0 to 0.05 V (stage one and stage two).50Eqn (4) occurs at ∼3.0 to 1.4 V. XAS shows the pre-edge peak at 4970 eV and the strong absorption peak at 4989 eV. The pre-edge peak gradually decreases during discharge from 3.0 to 1.4 V, indicating that the local environment of Ti atoms got more symmetrical. However, there is no phase transition as both TiS2 and LiTiS2 are in the 1T phase. The pre-edge peak and strong absorption peak could not go back to their original positions after charging to 3.0 V because the process is partially reversible. When discharged to 0.05 V, the XAS data show a trend similar to that when discharged to 1.4 V. Further, the final products are proven to be LiS2 and Ti, after conducting S K-edge XAS analysis and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, which is consistent with an earlier work.51
Regarding sodium intercalation, poly(ethylene oxide)-intercalated MoS2 (PEO-MoS2), prepared by restacking, was employed as the host for electrochemical intercalation of sodium. The increased interlayer spacing facilitates diffusion,67 which agrees with an earlier prediction.40In situ XRD and TEM tracking of MoS2 sodiation showed that the electrochemical intercalation of Na+ caused the phase transition from 2H to 1T (Fig. 4).39,68 The migration rate of Na+ derived from the area of Na-intercalated domain in MoS2 was ∼3 to 7 nm s−1.39 K+ intercalation is similar to lithium intercalation; it also induces a structural change. Upon discharge, the amount of K+ intercalated into MoS2 increases with a decrease in voltage. As the voltage decreases from the open-circuit voltage (OCV) to 0.9 V, the (002) peak of the XRD pattern downshifts from 14.5° to 10.8° together with the appearance of a new peak at 21.6°, which can be assigned to K0.4MoS2. As the voltage keeps decreasing, the (002) peak upshifts slightly to 11.0°, which may be induced by structural distortion.69 During K+ insertion and extraction cycles, the interlayer distance increased to 0.79 nm and remained unchanged.69 First-principles calculations demonstrated the expansion and contraction of a-axis during K+ insertion.70 The DFT calculations show that the formation enthalpy of K1.5MoS2 (Kx(MoS2)1−x, x = 0.6) is the lowest among Kx(MoS2)1−x (0 < x < 1), which means that K1.5MoS2 is the most stable.
 Fig. 4  XRD patterns of intercalated TMDs. (a) Intercalation of alkaline metal ions into the interlayer-spacing-expanded MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014. (b) Chemical intercalation of lithium into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016. (c) Electrochemical intercalation of sodium into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014. (d) Electrochemical lithium intercalation into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018. 
2.3 Intercalations of other ions (transition metal ions, anions, and ammonium ions)
Besides the intercalation of alkali metal ions, other ions can also be intercalated. For example, magnesium ion, zinc ion, and ammonium ion. The intercalation of these ions can be used for energy storage, modification of TMD structures, and tuning the electronic properties of TMDs for potential applications.
The intercalation energy barrier of magnesium ions is higher than those of sodium and lithium ions,40 even though the ionic radii of Mg2+ is smaller than that of Li+. Therefore, intercalation into TMDs is more difficult than just immersing the TMDs into the organic salts of magnesium solutions. The maximum magnesium content that could be obtained in layered TiS2 was 0.22 by the intercalation of di-n-butylmagnesium;72 further, the c-axis expanded from 0.5699 to 0.6127 nm, whereas the a-axis expanded from 0.3407 to 0.3488 nm.72,73 In addition to direct intercalation, Mg2+ can intercalate into MoS2 by restacking;74 during this restacking process, hydrated magnesium was intercalated into MoS2 with increased interlayer spacing, as proven by the XRD data. In addition, phase transformation from 2H to 1T also occurred with 90% of the 1T phase, which was proven by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data. Some TMDs have been used as the cathode in magnesium-ion batteries.75–79 Reactions occurring in the electrochemical intercalation of Mg2+ have been described using eqn (6) (ref. 76) and eqn (7).77 In eqn (7), Mg2+ intercalates along with the solvent (SL), which is called cointercalation.42 Li et al. were the first to report the phase transition from 2H to 1T during magnesium insertion and extraction; the 1T phase appeared and its content gradually increased until the end of first extraction.80 The phase transition of TiS2 was also induced by Mg intercalation. There are 4 phases in the overall intercalation; the lattice parameters are listed in Table 1.79 Both chemical intercalation with di-n-butylmagnesium and electrochemical intercalation produce heterogeneous products due to the poor diffusion ability.72,79 DFT calculations demonstrated that Mg atom migrated from an octahedral site into an adjacent octahedral site via a tetrahedral site, and the migration barrier decreased as the c-axis expanded.78 6MoS2 + 4Mg2+ + 8e+ → Mg4Mo6S12(6) [xMg2+ − ySL] + 2xe− + TiS2 → MgxSLyTiS2(7)
Table 1 Lattice parameters of different phases appearing during Mg intercalation




Phase
Ratio (Mg/TiS2)

a/nm

c/nm




Phase 1
0
0.34058(2)
0.56987(4)


Phase2
0.05
0.3416(3)
0.5903(7)


Phase3
0.17
0.3431(2)
0.6112(3)


Phase4
0.56
0.34934(5)
0.6123(1)




Zinc intercalation has sluggish kinetics, which is similar to that in magnesium intercalation. Even under electrochemical intercalation, only a small amount of zinc can be inserted into MoS2. It has been reported that oxygen incorporation into MoS2 can not only increase the interlayer spacing from 6.2 to 9.5 Å, but also improve the hydrophilicity and therefore significantly lower the Zn2+ intercalation barrier energy. Therefore, the diffusion parameters were 1000 times higher than those for pristine MoS2; in addition, the phase transition from 2H to 1T was observed, as proven by the XRD, XPS, and Raman data.81 This data were different from those reported by Li et al.,82 where they fabricated expanded interlayer MoS2 as the cathode in zinc-ion batteries and did not find any phase transition in the XRD as well as Raman data (Fig. 5). It is noteworthy that both magnesium and zinc intercalations have been used as effective strategies for energy conversion and storage. Even though these intercalations have increased interlayer spacing just like the intercalation of alkali ions, intercalated TMDs have not been employed as the precursor for exfoliation.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of Mg intercalation into TiS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016. (b) and (c) Zn intercalation into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019. 
The intercalation of electrochemical anions (˙OH and ˙O radicals and/or SO42− anions) was also used to prepare monolayer or few-layer MoS2 nanosheets with a lateral size in the range of ∼5 to 50 μm.52,53 It is a facile method to produce 2D TMD nanosheets with attractive applications; however, the evolution of TMDs during anion intercalation has not been comprehensively investigated. With regard to the intercalation of ammonium ions, Jeffery et al.83 prepared NH4+-intercalated MoS2 (ammoniated MoS2) and WS2 (ammoniated WS2) by ion exchange: an aqueous saturated solution of ammonium chloride was added into n-BuLi-intercalated MoS2 and WS2. It should be noted that the increase in the lattice parameter c equals to the size of NH4+/NH3. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and XPS data reveal that both NH3 and NH4+ were intercalated into WS2, but only NH3 was intercalated into MoS2. To explore new types of ion intercalations, researchers have attempted to formulate intercalation compounds without any phase transitions. Earlier theoretical studies have suggested that during intercalation, phase transformation occurs when the electron injection exceeds 0.29 electrons per MoS2 formula unit. The large size of tetraheptylammonium bromide (THAB, d ≈ 20 Å) naturally limits the number of molecules that can be inserted into the host and consequently the number of electrons that can be injected. As a result, there was no phase change during THAB intercalation.84 Nevertheless, the intercalation of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) into MoS2 was accompanied by a partial phase transition from the semiconducting to metallic phase. The in situ current profile suggested that quaternary ammonium intercalation occurred within an electrochemical potential window, for example, ∼−1.7 ± 0.1 V versus Ag/AgCl for CTAB-MoS2, which was signified by an abrupt increase in conductivity.85 Both THAB and CTAB intercalations resulted in excellent optical and electric properties.
2.4 Intercalation of molecules or atoms
Besides ion intercalation, the intercalations of molecules and atoms have also been studied. Ammonia intercalation includes gas intercalation86 and liquid intercalation.87 The intercalation of ammonia into TaS2 is a nucleated process with a threshold pressure of 700 Torr at 298 K. In the (NH3)xTaS2 single-phase region (0.65 < x < 0.85), the isosteric enthalpy of intercalation increases with the ammonia content, while deintercalation below x ∼ 0.65 leads to the formation of a second-stage compound.86 In addition, the crystal structures of the intercalation complexes of TiS2·NH3 and TaS2·NH3 from the XRD data were also reported. In TiS2·NH3, nitrogen is on the midplane between the layers in a 2H sulfur environment, but nitrogen cannot be located in TaS2·NH3. This is because TiS2·NH3 has a rhombohedral structure with three layers per unit cell, while TaS2·NH3 is a hexagonal lattice with two layers per unit cell.87 With regard to MoS2, when intercalated LixMoS2 is exposed in air or water, new (001) peaks appear at 2θ = 7.84°, which can be attributed to the absorbed H2O in the interlayers. Both XRD and solid-state NMR show that the intercalated samples exposed to wet air would absorb H2O.54
Organic molecules can be inserted into the interlayer of bulk TMDs by restacking or direct intercalation. PEO intercalated into MoS2 by restacking has larger interlayer spacing than that in commercial MoS2.30 It is well known that the phase transition of MoS2 from 2H to 1T is induced by the charge transfer from lithium to MoS2 in the electrochemical intercalation of lithium. It should be noted that PEO-MoS2 also shows the same phase transition as that indicated in the XPS data.67 Further, PEO at different molecular weights affords different phases of intercalated MoS2.88 For other organic molecules, Lewis bases can be directly intercalated into TMDs, affording products with superconductivity.10 Deuteropyridine insertion into 2H TaS2 is a heterogeneous reaction; the obtained products contain two compounds: one is pyridine intercalated into every van der Waals gap and the other is pyridine intercalated into every other van der Waals gap.89 This is similar to NH3 intercalation in TaS2.86 Isocyanide intercalation in 2H TaS2 exhibits high thermal stability.90 The intercalations of dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine (DMPD)91 and methyl ammonium (MA)92 in MoS2 were achieved by performing a hydrothermal reaction. The 1T′ phase content increases with an increase in the amount of intercalated DMPD. When the intercalation compound of MoS2 contains 12% DMPD, it showed the best hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance with a Tafel slope of only 38 mV dec−1.91 MA can also intercalate in MoS2 with the 2H phase converted to the 1T′ phase; the 1T′ phase was retained for 6 months without any structural changes, which exhibited a good electrocatalytic HER activity with a Tafel slope of only 38 mV dec−1.92 Cobaltocene is another interesting molecule, which was inserted in 2H SnS2 and studied by time-resolved in situ XRD. Solid-state kinetics was treated by categorizing the overall reaction into nucleation and growth, which was governed by eqn (2). The half-life of the reaction was affected by the temperature, host, and solvent, but it was independent of the cobaltocene concentration.34 The insertion of cobaltocene into 1T′-WS2 nanosheets increased its interlayer distance to 2.2 nm, and 1T′ remained to be the major phase. The intercalated WS2 with 14% cobaltocene showed the best catalytic property of HER.93 In addition, ferrocene intercalation could produce ferrocene-intercalated MoS2 films, which were not thermally stable. The XRD patterns showed that the increased interlayer distance was 1.18 nm and the increase was 0.58 nm, which corresponded to the diameter of the cyclopentadienyl ring (0.56 nm).94
Atom intercalation can be conducted by the deposition95 or liquid method.32,96 Mixing TaS2 with a slight excess of liquid mercury under inert conditions could lead to Hg intercalation into TaS2.96 The product Hg1.24TiS2 is an unusual (3 + 1)-dimensional layered misfit compound, which is three-dimensional (3D) TiS2 with Hg sublattices, and the intercalated Hg in Hg1.24TiS2 has very little ionic character due to its short Hg–Hg bond. In another case, TaS2 was immersed into tetrakis (acetonitrile) copper(I) hexafluorophosphates in acetone: copper could intercalate into TaS2 by a disproportionate redox reaction. XRD showed that the lattice parameter c changed from 0.5897 to 0.5966 nm; energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) revealed the homogeneous distribution of copper in the sample, while electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) revealed the coexistence of Cu2+ ion with the Cu atom.32
There are a large number of intercalants that can be intercalated into TMDs. Each intercalant has its own function; alkaline metal ions are used for energy conversion as well as assistants for exfoliation. PEO has been used for interlayer expansion and superconductivity enhancement. Certain atoms have been used for the modification of TMD properties. Others have been used for fundamental research: for example, cobaltocene can be used as the intercalant to explore the intercalation kinetics34 and ferrocene can be used to investigate the intercalation model.28 All the intercalants induce structural changes and property variations, which are important and worthwhile to be further studied using advanced technologies, particularly in situ technologies.
3. Exfoliation
Exfoliation involves the removal of layered bulk materials in a layer-by-layer manner. The force that facilitates exfoliation can be inside or outside, namely, intercalation-based exfoliation or direct exfoliation, respectively. In this review, intercalation-based exfoliation and direct exfoliation in solvents (subsequently referred to as “direct exfoliation”) will be discussed. Lithium-intercalation-based exfoliation16 results in a separating force from the generation of H2 gas bubbles in adjacent TMD layers, and anion-intercalation-based exfoliation52,53 results in a separating force from the generation of SO2 or O2 gas bubbles similar to H2 gas bubbles. Direct exfoliation is assisted by the shear force97 or force from acoustic cavitation induced by ultrasound;98 both these forces are exerted on the surface or edge of the bulk material.
Upon exfoliation, the power of ultrasound, shear rate, concentration of bulk material, and solvent and surfactant properties are the influencing factors. In particular, solvents are the reactants in intercalation-based exfoliation and are the media for power transfer and heat transfer. Surfactants are stabilizers that prevent the exfoliated nanosheets from restacking or reaggregation. Hence, in this section, our main focus will be devoted toward solvents and surfactants.
3.1 Mechanism of exfoliation
As mentioned earlier, liquid exfoliation comprises two categories: intercalation-based exfoliation and direct exfoliation. The former is much easier than the latter because the former is driven by a force between two adjacent layers, while the latter is driven by a force exerted on the basal plane or edges. With regard to the reaction mechanism, the thermodynamics and kinetics of the reactions are dominant. However, the kinetics are ambiguous due to the unclear reactions that occur during the exfoliation process.
The common precursors of intercalation-based exfoliation are LixTS2. When the precursors are immersed into H2O, intercalated Li reacts with H2O and generates H2, as shown in eqn (8), which forces the layers to go apart.55 Li + H2O → LiOH + H2(8)
It is well known that Li, Na, and K vigorously react with H2O; the larger the atomic number, the more vigorous is the reaction. On the basis of this principle, sodium- and potassium-intercalated TMDs can be more easily exfoliated into monolayer or multilayer nanosheets. However, potassium-intercalated MoS2 cannot be converted into single layer or multiple layers after exfoliation.62 Therefore, considering the fact that only the reaction between the intercalated metal ions and H2O is insufficient, the reaction mechanism needs to be comprehensively investigated.
In direct exfoliation, sonication- or shearing-assisted exfoliations are shown in Fig. 6. There is no exact reaction describing the interactions between the solvents and TMDs. Therefore, the kinetics of exfoliation could not be discussed. Most efforts have focused on the thermodynamics of the solvents during exfoliation. In some cases, when the surface tension of the solvent and TMDs match, the exfoliation is effective, but this rule is not suitable for all the cases.18 Hildebrand and Hansen parameters are the other factors employed to select the solvents; solvents and TMDs match for each other when they have the same cohesive energy.18,99 Solvents play an important role in direct exfoliation, but there is no general guideline toward selecting solvents. Further research can be done regarding this in the future.
 Fig. 6  Effects of sonication on the basal plane (a) and Mo–S–Mo bond (b) during exfoliation in IPA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015. (c) Shearing-assisted exfoliation of MoS2 in NMP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018. 
3.2 Solvents or surfactants in exfoliation
Intercalation-based exfoliation is facile due to the expanded interlayer spacing and weakened van der Waals interaction. In this type of exfoliation strategy, water-based solvents are usually employed.102,103 Direct exfoliation is more difficult than intercalation-based exfoliation. Since Coleman's group extended direct exfoliation from graphene to TMDs,18,104 considerable efforts have been devoted toward the direct exfoliation of TMDs, particularly with regard to solvent selection that has a significant impact on the products. Solvents are usually preselected according to the solubility parameters, such as surface energy, Hildebrand solubility parameter, and Hansen parameter.18,105–107 By investigating 20 kinds of solvents, Coleman et al. found that a high dispersion concentration of TMDs can be accomplished by dispersing in a solvent with the Hansen parameter close to the TMDs' Hansen parameter.18 For a mixed solvent, the solubility parameters are related to the volume fraction as well as the solubility parameters of each solvent.105 Therefore, a mixed solvent can be designed by adjusting the ratio of each solvent used for exfoliation. For example, a rational strategy for the design of a pathway toward high-yield exfoliation of layered materials has been proposed based on surface tension and contact angle.108
Besides preselection based on the solubility parameters, experiments are important because they can directly illustrate the exfoliation results. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) is a widely used solvent for liquid exfoliation,18,109 because the surface energies of the NMP and nanosheets match well; further, the concentration of the dispersion obtained by direct exfoliation in NMP was about 7.5 mg mL−1 with a lateral size of ∼700 nm. Because of the O2 (g) dissolved in moisture, NMP was converted into N-methylsuccinimide by the hydroperoxide intermediates via autoxidation. In this process, the redox active species were formed at the reactive edge sites, which created the charged basal plane. Coulombic repulsion between the neighboring sheets disrupted the bonding at the interlayer basal plane and enabled the electrostatic stabilization of particles in high-dipole solvents.110 Gupta et al. proved that trace water played a significant role in NMP liquid-phase exfoliation, because water localized at the Mo-terminating edge of the nanosheets protected these nanosheets against erosion and enhanced the interactions between NMP and the nanosheets.111
Oxidization does not only occur before exfoliation, but also after it. For example, benzyl-alcohol-exfoliated TiS2 has been found to be oxidized at the edge of the nanoflakes afterward.112N-Cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP) has been proven to be a better solvent to suppress the oxidization of nanosheets after exfoliation. There was no evidence showing that CHP-exfoliated TiS2 nanosheets were oxidized after being transformed into dry films under ambient conditions for 30 days.113 When comparing isopropanol (IPA) exfoliation with NMP exfoliation, it was found that the concentration of the former (0.0102 mg mL−1) was much lower than that of the latter (0.323 mg mL−1).23 Hence, the author also tried a 2-step exfoliation process, namely, IPA exfoliation followed by NMP exfoliation; the dispersion exhibited a concentration of 0.206 mg mL−1. MoS2 exfoliation in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was also conducted following NaCl and sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) reflux. It was found that NaCl could intercalate into bulk MoS2 and facilitate exfoliation with SDBS as the surfactant. However, the functions of NaCl and SDBS are still not clear.98 In order to explore the effect of the solvents on TMD nanosheets, five solvents, namely, acetonitrile (ACN), DMF, ethanol (EtOH), methanol (MeOH), and water, have been employed to exfoliate MoS2.114
Given the synergistic effects of various solvents, cosolvents or mixed solvents have also drawn a lot of attention. Halim et al.108 used Young's equation and contact angle to predict the appropriate cosolvent concentration for exfoliation. Among water mixtures with MeOH, EtOH, IPA, and t-butyl alcohol (TBA), the addition of 10–30 wt% TBA or IPA into water can considerably increase the exfoliation yield of both graphite and MoS2. For several cosolvents, it has been proven that the surface tension can be tuned by the content of each solvent;115 therefore, the exfoliation yield can be regulated. H2O2–NMP mixed solvent can improve the exfoliation yield of MoS2 under mild conditions, which can be attributed to the spontaneous dissolution of MoS2 in H2O2, but increasing the H2O2 amount cannot enhance the exfoliation yield.116 H2O–dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) mixed solvents used for exfoliation can lead to mono- and double-layered WS2 with sizes in the order of 1 μm.117 The exfoliation yield depends on the type of solvents as well as the relative volume fraction of each solvent. In exfoliation using the IPA–H2O mixed solvent, the highest yield of WS2 nanosheets was found for a combination of 20 vol% IPA with 80 vol% water. The exfoliation yield was approximately 7 times higher than that for pure IPA and 4 times higher than that for pure water, which can be attributed to the perfect match between the surface tension of WS2 and the binary solvent system.118 Some mixtures of acetone and water have been employed as the solvent for the exfoliation of WS2. In order to enhance the yield, the temperature was maintained at 4 °C before (pre-freezing) and during (freezing) sonication.119 The yield with a mixture of solvents of 60 vol% acetone and 40 vol% water sonicated for 8 h was as high as that in NMP, which could be attributed to the pre-freezing process. The yield of MoS2 exfoliated in 30% v/v IPA/water mixture was improved by more than 3 times with the assistance of N2H4, and the as-produced dispersion could be stable for several weeks.120
Dispersion achieved by exfoliation usually reaggregates; therefore, surfactants have been used as the stabilizing agents by keeping the surface charged, which keep them stable in an aqueous solution due to the electrostatic repulsion between the nanosheets.20 For example, positively charged nanosheets can be obtained by CTAB (a cationic surfactant), while negatively charged nanosheets can be obtained using anionic surfactants (e.g., sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)).121 In addition, the concentration of MoS2 nanosheets can also be enhanced by adding sodium citrate as the surfactant; since sodium citrate adsorbs on MoS2 surfaces, the dispersion stability of MoS2 nanosheets is facilitated.101
Although numerous solvents and surfactants have been used in the exfoliation process of TMDs, a large number of experiments are still required to explore the best match among the solvents or cosolvents, surfactants, and TMDs. Even though Hansen and Hildebrand parameters can be used to preselect some solvents, they are not universal. If sufficient experimental data are acquired, the empirical law can be improved or even a new law can be formulated by using statistical methods.
3.3 Exfoliation process
The exfoliation process involves three steps. First, bulk TMDs are immersed in the solvent; second, the bulk TMDs are exfoliated with ultrasound or shearing assistance; third, the TMD nanosheets are separated from the dispersion. The schematic of this process is shown in Fig. 7. Except for the solvent, the parameters of ultrasound and shear force have also drawn a lot of attention.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the exfoliation process. It shows the separation of nanosheets by size via centrifugation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2016. 
Sonication has been widely used in the exfoliation process, which utilizes the physical effects of highly energetic transient acoustic cavitation to peel off the powder of bulk TMDs.123 Ultrasound generates cavitation with high surface energy or kinetic energy in the liquid; the collapsing bubbles or cavitation can convert these forms of energy into chemical energy.124 The effects of ultrasound on the exfoliation process can be categorized into two parts: (1) separating the bulk TMDs into platelets and (2) breaking the Mo–S–Mo bond. Sonication can change the medium temperature, which linearly increases with sonication time;125 further, the temperature increase can be used as a power indicator. The author also found that with DMSO or NMP, the two-step exfoliation (step-by-step sonication with probe immersion depths of 0.5 and 2.5 cm) of MoS2 was better than one-step exfoliation. The optical absorption of MoS2 dispersion did not always increase with the sonication time. At longer sonication times, the size of the nanosheets size decreased due to sonication-induced scission,109 and different sizes of nanosheets could be separated by using controlled centrifugation. The sonication time not only affects the morphology of the nanosheets, but also influences their properties. WS2 obtained from various sources was sonicated for different times in the exfoliation process; evidently, with a longer sonication time, the HER performance deteriorated.126 As mentioned above, the size of the nanosheets decreased with an increase in the sonication time: smaller nanosheets have a larger area and more edge sites, which may exhibit better catalytic properties. However, as-prepared WS2 nanosheets exhibit the opposite trend.
Shear devices can generate a lateral shear force to overcome the van der Waals forces between the TMD layers. Varrla et al.97 conducted a careful research on the shearing exfoliation of MoS2 and WS2. They found that the nanosheet concentration, thickness, and lateral size depended on the processing parameters, such as initial concentration of bulk TMDs, surfactant concentration, liquid volume, shear time, and shear rate. They developed a scaling law to optimize the processing parameters based on the dispersion concentration. However, the thickness and lateral size depend only on the surfactant concentration. For instance, the concentration of MoS2 nanosheets increased from 0.06 to 0.59 mg mL−1 with an increased shear rate, but decreased with prolonged shear time. A higher initial concentration of bulk MoS2 did not lead to a higher concentration of nanosheets.101 Obviously, the results were different from those in the conclusion of Varrla et al.,97 which was probably because they used different processing parameters and shear devices. Recently, mechanisms for the shearing exfoliation of graphene have been extended to other 2D materials,127 which can guide researchers toward the processes to optimize the minimum shear rate and how to choose the solvent. There are some reports about combining the shear force with sonication. The lateral size of MoS2 nanosheets reduced with an increased sonication time after grinding for 1 h.128 MoS2 layers were detached from the bulk material by shear force from grinding and then the MoS2 layers were broken by sonication in a water–EtOH mixture. The as-produced MoS2 dispersions showed a high concentration of 26.7 ± 0.7 mg mL−1 in an aqueous solution.129
To meet the requirements of different applications, the specific size is needed; therefore, size selection becomes a critical step. Similar to graphene,130 TMD nanosheets can be separated by centrifugation. A simple centrifugation technique based on band sedimentation can sort TMD dispersions according to their mass, which could be verified by their absorbance and extinction spectra. This is because the absorbance and extinction spectra of as-prepared MoS2 vary with the size of the nanosheets due to the effects of both confinement and nanosheet edges in the material.131 Liquid cascade centrifugation122,132 has been proven to be an effective way to fabricate specific-sized nanosheets with high yield and low wastage, as well as design and fabricate nanosheets with the desired lateral size and thickness.
4. Properties
Different intercalation and exfoliation chemistries have different impacts on the morphologies and structures of the exfoliated TMDs, therefore, they have different properties and potential applications. Here, we summarize certain typical chemical intercalation and electrochemical intercalation technologies, mainly focusing on the morphology, structure, and applications of the exfoliated TMDs.
4.1 Morphology
Roy Morrison was the first researcher to use the XRD spectrum to quantitatively investigate single-layer MoS2 prepared via the n-BuLi intercalation and exfoliation method (water was used as the exfoliation solvent),133 the use of this instrument to characterize the obtained TMD nanosheets has aroused considerable interest.55,57,134–137 Chhowalla et al.138 reported that the lateral dimension of liquid-exfoliated n-BuLi–MoS2 sheets were mostly 0.3–0.8 μm (as per the TEM image); further, the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image revealed a typical thickness of 1–1.2 nm, indicating the presence of single-layer MoS2. In order to increase the obtained flake size, Loh et al.62 used a two-step expansion and intercalation method, they first used the N2H4 molecule to expand the layer spacing between the MoS2 sheets and then intercalated with NaC10H8 to produce single-layer MoS2 with lateral widths of around 10 μm (Fig. 8), which was about 10 times larger than the solution-exfoliated flakes reported by using the n-BuLi method. The AFM characterization with statistical analysis revealed that 90% of the flakes were monolayer, which were synthesized by the ultrasound treatment of NaxMoS2 in pure water. Besides, such a large amount of single-layer MoS2 dispersions could be easily fabricated into films via the inkjet printing method, which is a feasible method to obtain printable single-layer TMDs via solution-phase processes.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a two-step expansion and intercalation method. (b) SEM, (c) AFM, and (d) TEM images of Na-exfoliated single-layer MoS2. Insets show the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images. (e) Wafer-scale MoS2 pattern jet printing. Large-area, continuous, and highly uniform MoS2 thin-film patterns were directly printed on a 4-inch Si/SiO2 wafer by inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014. 
Considering that the chemical intercalation of alkali metal ions needs to be operated in a glove box at higher temperatures for a long time (greater than 100 °C and 2 days), Coleman et al.18 developed a generic exfoliation technique: TMDs such as MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, TaSe2, NbSe2, NiTe2, and other layered compounds (like BN and Bi2Te3) can be exfoliated into nanoflakes in many common solvents. AFM and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) images of individual MoS2 flakes reveal that their typical thicknesses range from ∼3 to 12 nm, corresponding to 5–20 layers. Moreover, nanocomposites or hybrid dispersions can be prepared only by mixing the TMDs with polymers or other materials in the solution, which can be fabricated into films via vacuum filtration. However, single-layer MoS2 was not observed via this method. For manufacturing single-layer TMDs nanosheets with better quality, Zeng et al.15 developed a simple but efficient method to fabricate high-yield, single-layer 2D nanomaterials via the controllable intercalation of electrochemical lithium. Since the lithiation process can be controlled by the discharge voltage as well as current, the yield of single-layer MoS2 nanosheets can reach up to 92%. Further, this method has been used to prepare other single-layer TMDs nanosheets (such as WS2, TiS2, TaS2, and ZrS2; Fig. 9). Nevertheless, this method is sensitive to environmental conditions, and the lateral size of the exfoliated MoS2 sample is less than 1 μm. Developing a feasible route is very crucial for the synthesis of large-area ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets with high quality, thereby expanding the possible applications of thin-film electronics in the industry. Lee et al.53 demonstrated an anodic intercalation method by using negative ions to fabricate MoS2 nanosheets with a size up to 50 μm, which was accomplished by electrochemically exfoliating the bulk counterpart in Na2SO4 solution at ambient conditions. However, the thickness distribution revealed that more than 70% of the nanosheets were composed of 2–5 layers and only 7% of them were single-layer nanoflakes. Duan et al.84 developed another cation-based electrochemical intercalation method to produce high-quality, phase-pure semiconducting MoS2 layers with uniform thickness distribution by replacing the small Li+ ions with larger tetraheptylammonium (THA+) cations. The characterization data reveal that the exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets have 5–8 layers (according to the average thickness distribution of 3.8 ± 0.9 nm) and lateral dimensions of 0.5–2 μm (Fig. 10). The main intercalation and exfoliation methods for fabricating the 2D TMDs nanosheets with the corresponding morphology and structure are summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical lithiation process for the synthesis of 2D TMDs nanosheets from layered bulk materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012. (b) Photographs of the dispersion of 2D TMDs nanosheets and (c) the corresponding AFM images of TMDs on SiO2 substrates. Insets show the AFM images indicating the height profile of the TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the electrochemical intercalation of MoS2 with THAB. (b) Schematic of the intercalation and exfoliation of MoS2 crystals to produce 2D MoS2 nanosheet ink. (c) AFM image of an individual MoS2 nanosheet. The blue line represents the height profile across the nanosheet; scale bar: 200 nm. (d) Thickness distribution of exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets as measured by AFM (bars) and a Gaussian fit (red line). The mean thickness is 3.8 nm and the standard deviation is 0.9 nm. (e) TEM and (f) SAED images of a single MoS2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2018. 
Table 2 Summary of the main intercalation and exfoliation methods for preparing 2D TMDs materialsa




Materials
Methods
Thickness/lateral size/yield/phase





a ∼ means that the parameter is not mentioned in the literature.





MoS2
Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation
1 nm/∼/92%/1T,15 5 nm/0.3–0.5 μm/60%/1T,102 5 nm ∼/30%/2H,139 0.7 nm/50 μm/5–9%/2H,53 3.6 nm/0.5–2 μm/∼/2H84


Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation
1 nm/3–10 μm/80%/2H&1T,62 1–1.2 nm/0.3–0.8 μm/∼/2H&1T,138 20–200 nm/∼/∼/2H&1T,140 5 nm/∼/11–15%/2H,141 1.1 nm/∼/10.3%/1T,142 1.2 nm/0.3–1 μm/70%/1T143


Direct exfoliation
5–7 nm/0.5–1 μm/0.3 mg mL−1/∼,18 0.9–1.2 nm/∼/0.018 mg mL−1/∼,105 1.2 nm/∼/∼/2H,106 1.44 nm/∼/10 mg mL−1/∼,144 ∼/0.28 μm/0.25 mg mL−1/2H20


WS2
Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation
1 nm/∼/∼/1T15


Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation
5–70 nm/∼/∼/2H&1T,140 1.1 nm/∼/∼/∼62


Direct exfoliation
∼/0.14–0.15 μm/0.15 mg mL−1/∼,18 3 nm/∼/0.032 mg mL−1/∼,105 1.6 nm/∼/∼/2H106


TiS2
Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation
0.7–0.9 nm/∼/∼/1T,15 0.9 nm/0.5–1 μm/39%/∼41


Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation
1.1 nm/∼/∼/∼62


TaS2
Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation
1.0–1.1 nm/∼/∼/1T,15 0.9 nm/0.3–1 μm/93%/∼41


Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation
0.9 nm/∼/∼/∼62




4.2 Structure
Different phases correspond to different properties, for example, 2H-phase MoS2 has an indirect bandgap, endowing it with outstanding light response. Therefore, it finds excellent applications in semiconductor devices. Since the 1T-phase MoS2 has good conductivity, it is generally used in electrocatalysis. We can control the phase of the exfoliated TMDs to achieve the intended applications. It should be noted that the liquid intercalation chemistry can lead to different phases in the TMDs' structures, the two most common types are the 2H and 1T phases. The 2H phase has a hexagonal symmetry with the space group D3h, which implies the coordination mode of the metal atoms is trigonal prismatic. This configuration implies that in a single-unit layer, the chalcogen atoms on the surface are vertically aligned along the z-axis and perpendicular to the middle metal-atom layer, therefore, the arrangement sequence is AbA, where A and b represent the chalcogen and transition metal atoms, respectively. While the 1T phase exhibits tetragonal symmetry (D3d), the metal atoms adopt the octahedral coordination configuration. When compared with the 2H phase, a single layer of chalcogenide atoms in the unit of the 1T-phase structure is shifted, resulting in an AbC stacking sequence. The phase of single-layer TMDs strongly depends on the d-orbital electron density of the transition metal,145 therefore, fine-tuning the filling of the d-orbital can be used to control the phase of the TMDs. Reed et al.146 found that the surface charge density was required to be more than 0.09 e (e is the elementary electric charge) or less than −0.04 e per formula unit for monolayer MoTe2 and 0.35 e or −0.29 e for MoS2 to trigger phase transformation, as per the first-principle calculations. Zhang et al.147 were the first to experimentally demonstrate that the phase transition of single-layer MoTe2 could be driven by electrostatic doping. Based on the theories mentioned above, Duan et al.84 used the larger THA+ to replace the smaller Li+ to perform electrochemical intercalation, thereby reducing the amounts of injected electrons. As a result, pure 2H-phase MoS2 was successfully prepared using this method, which exhibited comparable mobility and on/off ratio as those MoS2 synthesized by the CVD method. Earlier studies have shown that the Mo coordination in MoS2 changed from 2H to 1T during the lithium intercalation reaction as revealed by in situ XRD, the mechanism of this phenomenon was considered to be the addition of electronic energy caused by electron transfer between the host material and intercalant.61 This phase transition has also been found in the electrochemical intercalation of lithium.15,148 With rapid developments in the applications of various ultrathin MoS2-based nanosheets, unique characterization techniques that can be used for the easy identification of the phases of atomic-thick MoS2 flakes are in high demand. Raman spectroscopy, a powerful characterization tool that does not entail sample destruction, has been used to identify different crystalline structures of MoS2.149–152 The in-plane E12g mode can be attributed to the opposite vibration of two S atoms with respect to the Mo atom, while the A1g mode is associated with the out-of-plane vibration of only S atoms in opposite directions.153 Tay et al.154 reported that only the frequencies of E12g and A1g peaks could be used as the key features to identify the number of layers in the MoS2 flake (≤4 layers), because they monotonously vary with the number of layers of ultrathin MoS2 flakes, while the intensities or widths of the peaks did not. The determination of the number of layers using the E12g or A1g frequency peaks are consistent with the optical, AFM, and photoluminescence data. Ryu et al.155 found that the peak position of the in-plane vibration (E12g) and out-of-plane vibration (A1g) moved closer to each other with a decrease in the thickness of MoS2, which can be attributed to the long-range coulombic interlayer interactions and the structural changes caused by stacking between the layers. The frequency difference (Δ = A1g − E12g) between these two peaks can be directly used to determine the number of layers in MoS2. For example, the peak differences for single-layer, bilayer, and trilayer MoS2 are 18–20, 20–22, and 22–24 cm−1, respectively. Besides the relationship between the frequency difference and number of layers, they also found that the movements of A1g and E12g are also an indicator to determine the defect density in TMDs. For example, as the defect density increased, the E12g peak moved to a lower wavelength, while the A1g peak shifted to the opposite direction: both peaks exhibited much broader bands. The DFT calculations revealed that these changes could be attributed to phonon confinement.156 In addition to these properties, the ratio of A1g/E12g can also be leveraged to evaluate the quality of exfoliated TMDs nanosheets: the smaller the ratio, the lower is the number of defects, therefore, the quality of the nanosheets is better.84,157 Various other characterization methods have been adopted by researchers to investigate the structures of the nanomaterials, which facilitate improvements in the precisions of existing analytical methods. XPS has been constantly used to acquire the composition of the tested sample. Cui et al.148 observed the shift in the oxidation state and phase transition of MoS2 during the discharging process by using XPS. It should be noted that before phase transformation, the binding energy of Mo 3d5/2 continuously shifts to a lower position along with the discharge voltage decreases from 1.8 to 1.5 V (vs. Li+/Li), which is caused by intercalated Li that donates electrons to MoS2 and thus resulting in the lower oxidation states of Mo atom. Mo 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 peaks are then split into two independent regions at 1.2 and 1.1 V vs. Li+/Li, representing the 2H to 1T MoS2 phase transition. The composition of the 1T phase in MoS2 discharged to 1.1 V vs. Li+/Li is increased as compared to the one at 1.2 V, which corresponds to the decreased ratio of the 2H to 1T phase. Generally speaking, the phase transformation in exfoliated single-layer TMDs is not complete with both 2H and 1T phases exist, which can be observed via high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM).158 It is well known that lithium intercalation results in the loss of the pristine semiconducting properties of MoS2 due to structural changes that occur during Li intercalation; further, 1T MoS2 is the major phase in the exfoliated material. Chhowalla et al.138 reported that metastable metallic 1T-phase MoS2 could be largely restored to its semiconducting phase at an annealing temperature above 300 °C, which exhibited prominent bandgap photoluminescence (similar to that by mechanically exfoliated monolayers). This reversible phase transformation was also demonstrated by Mallouk et al.58 They initially used n-BuLi to intercalate 2H MoS2 and obtain exfoliated 1T MoS2, then, infrared laser irradiation was used to convert the 1T phase back into the 2H phase.
4.3 Applications
Exfoliated TMDs have been widely used in various fields, such as electronics and optoelectronics,24,159–163 electrocatalysis,164–168 and energy storage169–172 because of their excellent semiconducting performance, tunable electronic structure, large accessible surface areas, and interlayer spacing.

4.3.1 Electronics and optoelectronics. 
The typical applications in the field of optoelectronics are field-effect transistors (FETs), photodetectors, and photovoltaic devices; all these applications are based on the light absorptivity and photoelectrical conversion ability of the TMDs nanosheets. It is well known that the optoelectronic properties of TMDs rely considerably on their band structure, which changes with the layer thickness. For example, the bandgap of bulk MoS2 is 1.29 eV (indirect bandgap with very weak photoluminescence), while this value increases to 1.9 eV when the number of layers decrease to monolayer (direct bandgap with bright photoluminescence) due to confinement effects.173 Lee et al.174 fabricated top-gate phototransistors by using MoS2 nanosheets with different numbers of layers (1–3 layers) as the channel material, they reported that a device with triple-layer MoS2 showed worthwhile performance toward red-light detection, whereas single and double layers exhibited useful performance toward green-light detection. This could be attributed to the tunable energy gap by tuning the number of layers. Another example is the device mobility of the ReSe2 transistor that varied significantly with the thickness, the single-layer one presented mobility as high as 9.78 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much higher than that of few-layer transistors (0.10 cm2 V−1 s−1).175 In addition, a single-layer ReSe2 device was demonstrated to be highly sensitive toward the detection of red light (633 nm). Zeng et al.15 successfully fabricated a single-layer MoS2-based FET, and they used liquid-exfoliated single-layer nanosheets to prepare thin-film transistors (TFTs) that exhibited high sensitivity and low detection limit with respect to NO-gas detection. This proved that ultrathin MoS2-based TFTs were a promising sensing platform. Choi et al.176 reported the preparation of flexible amine-functionalized TMDs composite films (MoSe2/PS-NH2), which were synthesized via the liquid exfoliation of MoSe2 in amine-terminated poly(styrene) (PS-NH2) in toluene. The films exhibited high photoconductivity to near-infrared (NIR) light (wavelength: 1064 nm) even at extreme bending conditions (bending radius: 200 μm), as shown in Fig. 11. In addition, the photodetection activity could be easily tuned by controlling the composition ratio of MoSe2 and MoS2 in a mixed solution. The fabricated hybrid films exhibited wide-spectrum detection (from the visible to NIR regions). Nevertheless, it should be noted that liquid-exfoliated TMDs nanosheets have been rarely used in photoelectric detection, which can be attributed to their poor quality, such as numerous defects, impurities, nonuniformity, and small size, thereby weakening their intrinsic performance. Despite these unfavorable factors, solution exfoliation has many advantages. For instance, it can be operated under milder conditions at a low cost; the layered materials can be easily fabricated into films or composites;18,177,178 and this method has the potential to be used in the fabrication of optoelectronic devices, if the problems related to quality and scale production are resolved.
 Fig. 11  (a) Composite film deposited on a nylon membrane filter paper. (b) Schematic representation of the photodetector device. (c) Semi-log scale I–V characteristics of a MoSe2 photodetector in the dark and under different light intensities of NIR light at a wavelength of 1064 nm for a bias voltage of ±10 V. (d) Schematic illustration of the photodetector containing a mixture of MoSe2 and MoS2 nanosheets exfoliated with PS-NH2. (e) Photoresponse performance of blended composites for different mixing ratios of MoSe2 and MoS2 with PS-NH2 as a function of wavelength (in the visible to NIR regions). (f) Photocurrent as a function of the composition of MoSe2 and MoS2 mixtures embedded in PS-NH2 at wavelengths of 532 and 1064 nm at light intensities of 63 and 230 mW cm−2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015. 


4.3.2 Electrocatalysis (hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and N2 reduction reaction (NRR)). 
Due to energy shortage and environmental pollution problems, converting small molecules into fuels with high energy density as well as water splitting via an electrochemical method are two promising research directions, because they can create new, clean energy at the cost of consuming renewable electric power. Catalysts are the key to electrochemical synthesis, which can improve the reaction rate and product selectivity.179 Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation methods show advantages in the fabrication of 2D TMDs materials, because they can tune the structure of the products and therefore influence their properties and applications. Cui et al.148 were the first to report the relationship between the MoS2 structure and the corresponding electrocatalytic properties, they investigated the electronic structure of the MoS2 samples by using TEM, XPS, and Raman techniques and then tested the corresponding HER activity at different lithiated stages by controlling the discharge potential. The obtained results showed that the HER activity was continuously enhanced as the cutoff voltage decreased from 1.8 to 1.1 V vs. Li+/Li (Fig. 12c and d). The phase transition from the 2H to 1T phase and the lowered oxidation states of Mo could be attributed to the improved performance. However, when the discharge voltage step reduced to a voltage lower than 1.1 V vs. Li+/Li (i.e., 0.8 V vs. Li+/Li), the HER activity of the exfoliated MoS2 degraded significantly, which might be attributed to structural decomposition.15 Hence, this method offers a promising way to optimize the structure of the exfoliated TMDs for practical applications.
 Fig. 12  Continuously tuning the HER performance of MoS2 by controlling the discharge voltage in the electrochemical intercalation of Li. (a) Schematic of the battery testing system using vertically aligned MoS2 nanofilms as the cathode. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curve exhibiting the lithiation process and associated structural transformations. (c) Polarization curves of pristine and different lithiated MoS2 tested in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Tafel slope of MoS2 is consecutively tuned by the electrochemical intercalation of Li to different voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2013. 
Dryfe et al.102 synthesized 1T MoS2 within 2 h by using the electrochemical intercalation of lithium, where they used LiClO4 as the lithium source, which prevented the use of metallic lithium as well as an inert atmosphere. The obtained three-layered MoS2 exhibited enhanced electrocatalytic performance toward HER when compared with 2H MoS2. The overpotential (η) and Tafel slopes were 0.25 V and 109 mV per decade for semiconducting 2H-phase MoS2 and 0.13 V and 49 mV per decade for metallic 1T-phase MoS2, respectively. This work illustrates that the electrolyte source can be another factor to fine-tune the properties of the obtained TMDs. This enhanced performance can be explained by the fact that the basal plane in 2H MoS2 is catalytically inert toward HER, while the surface sulfur sites of the basal plane in 1T MoS2 act as the main binding sites for the hydrogen atoms.180 On the other hand, metallic 1T MoS2 shows much improved electrical conductivity than that of 2H MoS2. For the same reason, chemically exfoliated 1T WS2 also shows enhanced HER performance with very low overpotentials.181
Atomically thin TMDs nanomaterials are also a good candidate as supports to grow other catalytic materials on them due to their high surface-to-volume ratio,182 which can alleviate catalyst agglomeration and realize active components in nanometer sizes. Zeng et al.41 optimized the electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation conditions (i.e., cutoff voltage, discharge current, and exfoliation environment) to prepare single-layer TiS2 and TaS2 (Fig. 13a), which were then used as dispersible templates to grow noble-metal-based nanoparticles (Pt NPs and Au NPs). Because of the synergistic coupling between Pt NPs and TiS2 nanosheets, the prepared Pt–TiS2 composite exhibited electrocatalytic activity comparable to that of commercial Pt–C catalyst for HER for equal Pt loading (Fig. 13b and c). Furthermore, the Pt–TiS2 composite showed good stability with a little decline in the HER performance after 1000 cycles (Fig. 13d).
 Fig. 13  Single-layer-based Pt–TiS2 composite for HER. (a) i, TEM image of Pt–TiS2. Inset: the diffraction pattern. ii, Magnified TEM image of Pt–TiS2. Inset: HRTEM of Pt–TiS2 (scale bar: 1 nm). iii, iv, AFM data of typical TiS2 and TaS2 deposited on Si–SiO2 substrates. (b) Polarization curves of different electrocatalysts. (c) Corresponding Tafel plots. (d) Cycle stability test of TiS2 and Pt–TiS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014. 
OER has received increasing attention in recent years because it is a very important half reaction for both water splitting and CO2RR. Lou et al.183 were the first to report the high electrocatalytic activity of 1T MoS2 nanosheets toward OER in acid media, which were produced by the lithium intercalation of the bulk material and then exfoliation using a mixture of water and IPA (Fig. 14). 1T MoS2 showed the best performance among 1T MoS2/TaS2 and 2H MoS2/TaS2 (Fig. 14c), where ultrathin 2H MoS2 as well as 1T and 2H TaS2 samples were exfoliated using the corresponding crystalline precursors in mixed solvents. The catalytic efficiency was very close to that of the best value obtained using the IrO2 electrocatalyst. The DFT calculation results reveal that the edge sites are catalytically active instead of the basal surface sites. Here, we can find that 1T MoS2 exhibits excellent electrocatalytic activity for both HER and OER under acid conditions, suggesting its potential applications as bifunctional electrocatalysts in the water-splitting process.
 Fig. 14  Exfoliated TMDs electrocatalysts for OER applications. (a) Schematic of the exfoliation method using a mixed solvent. (b) Schematic of the preparation method for a working electrode in OER. (c) Polarization curves of the exfoliated TMDs in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2016. 
CO2RR is a promising technique to mitigate the energy issue and greenhouse effect because it can transform redundant CO2 molecules into carbonaceous fuel.184 A few reports have investigated the use of TMDs nanosheets for CO2RR, this might be because HER is a competitive reaction during the CO2RR process. Luo et al.185 demonstrated that ultrathin MoTe2 layers have a promising ability to reduce CO2 to CH4 with a faradaic efficiency of 83% and current density of 25.6 mA cm−2 at moderate applied potential (−1.0 VRHE) in ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes (Fig. 15), the stability was also very good (as long as 45 h). These extraordinary properties could be attributed to its ultrathin structure, increased abundance of exposed active sites, and the use of IL electrolytes. Salehi-Khojin's group reported several nanostructured TMDs electrocatalysts for CO2RR in an IL solution, such as MoS2,186 WSe2,187 and Nb-doped MoS2,188 which were grown by using the CVD method. All these materials showed promising activity with large current density and high CO selectivity for reducing CO2 to CO in diluted 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM-BF4) IL (Fig. 16). At present, all the proven cases for CO2RR by employing TMDs nanomaterials as the electrocatalyst have adopted IL as the electrolyte; this is because in other solutions, the competing HER process persisted during the electrolysis process. This is because the 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMIM+) ion helps to transport CO2 to the catalyst surface by complexation under acidic conditions, thereby lowering the initial reduction barrier to form (CO2)− intermediates.189 Exploring the CO2RR performance of TMDs nanosheets in a bicarbonate solution rather than IL is worth investigating in the future, because IL is costly and therefore unsuitable for large-scale fabrication.
 Fig. 15  Ultrathin MoTe2 shows excellent activity for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4. (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (b) AFM image of ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves obtained for IL–H2O-composed electrolyte. (d) Faradaic efficiency for methane at various applied potentials. (e) Chronoamperometry curve at a potential of −1.0 VRHE and the corresponding faradaic efficiency of methane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 16  Three types of CO2RR electrocatalysts in an IL (EMIM–BF4–H2O mixture). (a and b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of bulk MoS2 in a CO2 environment and the corresponding faradaic efficiencies at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2014. (c and d) CV curves for WSe2 NFs and their faradaic efficiencies at a series of applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016. (e and f) CV curves and faradaic efficiencies of Nb-doped MoS2 under different voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2017. 
Recently, the electrochemical synthesis of ammonia has attracted increasing attention due to its mild operating conditions, however, N2 fixation has been achieved in the industry via the Haber–Bosch process using a solid-state Fe-based catalyst at higher temperatures and pressures190,191 at the expense of CO2 emission. Inspired by the nitrogenase enzymes in the natural world, this harsh process has been modified to work well under ambient conditions. Researchers have started to explore compounds containing Fe,192–194 Mo,195–197 and other transition metals198,199 as the electrocatalysts for NRR. Yang et al.199 prepared TiS2 nanosheets by a facile method of liquid exfoliation and reported the catalytic performance of NRR in 0.1 M Na2SO4, which exhibited a high faradaic efficiency of 5.50% and high NH3 yield of 16.02 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.6 VRHE. They outperformed bulk TiS2 on account of their large exposed active sites and lower charge transfer resistances. Although TMDs such as MoS2, TiS2, and WS2 currently show catalytic activity toward NRR, when compared with ammonia synthesis in the industry, the NH3 yield, selectivity, and stability need to be improved by a large amount for practical applications. Here, we assume liquid-exfoliated TMDs nanosheets are worth exploring as nonprecious electrocatalysts for the direct fabrication of valuable products.


4.3.3 Energy storage. 
In addition to the energy conversion processes mentioned above (HER, OER, CO2RR, and NRR), the development of renewable energy can also be a good replacement or complement for the current fossil energy sources.200 Batteries and supercapacitors are the main focus due to their portability, high energy density, and worthwhile design flexibility.201,202 Developing highly efficient energy storage materials and devices are the key for these two technologies. Exfoliated TMDs nanosheets exhibit promising possibilities for high-performance energy storage applications,102,203,204 since the large interlayer spacing is favorable for the intercalation/deintercalation of ions; further, the large specific surface area of TMDs nanosheets can facilitate the intercalation process, too. However, the restacking or reaggregation of exfoliated TMDs nanosheets during lithium intercalation and deintercalation cycles can affect their applications in batteries, which has encouraged the fabrication of TMDs-based composites (MoS2 nanosheets decorated with TiO2 nanobelts,205 TiO2 microspheres@MoS2,206 few-layered MoS2@TiO2,207 and MoS2–TiO2 fibres208) to activate the TMDs nanosheets for electrolyte penetration and to prevent TMDs nanosheets from restacking. In addition, poor electrical conductivity and low mechanical strength always result in a large capacity loss after long cycles,209 therefore, the introduction of the conductive polymer,210 graphene,209,211 or carbon nanotube171 into TMDs nanosheets has been proven to be an effective way to improve the cyclic stability and capacity performance. Zhang et al.212 reported a facile and universal electrochemical approach to successfully prepare 2D semiconducting hetero-nanostructures, CuS–TiS2, ZnS–TiS2, and Ni3S2–TiS2 were synthesized via the electrochemical intercalation of lithium.15 The cathode materials are homogeneous slurry of bulk TiS2 coated on Cu, Zn, and Ni foil, respectively, which were assembled in a lithium-ion battery. The exfoliation was implemented after 2 weeks of discharging, and the ultrathin triangular or hexagonal CuS nanoplates (size: 50–120 nm) were observed on the TiS2 nanosheets (Fig. 17) with perfect epitaxial alignment because of their similar crystal symmetry. The obtained CuS–TiS2 was used as the anode material in a lithium-ion battery, which exhibited high specific capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at 3 A g−1 even after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 17  2D vertical epitaxial CuS–TiS2 hetero-nanostructure and its excellent performance as an anode in a lithium-ion battery. (a) TEM image of CuS nanoplates epitaxially grown on a TiS2 nanosheet. Inset: photograph of CuS–TiS2 solution. (b) Highly magnified TEM image of CuS–TiS2. (c) The SAED pattern of CuS–TiS2 with the electron beam perpendicular to the basal plane of the TiS2 nanosheet. (d) HRTEM image and (e) the corresponding FFT-generated SAED pattern of a typical CuS nanoplate on a TiS2 nanosheet. The dotted curve in (d) shows an approximation of the interface between CuS and TiS2. (f) Cycling performance of the CuS–TiS2 electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2015. 
Other exfoliated TMDs and their hybrids like MoS2,213,214 PEO/MoS2,210 and MoS2/SWNT171 also show similar performance in lithium- and sodium-ion batteries. Supercapacitors are another prospective energy storage device owing to their high power density (∼103 W kg−1), rapid charge/discharge rate (∼1 s), exceptional stability, and mild operation conditions.215 Chhowalla et al.216 found that the liquid-exfoliated 1T-phase-MoS2-based electrodes can intercalate numerous cations in both inorganic and organic electrolytes with remarkable efficiency and large capacitance values ranging from ∼400 to ∼700 F cm−3 (Fig. 18). Furthermore, this material can work smoothly under higher voltages (3.5 V) for 5000 cycles in nonaqueous organic electrolytes with greater than 95% coulombic efficiencies. They ascribed these worthwhile properties to the material's intrinsic hydrophilicity (contact angle: 28°), high electrical conductivity (70% 1T phase), and competence in intercalating diverse cations. Other metallic TMDs such as VS2 (ref. 217) and TaS2 (ref. 170) nanoflakes have also shown promising performance as supercapacitors.
 Fig. 18  (a) Side view of an electrode observed by SEM, showing the layered nature of the film made by restacking exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets. (b) High-magnification image of restacked MoS2 nanosheets. (c) Evolution of the volumetric capacitance of 1T-phase MoS2 electrodes at different scan rates for different electrolytes. The concentration of cations in the electrolyte solutions was fixed at 1 M. (d) Capacitance retention after 5000 cycles in 0.5 M Li2SO4, H2SO4, and 1 M TEA BF4 in acetonitrile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2015. 
Besides the above applications, solution-processed 2D TMDs have also shown promising potential for converting solar energy into hydrogen energy when used as photoanode materials because of their outstanding semiconductor properties (ability to capture sunlight) and photoelectrochemical properties in addition to their photocatalytic stability against photocorrosion.218–220 This provides a green and sustainable approach and therefore should also be investigated.

5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we have discussed the methods (intercalation-based exfoliation and direct exfoliation) for preparing 2D ultrathin TMDs from different types of intercalators and the corresponding mechanism to the exfoliation process, which include solvent selection, reaction conditions (temperature, time, and power selection during the ultrasonic process), and the state-of-the-art applications in electronics, optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, and energy storage. There are mainly two types of intercalation techniques: chemical intercalation and electrochemical intercalation. The mechanism of each type is summarized in detail.
In the intercalation section, however, numerous species of intercalants (atoms, molecules, and ions) have been used to intercalate the TMDs for theoretical study or properties-based applications. Intercalation chemistry is still not fairly clear for choosing the host and guest pair to achieve purposeful structural modification, therefore, the in situ tracking technologies need to be considered to investigate the structural changes during the intercalation process and clearly clarify the mechanism in the future.
In the exfoliation section, it is well known that the exfoliation process is fairly complicated, which includes many factors, such as the basis for solvent selection (surface tension and Hansen and Hildebrand parameters), reaction temperature, time and pressure, as well as ultrasonic power in the exfoliation environment. In particular, we introduced the exfoliation process including the mechanism behind the phenomenon and the ways to choose the appropriate solvents and control the reaction conditions to exfoliate bulk TMDs in a more effective and efficient manner. Then, we compared the different intercalation and exfoliation methods in terms of the size, layers, and phase of the obtained TMDs nanosheets.
In the properties and application section, because of the numerous elements in the TMDs families, the exfoliated compounds range from insulators to semiconductors, conductors, and even superconductors. These attributes allow them to be used in different electronic and optoelectronic applications. With regard to electrocatalysis and energy storage, the accessible large surface area and exposed active sites make the TMDs nanosheets good for electrochemical reactions. In addition, the excellent electric conductivity is also very vital to promote the process. Therefore, the combination of 2D TMDs with conductive supports is a wise choice to improve the performance of electrode materials in electrocatalysis and supercapacitors.
The potential of exfoliated 2D TMDs materials is definitely not restricted to the applications mentioned above, therefore, other unique TMDs in this family need to be exfoliated into a single layer or few layers to discover the intriguing properties and subsequent potential applications. Further, a theoretical prediction with high-throughput calculations can be used to guide and assist the experimental direction. The exploitation of novel intercalation and exfoliation methods is extremely important to synthesize atomic-scale TMDs with simple and mild operations. From the perspective of applications, the preparation of 2D TMDs nanosheets with high quality demands operations at a large scale, but current research is done only at the lab level. High crystallinity, large area, uniform thickness distributions, and semiconducting nature of ultrathin TMDs are excellent advantages for flexible optoelectronics applications. Solution-processed 2D TMDs dispersions show significant advantages in this respect as compared to those of the CVD and mechanical methods, because mass production can be undertaken in solution and easily fabricated into films by spray-coating or spin-coating, vacuum filtration, and inkjet printing. Nevertheless, the remaining challenges are improvements in the quality, size, and thickness for practical applications. With regard to electrocatalysis and energy storage, metallic-phase TMDs exhibit superiority for their high conductivity, however, until now, pure metallic-phase materials have not been prepared. Based on the above discussions, tremendous efforts need to be directed toward resolving the above challenges for both fundamental research and practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Start-Up Grant from CityU (CityU9610435) and ECS scheme (CityU9048163) from RGC in Hong Kong.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jung, Y. Zhou and J. J. Cha, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 452–463 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. C. Lai, C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, D. Valiev and R. Nemkayeva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 093111 CrossRef .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Gamble, J. H. Osiecki, M. Cais and R. Pisharody, Science, 1971, 174, 493–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Wang, H. T. Yuan, S. S. Hong, Y. B. Li and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664–2680 RSC .
J. Y. Wan, S. D. Lacey, J. Q. Dai, W. Z. Bao, M. S. Fuhrer and L. B. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6742–6765 RSC .
H. T. Wang, Z. Y. Lu, D. S. Kong, J. Sun, T. M. Hymel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Small, 2015, 11, 605–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zeng, Z. Y. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. Y. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zeng, T. Sun, J. X. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, G. Lu, Z. X. Fan, Q. Y. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052–9056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Lu, K. Jiang, G. X. Chen, H. T. Wang and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800978 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Z. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, R. Nemkayeva, N. Guseinov, M. Kaikanov and A. Tikhonov, J. Lumin., 2020, 217, 116786 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozheyev, D. Valiev, R. Nemkayeva, V. An, A. Tikhonov and G. Sugurbekova, J. Lumin., 2017, 192, 1308–1312 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zeng, H. Hirwa, S. Metel, V. Nicolosi and V. Wagner, Solid-State Electron., 2018, 141, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Z. Sofer and A. Ambrosi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8981–8987 RSC .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. F. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. J. Ji, Z. Y. Ju, K. Yu, P. J. Ferreira, Y. Y. Liu and G. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1–6 CrossRef .
M. B. Dines, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 287–291 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruizhitzky, R. Jimenez, B. Casal, V. Manriquez, A. S. Ana and G. Gonzalez, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 738–741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liang, H. D. Yoo, Y. F. Li, J. Shuai, H. A. Calderon, F. C. R. Hernandez, L. C. Grabow and Y. Yao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2194–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Y. Li, Y. Xie, Q. Chen, Z. Y. Chen and Q. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 46699–46703 RSC .
K. Sato, T. Noji, T. Hatakeda, T. Kawamata, M. Kato and Y. Koike, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 86, 104701 CrossRef .
J. S. O. Evans, S. J. Price, H. V. Wong and D. O'Hare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 10837–10846 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mortazavi, C. Wang, J. K. Deng, V. B. Shenoy and N. V. Medhekar, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuc and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2603–2614 RSC .
S. X. Fan, X. L. Zou, H. D. Du, L. Gan, C. J. Xu, W. Lv, Y. B. He, Q. H. Yang, F. Y. Kang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13599–13605 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Wang, Z. Xu, W. L. Wang and X. D. Bai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6693–6697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, L. P. Wang, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and K. H. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11296–11301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shuai, H. D. Yoo, Y. L. Liang, Y. F. Li, Y. Yao and L. C. Grabow, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3, 064001 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zeng, C. L. Tan, X. Huang, S. Y. Bao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 797–803 RSC .
N. Imanishi, M. Toyoda, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 58, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi and D. Aurbach, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 421, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi, E. A. Levi and D. Aurbach, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 421, 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Tian, Q. C. Zhuang, J. Li, Y. L. Shi, J. P. Chen, F. Lu and S. G. Sun, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 3204–3212 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Hong, G. Yoon, H. Kim, K. Y. Park, M. S. Park, W. S. Yoon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2963–2969 RSC .
M. Doyle, T. F. Fuller and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1526–1533 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Smith, C. D. Rahn and C. Y. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 2565–2578 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Sun, J. Kang, J. Feng, H. A. Bechtel, L. W. Wang, E. J. Cairns and J. H. Guo, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1466–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Sun, J. Kang, H. T. Wang, S. H. Hsieh, W. F. Pong, H. A. Bechtel, J. Feng, L. W. Wang, E. J. Cairns and J. H. Guo, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4506–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Zhao, H. B. Shu, Z. H. Shen, H. M. Hu, J. Wang and X. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2139–2146 CrossRef CAS .
X. You, N. Liu, C. J. Lee and J. J. Pak, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, P. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. H. Ye, S. Kim and C. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6902–6910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mieda, R. Azumi, S. Shimada, M. Tanaka, T. Shimizu and A. Ando, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 08LB07 CrossRef .
B. K. Miremadi and S. R. Morrison, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 63, 4970–4974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chrissafis, M. Zamani, K. Kambas, J. Stoemenos, N. A. Economou, I. Samaras and C. Julien, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1989, 3, 145–151 CrossRef .
D. Yang and R. F. Frindt, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1996, 57, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Fan, P. T. Xu, D. K. Zhou, Y. F. Sun, Y. G. C. Li, M. A. T. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5956–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim and Z. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 48, 43–48 Search PubMed .
K. S. Suslick, Y. Didenko, M. M. Fang, T. Hyeon, K. J. Kolbeck, W. B. McNamara, M. M. Mdleleni and M. Wong, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1999, 357, 335–353 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Py and R. R. Haering, Can. J. Phys., 1983, 61, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. H. Dong, Y. P. Liu, C. T. Nai, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, B. Liu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2995 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Wan, W. Z. Bao, Y. Liu, J. Q. Dai, F. Shen, L. H. Zhou, X. H. Cai, D. Urban, Y. Y. Li, K. Jungjohann, M. S. Fuhrer and L. B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401742 CrossRef .
C. Q. Feng, J. Ma, H. Li, R. Zeng, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1811–1815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, J. Wang, D. L. Chao, Z. Chen, Z. Liu, J. L. Kuo, J. X. Yan and Z. X. Shen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7533–7540 RSC .
F. Xiong, H. T. Wang, X. G. Liu, J. Sun, M. Brongersma, E. Pop and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6777–6784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Li, Y. L. Liang, F. C. R. Hernandez, H. D. Yoo, Q. Y. An and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang, X. Shen, Z. X. Wang, R. C. Yu and L. Q. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11394–11400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Du, J. Q. Huang, X. Y. Guo, X. Y. Lin, J. Q. Huang, H. Tan, Y. Zhu and B. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8801–8809 CrossRef CAS .
A. Andersen, S. M. Kathmann, M. A. Lilga, K. O. Abrecht, R. T. Hallen and D. H. Mei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1826–1832 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Tang, B. Tian, C. T. Nai, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9208–9215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, F. Krok, J. Nowinski, V. C. Gibson and K. Tavakkoli, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 705–706 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, F. Krok, P. Lightfoot, J. L. Nowinski and V. C. Gibson, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53, 351–355 CrossRef .
H. Liu, B. C. Chen, L. B. Liao, P. Fan, Y. Hai, Y. Y. Wu, G. C. Lv, L. F. Mei, H. Y. Hao, J. Xing and J. J. Dong, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 13247–13254 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li and Y. D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13893–13900 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liang, R. J. Feng, S. Q. Yang, H. Ma, J. Liang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Tchitchekova, A. Ponrouch, R. Verrelli, T. Broux, C. Frontera, A. Sorrentino, F. Barde, N. Biskup, M. E. Arroyo-de Dompablo and M. R. Palacin, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 847–856 CrossRef CAS .
A. Emly and A. Van der Ven, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 4394–4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Sun, P. Bonnick and L. F. Nazar, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Li, X. K. Mu, Z. Zhao-Karger, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm, C. Kubel and M. Fichtner, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
H. F. Liang, Z. Cao, F. W. Ming, W. L. Zhang, D. H. Anjum, Y. Cui, L. Cavallo and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3199–3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Li, Q. Yang, F. N. Mo, G. J. Liang, Z. X. Liu, Z. J. Tang, L. T. Ma, J. Liu, Z. C. Shi and C. Y. Zhi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 94–101 CrossRef .
A. A. Jeffery, C. Nethravathi and M. Rajamathi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1386–1396 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Lin, Y. Liu, U. Halim, M. N. Ding, Y. Y. Liu, Y. L. Wang, C. C. Jia, P. Chen, X. D. Duan, C. Wang, F. Song, M. F. Li, C. Z. Wan, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nature, 2018, 562, 254–258 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. He, Z. Y. Lin, M. N. Ding, A. X. Yin, U. Halim, C. Wang, Y. Liu, H. C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6819–6826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dines and R. Levy, J. Phys. Chem., 1975, 79, 1979–1982 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chianelli, J. Scanlon, M. Whittingham and F. Gamble, Inorg. Chem., 1975, 14, 1691–1696 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bissessur, J. L. Schindler, C. R. Kannewurf and M. Kanatzidis, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1994, 244, A249–A254 CrossRef .
C. Riekel and C. Fischer, J. Solid State Chem., 1979, 29, 181–190 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Dines, Inorg. Chem., 1978, 17, 762–763 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, H. G. Abbas, G. Jung, Y. Lee, J. Park, S. J. Yoo, J. G. Kim and H. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11349–11356 RSC .
I. H. Kwak, I. S. Kwon, H. G. Abbas, G. Jung, Y. Lee, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5613–5617 RSC .
I. H. Kwak, H. G. Abbas, I. S. Kwon, Y. C. Park, J. Seo, M. K. Cho, J. P. Ahn, H. W. Seo, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8101–8106 RSC .
W. M. R. Divigalpitiya, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Science, 1989, 246, 369–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van Bremen, Q. R. Yao, S. Banerjee, D. Cakir, N. Oncel and H. J. W. Zandvliet, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2017, 8, 1952–1960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganal, P. Moreau, G. Ouvrard, M. Sidorov, M. McKelvy and W. Glaunsinger, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1132–1139 CrossRef CAS .
E. Varrla, C. Backes, K. R. Paton, A. Harvey, Z. Gholamvand, J. McCauley and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1129–1139 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Yang, Z. Chen, J. F. Fang, Q. Yang, W. Zhao, X. X. Qian, C. X. Liu, D. T. Zhou, S. Tao and X. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2019, 255, 126596 CrossRef .
E. D. Grayfer, M. N. Kozlova and V. E. Fedorov, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 245, 40–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lucia Muscuso, F. Cesano, D. Scarano and A. Zecchina, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3791–3801 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Yin and W. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2838–2846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ejigu, I. A. Kinloch, E. Prestat and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11316–11330 RSC .
J. Peng, J. J. Wu, X. T. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Yu, Y. Q. Guo, J. C. Wu, Y. Lin, Z. J. Li, X. J. Wu, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9019–9025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Niu, J. N. Coleman, H. Zhang, H. Shin, M. Chhowalla and Z. J. Zheng, Small, 2016, 12, 272–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-G. Zhou, N.-N. Mao, H.-X. Wang, Y. Peng and H.-L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, Y. He, J. Wu, C. Gao, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5449–5454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. S. D. Bergin, D. Rickard, P. V. Streich, J. P. Hamilton and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2340–2350 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Halim, C. R. Zheng, Y. Chen, Z. Y. Lin, S. Jiang, R. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2213 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O'Neill, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2414–2421 CrossRef .
A. Jawaid, D. Nepal, K. Park, M. Jespersen, A. Qualley, P. Mirau, L. F. Drummy and R. A. Vaia, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, V. Arunachalam and S. Vasudevan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4884–4890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Cucinotta, K. Dolui, H. Pettersson, Q. M. Ramasse, E. Long, S. E. O'Brian, V. Nicolosi and S. Sanvito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15707–15715 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vega-Mayoral, R. Y. Tian, A. G. Kelly, A. Griffin, A. Harvey, M. Borrelli, K. Nisi, C. Backes and J. N. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6206–6216 RSC .
X. J. Chua and M. Pumera, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6610–6619 RSC .
J. F. Shen, J. J. Wu, M. Wang, P. Dong, J. X. Xu, X. G. Li, X. Zhang, J. H. Yuan, X. F. Wang, M. X. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2016, 12, 2741–2749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dong, S. Lin, L. Yang, J. J. Zhang, C. Yang, D. Yang and H. B. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15936–15939 RSC .
M. Esfandiari and S. Mohajerzadeh, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 425204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sajedi-Moghaddam and E. Saievar-Iranizad, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 015045 CrossRef .
R. Jha and P. K. Guha, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 7256–7268 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Liu, H. L. Ma, I. Teixeira, Z. Y. Sun, Q. N. Xia, X. L. Hong and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. –Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2910–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, V. Arunachalam and S. Vasudevan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .
C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, A. Kelly, C. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 243–255 CrossRef .
M. Gutierrez and A. Henglein, Ultrasonics, 1989, 27, 259–261 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, E. Skorb, V. Belova and H. Mohwald, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1922–1934 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, J. I. Jang, H. Kim, J. Y. Hwang, H. K. Yoo, J. S. Woo, S. Choi, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, K. J. Baeg, K. Cho and G. W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5133 CrossRef PubMed .
S. X. Leong, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa, S. M. Tana and M. Pumera, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2768–2777 RSC .
S. Biccai, S. Barwich, D. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon, N. McEvoy and J. N. Coleman, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 015008 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, H. P. Zhang, Y. Q. Sun, H. Q. Chen and Y. D. Zhang, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 725246 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Yao, L. Tolentino, Z. Z. Yang, X. J. Song, W. Zhang, Y. S. Chen and C. P. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3577–3583 CrossRef CAS .
U. Khan, A. O'Neill, H. Porwal, P. May, K. Nawaz and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2012, 50, 470–475 CrossRef CAS .
C. Backes, R. J. Smith, N. McEvoy, N. C. Berner, D. McCloskey, H. C. Nerl, A. O'Neill, P. J. King, T. Higgins, D. Hanlon, N. Scheuschner, J. Maultzsch, L. Houben, G. S. Duesberg, J. F. Donegan, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Backes, B. M. Szydlowska, A. Harvey, S. J. Yuan, V. Vega-Mayoral, B. R. Davies, P. L. Zhao, D. Hanlon, E. J. G. Santos, M. I. Katsnelson, W. J. Blau, C. Gadermaier and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1589–1601 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schumacher, L. Scandella, N. Kruse and R. Prins, Surf. Sci., 1993, 289, L595–L598 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Gordon, D. Yang, E. D. Crozier, D. T. Jiang and R. F. Frindt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 125407 CrossRef .
D. Yang, S. J. Sandoval, W. M. R. Divigalpitiya, J. C. Irwin and R. F. Frindt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 43, 12053–12056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. García-Dalí, J. I. Paredes, J. M. Munuera, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Adawy, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36991–37003 CrossRef .
S. M. Tan, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa and M. Pumera, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4594–4607 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Fan, P. T. Xu, Y. C. Li, D. K. Zhou, Y. F. Sun, M. A. T. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5143–5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Yuwen, H. Yu, X. R. Yang, J. J. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhang, Z. M. Luo, S. Su and L. H. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 529–532 RSC .
L. Nurdiwijayanto, R. Z. Ma, N. Sakai and T. Sasaki, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 7620–7623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, X. Liu, L. Ma, P. Gong, Z. Yang, H. Wang, J. Wang and S. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 82763–82773 RSC .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
Y. Li, K. A. N. Duerloo, K. Wauson and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Y. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Alsaid, K. Y. Fong, Y. Zhou, S. Q. Wang, W. Shi, Y. Wang, A. Zettl, E. J. Reed and X. Zhang, Nature, 2017, 550, 487–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Wang, Z. Y. Lu, S. C. Xu, D. S. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Y. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Chen and C. S. Wang, Solid State Commun., 1974, 14, 857–860 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chakraborty, H. Matte, A. K. Sood and C. N. R. Rao, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 92–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wang, C. X. Cong, C. Y. Qiu and T. Yu, Small, 2013, 9, 2857–2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chen, C. X. Zheng, M. S. Fuhrer and J. Yan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2526–2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Bertrand, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 5745–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhang, C. C. R. Yap, B. K. Tay, T. H. T. Edwin, A. Olivier and D. Baillargeat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, H. Yan, L. E. Brus, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and S. Ryu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2695–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mignuzzi, A. J. Pollard, N. Bonini, B. Brennan, I. S. Gilmore, M. A. Pimenta, D. Richards and D. Roy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 195411 CrossRef .
B. J. Zheng, Y. F. Chen, F. Qi, X. Q. Wang, W. L. Zhang, Y. R. Li and X. S. Li, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025092 CrossRef .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Witomska, T. Leydecker, A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901126 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Gong, Y. X. Zhang, W. Chen, J. W. Chu, T. Y. Lei, J. R. Pu, L. P. Dai, C. Y. Wu, Y. H. Cheng, T. Y. Zhai, L. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700231 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shim, H. Y. Park, D. H. Kang, J. O. Kim, S. H. Jo, Y. Park and J. H. Park, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600364 CrossRef .
J. Y. Oh, J. H. Lee, S. W. Han, S. S. Chae, E. J. Bae, Y. H. Kang, W. J. Choi, S. Y. Cho, J. O. Lee, H. K. Baik and T. Il Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1696–1705 RSC .
Q. P. Lu, Y. F. Yu, Q. L. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Zhu, D. Q. Gao, J. Ding, D. L. Chao and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4332–4356 RSC .
H. Y. Jin, C. X. Guo, X. Liu, J. L. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. C. Lai, Q. L. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3301–3338 RSC .
X. C. Duan, J. T. Xu, Z. X. Wei, J. M. Ma, S. J. Guo, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700156 CrossRef .
J. J. Wu, J. Peng, Z. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Q. Guo, Z. J. Li, Y. Lin, K. Q. Ruan, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 493–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Liu, X. Y. He, D. Hanlon, A. Harvey, J. N. Coleman and Y. G. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8821–8828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yang, H. Ji and Y. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26374–26380 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Lee, S. W. Min, Y. G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3695–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Yang, S. Tongay, Y. Li, Q. Yue, J. B. Xia, S. S. Li, J. B. Li and S. H. Wei, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7226–7231 RSC .
D. B. Velusamy, R. H. Kim, S. Cha, J. Huh, R. Khazaeinezhad, S. H. Kassani, G. Song, S. M. Cho, S. H. Cho, I. Hwang, J. Lee, K. Oh, H. Choi and C. Park, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–11 Search PubMed .
C. Backes, N. C. Berner, X. Chen, P. Lafargue, P. Laplace, M. Freeley, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman and A. R. Mcdonald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2638–2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Kelly, T. Hallam, C. Backes, A. Harvey, A. S. Esmaeily, I. Godwin, J. Coelho, V. Nicolosi, J. Lauth, A. Kulkarni, S. Kinge, L. D. A. Siebbeles, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2017, 356, 69–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tang and D. E. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4953–4961 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. W. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng, S. Y. Bao, M. F. Wang, X. Y. Qi, Z. X. Fan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. J. Wu, M. J. Liu, K. Chatterjee, K. P. Hackenberg, J. F. Shen, X. L. Zou, Y. Yan, J. Gu, Y. C. Yang, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500669 CrossRef .
F. Pelayo García De Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. Mccallum, A. R. Kirmani, D.-H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. X. Liu, L. D. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1704049 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Kral, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Abbasi, M. Asadi, C. Liu, S. Sharifi-Asl, B. Sayahpour, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 453–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H. L. Du, D. B. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. Macfarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, S. Z. Zhao, R. J. Guo, J. He, X. Y. Peng, H. H. Bao, J. T. Fu, L. L. Han, G. C. Qi, J. Luo, X. L. Tang and X. J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 420–427 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhao, X. Lan, D. K. Yu, H. Fu, Z. M. Liu and T. C. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13010–13013 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Q. Cui, J. X. Zhao, G. R. Jia, L. Gu, Q. H. Zhang, L. K. Meng, Z. Shi, L. R. Zheng, C. Y. Wang, Z. W. Zhang and W. T. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, H. J. Wang, X. Z. Yuan, H. Li and M. H. Shao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1336–1341 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Q. Ji, X. Ren, Y. J. Ma, X. F. Shi, Z. Q. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Li, T. S. Li, Y. J. Ma, Q. Wei, W. B. Qiu, H. R. Guo, X. F. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. P. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801357 CrossRef .
X. Yao, Z. W. Chen, Y. R. Wang, X. Y. Lang, W. Gao, Y. F. Zhu and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25961–25968 RSC .
K. Jia, Y. Wang, L. Qiu, J. J. Gao, Q. Pan, W. H. Kong, X. X. Zhang, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, B. H. Zhong, X. D. Guo and L. Yang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1986–1989 RSC .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nitta, F. X. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed .
D. Sun, D. Huang, H. Y. Wang, G. L. Xu, X. Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. G. Tang, D. Abd Ei-Hady, W. Alshitari, A. S. Al-Bogami, K. Amine and M. H. Shao, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 361–369 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Lin, W. Lei, S. W. Zhang, Y. Q. Liu, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 408–423 CrossRef .
M. L. Mao, L. Mei, D. Guo, L. C. Wu, D. Zhang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12350–12353 RSC .
B. J. Guo, K. Yu, H. Fu, Q. Q. Hua, R. J. Qi, H. L. Li, H. L. Song, S. Guo and Z. Q. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6392–6401 RSC .
B. Chen, N. Q. Zhao, L. C. Guo, F. He, C. S. Shi, C. N. He, J. J. Li and E. Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12895–12905 RSC .
W. Zhuang, L. C. Li, J. H. Zhu, R. An, L. H. Lu, X. H. Lu, X. B. Wu and H. J. Ying, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Teng, H. L. Zhao, Z. J. Zhang, Z. L. Li, Q. Xia, Y. Zhang, L. N. Zhao, X. F. Du, Z. H. Du, P. P. Lv and K. Swierczek, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8526–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. W. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Tan, Z. Y. Zeng, X. Huang, X. H. Rui, X. J. Wu, B. Li, Z. M. Luo, J. Z. Chen, B. Chen, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Bang, K. W. Nam, J. Y. Kim, J. Shin, J. W. Choi and S. Y. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7084–7089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Su, S. X. Dou and G. X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401205 CrossRef .
X. K. Cai, Y. T. Luo, B. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6224–6266 RSC .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Z. Wu, L. L. Peng, C. W. Lin, S. L. Hu, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, M. S. Prevot and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5892–5899 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yu, M. S. Prevot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, N. Guijarro, M. Johnson and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Qingyong Zhang	Qingyong Zhang received his BS and MS from Harbin Institute of Technology in 2014 and 2016, respectively. Then, he worked for China Aviation Lithium Battery Co., Ltd. and Shenzhen BAK Battery Co., Ltd. from 2016 to 2019, focusing on the analysis of lithium-ion batteries. Currently, he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Asst. Prof. Zhiyuan Zeng. He is focusing on the electrochemical intercalation strategy for the preparation and applications of transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets.
Liang Mei	Liang Mei received his BE in Jianghan University in 2014. After receiving his MS from South China University of Technology in 2017, he worked as a Research Assistant in Prof. Xiao-Ming Chen's group in Sun Yat-sen University. Then, he moved to the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the City University of Hong Kong in 2019 to pursue his PhD under the supervision of Asst. Prof. Zhiyuan Zeng. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and their composites.
Xiehong Cao	Dr Xiehong Cao received his BE from Zhejiang University, China (2008). He completed his PhD under Prof. Hua Zhang and then worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013–2015). He joined the Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT, China) in 2015. He is now the director of 2D Functional Materials Lab, Institute of Advanced Materials Research Center, ZJUT. He was selected as a “Highly Cited Researcher” in 2018 and 2019. His current research interests include the synthesis of two-dimensional nanomaterials for metal–air batteries, Zn-ion batteries, and water desalination via capacitive deionization.
Yuxin Tang	Dr Tang Yuxin is an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering (IAPME) at the University of Macau. He obtained his BS and MS at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and graduated from Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) with a PhD in Materials Science (2013). After his postdoctoral fellow training at NTU, he joined IAPME as an Assistant Professor in 2018. His research interests include solid-state and fast-charging energy storage devices and the development of real-time electrochemical-reaction-monitoring techniques.
Zhiyuan Zeng	Dr Zhiyuan Zeng obtained his BE and ME from Central South University, Zhejiang University, in 2006 and 2008, respectively. He completed his PhD under Prof. Hua Zhang at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2013). He joined Dr Haimei Zheng's group as a Postdoctoral Fellow at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2013–2017). After working for Applied Materials Inc. in Silicon Valley (2017–2019), he joined the City University of Hong Kong as an Assistant Professor in 2019. His current research interest focuses on battery intercalation strategies involving the preparation of single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and their applications in energy storage, catalysis, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the intercalation and exfoliation with the intercalation method and a summary of the species.	 
nI + TX2 → InTX2	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of chemical intercalation, which can be assisted by sonication or heating, thereby significantly reducing the reaction time.	 
α(t) = 1 − exp(−(kt)m)	(2)
ln(−ln(1 − α(t))) = mln(kt)	(3)
TS2 + xLi+ +xe− → LixTS2	(4)
LixTS2 + (4 − x)Li+ + (4 − x)e− → Li2S + T	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of electrochemical intercalation into TMDs. (a) Intercalation of metal ions (such as Li+, Na+, and K+). (b) Intercalation of anions and radicals (such as SO42−, OH˙, and O˙). (c) Intercalation of ammonium ion.	 

 	Fig. 4  XRD patterns of intercalated TMDs. (a) Intercalation of alkaline metal ions into the interlayer-spacing-expanded MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014. (b) Chemical intercalation of lithium into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016. (c) Electrochemical intercalation of sodium into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014. (d) Electrochemical lithium intercalation into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018.	 
6MoS2 + 4Mg2+ + 8e+ → Mg4Mo6S12	(6)
[xMg2+ − ySL] + 2xe− + TiS2 → MgxSLyTiS2	(7)

Phase 1	0	0.34058(2)	0.56987(4)
Phase2	0.05	0.3416(3)	0.5903(7)
Phase3	0.17	0.3431(2)	0.6112(3)
Phase4	0.56	0.34934(5)	0.6123(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of Mg intercalation into TiS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016. (b) and (c) Zn intercalation into MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019.	 
Li + H2O → LiOH + H2	(8)

 	Fig. 6  Effects of sonication on the basal plane (a) and Mo–S–Mo bond (b) during exfoliation in IPA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015. (c) Shearing-assisted exfoliation of MoS2 in NMP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the exfoliation process. It shows the separation of nanosheets by size via centrifugation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a two-step expansion and intercalation method. (b) SEM, (c) AFM, and (d) TEM images of Na-exfoliated single-layer MoS2. Insets show the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images. (e) Wafer-scale MoS2 pattern jet printing. Large-area, continuous, and highly uniform MoS2 thin-film patterns were directly printed on a 4-inch Si/SiO2 wafer by inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical lithiation process for the synthesis of 2D TMDs nanosheets from layered bulk materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012. (b) Photographs of the dispersion of 2D TMDs nanosheets and (c) the corresponding AFM images of TMDs on SiO2 substrates. Insets show the AFM images indicating the height profile of the TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the electrochemical intercalation of MoS2 with THAB. (b) Schematic of the intercalation and exfoliation of MoS2 crystals to produce 2D MoS2 nanosheet ink. (c) AFM image of an individual MoS2 nanosheet. The blue line represents the height profile across the nanosheet; scale bar: 200 nm. (d) Thickness distribution of exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets as measured by AFM (bars) and a Gaussian fit (red line). The mean thickness is 3.8 nm and the standard deviation is 0.9 nm. (e) TEM and (f) SAED images of a single MoS2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2018.	 


MoS2	Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation	1 nm/∼/92%/1T,15 5 nm/0.3–0.5 μm/60%/1T,102 5 nm ∼/30%/2H,139 0.7 nm/50 μm/5–9%/2H,53 3.6 nm/0.5–2 μm/∼/2H84
Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation	1 nm/3–10 μm/80%/2H&1T,62 1–1.2 nm/0.3–0.8 μm/∼/2H&1T,138 20–200 nm/∼/∼/2H&1T,140 5 nm/∼/11–15%/2H,141 1.1 nm/∼/10.3%/1T,142 1.2 nm/0.3–1 μm/70%/1T143
Direct exfoliation	5–7 nm/0.5–1 μm/0.3 mg mL−1/∼,18 0.9–1.2 nm/∼/0.018 mg mL−1/∼,105 1.2 nm/∼/∼/2H,106 1.44 nm/∼/10 mg mL−1/∼,144 ∼/0.28 μm/0.25 mg mL−1/2H20
WS2	Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation	1 nm/∼/∼/1T15
Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation	5–70 nm/∼/∼/2H&1T,140 1.1 nm/∼/∼/∼62
Direct exfoliation	∼/0.14–0.15 μm/0.15 mg mL−1/∼,18 3 nm/∼/0.032 mg mL−1/∼,105 1.6 nm/∼/∼/2H106
TiS2	Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation	0.7–0.9 nm/∼/∼/1T,15 0.9 nm/0.5–1 μm/39%/∼41
Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation	1.1 nm/∼/∼/∼62
TaS2	Electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation	1.0–1.1 nm/∼/∼/1T,15 0.9 nm/0.3–1 μm/93%/∼41
Chemical intercalation in liquid and exfoliation	0.9 nm/∼/∼/∼62

 	Fig. 11  (a) Composite film deposited on a nylon membrane filter paper. (b) Schematic representation of the photodetector device. (c) Semi-log scale I–V characteristics of a MoSe2 photodetector in the dark and under different light intensities of NIR light at a wavelength of 1064 nm for a bias voltage of ±10 V. (d) Schematic illustration of the photodetector containing a mixture of MoSe2 and MoS2 nanosheets exfoliated with PS-NH2. (e) Photoresponse performance of blended composites for different mixing ratios of MoSe2 and MoS2 with PS-NH2 as a function of wavelength (in the visible to NIR regions). (f) Photocurrent as a function of the composition of MoSe2 and MoS2 mixtures embedded in PS-NH2 at wavelengths of 532 and 1064 nm at light intensities of 63 and 230 mW cm−2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  Continuously tuning the HER performance of MoS2 by controlling the discharge voltage in the electrochemical intercalation of Li. (a) Schematic of the battery testing system using vertically aligned MoS2 nanofilms as the cathode. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curve exhibiting the lithiation process and associated structural transformations. (c) Polarization curves of pristine and different lithiated MoS2 tested in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Tafel slope of MoS2 is consecutively tuned by the electrochemical intercalation of Li to different voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 13  Single-layer-based Pt–TiS2 composite for HER. (a) i, TEM image of Pt–TiS2. Inset: the diffraction pattern. ii, Magnified TEM image of Pt–TiS2. Inset: HRTEM of Pt–TiS2 (scale bar: 1 nm). iii, iv, AFM data of typical TiS2 and TaS2 deposited on Si–SiO2 substrates. (b) Polarization curves of different electrocatalysts. (c) Corresponding Tafel plots. (d) Cycle stability test of TiS2 and Pt–TiS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 14  Exfoliated TMDs electrocatalysts for OER applications. (a) Schematic of the exfoliation method using a mixed solvent. (b) Schematic of the preparation method for a working electrode in OER. (c) Polarization curves of the exfoliated TMDs in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  Ultrathin MoTe2 shows excellent activity for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4. (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (b) AFM image of ultrathin MoTe2 layers. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves obtained for IL–H2O-composed electrolyte. (d) Faradaic efficiency for methane at various applied potentials. (e) Chronoamperometry curve at a potential of −1.0 VRHE and the corresponding faradaic efficiency of methane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 16  Three types of CO2RR electrocatalysts in an IL (EMIM–BF4–H2O mixture). (a and b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of bulk MoS2 in a CO2 environment and the corresponding faradaic efficiencies at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2014. (c and d) CV curves for WSe2 NFs and their faradaic efficiencies at a series of applied potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016. (e and f) CV curves and faradaic efficiencies of Nb-doped MoS2 under different voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  2D vertical epitaxial CuS–TiS2 hetero-nanostructure and its excellent performance as an anode in a lithium-ion battery. (a) TEM image of CuS nanoplates epitaxially grown on a TiS2 nanosheet. Inset: photograph of CuS–TiS2 solution. (b) Highly magnified TEM image of CuS–TiS2. (c) The SAED pattern of CuS–TiS2 with the electron beam perpendicular to the basal plane of the TiS2 nanosheet. (d) HRTEM image and (e) the corresponding FFT-generated SAED pattern of a typical CuS nanoplate on a TiS2 nanosheet. The dotted curve in (d) shows an approximation of the interface between CuS and TiS2. (f) Cycling performance of the CuS–TiS2 electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Side view of an electrode observed by SEM, showing the layered nature of the film made by restacking exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets. (b) High-magnification image of restacked MoS2 nanosheets. (c) Evolution of the volumetric capacitance of 1T-phase MoS2 electrodes at different scan rates for different electrolytes. The concentration of cations in the electrolyte solutions was fixed at 1 M. (d) Capacitance retention after 5000 cycles in 0.5 M Li2SO4, H2SO4, and 1 M TEA BF4 in acetonitrile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2015.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
