Device physics of back-contact perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE04203B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE04203B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1753-1765Device physics of back-contact perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Zhenhai 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weichuang 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xi 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. C. 
            Greer
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Sheng
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Baojie 
            Yan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jichun 
            Ye
          
        
      *a
aNingbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: shengjiang@nimte.ac.cn; jichun.ye@nimte.ac.cn
bDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering, The University of Nottingham, Ningbo 315100, China. E-mail: Jim.Greer@nottingham.edu.cn
Received 
      30th December 2019
    , Accepted 14th April 2020First published on 14th April 2020AbstractBack-contact perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are a promising candidate to further increase power conversion efficiency (PCE) and have been the subject of many investigations. However their full potential has not been achieved due to a lack of a complete understanding of their operation from a device physics perspective. In this study, a detailed photoelectrical model for back-contact PSCs is developed by coupling a drift-diffusion description of a free charge transport model with ion migration currents and emitted-carrier generation resulting from photon recycling. By studying the influence of relevant electrical parameters, the interplay between charge generation, transport and recombination is revealed to further clarify the design principles based on devices with a back-contact structure. Although devices featuring the back-contact structure exhibit sensitivity to electrical parameters, a high PCE exceeding 25% is predicted if the interface passivation and perovskite film quality can be well controlled. Different conduction band and valence band offsets offering various screening opportunities for functional materials with high efficiencies are introduced. Additionally, the simulated results revealed that mobile ions degrade the device performance if the average ion concentration exceeds 1016 cm−3. Furthermore, we point out that photon recycling can effectively compensate for radiative recombination, thereby resulting in an improved open circuit voltage. The results provide a new understanding of the carrier transport dynamics, ion migration, and photon recycling effects for the back-contact structure, which can be applied for a systematic improvement in the design of high efficiency PSCs.

Broader context
The use of back contact previously explored for silicon-based devices has received significant attention for perovskite solar cell (PSC) applications. A back contact design removing the need for front electrode eliminates the shielding effect and reduces parasitic absorption inherent to traditional sandwich devices, thereby affording a high short-circuit current density. Currently, back-contact PSCs are still limited by poor material selectivity and a poor understanding of their underlying device physics. Therefore, in this work, a comprehensive theoretical guidance is provided. The inherent behaviour of back-contact PSCs is revealed through a detailed photoelectrical simulation. By addressing the carrier dynamic processes, the design principles of a back-contact device are established and the charge carrier transport mechanisms are clarified. Different conduction band and valence band offsets, which provide various screening opportunities for functional materials with high efficiency, are introduced and reviewed. Furthermore, the effect of mobile ions and photon recycling effects on the device response is comprehensively investigated. The simulation results indicated that the mobile ions would alter the initial energy band alignment and free-carrier concentration distributions, exhibiting a significant effect on the device PCE if the mobile ion concentration Ni exceeds 1016 cm−3. Due to the photon recycling effect, radiative recombination can be suppressed effectively. Herein, the results unveil a possibility for further promoting the performance of PSCs and provide valuable guidelines for the design and fabrication of back-contact PSCs.

Introduction
As a promising candidate for the photovoltaics (PV) community, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown a remarkable improvement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) over the past decade. Hitherto, record PCEs exceeding 25% for single-junction PSCs and 28% for perovskite–silicon (Si) tandem solar cells (SCs) have been reported.1 Traditional PSCs are based on a sandwich p–i–n or n–i–p structure, which can achieve excellent PCEs by integrating high-quality perovskite films and electron/hole transport layers (ETLs/HTLs) as well as state-of-the-art interface passivation technologies.2 The developments in advanced material fabrication and device integration have minimized the photoelectrical losses of traditional sandwich PSCs, leaving little room for further improvements in efficiency with the conventional approach. A fundamental change in device architecture is necessary to overcome the limitations imposed by the sandwich structure.
The concept of back contacts (BCs) previously explored for Si-based optoelectronic devices3–5 has recently been introduced to PSCs.6–15 BC-PSCs eliminate the parasitic absorption due to the front-side contacts inherent to traditional sandwich PSCs. In the absence of the front electrodes, an opportunity for screening a suitable antireflective coating (ARC) and passivation materials is provided, endowing PSCs with a facile strategy for structural design. In terms of BC-PSCs, additional advantages of eliminating pinholes and protecting the perovskite film from damage by subsequent layers are offered. Moreover, perovskite properties such as photon recycling (PR)16 and simultaneous in situ and in operando film characterization17 can be studied in BC devices. To achieve the benefits of BC-PSCs, numerous attempts have been made. For instance, Bach et al. presented a self-assembled molecular monolayer to modify the gold–perovskite interface for BC-PSCs, resulting in an efficient charge extraction with a corresponding photovoltage of 600 mV and photocurrent of 12.1 mA cm−2.8 Furthermore, they introduced a honeycomb-like grid geometry for BC-PSCs, which demonstrated a high short-circuit current (Jsc) of 16.4 mA cm−2 and a stabilized PCE of 4%.10 David et al. used a directional evaporation technique to construct V-shaped micro-grooves for flexible BC-PSCs that showed a high PCE of 7.3% for an individual groove device, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 15 V and a PCE exceeding 4% for series-connected multiple groove devices.7 Recently, Deschler et al. reported electron- or hole-only transport phenomena for quasi-interdigitated back-contact (QIBC) PSCs, resulting from the long carrier diffusion lengths inside perovskite films (i.e., 12 and 13 μm for electrons and holes, respectively), and thereby a high Jsc of 18.4% mA cm−2 and a PCE of 4.1%.6 Moreover, Ma et al. investigated the affecting factors of IBC PSCs by a numerical simulation, which suggested that the device efficiency can be improved from 19.95% (sandwich PSCs) to 22.77% (IBC PSCs).12 However, the development of BC-PSCs is at an early stage and cannot yet compete with that of sandwich-type PSCs. To unlock the full potential of BC-PSCs, a fundamental understanding of the charge carrier transport mechanisms that result in limitations to BC-PSC performance is necessary. Additionally, a theoretical model for BC-PSCs including PR phenomena, which have been observed and confirmed experimentally,16,18–21 and an ion migration model, which has been exploited for sandwich-type PSCs,22–25 should be established.
In this study, a detailed photoelectrical model including ion migration and photon recycling effects to investigate methods to design high-efficiency QIBC PSCs is developed and analysed. With the example of nickel oxide (NiOx) as the HTL and stannic oxide (SnO2) as the ETL, the optical and electrical performances of this type of QIBC PSCs is reviewed by addressing the influence of relevant parameters on charge carrier generation, transport and recombination processes including the effects of interface passivation at the perovskite/ETL, perovskite/HTL and perovskite/ARC interfaces; the defect density, lifetime, and doping concentration of perovskite films; as well as ETL and HTL doping concentrations. The simulation results indicate that the QIBC structure not only shows a high Jsc compared to traditional sandwich devices owing to the negligible parasitic absorption, but also a low carrier recombination loss if the interface passivation and film quality can be well controlled. Furthermore, the study is expanded beyond typically used material sets by considering different conduction band and valence band offsets to enable screening to develop high-efficiency material systems. Moreover, a traditional two-dimensional (2D) carrier transport model coupled with ion migration was established to illustrate the relationship between device performance and ionic mobility. These simulations reveal that the mobile ions alter the initial energy band alignment at a heterojunction, the internal electric field distribution, free charge carrier concentration, and the built-in potential when the average ion concentration exceeds 1016 cm−3. Finally, the PR effect is included in the simulations quantitatively to analyse the role of effect on device performance. Detailed simulation results indicate that, owing to the PR effect, radiative recombination losses can be suppressed, thereby affording an improved Voc, a modified S-shaped current–voltage (J–V) curve, and a high tolerance against device pitch and carrier diffusion length.
Results and discussion
Simulation device and photogeneration
In this study, we focus on the QIBC structure instead of the standard IBC configuration to investigate the photoelectrical response of BC-PSCs. The QIBC structure allows charge carriers to travel large lateral distances through a perovskite film before reaching their respective contacts and has been confirmed to be an efficient design by Deschler et al. owing to the combination of their relatively simple fabrication processes and the long-range charge transport.6 We replicated the simulation model of Deschler et al. as shown in Fig. 1a. A 100 nm-thick SnO2 layer and a 50 nm-thick NiOx layer were used as the ETL and HTL, respectively, which were electrically insulated by a 100 nm-thick aluminium oxide (Al2O3) insulating layer. A 500 nm-thick F-doped stannic oxide (FTO) film and a 50 nm-thick nickel metal (Ni) film were selected as the negative and positive electrodes, respectively. Additionally, a flat polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) ARC was used to cover the front surface of the perovskite film. The width of the HTL (WHTL) and the pitch were fixed at 1 and 2 μm, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of QIBC PSCs. (b) Profile map of photogeneration carrier rate inside the perovskite region with an effective thickness of 500 nm and a pitch of 2 μm. Normalized generation rate along (c) the lateral direction across the span of a single pitch and (d) perovskite depth. (e) Spectra of effective carrier generation and loss rate (i.e., Abs, Ref, and Para abs). The inset pie chart shows the distributions of the corresponding current densities. 
To obtain accurate photoelectrical information of QIBC PSCs, it is necessary to strive for a specific 2D spatial photogeneration carrier distribution. For many one-dimensional (1D) carrier transport models, a simple uniform distribution or the Lambert–Beer model has been applied to describe the photogeneration carrier distribution.26 However, this approach is inaccurate in most cases, especially for devices with 2D textured structures as multiple reflections and resonances are ignored. To include these effects, a thorough electromagnetic calculation is needed. The spatial and wavelength-dependent carrier generation rate, g(x, y, x, λ), is as follows:27 g(x,y,z,λ) = α(λ)φ(λ)Ps(x,y,z,λ)(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)where α(λ) = 4πκ/λ is the extinction coefficient of the photoactive material, κ is the imaginary part of the refractive index, φ is the spectral flux under AM1.5G, Ps is the power flow, Psx, Psy and Psz are the power flux components in the x, y and z directions, respectively, E/H is the frequency and spatially dependent electric/magnetic field, ‘Re’ and ‘*’ are the operators used to obtain the real component and the complex conjugate, respectively. Therefore, the spatially dependent generation (G) can be expressed as (6)In eqn (6), λmin and λmax are the minimum and maximum values of the absorption wavelength that are taken as 300 and 800 nm, respectively, corresponding to the perovskite absorption spectrum with a bandgap of 1.55 eV. Using these model equations, the cross-sectional carrier generation rate inside the perovskite region is calculated and shown in Fig. 1b, which reveals a non-uniform carrier generation distribution. For the calculated results in Fig. 1b, the out-of-plane thickness along the z direction was fixed at 1 mm. For a deeper understanding, the carrier generation rates along the lateral direction within one pitch span within the perovskite region are plotted in Fig. 1c and d, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 1c, the optical absorption was strengthened near the middle position of two adjacent HTL bars and weakened at the HTL/ETL boundary. The depth-dependent generation rate in Fig. 1d shows that (1) the carrier generation mainly concentrates on the front surface of the perovskite layer, which is similar to the results reported by Koster et al.;28 (2) a sharp decrease at a depth of 400 nm can be observed owing to the shrunken perovskite area. Additionally, the spectra displayed in Fig. 1e are those of the frequency-dependent carrier generation and loss rate, i.e., blue, green and red regions for perovskite absorption (Abs), device reflection (Ref) and parasitic absorption loss (Para Abs), respectively. The new design (i.e., QIBC structure) shows a high optical absorption efficiency from the ultraviolet to the infrared waveband. For a comprehensive evaluation, we define the photocurrent density as Jph, which can be calculated by the following equation: (7)where q is the electronic charge. For our 2D model, we only need to consider the 2D carrier generation rate, i.e., G(x, y). The photocurrent density loss can be addressed using the same approach.
Notably, the effective perovskite and ARC thicknesses are 300 and 50 nm, respectively, in Koster's experiment. This is represented by a low Jph of 21.37 mA cm−2 in our simulation owing to strong reflection and transmittance, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). To pursue an improvement in the value of Jph, a comprehensive optical optimization was implemented by increasing the effective perovskite thickness from 300 to 500 nm, increasing the PMMA thickness from 50 to 80 nm, and replacing the transparent glass substrate with an opaque metal substrate as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Consequently, the effective photocurrent and loss densities were 24.26 (for Abs), 2.50 (for Ref), and 0.73 mA cm−2 (for Para Abs) as shown in Fig. 1e. The Para Abs analysis presented in Fig. S3 (ESI†) indicates that parasitic absorption loss is primarily from the Ni and FTO films. To facilitate comparisons, the corresponding sandwich structure exhibiting the same configuration is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). In this structure, a moderate value of Jph = 22.38 mA cm−2 is found accompanied by a high Para Abs current loss of 2.37 mA cm−2. These values are representative for the sandwich-type designs. Hence the QIBC devices exhibit strong potential for improving the effective optical absorption while simultaneously suppressing reflections and parasitic absorption losses, thereby achieving a relatively high carrier generation rate.
Dependence of electrical parameters
Based on the optical generation rate, the coupled set consisting of typical Poisson's, carrier continuity, and drift-diffusion equations were solved to determine the electrical performance of the PSCs and are explicitly given by23 −∇·(εr∇V) = q(p − n + Nd − Na + n+t−n−t)(8) (9) (10)respectively, using standard notation where εr is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, V is the electrostatic potential, n/p is the electron/hole concentration, Nd/Na is the ionized donor/acceptor concentration, n+t/n−t is the donor/acceptor trap density, Jn/Jp is the electron/hole current density, μn/μp is the electron/hole mobility, Dn/Dp is the electron/hole diffusion coefficient, which can be deduced by Einstein's relation, i.e., Dn,p = μn,pkBT/q with kB Boltzmann's constant and T the operating temperature set to be 300 K in the simulation, ξ is the electric field, which can be obtained using  is the transient electron (hole) concentration change, which is set at 0 and only the steady-state case is considered in this study. R is the total carrier recombination rate, which is described by four contributions:29 R = Rrad + RAug + RSRH + Rsur(11) Rrad = Brad(np − ni2)(12) RAug = (Ann + App)(np − ni2)(13) (14) (15)where Rrad is the radiative or direct recombination rate, Brad is the radiative recombination coefficient, RAug is the Auger recombination rate, An/Ap is the electron/hole Auger recombination coefficient, RSRH is the Shockley-Read-Hall recombination rate, τn/τp is the electron/hole lifetime, Rsur is the surface recombination rate, Sn/Sp is the surface recombination velocity of the electrons/holes, ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration, nt/pt is the bulk electron/hole concentration of the trap states, and nts/pts is the corresponding surface trap state concentration. A good estimation was presumed by approximating the bulk and interface states of all energies into a single energy at the middle level of the bandgap, therefore, nt = nts = pt = pts = ni. RSRH and Rsur can be expressed by the interface and bulk defect densities (Dit and Nt), respectively, with Dit = vthσn,pSn,p and Nt = 1/(vthτn,pσn,p), where vth is the thermal velocity and σ is the relevant capture cross-section for the charge carriers. The relevant parameters used in this simulation are listed in Table S1 (ESI†).
The relationship between PCE and materials parameters including the defect density at HTL/perovskite interfaces (Dit_HTL) and ETL/perovskite interfaces (Dit_ETL), surface recombination velocity of PMMA/perovskite (Stop), bulk defect density (Nt) and electron mobility (μn) in perovskite, and Vocversus light intensity are shown for QIBC PSCs in Fig. 2, in which results for the traditional sandwich structure are also shown for comparison. Here, we assume that the parameters are independent of each other even though they are not. Such a relationship between different parameters is expected to be established in the future by innovative methods. As can be seen from Fig. 2a and b, it can be concluded that (i) the PCEs for both cases (i.e., QIBC and sandwich PSCs) tend to decrease monotonically as Dit_HTL is increased from 108 to 1014 cm−2, but remain larger than the values for the sandwich structure for values Dit_ETL < 1011 cm−2. The efficiencies decrease significantly for larger values of Dit_ETL; (ii) a faster/slower PCE falloff for the QIBC case can be observed when Dit_HTL/Dit_ETL increases from 108 to 1014 cm−2, indicating that the QIBC design has a higher/lower tolerance for Dit_ETL/Dit_HTL than the sandwich design. This phenomenon can be attributed to the fact that the incident direction of the sandwich-type structure is from the ETL side (Fig. S4, ESI†), which results in severe carrier recombination losses if Dit_ETL is too large owing to a large amount of photogeneration carriers near the ETL/perovskite interface. Moreover, for the QIBC design, carrier selective contacts (i.e., ETL and HTL) are further away relative to the sandwich design from the high concentration region of carrier generation, thereby resulting in a relatively low carrier recombination loss. This inference can be confirmed by the recombination loss distributions shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The effect of Stop on the PCE and fill factor (FF) of QIBC PSCs is shown in Fig. 2c; in the figure it is evident that the performance of the QIBC device depends primarily on Stop, especially for Stop > 10 cm s−1. Fig. 2d and e show the PCE values as functions of the trap density Nt and electron mobility μn of the perovskite region, which reveal that (i) QIBC PSCs achieve higher PCE values than that of sandwich PSCs at lower trap densities Nt < 1014 cm−3 and for higher values of electron mobility μn > 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1; (ii) the QIBC design relies significantly on Nt and μn because of the long lateral carrier diffusion lengths within perovskite films. The corresponding electrical parameters such as FF, Jsc and Voc are shown in Fig. S6–S10 (ESI†). The device response (i.e., Voc) under different light intensities is plotted in Fig. 2f, where the slope of the curves reflects trap-assisted recombination.30 Here, the devices based on the sandwich and QIBC architectures indicate slopes of 1.32 and 1.26 kBT/q, respectively, when assuming moderate interface passivation (i.e., Dit_HTL = Dit_ETL = 1010 cm−2), as shown in Fig. 3f, suggesting an analogous trap-assisted recombination, which is consistent with the conclusions from Fig. 2a and b. The PSCs assuming high-quality interface passivation with Dit_HTL = Dit_ETL = 108 cm−2 are also shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†), which results in slopes of 1.012 and 1.027 kBT/q for the sandwich and QIBC designs, respectively, indicating that interface recombination is essential for determining the device performance. The results demonstrate that the QIBC design is not an obstacle to pursue a high-performance device if the interface recombination can be well suppressed. To briefly summarize, a high PCE for QIBC PSCs requires low values of Dit_HTL, Dit_ETL, Stop, Nt and high mobility μn and μp, simultaneously. Moreover, it is worth noting that the best efficiency beyond 25% is predicted in this study, higher than 22.77% reported by Ma et al. in ref. 12. The reasons for the different upper limit of device efficiency are that (i) QIBC PSCs in this work show higher potential in carrier collection area and carrier transport/collection efficiency than the conventional IBC PSCs in ref. 12, which is expected to be confirmed in our future work; (ii) the optimized parameters of carrier transport materials are adopted in this study, which is not the case in ref. 12.
 Fig. 2  Effects of (a) Dit_HTL, (b) Dit_ETL, (c) Stop, (d) Nt and (e) μn on the performance of QIBC PSCs, where the traditional sandwich counterpart is plotted for comparison. (f) Vocversus light intensity for QIBC and sandwich PSCs under Dit_HTL = Dit_ETL = 1010 cm−2. 
 Fig. 3  Recombination loss distributions contributed by SRH, Rad, Aug and ARC/perovskite surface (top surface) under SC, MP and OC conditions for Dit = (a) 108 and (b) 1010 cm−2. (c) J–V characteristic curves for these two involved cases under Dit = 108 and 1010 cm−2. (d) Jn and (e) Jp distribution under the SC condition. The red arrows indicate the directions of Jn and Jp. (f) Integrated current density (norm.) including Jn, Jp and Jtot within a single pitch span under the SC condition. 
Carrier transport dynamics govern the charge collection efficiency further impacting the photovoltaic performance. Next, the effects of recombination are analysed in detail. The histograms in Fig. 3a and b present the recombination loss distributions for QIBC and sandwich PSCs with Dit = 108 and 1010 cm−2 for short-circuit (SC), maximum power (MP), and open-circuit (OC) conditions. It is evident that the Auger recombination for all cases is negligible. When Dit = 108 cm−2 as shown in Fig. 3a, the recombination loss for the QIBC and sandwich PSCs is dominated by nonradiative recombination (i.e., SRH and top surface recombination) with a SC condition, whereas these contributions to recombination are suppressed under the MP and OC conditions as inferred from the significant increase in the radiative recombination contribution (i.e., ∼60% for the MP condition and ∼90% for the OC condition). The relevant recombination distributions inside the perovskite region for the three conditions are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†). For moderate interface passivation described by an interface trap density of Dit = 1010 cm−2 as used to generate the results in Fig. 3b, radiative recombination becomes strongly suppressed, and the total rate is almost entirely governed by SRH recombination. The corresponding J–V characteristic curves for the two designs are shown in Fig. 3c, which suggest a reduced Voc, FF and PCE for the QIBC device owing to the strong SRH recombination with Dit increasing from 108 to 1010 cm−2. To reveal the nature of the carrier transport mechanism, the intensity distributions for the electron (Jn) and hole (Jp) current densities as shown in Fig. 3d and e within the perovskite film are examined, for which the corresponding current density direction is marked to highlight the carrier transport pathways. At SC, electrons between two adjacent HTL regions are transported vertically and directly, and they are not significantly affected by the HTL especially in the region nearest the ETL; whereas electrons in the HTL are first transported laterally and then vertically to reach the ETL. The highest current occurs at the middle position between two adjacent HTL electrodes, which has been confirmed by Tainter et al. in ref. 6. In contrast, the holes in Fig. 3e show the opposite behavior. The normalized current density integrated along the perovskite depth within one pitch span is depicted in Fig. 3f that shows self-consistent results in Fig. 3d and e. Moreover, the cases of the current density Jn and Jp distributions under MP and OC conditions shown in Fig. S13 and S14 (ESI†), respectively, suggest a poor carrier-selective transport and therefore a strong carrier recombination loss. Moreover, Jn and Jp show relatively low values at the edge of the finger under the SC condition, while demonstrate high values at the edge of the finger under MP and OC conditions. This conclusion can be attributed to the different potential distribution as shown in Fig. S15 (ESI†).
Doping concentration and conduction/valence band offset
In addition to the electrical parameters previously discussed, the doping concentrations of the perovskite film, HTL and ETL significantly affect the device performance.31Fig. 4a shows the PCE of a QIBC device and a sandwich PSC as a function of the doping concentration in the perovskite film. It is evident from Fig. 4a that a high PCE for the two cases can be well maintained with Na, Nd < 1016 cm−3; however, it decreases rapidly if Na or Nd > 1016 cm−3. The Jsc variation in Fig. S16 (ESI†) and the corresponding J–V characteristic curves in Fig. 4b and c reveal that the PCE deterioration for the high doping concentration case (i.e., Nd and Na) stems from the increased bulk recombination loss resulting in the reduced Jsc. Additionally, the doping concentration of the ETL and HTL is varied systematically in this study as shown in Fig. 4d where Nc (Nv) is the effective conduction (valence) band density. With Nd/Nc of the ETL or Na/Nv of the HTL increasing from 10−5 to 1, the PCEs of the QIBC PSCs first increase rapidly to 25% and then stabilize. The poor PCE for low Nd/Nc and Na/Nv is primarily caused by the S-shaped J–V characteristic curves in Fig. 4e and f and the inferior FF as shown in Fig. S17 (ESI†). A reasonable explanation for this is that the series resistance under the MP condition is limited by insufficient hole or electron conduction.32
 Fig. 4  (a) PCE of QIBC and sandwich PSCs as a function of perovskite doping concentration. The corresponding J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under (b) Na and (c) Nd = 1015, 1016, 1017, 5 × 1017 and 1018 cm−3. (d) PCE of QIBC PSCs under varied Nd/Nc of ETL and Na/Nv of HTL. The corresponding J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under (e) Na/Nd and (f) Na/Nv from 10−5 to 1. 
The above-mentioned results and conclusions are based on SnO2 ETL and NiOx HTL designs which restricts the universality of the analysis owing to the specific material system chosen. It is necessary to expand our study to include a wider range of typically used material sets. Here, we consider the effect of different material sets by considering the conduction band offsets (CBO) between the ETL/perovskite layers and valence band offsets (VBO) between the HTL/perovskite layers. Fig. 5a depicts the definitions of the CBO and VBO, where positive and negative energy offsets are defined by the barrier height to carrier transport from the perovskite to the ETL or HTL. If the affinity of the ETL (χETL) is larger/lower than that of the perovskite (χper), the CBO value is negative/positive and an energy cliff/spike is formed for electrons at the ETL/perovskite interface, which assists/opposes the electron transport as shown in Fig. 5b and c.33 Similarly, if the conduction band of the HTL (i.e., χHTL + Eg_HTL) is higher/lower than that of the perovskite (i.e., χper + Eg_per), the VBO value is positive/negative, and hence an energy spike/cliff is formed for holes at the HTL/perovskite interface, assisting/opposing the hole transport as shown in Fig. 5b and c. A set of widely studied functional materials that have been explored successfully are summarized in Fig. 5d. ETL materials include titanium oxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), SnO2, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), C60, bathocuproine, niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5), strontium titanium oxide (SrTiO3), indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), and indene-C60 tri-adducts (ICTA), whereas HTL materials include 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), NiOx, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene (PEDOT:PSS), copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN), graphene oxide, copper iodide (CuI), cuprous oxide (Cu2O), cupric oxide (CuO), CuGaO2, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and vanadium oxide (VOx).34–38 To provide a comprehensive study on material selectivity, PCE values as functions of CBO and VBO are shown in Fig. 5e, which reveals that a high PCE can be obtained for a large range of CBO (i.e., from −0.4 to 0.2 eV) and VBO (i.e., from −0.4 to 0.3 eV) values.
 Fig. 5  (a) Band alignments between ETL/perovskite layer/HTL. Energy band diagrams of PSCs under (b) negative CBO and VBO alignment, (c) positive CBO and VBO alignment. (d) Conduction and valence band positions shown by upper and lower rectangles, respectively, for different ETL and HTL materials. The band edges of perovskite are shown as a grey bar for reference. (e) Effects of CBO and VBO on the efficiency of QIBC PSCs, where the typically used ETL/HTL designs are marked in the figure. 
We assume that the relative Fermi levels of the ETLs and HTLs are constant values. When the CBO (VBO) is positive, an energy barrier can be observed as shown in Fig. 5c, and electrons (holes) must overcome the barrier, lowering the device's PCE if the barrier height is sufficiently large (i.e., >0.3 eV). In contrast, if the CBO (VBO) is negative, the energy barrier that is formed will not impede carrier transport when the CBO (VBO) values are low (i.e., <0.4 eV); however, a further increase in the CBO (VBO) values will promote a large recombination rate at the interface when being a detrimental activation energy of recombination and hence reduce the device PCE.39 Numerous ETL/HTL designs as reported in the literature are marked in Fig. 5e indicating that many alternative material sets satisfy the requirements for high PCEs employing our QIBC design. The resulting PCE estimates are listed in Table S2 (ESI†).
Ion migration effect
Ion migration behavior is a primary reason for hysteretic phenomena40 and perovskite film degradation25 has been widely investigated in sandwich-type devices. Mobile ions alter the electric field and charge carrier distribution within the perovskite layer which in turn affects carrier recombination and hence transport influencing the overall device performance as well. It is important to understand the effect of ion migration behavior on the performance of a device when using a QIBC structure. In this study, photoelectrical models are implemented that include ion migration by coupling the drift-diffusion equations for anion (a−) and cation (c+) concentrations with free-charge transport equations (i.e., eqn (9) and (10)) as follows:23 (16)where Ja−/Jc+ is the anion/cation current density, μa−/μc+ is the anion/cation mobility, and Da−/Dc+ is the anion/cation diffusion coefficient. The continuity equations for the anions and cations are as follows: (17)Therefore, Poisson's equation in eqn (8) can be rewritten as: −∇·(εr∇V) = ρ = q(p − n + Nd − Na + n+t − n−t + c+ − a−)(18)where ρ is the charge density. Here, the neutrality of ionic charge across the entire perovskite region is assumed, which indicates that the sum of all positive and negative ions throughout the perovskite region must be zero: (19)where S is the effective integral area of study, and Ni is the average ion concentration.
Based on the above equations, the performance of PSCs with ion migration can be evaluated thoroughly. In this study, degeneration in the quality of the perovskite films is not considered because the specific relationship between Ni and perovskite film quality is difficult to establish in the current model, although the effect should not be ignored in principle. Notably, the carrier transport in traditional sandwich-type PSCs is given by a 1D model, which only considers carrier vertical transport and ignores the lateral process. In this study, a 2D transport model that simultaneously includes free charges and the ionic carrier's vertical and lateral transport is treated. As depicted in Fig. 6a and b, anions and cations cannot separate for the case of no ion migration. However, for the ion migration case, ions can separate and migrate towards the ETL and HTL/perovskite interfaces, respectively, resulting in accumulation at the corresponding perovskite surfaces.
 Fig. 6  Energy diagram of PSCs with (a) no ion migration and (b) ion migration under equilibrium, where cations and anions are represented by purple and yellow symbols, respectively. (c) PCE as a function of average ion concentration (Ni) of the perovskite layer. (d) Energy band diagram, (e) carrier concentration and (f) space charge density (ρ) of QIBC PSCs under Ni = 0, 1015 and 1017 cm−3 under the SC condition. 
The separation and transport of the mobile ions are driven by the internal electric fields from the device configuration. Ion accumulation at the perovskite surfaces at steady state affects the internal electric field shifting the energy alignment as shown in Fig. 6a and b, indicating its significance for carrier recombination/transport in determining device performance. Fig. 6c displays the normalized PCE of QIBC PSCs as a function of Ni, which reveals that the effect of ions on the device performance is almost negligible if Ni > 1016 cm−3; however, the PCE rapidly decreases as Ni is increased from 1016 to 1019 cm−3, suggesting the importance of suppressing Ni for high-efficiency PSCs. The measured Ni ranging from 1015 to 1019 cm−3 from experiment is highlighted by the blue region in Fig. 6c.22 For a deeper insight into the influence of mobile ions on the device characteristics, further investigations of the energy levels, carrier concentration distributions and charge density (ρ) distribution are shown in Fig. 6d and f for three typical cases (i.e., Ni = 0, 1015 and 1017 cm−3) as examples. For low Ni (Ni = 1015 cm−3), the energy level is almost unchanged compared to the no ion case (i.e., Ni = 0). The position corresponding to intercepting the QIBC structure is displayed in Fig. S18 (ESI†). However, if Ni is increased to a value of 1017 cm−3, the energy level moves towards a zero offset owing to the mobile ions inside the perovskite film consistent with the results in Fig. 6a and b and other reports. This observation can be confirmed by the potential distribution in Fig. S19 (ESI†). The free charge and ion carrier distributions are displayed in Fig. 6e. For the case of Ni = 1015 cm−3, both anions and cations decay exponentially from the interface into the bulk-like regions in the perovskite film and free charge carriers are less affected. If Ni is sufficiently high (Ni = 1017 cm−3), the concentration of mobile ions will first reduce quickly and then remain unchanged from the interface to the bulk of the perovskite region, and the free charge carriers inside the perovskite region can be modulated and redistributed. In detail, the 2D cross-sectional ion distribution of anions and cations for the QIBC structure within the perovskite region is presented in Fig. S20 (ESI†). Moreover, the corresponding charge distribution ρ in Fig. 6f reveals that the accumulation and depletion of anions and cations at the respective interfaces for a high Ni (1017 cm−3) are predominantly limited to the thin Debye layer. These accumulated ions at the interfaces are responsible for shifting energy offsets, free charge carrier distributions, and electrostatic potentials, and hence give rise to the degraded device performance as shown in Fig. 6c.
Photon recycling effect
For a solar cell, carrier transport is usually limited by the insufficient carrier diffusion lengths, resulting in severe carrier recombination losses (especial for IBC device). The photon recycling effect through multiple absorption-diffusion-emission events could prolong the carrier diffusion distances, and therefore suppress the radiative carrier recombination losses and improve the carrier transport efficiencies. In that case, the split of quasi-Fermi levels can be improved, leading to a promoted Voc and PCE. As PR phenomena have been confirmed to be fundamental in perovskite-based devices, particularly for QIBC structures, it is necessary to understand the effect of PR on the device response for QIBC structures. First, detailed models with the PR effect must be established. As shown in Fig. 7a, radiatively emitted photons have three possible routes, i.e., (i) escape from the top surface with a probability of Pe, (ii) parasitic absorption by the rear substrate with a probability of Pa, and (iii) reabsorption and generation of charge carriers with a probability of Pr. For case (i), photons within an escape cone and that are not re-absorbed pass through the perovskite layer and escape into the free space from the front side of the device without being recycled. Similarly, the reemitted photons for case (ii) will be parasitically absorbed by the rear contact materials within the escape cone and do not participate in the recycling process. For case (iii), photons can be recycled by emitting photons outside the escape cone or by a possible direct reabsorption. For our QIBC structure, the calculated regions can be divided into two parts, i.e., on the HTL and outside the HTL (ETL). Therefore, the respective escape probabilities can be expressed as (20)where nARC and nper are the frequency-dependent reflective indexes of the ARC and perovskite materials, respectively, Afront is the absorptance of the perovskite layer for illumination from the front side, dETL (dHTL) is the perovskite thickness at the ETL (HTL) region, φbb is the blackbody radiation flux, which can be defined as (21)In fact, it is difficult to deduce Pa accurately. Therefore, we address it using the same method for Pe in eqn (20). Additionally, we assume that parasitic absorption is only governed by the rear contacts, and therefore Pa can be written as follows: (22)where nETL/nHTL is the frequency-dependent reflective index of the ETL/HTL, Arear is the absorbance of the perovskite layer for illumination from the rear side. Additionally, the effective Pe and Pa can be geometrically weighted by the ETL and HTL components. (23)
 Fig. 7  (a) Sketch map of possible routes of the reemitted photons caused by radiative recombination within the perovskite region. (b) Pe, Pa and Pr as a function of ff. The inset is the schematic diagram of the device size. (c) PCE of QIBC PSCs as a function of Pitch under ff = 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8 for non-PR and PR cases. Dependence of Ld and Pitch on the PCE of QIBC PSCs for (d) non-PR and (e) PR cases. (f) J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under Ld = 1 and 10 μm for non-PR and PR cases. Recombination loss distribution for (g) non-PR and (h) PR cases under the OC condition. (i) Roadmap for improving the PCE of QIBC solar cells to the upper limit. 
As the sum of the three probabilities is one, Pr thus can be expressed by Pr = 1 − Pe − Pa(24)By implementing these equations, the values of Pe, Pa and Pr can be determined. Fig. 7b shows Pe and Pa and Pr as a function of HTL size ratio ff, suggesting a structure-dependent Pr with values ranging from 0.8 to 0.86. Next, we verify the effect of PR on the device performance under three different values of ff (i.e., 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8) as shown in Fig. 7c. Here, we consider high-quality passivation of the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTL interfaces with Dit = 108 cm−2, because it is more meaningful to suppress nonradiative recombination at the bulk and interfaces when investigating the PR effect.18 We verify this conclusion by addressing the device properties under poor-quality interface passivation with Dit = 1010 cm−2 as shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†), which indicates a slight increase in the PCE owing to the PR effect. It is evident from Fig. 7c that (i) the PR cases for the three values of ff increase the value of PCE compared with the non-PR case especially for large device pitches; (ii) the case of ff = 0.5 shows higher PCE values for larger pitches owing to the relatively short diffusion length of the minority carriers; (iii) the PCEs for all cases remain almost constant for small pitches (i.e., less than 5 μm) but decrease severely if the pitch exceeds 2Ld, where Ld = (Dn,pτn,p)1/2 is the carrier diffusion length. Subsequently, the dependence of PCE for the QIBC PSCs on pitch and Ld is shown in Fig. 7d and e for the non-PR and PR cases, respectively. It is evident that the PR case induces a higher PCE, showing a relatively high tolerance against pitch and Ld, and the lower PCE for the non-PR case can be compensated for by the PR effect to some degree. The J–V characteristic curves for two representative cases (i.e., Ld = 1 and 10 μm under pitch = 2 μm marked by red and black stars, respectively) are presented in Fig. 7f, which indicate that (i) S-sharped J–V curves with a degraded Jsc are observed owing to the strengthened SRH recombination caused by the insufficient carrier diffusion lengths; (ii) nearly ideal J–V curves can be obtained for Ld = 10 μm, but the PR case exhibits a high Voc value owing to the suppressed radiative recombination under the OC condition. These results can be verified by the following equation: (25)where Jrad0 and Jnrad0 are the saturation currents of radiative and nonradiative recombination, respectively. Additionally, this conclusion has been confirmed by Kirchartz et al.18 It is noted that poor J–V curves near Voc can be observed in Fig. 3c, while flattened J–V curves at MP can be found in Fig. 7f. Difference between the two types of J–V responses can be attributed to the different carrier recombination mechanism, i.e., the former and the latter are dominated by interface and bulk recombination, respectively. Moreover, the recombination loss distributions for the non-PR and PR cases under the OC condition are shown in Fig. 7g and h, respectively. With PR, radiative recombination can be reduced from 89% to 68%. Finally, a specific scheme to further promote the PCE of this type of QIBC SCs is shown in Fig. 7i, which reveals that (i) PCE of QIBC SCs can be improved to 25.8% by suppressing the non-radiative recombination completely, which includes Auger recombination and SRH recombination at interface and bulk regions. Here, a very small improvement in PCE (0.4%) is due to the fact that high-quality interface passivation and low bulk defects have been considered in the primary case; (ii) with the PR effect, the PCE of QIBC SCs can be further boosted to 27.1%; (iii) a high PCE of 29.9% can be further realized by the advanced optical design, which allows a high Jsc that can be confirmed by the J–V curves in Fig. S22 (ESI†). Here, we noted that our predicted efficiency (29.9%) is slightly lower than 31% reported by Sha et al.,44 which maybe caused by the strong radiative recombination inherent to IBC devices. Anyhow, we demonstrate an implementable route to achieve a high PCE for QIBC PSCs, providing a scalable method to approach the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit of PSCs.
Conclusions
In conclusion, a detailed photoelectrical model for QIBC PSCs is developed. The model clarifies the design principles and carrier transport dynamics for the QIBC structure based on the processes of generation, carrier transport (i.e., drift and diffusion) and recombination. The simulation results reveal that the QIBC device can achieve a higher Jsc than that of the traditional sandwich device owing to suppressed parasitic absorption, and a high PCE exceeding 25% can be obtained if the interface passivation and film quality are well controlled. Further optimisation of the QIBC design was performed by investigating the effects of doping concentration of the perovskite, ETL and HTL layers and the influence of different energy offsets at the interfaces on the device performance. Importantly for the analysis of the QIBC structures, ionic migration and PR models are coupled to the transport in the simulations. By verifying the energy band alignment, free carrier and mobile ion concentrations, and space charge density, the effects of ion migration on the device performance can be extracted and it is concluded that mobile ions significantly affected the device PCE if Ni > 1016 cm−3. Furthermore, the role of PR in the device performance is quantitatively assessed and it is revealed that the PR effect can compensate for the poor S-shaped J–V curves, thereby improving the device Voc and affording a high tolerance against device pitch and carrier diffusion length. The results presented in this study provide effective guidelines for designing and optimizing high-efficiency QIBC PSCs.
Methods
Optical simulation
We implemented an optical simulation based on the finite-element method (FEM). By solving Maxwell's equations, spatial electromagnetic information coupled with frequency-domain responses can be obtained. A 2D simulation was performed with a pair of Floquet periodic exponents to enforce the periodic boundary conditions and a perfectly matched layer (PML) was used as the absorbing boundary condition. The wavelength-dependent refractive indexes of all the materials were obtained from the literature.41–43 The standard AM1.5G spectrum with wavelengths ranging from 300 to 800 nm was adopted as the solar incidence, which is consistent with the perovskite bandgap of 1.55 eV.
Electrical simulation
An electrical simulation was performed by solving the Poisson and drift-diffusion equations as given by eqn (8)–(10). The relevant electrical parameters used in this simulation, such as the bandgap, electron affinity, dielectric permittivity, effective valence (conduction) band density, carrier mobility, carrier lifetime, recombination coefficients and doping concentration, are listed in Table S1 (ESI†). For 2D carrier transport, the electrical periodic boundary conditions are applied in the horizontal direction. Ohmic contacts are considered for the ETL/FTO and HTL/Ni interfaces and no additional parasitic contact resistance is included in this study. Notably, the minority or majority carrier species (i.e., electrons or holes) depends on the ff of the QIBC structure. Furthermore, Deschler et al.6 reported that the performance of a device under the QIBC structure is driven by majority carrier diffusion. In fact, it is not rigorous but corresponds to the case when the device pitch is significantly larger than the perovskite thickness. It is evident that when WHTL is significantly higher/lower than WETL, the device is governed by hole/electron (majority carrier) diffusion.
Author contributions
Z. Y., J. C. G., J. S., and J. Y. conceived the simulation. Z. Y. implemented the simulation. Z. Y., J. C. G., J. S., and J. Y. wrote the manuscript. Z. Y., W. Y., and X. Y. contributed to the sketches. Z. Y., W. Y., X. Y., J. C. G., J. S., B. Y., and J. Y. discussed the results. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61874177, 61674154), the Zhejiang Energy Group (Project No. znkj-2018-118), and the National Key Research and Development of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1500103).
Notes and references
NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cellefficiency.html.
C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, E. M. Hutter, M. Sessolo, K. Lederer, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456–3463 RSC .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Lin, K. W. Chee, P. Gao and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Lin, J. Sheng, X. Yang, W. Wang, K. W. A. Chee, P. Gao and J. Ye, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900230 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Tainter, M. T. Hörantner, L. M. Pazos-Outón, R. D. Lamboll, H. Āboliņš, T. Leijtens, S. Mahesh, R. H. Friend, H. J. Snaith, H. J. Joyce and F. Deschler, Joule, 2019, 3, 1301–1313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wong-Stringer, T. J. Routledge, T. McArdle, C. J. Wood, O. S. Game, J. A. Smith, J. E. Bishop, N. Vaenas, D. M. Coles, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1928–1937 RSC .
X. Lin, A. N. Jumabekov, N. N. Lal, A. R. Pascoe, D. E. Gomez, N. W. Duffy, A. S. R. Chesman, K. Sears, M. Fournier, Y. Zhang, Q. Bao, Y. B. Cheng, L. Spiccia and U. Bach, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 613 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lin, A. S. R. Chesman, S. R. Raga, A. D. Scully, L. Jiang, B. Tan, J. Lu, Y.-B. Cheng and U. Bach, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805098 CrossRef .
Q. Hou, D. Bacal, A. N. Jumabekov, W. Li, Z. Wang, X. Lin, S. H. Ng, B. Tan, Q. Bao, A. S. R. Chesman, Y.-B. Cheng and U. Bach, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 710–716 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Jumabekov, J. A. Lloyd, D. M. Bacal, U. Bach and A. S. R. Chesman, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1077–1082 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, Q. Song, D. Tadaki, M. Niwano and A. Hirano-Iwata, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
G. DeLuca, A. N. Jumabekov, Y. Hu, A. N. Simonov, J. Lu, B. Tan, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Garnett, E. Reichmanis, A. S. R. Chesman and U. Bach, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4473–4478 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Jumabekov, E. Della Gaspera, Z. Q. Xu, A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden, S. A. Bonke, Q. Bao, D. Vak and U. Bach, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3125–3130 RSC .
R. H. Friend, F. Deschler, L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Abdi-Jalebi and M. Alsari, Sci. Video Protoc., 2019, 1, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrućinić, M. Alsari and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 1430–1433 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Alsari, O. Bikondoa, J. Bishop, M. Abdi-Jalebi, L. Y. Ozer, M. Hampton, P. Thompson, M. T. Hörantner, S. Mahesh, C. Greenland, J. E. Macdonald, G. Palmisano, H. J. Snaith, D. G. Lidzey, S. D. Stranks, R. H. Friend and S. Lilliu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 383–393 RSC .
T. Kirchartz, F. Staub and U. Rau, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 731–739 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Richter, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Sadhanala, M. Tabachnyk, J. P. H. Rivett, L. M. Pazos-Outon, K. C. Godel, M. Price, F. Deschler and R. H. Friend, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, H. Wei, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gan, X. Wen, W. Chen, C. Zhou, S. Yang, G. Cao, K. P. Ghiggino, H. Zhang and B. Jia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900185 CrossRef .
L. Bertoluzzi, C. C. Boyd, N. Rolston, J. Xu, R. Prasanna, B. C. O’Regan and M. D. McGehee, Joule, 2020, 4, 109–127 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, M. García-Rosell, S. Ravishankar, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and O. Almora, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702772 CrossRef .
P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, M. García-Rosell, J. A. Anta, S. Ravishankar, A. Bou and J. Bisquert, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1450–1453 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nandal and P. R. Nair, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11505–11512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh and A. Gagliardi, Sol. Energy, 2019, 187, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, N. P. Hylton, V. Giannini, K.-H. Lee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and S. A. Maier, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 109–120 CAS .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602432 CrossRef .
Y. Da, Y. Xuan and Q. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 206–213 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. An, A. Shang, G. Cao, S. Wu, D. Ma and X. Li, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800126 CrossRef .
F. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Wei, Y. Li, M. Lv, S. Yang, B. Zhang, J. Yao and S. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 253508 CrossRef .
T. Minemoto and M. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 133, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Kung, M. H. Li, P. Y. Lin, Y. H. Chiang, C. R. Chan, T. F. Guo and P. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800882 CrossRef .
Z. Yu and L. Sun, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700280 CrossRef .
H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994 RSC .
T. Liu, K. Chen, Q. Hu, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600457 CrossRef .
C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Scheer, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 104505 CrossRef .
J. Xiang, Y. Li, F. Huang and D. Zhong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 17836–17845 RSC .
P. Loper, M. Stuckelberger, B. Niesen, J. Werner, M. Filipic, S. J. Moon, J. H. Yum, M. Topic, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 66–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lehr, M. Langenhorst, R. Schmager, S. Kirner, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, C. Case and U. W. Paetzold, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2754–2761 RSC .
Z. Yang, W. Yang, Y. Zeng, C. Shou, B. Yan, K. W. A. Chee, J. Sheng and J. Ye, Opt. Lett., 2019, 44, 4865–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen and W. C. H. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 221104 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee04203bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
The use of back contact previously explored for silicon-based devices has received significant attention for perovskite solar cell (PSC) applications. A back contact design removing the need for front electrode eliminates the shielding effect and reduces parasitic absorption inherent to traditional sandwich devices, thereby affording a high short-circuit current density. Currently, back-contact PSCs are still limited by poor material selectivity and a poor understanding of their underlying device physics. Therefore, in this work, a comprehensive theoretical guidance is provided. The inherent behaviour of back-contact PSCs is revealed through a detailed photoelectrical simulation. By addressing the carrier dynamic processes, the design principles of a back-contact device are established and the charge carrier transport mechanisms are clarified. Different conduction band and valence band offsets, which provide various screening opportunities for functional materials with high efficiency, are introduced and reviewed. Furthermore, the effect of mobile ions and photon recycling effects on the device response is comprehensively investigated. The simulation results indicated that the mobile ions would alter the initial energy band alignment and free-carrier concentration distributions, exhibiting a significant effect on the device PCE if the mobile ion concentration Ni exceeds 1016 cm−3. Due to the photon recycling effect, radiative recombination can be suppressed effectively. Herein, the results unveil a possibility for further promoting the performance of PSCs and provide valuable guidelines for the design and fabrication of back-contact PSCs.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of QIBC PSCs. (b) Profile map of photogeneration carrier rate inside the perovskite region with an effective thickness of 500 nm and a pitch of 2 μm. Normalized generation rate along (c) the lateral direction across the span of a single pitch and (d) perovskite depth. (e) Spectra of effective carrier generation and loss rate (i.e., Abs, Ref, and Para abs). The inset pie chart shows the distributions of the corresponding current densities.	 
g(x,y,z,λ) = α(λ)φ(λ)Ps(x,y,z,λ)	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
−∇·(εr∇V) = q(p − n + Nd − Na + n+t−n−t)	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
R = Rrad + RAug + RSRH + Rsur	(11)
Rrad = Brad(np − ni2)	(12)
RAug = (Ann + App)(np − ni2)	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 2  Effects of (a) Dit_HTL, (b) Dit_ETL, (c) Stop, (d) Nt and (e) μn on the performance of QIBC PSCs, where the traditional sandwich counterpart is plotted for comparison. (f) Vocversus light intensity for QIBC and sandwich PSCs under Dit_HTL = Dit_ETL = 1010 cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 3  Recombination loss distributions contributed by SRH, Rad, Aug and ARC/perovskite surface (top surface) under SC, MP and OC conditions for Dit = (a) 108 and (b) 1010 cm−2. (c) J–V characteristic curves for these two involved cases under Dit = 108 and 1010 cm−2. (d) Jn and (e) Jp distribution under the SC condition. The red arrows indicate the directions of Jn and Jp. (f) Integrated current density (norm.) including Jn, Jp and Jtot within a single pitch span under the SC condition.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) PCE of QIBC and sandwich PSCs as a function of perovskite doping concentration. The corresponding J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under (b) Na and (c) Nd = 1015, 1016, 1017, 5 × 1017 and 1018 cm−3. (d) PCE of QIBC PSCs under varied Nd/Nc of ETL and Na/Nv of HTL. The corresponding J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under (e) Na/Nd and (f) Na/Nv from 10−5 to 1.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Band alignments between ETL/perovskite layer/HTL. Energy band diagrams of PSCs under (b) negative CBO and VBO alignment, (c) positive CBO and VBO alignment. (d) Conduction and valence band positions shown by upper and lower rectangles, respectively, for different ETL and HTL materials. The band edges of perovskite are shown as a grey bar for reference. (e) Effects of CBO and VBO on the efficiency of QIBC PSCs, where the typically used ETL/HTL designs are marked in the figure.	 
	(16)
	(17)
−∇·(εr∇V) = ρ = q(p − n + Nd − Na + n+t − n−t + c+ − a−)	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 6  Energy diagram of PSCs with (a) no ion migration and (b) ion migration under equilibrium, where cations and anions are represented by purple and yellow symbols, respectively. (c) PCE as a function of average ion concentration (Ni) of the perovskite layer. (d) Energy band diagram, (e) carrier concentration and (f) space charge density (ρ) of QIBC PSCs under Ni = 0, 1015 and 1017 cm−3 under the SC condition.	 
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Sketch map of possible routes of the reemitted photons caused by radiative recombination within the perovskite region. (b) Pe, Pa and Pr as a function of ff. The inset is the schematic diagram of the device size. (c) PCE of QIBC PSCs as a function of Pitch under ff = 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8 for non-PR and PR cases. Dependence of Ld and Pitch on the PCE of QIBC PSCs for (d) non-PR and (e) PR cases. (f) J–V characteristic curves of QIBC PSCs under Ld = 1 and 10 μm for non-PR and PR cases. Recombination loss distribution for (g) non-PR and (h) PR cases under the OC condition. (i) Roadmap for improving the PCE of QIBC solar cells to the upper limit.	 
Pr = 1 − Pe − Pa	(24)
	(25)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee04203b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
