Inhibiting lattice distortion of CsPbI 3 perovskite quantum dots for solar cells with efficiency over 16.6%   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02164A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02164A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4201-4212Inhibiting lattice distortion of CsPbI3 perovskite quantum dots for solar cells with efficiency over 16.6%†

        
          
            Donglin 
            Jia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingxuan 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rongshan 
            Zhuang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Hua
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xiaoliang 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: Xiaoliang.zhang@buaa.edu.cn
bYunnan Key Laboratory for Micro/Nano Materials & Technology, School of Materials and Energy, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China
Received 
      8th July 2022
    , Accepted 16th August 2022First published on 19th August 2022AbstractInorganic CsPbI3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) attracted tremendous attention for next-generation photovoltaics owing to their tunable surface chemistry and solution processability. However, the dynamically bound pristine ligands significantly suffer from dissociating from the PQD surface, and thus the intrinsic subtle lattices of PQDs are highly susceptible to distortion, dramatically affecting the long-range stacking and energy landscape of PQD solids. Herein, unfavorable [PbI6]4− octahedral tilts are effectively inhibited by riveting the aprotic trimethylsulfonium iodide (TMSI) ligand with an inverted triangular-pyramidal cationic structure into the vacancies of the PQD surface, which could leverage the steric effect to impart tensile strains from the PQD surface into the bulk. After riveting the TMSI ligands onto the PQD surface, the structural regularity, optoelectronic properties and stability of PQDs are substantially improved. Consequently, the PQD solar cell (PQDSC) yields an efficiency of up to 16.64%. The charge carrier dynamics within the PQDSCs are studied in-depth, which reveals that the remarkable performance of the PQDSCs is attributed to the oriented charge transport in the uniformly-packed PQD solid films with suppressed charge carrier recombination. This work provides new insight into the lattice-stabilization of PQDs through surface ligand engineering for high-performing optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
Inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite QDs (PQDs) show high potential for new-generation photovoltaics owing to their suitable bandgap energy, outstanding optoelectronic properties and chemical processability. However, the rapid dissociation of dynamically bound pristine ligands from the PQD surface upon purification leads to their intrinsically labile lattice suffering from distortion, essentially deteriorating the long-range orientated stacking of PQDs and roughening the energy landscape of PQD solids. In this work, we successfully riveted the aprotic trimethylsulfonium iodide ligand with an inverted triangular-pyramidal cationic structure into the vacancies of the PQD surface, leveraging its steric effect to consistently impart tensile strain to the PQD lattice that effectively suppressed the unfavorable [PbI6]4− octahedral tilt. Taking advantage of this strategy, the structural regularity, photophysical properties and stability of PQDs were substantially improved. As a result, the PQD solar cell (PQDSC) showed a power conversion efficiency of up to 16.64%. The charge carrier dynamics within the PQDSCs were studied in-depth, which revealed that the remarkable performance of the PQDSCs is attributed to the oriented charge transport in the homogeneously packed PQD solid films with suppressed charge carrier recombination. This work offers a facile and effective strategy to manage the lattice configuration of PQDs via surface ligand regulation for achieving high-performing solar cells or other optoelectronic devices.

1. Introduction
Inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br or I) perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) emerged as promising optoelectronic materials owing to their tunable bandgap energies (Eg), high defect tolerance and photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) for application in light-emitting diodes (LEDs),1 lasers,2 photodetectors,3 and solar cells.4,5 Specifically, CsPbI3 PQDs with a suitable Eg (∼1.73 eV) and high light absorption coefficient show great potential as photoactive materials for efficient solar cells. Compared to the bulk CsPbI3 perovskite, PQDs could generate an order of magnitude higher concentration of free carriers by tailoring their surface ligand chemistry, allowing higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) in solar cells.6 Meanwhile, PQDs with larger surface-to-volume ratios over bulk counterparts can maintain their better black phase (α-, β-, or γ-phase) stability by leveraging their surface energy.7 Furthermore, PQDs could be crystallized in large batches during the colloidal synthesis, eliminating limitations of the preferential crystallization process that is essential for bulk perovskites.8 Since the CsPbI3 PQD solar cell (PQDSC) with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.7% was reported by Swarnkar et al. in 2016,9 tremendous efforts were devoted to improving the photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs through the ligand7,10–12 and composition engineering of PQDs,13,14 as well as device architecture optimization of solar cells.15,16 Very recently, an inorganic PQDSC with a high PCE of over 16% was reported, showing great potential for next-generation photovoltaics.12,14,17
During the synthesis of PQDs, long-chain deprotonated oleic acid (oleate anion, OA−) and protonated oleylamine (oleylammonium cation, OAm+) ligands are generally applied to substitute the X- and Cs-site vacancies at the PQD surface, respectively, to maintain the colloidal stability of PQDs.18,19 Meanwhile, these ligands are of great importance in stabilizing the black phase of PQDs because they can terminate the growth of perovskite grains, leading to the negative surface tension of PQDs and thus a tensile surface strain.20 The surface strain of PQDs can be more readily delivered into the bulk with the flexible ionic bonding nature, thereby ensuring the lattice regularity and photoactivity of PQDs.21 However, given that the lattice-regular CsPbI3 grains stabilized by ligands are in high-energy states, the dynamically bound pristine ligands tend to desorb from the PQD surface during antisolvent washing,22 which generally renders the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral framework of the lattice susceptible to distortion for lowering the internal energy of CsPbI3 grains that lack surface strain.23 Meanwhile, the desorption of surface ligands would also introduce numerous surface defects in PQDs, leading to serious nonradiative recombination. These issues substantially hinder the homogeneous assembly of PQDs into solid films and accelerate phase transition from the black phase to the undesired yellow phase (δ-phase), thus deteriorating the photovoltaic performance and stability of PQDSCs. Therefore, during the construction of PQD solids for solar cells, the lattice-regular PQDs with diminished surface defects for uniform stacking are highly desired. Although efforts have been made to treat PQD solids using short ligands to improve carrier mobilities and surface defect passivation of PQDs,4,12,24 the intrinsic lattice distortion of PQDs fundamentally hampers the carrier transport within the PQD solids, which is a big challenge for the construction of PQD solids with desired charge carrier transport and diminished nonradiative recombination for efficient solar cells.
Herein, a feasible ligand riveting strategy is reported to substantially inhibit the lattice distortion and simultaneously passivate the surface defects of CsPbI3 PQDs. Extensive theoretical calculations and experimental studies reveal that the inverted triangular-pyramidal structured cation of trimethylsulfonium iodide (TMSI) can be applied as an aprotic “soft” Lewis acid, which could thoroughly fill the surface vacancies of PQDs and thus trigger sufficient tensile strain from the PQD surface into the bulk resulting from the steric hindrance of the TMSI, thereby suppressing tilts of [PbI6]4− octahedra in the PQD grain. Consequently, the photophysical properties, crystallographic orientation and the energy landscape of PQD solids were significantly improved, leading to a PCE of up to 16.64% being realized in PQDSCs, the highest efficiency among inorganic PQDSCs. Moreover, the stability of the PQDSCs fabricated with the hydrophobic ligand-riveted PQDs was also largely improved. The results of charge carrier dynamics revealed that the photoinduced charge carriers could be smoothly transported in the oriented PQD solid films with diminished trap-assisted recombination, resulting in improved photovoltaic performance.
2. Results and discussion
Ligand riveting of PQDs
CsPbI3 PQDs were synthesized using the hot-injection method as detailed in the Experimental section in the ESI.†Fig. 1a schematically presents the purification processes of PQDs. For the conventional approach, the PQDs dispersed in 1-octadecene (ODE) solvent were first purified with methyl acetate (MeOAc) antisolvent to remove impurities. Then the PQDs were transferred into the hexane solvent with better colloidal dispersity, followed by secondary purification with MeOAc to further remove impurities and residual ODE, finally obtaining monodispersed PQDs. Inevitably, during the conventional consecutive purifications of the PQDs with neat antisolvent, the dynamically bound OA−/OAm+ ligands were partly desorbed from the PQD surface, releasing the tensile surface strain of the internal perovskite grain and thus initiating tilting of the [PbI6]4− octahedron.25 Although the distortion is insufficient to cause the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral frameworks to be directly fractured, the lattice irregularity of PQDs could influence their crystallographic orientation and introduce a large number of surface defects that provide access for O2 and H2O attack, destructing the black-phase PQDs.26 Therefore, inhibiting the unfavorable lattice distortion and simultaneously passivating surface defects of PQDs are highly desired.
 Fig. 1  “Ligand riveting” of CsPbI3 PQDs. (a) Schematic presentation of the purification processes of PQDs, in which the ligand riveting treatment was conducted after the “Collection I” process. (b) Calculated surface structure of the pristine PQD (left) and TMSI-ACN/TL-based (right) PQD. 
To address the above issues, an aprotic short ligand, TMSI, is used to inhibit the lattice distortion of PQDs, whose cation is a “soft” Lewis acid with an inverted triangular-pyramidal structure. The inertness of TMSI makes it almost insoluble in the conventional MeOAc solvent. Therefore, acetonitrile (ACN) with a large dielectric constant (37.5)27 was chosen, which was mixed with toluene (TL) to dissolve the TMSI at a high concentration. An azeotropic mixture of ACN and TL in the ratio of 2:3 (named ACN/TL) shows a polarity of 0.243, which is similar to that of the conventional MeOAc (0.253) applied for the purification of PQDs (Fig. S1, ESI†).28 Finally, the PQDs obtained after two cycles of purification with conventional MeOAc were named “pristine” PQDs, and those obtained using neat ACN/TL and ACN/TL with TMSI for the secondary purification are named “ACN/TL-based PQDs” and “TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs”, respectively.
We first theoretically studied the binding feature of TMSI to the PQD surface and its effects on the lattice structure of the PQD using first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations,29 and the detailed calculation process is presented in the Experimental section in the ESI.† The binding energies (Ebinding) of the trimethylsulfonium (TMS+) cation and OAm+ to the {001} lattice plane of the Cs-terminated PQD in the α-phase (cubic) are calculated to be 4.65 and 4.82 eV, respectively. This suggests that the TMS+ might not sufficiently substitute the pristine OAm+ ligand on the PQD surface, whereas it may complement the surface A-site vacancies of PQDs resulting from the distortion of pristine OAm+ ligands during the purification (Fig. S2a–c, ESI†). To simulate the practical condition, we modeled an OAm+ substitution for the A-site vacancy (named OAm+-PQD) as an intermediate for the PQD after the 1st purification using the MeOAc antisolvent. An additional A-site vacancy was further introduced to the surface lattice of the OAm+-PQD, and the resultant relaxed structure was hypothesized as the pristine PQD after the 2nd purification using the MeOAc antisolvent. Correspondingly, a TMS+ was introduced to fill the A-site vacancy, and the structure after the relaxation was regarded as the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD in our typical experiment (Fig. 1b). We found that the distance between the sulfur head-group of TMS+ and the closest Cs+ (5.76 Å) is similar to that between the surface Cs+ and its closest bulk Cs+ (5.78 Å), which demonstrates that the head-group of TMS+ penetrates the binding pocket of the PQD, potentially promoting its binding to the PQD surface.30 However, for the pristine PQD with a surface A-site vacancy, the bond angles show a significant lattice distortion in the bulk, resulting from the reduced surface strain (the left figure in Fig. 1b). However, as shown in the right figure in Fig. 1b, when the vacancy is riveted by the TMS+ with distinctive widely spaced tail-groups, its steric hindrance is leveraged to impart sufficient tensile strain to the PQD, virtually eliminating the lattice distortion in the bulk. Notably, commonly adopted short aprotic cationic ligands, such as the quaternary ammoniums with a similar steric effect to TMS+, generally stay at the topmost of the PQD surface, which cannot substantially alleviate the lattice distortion of PQDs.12 Furthermore, the 2D electron localization function (ELF) mapping of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD shows that the binding of the TMS+ to the PQD surface is similar to that of Cs+ (Fig. S2d, ESI†), while the protic OAm+ could form hydrogen bonds with the I− of the bulk.
Fundamental characteristics of PQDs
As shown in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. S3, ESI†), pristine, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs possess cuboid morphology with average sizes of 11.17 nm, 10.60 nm and 11.10 nm, respectively. Fig. 2a shows the light absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of these PQDs, which show that absorption edges of these PQDs have no obvious difference with the PL emission peak at ∼685 nm, indicating that the Eg of PQDs would not be affected by the purifications. However, significant differences in PL intensities are observed in these PQDs wherein pristine PQDs show a PLQY of ∼68%, which is comparable with the literature.17 ACN/TL-based PQDs possess a slightly lowered PLQY of ∼62%, indicating that the purification of PQDs with neat ACN/TL antisolvent may affect their surface properties, thus introducing surface defects. By contrast, when PQDs were purified using ACN/TL with TMSI, the PLQY is largely increased to 85%, demonstrating noticeable suppressed nonradiative recombination that is likely due to the efficient surface defect passivation of PQDs using TMSI ligands. For the PQD with the OA−/OAm+ ligand terminated surface, the spatial repulsion of capping agents dominates their dispersion. Hence, we performed zeta potential measurements to gain more insight into the surface charge states of the PQDs that underwent different purifications.31 As shown in Fig. 2b, pristine PQDs purified twice using the MeOAc antisolvent exhibit a negative zeta potential of −6.88 mV, indicating the desorption of pristine OAm+ ligands during the purification.32,33 Although ACN/TL and MeOAc have similar polarities, ACN/TL-based PQDs show a more negative zeta potential of −10.7 mV, which may result from the dissolution of additional surface cationic components by ACN.27 Notably, TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs show a zeta potential of −0.371 mV, close to neutral, which suggests that the introduced TMSI ligands could thoroughly passivate surface cationic vacancies, leading to the realization of the near neutral PQD surface.
 Fig. 2  Fundamental properties of PQDs. (a) Normalized light absorption and PL spectra, and (b) zeta potential histogram of pristine, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solutions. (c) XRD patterns, (d) light absorption and PL spectra, (e) TRPL spectra, (f) FT-IR spectra, (g) S 2p core-level spectra, and (h) TGA plots of pristine, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs. (i) Evolutions of light absorption spectra and colours over time of pristine and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs under 80 °C thermal aging in a N2 atmosphere. The insets of (a) and (d) present photographs of the corresponding PQD solutions and PQD solid films under ultraviolet illumination, respectively. The inset of (b) shows the scheme of the dispersion mechanism of PQDs. The FT-IR spectrum and TGA plot of TMSI powder were included in (f) and (h) for comparison, respectively. 
The crystalline structure of PQDs was studied using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Fig. 2c), which shows that these PQDs feature an average β-phase (tetragonal) crystal structure after checking the measured patterns against the standard α-, β- and γ-CsPbI3 patterns extracted from the literature.34,35 It is worth noting that somehow γ-phase (orthorhombic) features are observed in the XRD patterns of pristine and ACN/TL-based PQDs, especially in the 22.5° to 27.5° region (Fig. 2c), which may result from the presence of orthorhombic distorted corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral frameworks, lowering the lattice symmetry of PQDs (both equatorial plane and along normal axial direction).36 By contrast, such diffraction of distorted structures is likely alleviated in TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs as confirmed in Fig. S4a (ESI†). Therefore, according to the standard XRD patterns of the undistorted {002} and tetragonal distorted {220} planes of β-CsPbI3 as well as the orthorhombic distorted {220} plane of γ-CsPbI3, we split the broad diffraction peak ranging from 27.5° to 30° to distinguish the degree of the lattice regularity of the PQDs (Fig. S4b and Table S1, ESI†).37 The results reveal that both pristine and ACN/TL-based PQDs show substantially distorted structures, whereas the distorted lattice in the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs is restrained, indicating that the tilting of [PbI6]4− octahedra is noticeably suppressed by riveting the TMSI ligand to the PQD surface.20,30 Furthermore, the intensities of diffraction peaks of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs are the strongest among these samples, revealing that TMSI ligands may inhibit the adverse effects of the antisolvent and preferentially improve the crystallinity of the PQDs during the purification.
Light absorption and PL spectra of PQD solid films were further measured (Fig. 2d), and almost no variation in absorption edges and PL peak position is observed. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements were carried out to analyze the carrier dynamics of PQDs, and the curves were fitted using a double-exponential function equation. As shown in Fig. 2e and Table S2 (ESI†), TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs possess the longest carrier lifetime, and the weight of the fast decay fraction corresponding to the nonradiative recombination is substantially suppressed after riveting TMSI ligands to the PQD surface, in line with the strongest PL emission. Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded to elucidate the states of surface ligands. As displayed in Fig. 2f and Fig. S5 (ESI†), it can be seen that the exclusive stretching and bending vibration intensities of OA− and OAm+ ligands, including υ(N–H3+), δ(N–H3+), υ(CC–H), υs(COO−) and υas(COO−), are identical among these PQDs.38,39 However, TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs show stronger alkyl stretching (υ(C–Hx)) and bending (δ(C–Hx)) vibrations, as well as the unique υ(S–C) resonance, compared to the other two samples, referring to the features of TMSI ligands.40 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization was also performed to study the surface composition of PQDs. As displayed in Fig. 2g, TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs show a distinct S 2p peak, which could be well fitted using two components at 163.9 eV and 165.1 eV, evidencing the existence of TMS+ ligands on the PQD surface.41 Meanwhile, no peak shift is observed in the core-level spectra of other elements (Fig. S6, ESI†), indicating that TMSI may be electrostatically attached to the PQD surface rather than being bonded to the surface components.
The quantitative XPS analysis of PQDs is summarized in Table S3 (ESI†), which reveals that for ACN/TL-based PQDs, the ratios of I/Pb and Cs/Pb are slightly increased compared to pristine PQDs, probably due to the ACN with a large dielectric constant dissolving the exposed Pb2+ from the PQD surface,42 explaining the more negative zeta potential of ACN/TL-based PQDs (Fig. 2b). However, for TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs, despite the ratio of I/Pb being larger than pristine PQDs, the Cs/Pb ratio still approaches the pristine ones, which may be due to the charge-shielding effect, resulting from the preferential adsorption of I− of TMSI ligands on the uncoordinated Pb2+ of the PQD surface.43 Moreover, similar N/Pb ratios among these PQDs demonstrate that the number of pristine OAm+ ligands was not largely affected by the purification methods. However, the S/Pb (∼0.56) and N/Pb (∼0.52) ratios of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs are nearly identical, indicating that the quantity of the bound TMS+ may be equal to that of the remaining pristine OAm+ ligands on the PQD surface. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurement was carried out to quantitatively determine the content of ligands bound to the PQD surface (Fig. 2h). Mass losses between 300 °C and 400 °C mainly arise from the sublimation of surface organic ligands, and the bulk CsPbI3 begins to thermally decompose above 550 °C.44,45 The mass losses below 400 °C increase from 13.5% for pristine and ACN/TL-based PQDs to 18% for TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs, where the extra one-fourth weight loss of organics in TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs would be attributed to the bound TMS+ ligands. Therefore, combining the TGA and XPS results, the number of the bound TMS+ ligands that is equal to the remaining pristine OAm+ ligands might be half of the pristine OA− ligands, consistent with the negatively charged surface of the pristine and ACN/TL-based PQDs and the almost neutral surface of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs.
Theoretically, the aprotic TMSI ligands do not participate in the Brønsted acid–base equilibrium of pristine OA−/OAm+ ligands, thus robustly binding to the PQD surface.46 Therefore, the water contact angles of the PQD solid films were measured (Fig. S7, ESI†), which show that pristine and ACN/TL-based PQD solid films have similar contact angles of less than 90°, probably due to hydrogen bonds formed between protic pristine ligands and water, as well as numerous surface vacancies.47 In contrast, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film possesses a water contact angle of 104°, showing a more hydrophobic characteristic. Subsequently, we annealed the PQD solid films at 80 °C in a N2 atmosphere to study their stability (Fig. 2i).48 After aging for 12 h, a new absorbance peak at ∼420 nm corresponding to the δ-CsPbI3 is observed in the pristine PQD solid film, which gradually dominates with the aging time prolonged to 96 h, suggesting that the loss of pristine ligands could accelerate the structural collapse of PQDs.49 By contrast, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film shows only trace amounts of δ-phase transition after aging for 96 h, and the color fading is much slower than that of the pristine sample. These important results reveal that the aprotic TMSI ligand binds more robustly than pristine ligands to the PQD surface, thereby to a large extent inhibiting lattice distortion of PQDs.
Structural and carrier features of PQD solids
To gain more insight into the effect of ligand riveting on PQD stacking, the structural and energy orderliness of PQD solids was studied in depth. The crystalline and stacking nature of PQD solid films was evaluated using grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) and grazing small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), respectively.50 As shown in Fig. 3a–c, the ACN/TL-based PQD solid shows the intensity-dispersed first-order diffraction features, indicating that PQDs are stacked highly randomly. However, the diffraction patterns of both pristine and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solids exhibit intensity-accumulated Bragg spots, demonstrating that these PQDs are overall orientationally stacked both along in- and out-of-plane directions. By contrast, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid shows stronger second-order diffraction features and it even appears with third-order diffraction features, indicating that the PQD solid with a more ordered long-range stacking is obtained, potentially facilitating charge carrier transport within the PQD solids.50 The inter-dot spacing of PQDs is calculated to be ∼13.22 nm, which indicates that the packing density of these PQD solids is dominated by the length of OA−/OAm+ ligands which is constant.51
 Fig. 3  Crystallographic identities, packing states and carrier dynamics of PQD solids. (a–c) 2D GISAXS patterns, (d–f) 2D GIWAXS patterns, and (g–i) 2D pseudo-color fs-TA plots of (a, d and g) pristine, (b, e and h) ACN/TL-, and (c, f and i) TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid films. 
We further employed the GIWAXS technique to investigate the crystallographic identity of PQD solids by collecting their 2D Bragg reflections (e.g., spots, arcs or rings) from certain lattice planes. Each sample was measured at an incidence angle of 0.2° to weaken the influence of stacking depth of PQD solids and gain more information on the intrinsic crystallographic orientation of PQDs.52 As shown in Fig. 3d–f and Fig. S8a (ESI†), all samples show the rings of the (110), (111) and (220) reflections of the β-CsPbI3 grain located at scattering vectors (q) of 1.006, 1.428, and 2.016 Å−1, respectively.34 Pristine and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solids show intensity-accumulated arcs on the scattering rings, indicating that these PQDs possess preferential crystallographic orientations, whereas the ACN/TL-based PQD solid shows no obvious scattering intensity accumulation, revealing that the crystallographic orientation of PQDs is random. Meanwhile, the integration intensities of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs in the (110) reflection at an azimuthal angle of 90° and in the (111) reflection at an azimuthal angle of 46.4° are more pronounced than those of the pristine sample (Fig. S8b and c, ESI†), demonstrating that the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid exhibits a stronger preferential orientation relative to the substrate.
Furthermore, the more orientated long-range stacking of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs than the other two samples can also be visualized in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. S9, ESI†). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements show that the surface morphology of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film is smoother than that of pristine and ACN/TL-based PQD solid films (Fig. S10, ESI†). Meanwhile, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film also shows a more uniform PL emission with improved intensity compared to that of pristine and ACN/TL-based PQD solid films (Fig. S11, ESI†). Therefore, based on these results, it can be seen that PQDs with a higher crystallographic orientation would facilitate the long-range stacking of PQDs, thereby achieving uniformly packed PQD solids.
Femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) measurements were performed to study the carrier dynamics of PQD solid films. Fig. 3g–i show the 2D pseudo-color fs-TA plots of these PQD solid films, in which the ground-state bleaching (GSB) peaks at 5 ps correspond to the exciton absorption positions. During carrier relaxation, bleaching peak redshifts of 10, 16 and 4 meV are observed for the pristine, ACN/TL-, and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid films (Fig. S12a–c, ESI†), respectively, which are attributed to the energy funneling toward undesired band-tail states.53 Among these samples, the ACN/TL-based PQD solid film shows the most disordered energy funnel, probably due to the presence of substantial lattice distortions. By contrast, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film shows the lowest energy disorder, indicating that the band-tail states are significantly decreased and thus result in a flatter energy landscape.53 The TA bleach recovery dynamics of PQD solid films are recorded in Fig. S12d (ESI†), and decay curves were fitted using a tri-exponential function (Table S4, ESI†). Since no additional carrier transport layer was introduced, the exciton decay process is dominated by the trap-assisted quenching component.54 As expected, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film possesses a longer decay time than that of the pristine and ACN/TL-based PQD solid films. Therefore, the ligand riveting of PQDs using TMSI could effectively eliminate band-tail states and thus prolong the carrier lifetime of PQDs.
Taking account of the above results, we attribute the improved properties of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid to the following causes. (1) Efficient surface passivation: since the “soft” Lewis acid TMS+ is compatible with the “soft” Lewis base I− of the perovskite grain,40 TMS+ could be introduced to complement surface vacancies of PQDs, thus sufficiently passivating these traps to diminish nonradiative recombination. (2) Inhibited lattice distortion: due to the unique inverted triangular-pyramidal structure of TMS+, its sulfur head-group would spontaneously penetrate the binding pocket of the PQD surface, which could impose large tensile surface strain by the steric hindrance of its tail-groups and deliver it to the bulk lattice of the flexible ionic-bonding nature, thereby sufficiently suppressing octahedral tilts of [PbI6]4− units. The improved lattice regularity favors the crystallographic orientation of PQDs, which in turn facilitates the long-range orientated stacking of PQDs, consequently resulting in the uniformly-packed PQD solids with a flat energy landscape. (3) Robust surface binding: unlike pristine dynamically bound OA−/OAm+ ligands, the aprotic TMSI ligand does not participate in the Brønsted type acid–base equilibrium. The TMSI ligand could bind tightly to the PQD surface taking advantage of its inertness to the surroundings, thereby constantly ensuring PQDs with a regular lattice and a well-passivated surface.
Photovoltaic performance of solar cells
To investigate the photovoltaic applications of the PQD solid with improved properties, the PQDSC with a planar structure of indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)/tin dioxide (SnO2)/PQDs/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD)/Ag was fabricated (Fig. S13a, ESI†), and the cross-sectional SEM image of a full PQDSC device is shown in Fig. 4a. The PQD solid film acting as a light absorber was prepared using the layer-by-layer deposition process as described in the Experimental section in the ESI.† The TMSI solution with an optimized concentration of 0.5 mg ml−1 was applied for the post-treatment of PQD solid films to substitute pristine long-chain ligands with TMSI ligands, which is demonstrated in Fig. S14 (ESI†), Table S3 (ESI†) and Note S1 (ESI†). Due to the PQD surface chemistry also affecting its energy band structure,55 we performed the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement of PQD solid films to determine their electronic structures (Fig. 4b and Fig. S15, ESI†). The TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film shows an upward shifted energy level compared to that of pristine and ACN/TL-based samples, which is favorable for efficient hole extraction.56,57
 Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a full PQDSC device. (b) Energy level diagram of each layer within the PQDSC. (c) J–V curves and the photovoltaic parameters, and (d) PCE statistics of the control, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. 21 devices fabricated from different batches were applied for statistics. (e) IPCE spectrum with integrated photocurrent density, (f) stabilized current density and power output of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC. (g) Stability of the unencapsulated control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs stored under ambient conditions with 35 ± 5% RH. (h) Operational stability of the unencapsulated control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination in a N2 atmosphere. 

Fig. 4c shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of PQDSCs measured under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. The conventional PQDSC fabricated with pristine PQDs is denoted as the “control” device. The control and ACN/TL-based PQDSCs deliver PCEs of 15.21% and 14.54%, respectively. The TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC gives the highest PCE of 16.64%, which is mainly attributed to the improved VOC and fill factors (FF). Impressively, such a 16.64% efficiency is the highest PCE among the inorganic CsPbI3 PQDSCs as summarized in Table S5 (ESI†), which is also comparable to the efficiency of organic–inorganic Cs1−xFAxPbI3 PQDSCs.58 Unfortunately, although the hysteresis of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC was decreased compared to the other two devices when recording the J–V curves with different voltage scanning directions, the hysteresis was not completely eliminated (Fig. S13b, ESI†). To date, hysteresis remains a thorny issue of inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite-based solar cells, which may result from the ion migration within the CsPbI3 crystal lattice under operational conditions,59,60 and the unbalanced charge carrier transport between spiro-OMeTAD and SnO2.61,62 The statistical photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Fig. 4d, Fig. S16 and Table S6 (ESI†). The results reveal that these devices are highly reproducible and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs show a higher average PCE in comparison to the control and ACN/TL-based devices. Fig. 4e and Fig. S17 (ESI†) present the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of PQDSCs, and the photocurrent densities integrated from the IPCE spectra are 16.61, 16.48 and 17.10 mA cm−2 for the control, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs, respectively, which are in good agreement with the short-circuit current density (Jsc) extracted from the J–V measurements. Fig. 4f shows the stabilized power output of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC wherein a stabilized PCE of ∼15.75% is obtained, which is higher than that of the control (14.32%) and ACN/TL-based (14.02%) devices (Fig. S18, ESI†).
To theoretically understand the effect of ligand riveting on the stability of PQDSCs, the interaction energies of OAm+ and TMS+ with antisolvents were calculated (Fig. S19, ESI†), which shows that the interaction between TMS+ and antisolvents is much weaker than that of OAm+. Moreover, the XPS analysis shows that the ratio of S/Pb in the PQD solid film remains unchanged before and after being rinsed with neat antisolvents (Table S3, ESI†). These results reveal that the riveted TMSI ligands on the PQD surface could not be easily washed away by antisolvent rinsing. The lattice regularity of PQDs might deteriorate as the PQD solid film underwent continuous antisolvent rinsing, which could remove surface ligands during the layer-by-layer deposition of PQD light absorbers. Therefore, the tolerance of the as-cast PQD solids to antisolvents was studied by measuring the XRD and GIWAXS patterns (Fig. S20, ESI†). After successive antisolvent rinsing, the fragile lattices of pristine PQDs suffer from serious orthorhombic distortion, obviously weakening the preferential crystallographic orientations. In contrast, the crystallographic identities of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid remain unchanged after being rinsed with the antisolvent, indicating that the robustly bound TMSI ligands can effectively improve the resistance of the PQD lattice to antisolvents, thereby maintaining the homogeneous packing of PQDs.
Accordingly, the stability of PQD light absorbers stored under ambient conditions with relative humidity (RH) of 35 ± 5% was investigated. As shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†), compared with the pristine PQD light absorbers that underwent various solid-state ligand exchanges, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD light absorber that underwent hydrophobic TMSI ligand exchange shows better storage stability. PQD light absorbers with improved stability could lead to good stability of PQDSCs, and thus the device stability of PQDSCs was further studied. The unencapsulated PQDSCs were stored under ambient conditions, the results of which show that the control PQDSC maintains ∼35% of the initial efficiency after aging for 200 h, whereas the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC holds ∼74% of the initial efficiency as shown in Fig. 4g, which is among the most stable CsPbI3 PQDSCs (Table S7, ESI†). Moreover, the stability of unencapsulated PQDSCs stored under dry air (10 ± 5% RH) conditions was also tested due to the PQDSC being very sensitive to humidity. As expected, after aging for 30 days, the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs retain ∼78% and ∼86% of their initial PCEs, respectively (Fig. S22, ESI†). Continuous illumination would lead to massive detachment of ligands, thus collapsing the PQD structure and introducing defects, which significantly deteriorates the operational stability of PQDSCs.63 Therefore, the operational stability of PQDSCs was measured by tracking the maximum power point (MPP) of PQDSCs under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination. As shown in Fig. 4h, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC maintains ∼80% of its initial efficiency after continuous illumination for 200 h, whereas the control device retains only ∼50% of its initial efficiency. These important results show that inhibiting lattice distortion and diminishing surface defects of PQDs can ensure their stable operation in diverse conditions. Meanwhile, the photovoltaic performance and stability of PQDSCs can be substantially improved by finely controlling the surface chemistry of PQDs, such as robustly riveting PQDs using aprotic TMSI ligands.
Charge carrier dynamics of PQDSCs
To fundamentally understand the causes leading to improved photovoltaic performance in TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs, the charge carrier dynamics of PQDSCs were analyzed. Since ACN/TL-based PQDSCs show inferior performance compared to the control PQDSCs, we mainly focused on the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. The trap densities (Ntrap) of PQD solid films were quantitatively investigated by measuring the space-charge limited current (SCLC) of the electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/SnO2/PQDs/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/Ag, and the calculation method is described in the Experimental section in the ESI.† As shown in Fig. 5a, the control device fabricated with the pristine PQD solid film shows a trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) of 0.22 V, corresponding to the Ntrap of 0.62 × 1015 cm−3. In contrast, the VTFL and the corresponding Ntrap of the device fabricated with the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film are decreased to ∼0.12 V and ∼0.34 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Moreover, the conductivity of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid film is also increased compared to that of the pristine PQD solid film (Fig. S23a, ESI†). These improvements could facilitate charge carrier transport within the device.
 Fig. 5  Charge carrier recombination and extraction. (a) SCLC curves of the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based devices. (b) Normalized TPV curves, (c) normalized TPC curves, (d) Mott–Schottky analysis, (e) EIS curves, and (f) light intensity-dependent VOC plots of the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. Schematic illustrations of charge carrier collection and recombination within the (g) control and (h) TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. The insets of (a) and (e) show the structure of the electron-only device and the equivalent circuit model, respectively. 
Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed to better understand the charge carrier recombination and extraction of PQDSC devices. Fig. 5b shows the TPV curves of PQDSCs, which were fitted using a double-exponential function (Table S8, ESI†). The TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC shows an average decay time of 3.12 ms, longer than that of 1.05 ms for the control device, indicating that the charge carrier recombination within the TMSI-ACN/TL-based device is sufficiently suppressed. TPC measurement was conducted and the charge-extraction time was calculated by fitting the TPC curve using a single-exponential function (Fig. 5c). The decay time of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC is fitted to be 3.35 μs, shorter than that of 6.47 μs for the control device, which implies that more efficient charge carrier extraction of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based device is obtained. The built-in potential (Vbi) of PQDSCs was obtained using the Mott–Schottky analysis of capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements (Fig. 5d). As a result, a Vbi of 1.43 V is obtained for the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC, higher than that of 1.33 V for the control device, resulting in facilitated charge carrier extraction.64 Accordingly, the corresponding depletion widths (WD) under the short-circuit condition are calculated to be ∼150 nm and ∼180 nm for the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based devices, respectively. A longer WD in the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC could explain the higher JSC and FF during device operation, which may be attributed to the oriented charge carrier transport within the uniformly packed light absorber.
We further conducted electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements to probe the charge carrier transfer process in the device. Fig. 5e shows the Nyquist plots of the PQDSCs, wherein the semicircles were fitted using the inserted equivalent circuit model. In the low-frequency region of the semicircle, the recombination resistance (Rrec) of the PQDSCs can be observed, wherein the Rrec of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based device is increased from 2.89 kΩ for the control device to 4.07 kΩ, demonstrating that the charge recombination is significantly suppressed within the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC. Meanwhile, a lowered current leakage is also observed in the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC (Fig. S23b, ESI†). Fig. 5f and Fig. S23c (ESI†) show the linear approximations of semi-logarithmic plots of VOC and JSCversus the light intensity, respectively, and the fitting method is described in the Experimental section in the ESI.† For the light intensity-dependent VOC of PQDSCs, the diode ideality factor extracted from the slope decreases from 1.89 for the control device to 1.39 for the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC, which suggests that the trap-assisted charge carrier recombination is substantially inhibited within the solar cells. For the light intensity-dependent JSC of PQDSCs, the exponential factors of 0.987 and 0.992 are obtained for the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs, respectively. The exponential factor of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based device with a value close to 1 demonstrates suppressed bimolecular charge carrier recombination within the device.65
Based on the above results, a schematic model was proposed to comprehensively unravel the reasons leading to improved photovoltaic performance and stability of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. For the control PQDSCs, the remaining vacancies on the pristine PQD surface would capture carriers to initiate recombination, resulting in energy losses for solar cell devices. However, it is not sufficient to dominate the deterioration of photovoltaic performance due to the high defect tolerance of perovskites. The severe lattice distortion of pristine PQDs resulting from the ligand desorption would lead to an inhomogeneously packed light absorber, which fundamentally hampers the carrier transport within the PQD solids (Fig. 5g), consequently deteriorating the photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs. Additionally, both lattice distortions and surface defects would accelerate the degradation of PQDs into the undesired yellow phase, thus deteriorating the stability of PQDSCs. However, after the surface vacancies of PQDs are riveted by TMSI ligands, lattice distortions and nonradiative recombination are both dramatically inhibited, which largely improves the orientational stacking of PQD solids and flattens the energy landscape, facilitating charge carrier transport with diminished recombination (Fig. 5h). Furthermore, employing lattice-stabilized PQDs with hydrophobic ligands would also increase the resistance of the PQD solids to adverse surroundings.
Benefiting from the ligand riveting strategy using TMSI ligands, we also attempted to extend the treatment process using other ligands, such as isopropylammonium iodide (IPAI),66 guanidinium iodide (GAI),12 tetramethylammonium iodide (TMAI) and tributylsulfonium iodide (TBSI). Unfortunately, the introduction of these ligands failed to show any positive effect on the PQDs (for the detailed discussion, see Fig. S24 and Note S2, ESI†). In addition, the trimethylsulfonium bromide (TMSBr) ligand was also tried to rivet the CsPbBr3 PQDs with a more stable lattice, which shows a slight improvement in the optoelectronic properties of PQDs being obtained. We believed that the space structure, protic type of the ligand and its reactivity with the perovskite components are essential to be carefully taken into account for ligand riveting of PQDs.
3. Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrated a ligand riveting strategy to inhibit the unfavorable lattice distortion of PQDs and simultaneously passivate surface defects for high-performing solar cells. Through robustly riveting TMSI ligands with an inverted triangular-pyramidal cationic structure into surface vacancies of PQDs, distortions of the [PbI6]4− octahedral frameworks were suppressed by the consistent tensile strain imposed from the steric hindrance of the aprotic TMS+. Meanwhile, the long-range stacking of PQD solids became more oriented, and the energy landscape was flattened, resulting in homogeneously packed PQD light absorbers. Consequently, the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC showed a PCE of up to 16.64%, the highest value among inorganic PQDSCs. The remarkable photovoltaic performance of TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs was attributed to the improved charge carrier extraction and reduced charge carrier recombination, resulting from the oriented charge transport and efficient surface defect passivation of PQDs, respectively. Moreover, the stability of PQDSCs was also dramatically improved after ligand riveting of PQDs. This work highlighted the design criteria of surface ligands for maintaining the high regularity of the PQD lattice, which is significantly important for achieving high-quality PQD solids. Meanwhile, this work also provides important guidance for managing the lattice configuration of PQDs from the surface chemistry for high-performance solar cells or other optoelectronic devices.
Author contributions
X. Zhang and D. Jia designed the research and experiments. D. Jia and J. Chen synthesized PQDs, conducted XRD, FT-IR, TEM, SEM, light absorption and PL spectral measurements. D. Jia fabricated solar cells and measured the solar cell performance. R. Zhuang and Y. Hua conducted TAS spectral measurements. D. Jia conducted DFT calculations. D. Jia wrote the first version of the manuscript and prepared the figures. All authors contributed to discussions and commented on the manuscript, and all authors reviewed the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51872014), the Recruitment Program of Global Experts, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the “111” project (B17002). This work was also supported by the HPC of Beihang University and the Academic Excellence Foundation for PhD Students of Beihang University.
References
X. Mei, D. Jia, J. Chen, S. Zheng and X. Zhang, Nano Today, 2022, 43, 101449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shen, H. Xu, X. Li, J. Guo, S. Sathasivam, M. Wang, A. Ren, K. L. Choy, I. P. Parkin, Z. Guo and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jia, J. Chen, M. Yu, J. Liu, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and X. Zhang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Jia, R. Zhuang, Y. Hua and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 2204259 CrossRef PubMed .
B. M. Wieliczka, J. A. Márquez, A. M. Bothwell, Q. Zhao, T. Moot, K. T. VanSant, A. J. Ferguson, T. Unold, D. Kuciauskas and J. M. Luther, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19334–19344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Jia, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 224–261 RSC .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Cho, F. Dinic, J. Choi, C. Choi, S. M. Jeong, J. S. Lee, O. Voznyy, M. J. Ko and Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104985 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ling, J. Yuan, X. Zhang, Y. Qian, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. W. Larson, Q. Zhao, J. Shi, J. Yang, K. Ji, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Duhm, J. M. Luther, M. Gratzel and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jia, J. Chen, J. Qiu, H. Ma, M. Yu, J. Liu and X. Zhang, Joule, 2022, 6, 1632–1653 CrossRef .
C. Bi, X. Sun, X. Huang, S. Wang, J. Yuan, J. X. Wang, T. Pullerits and J. Tian, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 6105–6113 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Kang, G. Zhang, Z. Pan, Z. Huang, S. Xu, H. Rao, H. Liu, S. Wu, X. Wu, X. Li, Z. Zhu, X. Zhong and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2005930 CrossRef .
L. Hu, Q. Zhao, S. Huang, J. Zheng, X. Guan, R. Patterson, J. Kim, L. Shi, C. H. Lin, Q. Lei, D. Chu, W. Tao, S. Cheong, R. D. Tilley, A. W. Y. H. Baillie, J. M. Luther, J. Yuan and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Huang, X. Ling, J. Sun, X. Jiang, Y. Wang, D. Xue, L. Huang, L. Chi, J. Yuan and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2021, 34, 2105977 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jia, J. Chen, X. Mei, W. Fan, S. Luo, M. Yu, J. Liu and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4599–4609 RSC .
D. P. Nenon, K. Pressler, J. Kang, B. A. Koscher, J. H. Olshansky, W. T. Osowiecki, M. A. Koc, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17760–17772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Li, W. T. Huang, R. R. Zhang, Y. Guo, H. J. Yang, X. Y. He, M. X. Yu, L. X. Wang and Q. T. Zhang, Rare Met., 2022, 41, 1230–1238 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, A. Hazarika, L. T. Schelhas, J. Liu, E. A. Gaulding, G. Li, M. Zhang, M. F. Toney, P. C. Sercel and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 238–247 CrossRef .
M. Imran, P. Ijaz, L. Goldoni, D. Maggioni, U. Petralanda, M. Prato, G. Almeida, I. Infante and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 819–824 CrossRef CAS .
G. Almeida, L. Goldoni, Q. Akkerman, Z. Dang, A. H. Khan, S. Marras, I. Moreels and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1704–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Jia, J. Qiu, R. Zhuang, Y. Hua and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2022, 96, 107140 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Duan, L. Hu, X. W. Guan, C. H. Lin, D. W. Chu, S. J. Huang, X. G. Liu, J. Y. Yuan and T. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100354 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ke, C. Wang, C. Jia, N. R. Wolf, J. Yan, S. Niu, T. P. Devereaux, H. I. Karunadasa, W. L. Mao and Y. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hoshi, T. Chiba, J. Sato, Y. Hayashi, Y. Takahashi, H. Ebe, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24607–24612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, R. Wang, S. Nuryyeva, M. E. Liao, S. Y. Chang, L. Meng, D. Meng, P. Sun, O. Lin, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1866–1878 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, M. Yu, J. Zhong, Q. Zhou, J. Qiu and X. Zhang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2006030 Search PubMed .
A. Stelmakh, M. Aebli, A. Baumketner and M. V. Kovalenko, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 5962–5973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Park, S. J. Kim, J. H. Lee, M. J. Jeong, J. M. Lee, H. S. Jung and J. H. Noh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, W. Peng, B. Murali, S. P. Sarmah, M. Yuan, L. Sinatra, N. M. Alyami, J. Liu, E. Yassitepe, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. N. Hedhili, O. F. Mohammed, Z. H. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8718–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, W. Su, J. Li, B. Xu, Q. Shan, Y. Wu, F. Zhang, M. Luo, H. Xiang, Z. Cui and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marronnier, G. Roma, S. B. Richard, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu, Y. Bonnassieux, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Even, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3477–3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bertolotti, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko, S. Yakunin, A. Cervellino, S. J. L. Billinge, M. W. Terban, J. S. Pedersen, N. Masciocchi and A. Guagliardi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3819–3831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Shao, Z. Li, D. Liu, C. Gao, C. Chen, B. Zhang, L. Hao, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Wang, Y. Lu, X. Wang, G. Cui and S. Pang, Joule, 2022, 6, 850–860 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Z. Yao, X. Sun, X. Wei, J. Wang and J. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Wheeler, E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, P. Schulz, M. Suri, N. C. Anderson, J. A. Christians, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, S. P. Harvey, J. J. Berry, L. Y. Lin and J. M. Luther, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10504–10513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Lan, J. S. Yao, J. N. Yang, Y. H. Song, X. C. Ru, Q. Zhang, L. Z. Feng, T. Chen, K. H. Song and H. B. Yao, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 8756–8763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, C. Ge, L. Chu, Y. Feng, S. Xiao, Y. Ma, W. Liu, X. A. Li and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 59, 581–588 CrossRef .
M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. C. Boehme, S. Ten Brinck, C. Bernasconi, Y. Shynkarenko, F. Krieg, R. Widmer, B. Aeschlimann, D. Gunther, M. V. Kovalenko and I. Infante, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 63–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sliz, M. Lejay, J. Z. Fan, M. J. Choi, S. Kinge, S. Hoogland, T. Fabritius, F. P. Garcia de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11988–11995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hoffman, G. Zaiats, I. Wappes and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9767–9774 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krieg, S. T. Ochsenbein, S. Yakunin, S. Ten Brinck, P. Aellen, A. Suess, B. Clerc, D. Guggisberg, O. Nazarenko, Y. Shynkarenko, S. Kumar, C. J. Shih, I. Infante and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, M. Kim, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Adv. Sci., 2019, 7, 1901840 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Jin, D. Chen, D. Bai, H. Bian, J. Sun, G. Zhu, G. Wang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800007 CrossRef .
F. Ye, H. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Cai, R. S. Gurney, A. J. Pearson, D. Liu and T. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800489 CrossRef .
S. Huang, Z. Li, B. Wang, N. Zhu, C. Zhang, L. Kong, Q. Zhang, A. Shan and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7249–7258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dey, J. Ye, A. De, E. Debroye, S. K. Ha, E. Bladt, A. S. Kshirsagar, Z. Wang, J. Yin, Y. Wang, L. N. Quan, F. Yan, M. Gao, X. Li, J. Shamsi, T. Debnath, M. Cao, M. A. Scheel, S. Kumar, J. A. Steele, M. Gerhard, L. Chouhan, K. Xu, X. G. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Dutta, C. Han, I. Vincon, A. L. Rogach, A. Nag, A. Samanta, B. A. Korgel, C. J. Shih, D. R. Gamelin, D. H. Son, H. Zeng, H. Zhong, H. Sun, H. V. Demir, I. G. Scheblykin, I. M. Sero, J. K. Stolarczyk, J. Z. Zhang, J. Feldmann, J. Hofkens, J. M. Luther, J. P. Prieto, L. Li, L. Manna, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, M. B. J. Roeffaers, N. Pradhan, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr, P. Yang, P. M. Buschbaum, P. V. Kamat, Q. Bao, Q. Zhang, R. Krahne, R. E. Galian, S. D. Stranks, S. Bals, V. Biju, W. A. Tisdale, Y. Yan, R. L. Z. Hoye and L. Polavarapu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10775–10981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, H. Kanda, Y. Ding, H. Huang, H. Chen, B. Ding, Y. Liang, X. Liu, M. Cai, P. J. Dyson, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104868 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, S. Zhou, J. Yuan, J. Shi, Y. Qian, B. W. Larson, Q. Zhao, C. Qin, F. Li, G. Shi, C. Stewart, J. Hu, X. Zhang, J. M. Luther, S. Duhm and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900721 CrossRef .
J. Kim, B. Koo, W. H. Kim, J. Choi, C. Choi, S. J. Lim, J. S. Lee, D. H. Kim, M. J. Ko and Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104130 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, L. Xie, R. Zhuang, T. Wu, R. Zhao, L. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Hua, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4209–4219 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
M. Hao, Y. Bai, S. Zeiske, L. Ren, J. Liu, Y. Yuan, N. Zarrabi, N. Cheng, M. Ghasemi, P. Chen, M. Lyu, D. He, J. H. Yun, Y. Du, Y. Wang, S. Ding, A. Armin, P. Meredith, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, Q. Zhou, D. Jia, Y. Wang, S. Li and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1821–1830 RSC .
X. Gu, W. Xiang, Q. Tian and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23164–23170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ji, Y. K. Wang, L. Feng, G. H. Li, W. Y. Wang, Z. F. Li, Y. Y. Hao and Y. X. Cui, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 2690–2711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhang and Y. Li, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 2993–3018 CrossRef CAS .
R. An, F. Zhang, X. Zou, Y. Tang, M. Liang, I. Oshchapovskyy, Y. Liu, A. Honarfar, Y. Zhong, C. Li, H. Geng, J. Chen, S. E. Canton, T. Pullerits and K. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39222–39227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jia, J. Chen, S. Zheng, D. Phuyal, M. Yu, L. Tian, J. Liu, O. Karis, H. Rensmo, E. M. J. Johansson and X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Lu, L. Han, Z. Liu, G. Shi, H. Fang, S. Chen, T. Wu, F. Yang, M. Gu, S. Zhou, X. Ling, X. Tang, J. Zheng, M. A. Loi and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704871 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Li, J. Xu, Y. Dong, B. Chen, S. M. Park, D. Ma, S. Lee, J. E. Huang, S. Teale, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02164aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite QDs (PQDs) show high potential for new-generation photovoltaics owing to their suitable bandgap energy, outstanding optoelectronic properties and chemical processability. However, the rapid dissociation of dynamically bound pristine ligands from the PQD surface upon purification leads to their intrinsically labile lattice suffering from distortion, essentially deteriorating the long-range orientated stacking of PQDs and roughening the energy landscape of PQD solids. In this work, we successfully riveted the aprotic trimethylsulfonium iodide ligand with an inverted triangular-pyramidal cationic structure into the vacancies of the PQD surface, leveraging its steric effect to consistently impart tensile strain to the PQD lattice that effectively suppressed the unfavorable [PbI6]4− octahedral tilt. Taking advantage of this strategy, the structural regularity, photophysical properties and stability of PQDs were substantially improved. As a result, the PQD solar cell (PQDSC) showed a power conversion efficiency of up to 16.64%. The charge carrier dynamics within the PQDSCs were studied in-depth, which revealed that the remarkable performance of the PQDSCs is attributed to the oriented charge transport in the homogeneously packed PQD solid films with suppressed charge carrier recombination. This work offers a facile and effective strategy to manage the lattice configuration of PQDs via surface ligand regulation for achieving high-performing solar cells or other optoelectronic devices.


 	Fig. 1  “Ligand riveting” of CsPbI3 PQDs. (a) Schematic presentation of the purification processes of PQDs, in which the ligand riveting treatment was conducted after the “Collection I” process. (b) Calculated surface structure of the pristine PQD (left) and TMSI-ACN/TL-based (right) PQD.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fundamental properties of PQDs. (a) Normalized light absorption and PL spectra, and (b) zeta potential histogram of pristine, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solutions. (c) XRD patterns, (d) light absorption and PL spectra, (e) TRPL spectra, (f) FT-IR spectra, (g) S 2p core-level spectra, and (h) TGA plots of pristine, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs. (i) Evolutions of light absorption spectra and colours over time of pristine and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDs under 80 °C thermal aging in a N2 atmosphere. The insets of (a) and (d) present photographs of the corresponding PQD solutions and PQD solid films under ultraviolet illumination, respectively. The inset of (b) shows the scheme of the dispersion mechanism of PQDs. The FT-IR spectrum and TGA plot of TMSI powder were included in (f) and (h) for comparison, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Crystallographic identities, packing states and carrier dynamics of PQD solids. (a–c) 2D GISAXS patterns, (d–f) 2D GIWAXS patterns, and (g–i) 2D pseudo-color fs-TA plots of (a, d and g) pristine, (b, e and h) ACN/TL-, and (c, f and i) TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQD solid films.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a full PQDSC device. (b) Energy level diagram of each layer within the PQDSC. (c) J–V curves and the photovoltaic parameters, and (d) PCE statistics of the control, ACN/TL- and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. 21 devices fabricated from different batches were applied for statistics. (e) IPCE spectrum with integrated photocurrent density, (f) stabilized current density and power output of the TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSC. (g) Stability of the unencapsulated control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs stored under ambient conditions with 35 ± 5% RH. (h) Operational stability of the unencapsulated control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination in a N2 atmosphere.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge carrier recombination and extraction. (a) SCLC curves of the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based devices. (b) Normalized TPV curves, (c) normalized TPC curves, (d) Mott–Schottky analysis, (e) EIS curves, and (f) light intensity-dependent VOC plots of the control and TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. Schematic illustrations of charge carrier collection and recombination within the (g) control and (h) TMSI-ACN/TL-based PQDSCs. The insets of (a) and (e) show the structure of the electron-only device and the equivalent circuit model, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02164a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
