An ultrathin amorphous defective co-doped hematite passivation layer derived via an in situ electrochemical method for durable photoelectrochemical wa ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA03792K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA03792K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 16655-16665An ultrathin amorphous defective co-doped hematite passivation layer derived via an in situ electrochemical method for durable photoelectrochemical water oxidation†

        
          
            Milad 
            Fathabadi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad 
            Qorbani
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Amr 
            Sabbah
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Shaham 
            Quadir
          
        
      bdfg, 
      
        
          
            Chih-Yang 
            Huang
          
        
      bcfh, 
      
        
          
            Kuei-Hsien 
            Chen
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Li-Chyong 
            Chen
          
        
      *bci and 

        
          
            Naimeh 
            Naseri
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran 11155-9161, Iran. E-mail: naseri@sharif.edu
bCenter for Condensed Matter Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: mqorbani@ntu.edu.tw; chenlc@ntu.edu.tw
cCenter of Atomic Initiative for New Materials, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
dInstitute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
eTabbin Institute for Metallurgical Studies, Tabbin, Helwan 109, Cairo 11421, Egypt
fMolecular Science and Technology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan
gDepartment of Physics, National Central University, Taoyuan City 32001, Taiwan
hInternational Graduate Program of Molecular Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan
iDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Received 
      11th May 2022
    , Accepted 15th July 2022First published on 15th July 2022AbstractAlthough hematite (i.e., α-Fe2O3) has been widely investigated in photoelectrochemical water oxidation studies due to its high theoretical photocurrent density, it still suffers from serious surface charge recombination and low photoelectrochemical stability. Here we report an in situ electrochemical method to form a uniform and ultrathin (i.e., 3–5 nm) passivation layer all over the pores of an optimized ∼3.2% Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 photoanode. We unveil the amorphous and defective nature of the in situ derived layer assigned to a high concentration of oxygen vacancies and intercalated potassium atoms there, i.e., the formation of Ti/K co-doped defective α-Fe2O3−x. Owing to the efficient passivation of surface states, alleviated surface-potential fluctuations, and low charge-transfer resistance at the interface, photoanodes show an average of ∼60% enhancement in the photoelectrochemical performance, applied bias absorbed photon-to-current efficiency of 0.43%, and faradaic efficiency of ∼88%. Moreover, the passivation layer prevents direct contact between the electrode material and electrolyte, resulting in less degradation and outstanding photoelectrochemical stability with a photocurrent retention of ∼95% after ∼100 hours, albeit by performing several successive in situ electrochemical passivation processes. This work presents an industrially scalable method to controllably engineer the interfaces of semiconductors–electrolytes with precious metal-free defective hematite-based co-catalysts for sustainable photoelectrochemical solar-to-fuel conversion applications.
1 Introduction
The rise of the average sea level, due to the melting of glaciers at an unprecedented rate, can drastically change our climate resulting in water shortages, water-borne disease, malnutrition, storms, and heatwaves.1,2 It is well known that the rise of the mean annual global temperature following the greenhouse effect—i.e., warming of the planet's surface by trapping solar energy in the atmosphere due to the industrial fossil fuel-based emissions of CO2—is the main reason behind this scenario. Using solar irradiation as a clean energy source over concentrated solar power systems, photovoltaic solar panels, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, photoelectrochemical (PEC) CO2 reduction, and PEC water splitting can be a sustainable method for zero-carbon energy production.3–10 Fundamentally, a PEC cell requires low-overpotential water reduction, oxidation, and efficient separation of O2/H2 products by the photocathode, photoanode, and membrane, respectively.11–13 Anyway, studying photoanode materials has attracted the attention of many researchers due to the higher overpotential of the water oxidation process as the rate-determining step of water splitting.14 Earth-abundant, non-toxic, and precious metal-free transition metal oxides have been widely used as photoanode materials because of their scalable preparation techniques.15–17 Among them, the α-Fe2O3 (i.e., hematite) photoanode has been extensively studied due to its suitable bandgap of ∼2.1 eV and high theoretical maximum photocurrent.18,19 However, the PEC performance of hematite is limited due to several intrinsic drawbacks such as poor conduction, short charge carrier lifetime, short hole diffusion length, high surface charge recombination, and slow oxygen evolution kinetics.20
Reducing the hole transfer path is essential to overcome the short hole diffusion length of hematite-based photoanodes. So far, several strategies have been proposed to address this problem. Here, we concisely review some of them. (i) Nanostructuring with feature sizes less than the hole diffusion length.21 (ii) Enhancing the electrical conductivity of hematite by doping different ions.22–24 (iii) Creating oxygen vacancies (OV) which can improve the PEC performance by increasing the concentration of charge carriers and enhancing the surface oxygen evolution reaction (OER). For example, controlled OV in Ti-doped hematite could increase the photocurrent density from less than 1 to 3 mA cm−2 at 1.6 VSHE (VSHE means potential versus the standard hydrogen electrode).25 (iv) Heterostructuring hematite with well-positioned conduction and valence semiconductors can result in better charge separation, promoting light absorbance ability and reducing charge recombination. For instance, it has been reported that a ZnO/Fe2O3 core–shell nanowire heterostructure can reach a photocurrent density of 1.5 mA cm−2 at 0.6 VAg/AgCl (VAg/AgCl means potential versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode), which is about three times larger than that of bare hematite.26
In addition, surface trap states, as a significant drawback that causes high surface charge recombination and overpotential towards the OER, can easily form in the synthesis process and can be removed by loading a co-catalyst or a passivation layer on the surface.27–29 Nevertheless, combining two or more modification strategies could further improve the PEC performance of hematite-based photoanodes.30,31 It has been reported that the deposition of an ultrathin Al2O3 layer decorated with Co2+ and CuCoOx co-catalysts could achieve photocurrents of 2 and 2.23 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE (VRHE means potential vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode), respectively.32,33 Moreover, Zhang et al. have demonstrated a simple electrochemical method for improving the PEC performance of Nb/Sn co-doped hematite.34 This treatment could enhance the electrical conductivity of hematite by creating OV in bulk, passivating the surface states by removing some surface Fe ions, and introducing Nb–O/Sn–O bonds, leading to a 62.3% increase in the photocurrent density. Hence, a dual-role passivation layer, as an alleviator for the surface states and electrocatalyst for the OER, is needed for hematite-based films to achieve a high-performance and stable photoanode. However, the challenge of synthesizing an ultrathin, high-performance, and stable passivation layer all over the macro- and micro-pores—e.g., the widely used growth methods that cannot guarantee the formation of a uniform layer all over the pores due to their fundamental limitations—thus limits the utilization of hematite for large-scale PEC applications.
Here, using a hydrothermal method, the amount of Ti dopant in the hematite lattice was optimized to obtain the highest photocurrent—see Notes S1–S6 and Fig. S1 to S9† for the experimental details and optimization of Ti concentration in the ESI.† PEC tests determined an optimum Ti concentration of 3.2% in good agreement with the reported results by Zandi and co-workers.35 Then, we introduced a novel, facile, and in situ electrochemical method to grow an ultrathin Ti/K co-doped α-Fe2O3−x passivation layer on the surface of porous thin-film Ti-doped Fe2O3—in this paper, we use TFO and EP-TFO as abbreviations for the pristine and electrochemically passivated Ti-doped Fe2O3, respectively. Characterization showed that the electrochemical formation of the passivation layer does not change the bulk properties of the TFO absorber—i.e., TFO and the ultrathin passivation layer act as an absorber and co-catalyst, respectively. Furthermore, the passivation layer exhibited a uniform surface potential in nanoscale domains and a dramatically lower surface charge recombination. We observed that the presence of the passivation layer not only enhances the photocurrent density but also it can stabilize the photoanode as compared with the other reports on the passivated hematite-based photoanodes (see Table S1, ESI†). The results showed that the successive in situ electrochemical passivation processes can keep the photoanode stable for several days. Our work introduces a new industrially scalable method to controllably engineer the interface of different materials with ultrathin defective hematite-based co-catalysts, which simultaneously can passivate the surface states and protect the absorber.
2 Results and discussion
2.1. Electrochemical passivation of the photoanode
An electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) method, at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in a 1 M KOH electrolyte, was used to passivate the surface of the photoanodes. First, we have determined a suitable potential window; and then, the number of cycles was optimized. Fig. 1a and b exhibit the CV curves in different potential windows from 0.0 to −1.4 VAg/AgCl and the average photocurrent density at 0.5 VAg/AgCl after each CV cycle, respectively. The average photocurrent density reaches a maximum for the potential difference ΔV = 1.2 V—potential difference is ΔV = |Vf − Vi|, where Vi = 0.0 VAg/AgCl. Moreover, the CV curves show strong irreversible redox peaks for ΔV = 1.4 VAg/AgCl and a striking decline in the PEC performance as well as the change of the photoanode colour (Fig. S10, ESI†). We further observed the same redox peaks by performing more cycles (>1) that have the same destructive impact on the photocurrent albeit without the observable change in the colour of the electrode. Fig. 1c and d show that just one CV cycle in the potential window from 0.0 to −1.2 VAg/AgCl is enough to passivate the photoanode. The results obtained from EP-TFO with xc = 1.0% show an average of ∼60% (with a variation of about ±15%) enhancement in the PEC performance after the electrochemical passivation process. Fig. 1e displays the LSV of the photoanodes before and after the electrochemical passivation process. After the formation of the passivation layer, a small cathodic shift of the dark LSV curve indicates a lower overpotential of the OER. Notably, the same electrochemical method was used on other TFO electrodes with different xc = 0.5%, 1.5%, and 2.0% (Fig. S11a–c, ESI†). The results show that the introduced passivation process enhances the PEC performance of all photoanodes and one cycle would give the highest enhancement over prolonged cycles (Fig. S11d and e, ESI†). The observation of enhancement in the photocurrent of the pristine Fe2O3 photoanode after the passivation process, albeit with a slightly different potential difference, shows that the presence of Ti does not have a special role in the formation of the passivation layer (Fig. S12, ESI†). Nevertheless, EP-TFO with xc = 1.0% still has the highest photoresponse. Moreover, performing the same passivation process in a 1 M Na2SO4 neutral electrolyte show a slight improvement in the PEC performance and less water oxidation overpotential, implying the importance of electrolyte ions and the pH value (Fig. S13, ESI†). Notably, Fig. S14† reveals that the onset potential in light does not vary after the electrochemical passivation process and the changes are within the error range. Hereafter, unless specified otherwise, the presented EP-TFO data are obtained for those with xc = 1.0%.
 Fig. 1  Electrochemical passivation of the photoanode. (a) CV cycles for the applied potential windows and (b) photocurrent density under light irradiation versus the potential difference. (c) Different CV cycles in the potential window of 0 to −1.2 VAg/AgCl and (d) photocurrent density under light irradiation versus the cycle number. (e) LSV curves in the dark and under light irradiation of the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes. (f) Nyquist plots and (g) the corresponding equivalent circuit of the TFO (blue circuit) and EP-TFO (red circuit) photoanodes. ZIm and ZRe stand for the real and imaginary parts of the complex impedance. 

Fig. 1f–g and Table S2 (ESI†) present the Nyquist plots, the equivalent circuits, and equivalent circuit parameters of the TFO and EP-TFO electrodes. Notably, to allow explicit fitting of the electrochemical impedance data to the equivalent circuit, the contribution of charge-transfer resistance from the valence band to the electrolyte was removed for the case of the OER.36 The equivalent circuit elements of the pristine electrode include the equivalent series resistance Rs, constant phase element which represents the space-charge capacitance of the bulk CPEbulk, surface state capacitance Css, a resistance which stands for the trapping of holes in the surface states Rtrap ≈ 6.9 kΩ cm, and charge-transfer resistances from the surface states to the electrolyte Rct,ss ≈ 8.4 kΩ cm as suggested by Bisquert and Hamann,37 Z(f) = Rs + [[Rtrap + [Rct,ss∥Css]]∥CPEbulk],(1)where Z(f) and f are the total frequency-dependent impedance and frequency. After the passivation process, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results show a little more complex equivalent circuit to the contribution of the passivation layer. The proposed equivalent circuit is given by Z(f) = Rs + [[Rtrap + [Rct,ss∥Css] + Zsl]∥CPEbulk],(2)where Zsl is the loop related to the passivation layer, Zsl = [Rct,sl∥Csl].(3)
In this case, Rct,ss ≈ 1.6 kΩ cm, Css, Rct,sl = 3.5 k Ω cm, and Csl are charge-transfer resistances from the surface states to the passivation layer, surface state capacitance, charge-transfer resistances from the passivation layer to the electrolyte, and passivation layer capacitance, respectively. Moreover, EIS results show that the Rtrap reduces by about three orders of magnitude because of the suppression of electron–hole recombination in the surface states.
To study the effect of the electrochemical passivation process on the PEC activity of the Ti-doped hematite photoanode, we have performed several characterization techniques that will be discussed in the following sections.
2.2. Bulk characterization
Field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) images of the surface morphologies before and after the electrochemical passivation process are shown in Fig. 2a. It shows that the granular morphology of the grains did not change after the passivation process, which is consistent with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. S15, ESI†). Furthermore, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images show that the microstructures of Ti-doped Fe2O3 are the same before and after the passivation process (Fig. 2b). For example, the d-spacing of (110) planes is 0.25 nm for both TFO and EP-TFO samples. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) and XRD patterns show that the passivation process does not change the crystal structure of the film (no peak shifts and relative intensity differences are observed in the XRD patterns). Fig. 2e presents the Raman spectra of the TFO and EP-TFO films. All observed peaks are assigned to Ti-doped Fe2O3 without significant change after the passivation process.38,39 Table S3 (ESI†) presents the peak positions, full width at half maximum (FWHM), and relative area of the fitted Lorentz line shape. The observed changes in the FWHM and peak area can be assigned to the presence of the disordered passivation layer. All these characterization techniques revealed that the bulk properties of Ti-doped Fe2O3 do not change due to the passivation process. Therefore, the improvement of the PEC performance could be assigned to the interfacial modification, which will be discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  Bulk characterization. (a) and (b) Top-view FE-SEM and HRTEM images of the TFO and EP-TFO electrodes, respectively. (c) to (e) SAED (with the corresponding planes of each ring), XRD patterns, and Raman scattering carried out by using a continuous-wave laser with a wavelength of 532 nm, respectively. 
2.3. Surface characterization
HRTEM images show that the surface of the as-prepared TFO is atomically sharp and well-crystallized (Fig. 3a and S16, ESI†). It is well known that the presence of dangling bonds and frustrated lattice structures can form unfavourable surface states, resulting in non-radiative surface charge recombination.37,40–42 After the passivation process, an ultrathin layer with a thickness of 3–5 nm was formed on the surface of EP-TFO (Fig. 3a). HRTEM images illustrate that the electrochemical method could successfully form a uniform layer at the outer edge of each grain of the porous film (Fig. S17, ESI†). How this layer passivates the surface states, resulting in less surface charge recombination, will be discussed later in the optical results.
 Fig. 3  Surface characterization. (a) to (c) HRTEM images, XPS signals (Fe 2p, O 1s, Ti 2p, and K 2p spectra), and KPFM topography map of the TFO and EP-TFO samples. Insets of (c) show the corresponding surface topographies. The surface potential and height profiles of the region marked by the dashed line are shown in Fig. S18 (ESI†). 

Fig. 3b and Table S4 (ESI†) present the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra, peak positions, and FWHMs of Fe 2p, O 1s, Ti 2p, and K 2p signals. As expected, it shows the existence of ∼3.2% Ti inside the lattice (trigonal space group Rc) of hematite. It further reveals that the Ti–to–Fe ratio slightly increased after the activation process, which could be due to the leaching of Fe cations into the electrolyte under the cathodic applied potential. Our analyses show the presence of ∼4.1% Ti in the EP-TFO sample. The Fe 2p and O 1s signals of the TFO sample show several peaks such as Gupta–Sen (GS) multiples (Fe3+) and lattice oxygen (Ol), consistent with the hematite phase with oxygen vacancy (the OV–to–Ol ratio is ∼13% for TFO).34,43 Furthermore, it shows two broader peaks at 714.4 and 718.9 eV assigned to the surface peak and satellite signals due to the presence of surface oxides. As shown in the Fe 2p spectrum of the EP-TFO sample, these two peaks were suppressed after the electrochemical passivation process, forming a defective layer. This statement is in agreement with the large enhancement of the OV signal in the O 1s spectrum (the OV–to–Ol ratio is ∼28% for EP-TFO). Such a large oxygen vacancy (or metal-rich environment) can be responsible for the presence of extra electrons in the passivation layer, electrons from the d orbitals of Fe or Ti elements, resulting in a negative shift of ∼0.3 eV of the XPS signals to lower binding energy (Table S4, ESI†). This can be interpreted as the shifts in the core-level binding energies induced by the chemical environment of an element.44 Besides, the EP-TFO sample shows two small peaks at 292.4 and 295.2 eV assigned to the K 2p signal due to using KOH as the electrolyte for the passivation process (K–to–Fe ratio is estimated to be ∼2.3%). XPS analyses show that the chemical composition of the EP-TFO sample is Ti/K co-doped α-Fe2O3−x. Limited carrier transport across grain boundaries can occur because of a high trap density or due to a potential barrier at the grain boundaries.45,46 We performed Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) to address the surface-potential barrier (Fig. 3c). The results indicate that the surface potential of EP-TFO shows a much more uniform distribution than that of the TFO. The FWHM of the potential distributions was calculated to be 7 and 12 mV for TFO and EP-TFO, respectively. KPFM potential fluctuation profiles show that the passivation layer drastically reduces the potential barrier at the grain boundaries, resulting in better charge transport on the surface (Fig. S18, ESI†).
To address the degree of crystallinity of the passivation layer, we have further studied the filtered HRTEM and annular dark-field and bright-field scanning transmission electron microscope (ADF and BF STEM) images from the bulk and surface of the EP-TFO sample. As shown in Fig. 4a–b and S19 (ESI†), compared with the bulk crystalline phase, the filtered HRTEM images show the lack of crystalline order in the passivation layer. The ADF STEM image determines that the passivation layer cannot diffract electron beans as efficiently as the bulk region (Fig. 4c and S20, ESI†). It means that both BF and DF STEM images together can depict the interface between the bulk and passivation layer. These results imply that the passivation layer has an amorphous nature due to a large amount of OV and the presence of intercalated K ions. Additionally, high-resolution EDX elemental mapping unveils the lack of O (i.e., presence of OV) and a higher Ti–to–Fe ratio in the passivation layer as compared with the bulk region (Fig. 4d), which is in agreement with the XPS results. As illustrated in Fig. S21 (ESI†), the electrochemical passivation process reduces the surface, i.e., it introduces additional oxygen vacancies and K ions via the cathodic applied potential and irreversible redox reactions. Because of the large amount of OV and the presence of K ions, the crystal structure of Ti-doped Fe2O3 faces a large distortion leading to a disordered structure on the nanometer scale near the surface. A high concentration of OV destroys the charge balance and leads to the introduction of extra electrons in the passivation layer. Moreover, the uniform disordered layer alleviates the surface electrostatic potential fluctuation, resulting in better charge (hole in the case of the OER) transport at the interface.
 Fig. 4  Amorphous passivation layer. (a) BF STEM image of the in situ derived passivation layer. (b) Filtered STEM images from the corresponding regions of (a). Red and green colours show the amorphous passivation layer and crystalline bulk regions, respectively. (c) ADF STEM image of the in situ derived passivation layer. (d) High-resolution EDX elemental mapping images of the Fe, O, and Ti elements. The right image of (d) shows the Ti and Fe signals together. The dashed line shows the interface of the bulk and passivation layer. 
2.4. Optical properties
UV–visible absorption spectra show an indirect bandgap of ∼2.06 and ∼2.08 eV for TFO and EP-TFO, respectively (with an error of ±0.03 eV; Fig. 5a). Moreover, the EP-TFO photoanode shows anenhancement in the absorption in the range of 450 to 550 nm, which can be assigned to the presence of disordered phases after the passivation process.
 Fig. 5  Optical transitions of passivated Ti-doped Fe2O3. (a) and (b) UV-visible absorption and PL (at ∼293 K) spectra of TFO and EP-TFO, respectively. (c) and (d) Colour map of the intensity-dependent PL spectra and TRPL curves at different wavelengths of EP-TFO at 80 K, respectively. (e) The proposed electronic transitions and charge recombination processes in EP-TFO. 
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and time-resolved PL (TRPL) were used to monitor the charge-transfer dynamics at room and low temperatures. As shown in Fig. 5b, the TFO photoanode does not display any PL signal due to the high non-radiative surface charge recombination associated with the presence of surface states (Fig. S22, ESI† shows that these peaks are not matched with those of the FTO substrate).32,34,47,48 In contrast, the EP-TFO photoanode shows a strong broad PL signal in the visible region. This proves that the passivation layer could successfully passivate the surface states and enhance the radiative recombination. The broad spectrum implies that there are several optical transitions in the Ti-doped Fe2O3 material. We performed an intensity-dependent PL experiment at low temperatures that can provide a better picture of the possible peaks (Fig. 4c). It shows three broad peaks at around 505, 570, and 650 nm (named P1, P2, and P3, respectively) with a linear response to the laser intensity (Fig. S23, ESI†). Furthermore, the lifetime of each optical transition was measured by fitting the TRPL curves with the following mono-exponential decay function, (4)where A0, A, erf(t), t, t0, σ, and τ are the constant offset, normalized radiative recombination coefficient, error function, time, starting decay time, standard deviation accounting for the instrument response function (IRF), and recombination time scale.49,50 P1 and P2 show higher recombination times of 0.38 and 0.36 ns than P3, which is 0.27 ns, respectively (Fig. 4d). This implies that the P3 level acts as a charge recombination centre that facilitates the rapid recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, reducing the recombination lifetime.51,52 Regarding the abovementioned statements and the other reports on Ti-doped Fe2O3,53–55 levels P1 (at ∼2.45 eV), P2 (at ∼2.17 eV), and P3 (at ∼1.91 eV) can be assigned to the ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT: O 2p → Fe 3d) near OV, indirect Fe3+ d–d transition, and shallow defect-mediated radiative recombination pathways, respectively (Fig. 4e). These results are in good agreement with the UV–visible absorption spectrum of EP-TFO.
2.5. Photoelectrochemical properties of the passivated photoanode
Fig. S21a (ESI†) shows that the photocurrent density reaches ∼1.6 and ∼2.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 and 1.4 VRHE, respectively. The applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) and applied bias absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (ABAPE) are calculated from the LSV curve by using the following equations, (5)and, (6)respectively, where Jph (mA cm−2), Vb (V), and P (mW cm−2) are the photocurrent density, applied potential, and incident illumination power density, respectively.56 As shown in Fig. S24 (ESI†), the overall absorption percentage (βAM1.5G) is estimated to be 21.1% by using the following equation, (7)where λ [nm], A(λ < λg), and ϕAM1.5G(λ) [W cm−2 nm−1] are the wavelength, absorption, and incident photon flux, respectively.50,57 The results show that the ABAPE reaches and 0.43% (or ABPE = 0.09%) at 1.11 VRHE, respectively, which is in the same order of the highest productivity plants that have a typical efficiency of ∼1% annually (inset of Fig. S25a, ESI†).58 Furthermore, the steady-state photocurrent density under chopped light shows stable and excellent switching behaviour (Fig. S25b, ESI†). The fluctuations of the photocurrent density are due to the rapid bubble formation on the surface of the EP-TFO photoanode (Fig. S26, ESI†). Fig. S25c (ESI†) shows the open-circuit voltage (OCP) in the light on–off process, which is in agreement with the behaviour of an n-type semiconductor. After stopping the illumination, the potential decays slowly as the photogenerated electrons leak out of the photoanode. This curve further can be used to calculate the electron lifetime (τn) as a function of the OCP by using the following equation, (8)where Voc, kB, T, e, and t are the OCP, Boltzmann constant, temperature, electron charge, and time, respectively. The inset of Fig. S25c (ESI†) shows that the τn is about 4.3 s just after turning off the light. Moreover, the linear response of the photocurrent density to the light intensity potentials suggests that the charge carrier generation is the rate-limiting step (Fig. S25d, ESI†).16 It suggests that the EP-TFO photoanode could even be workable under more concentrated light in practical cases.
Using the following equations, surface charge injection (ηinj) and bulk charge separation (ηsep) efficiencies are determined for PEC water oxidation in a KOH electrolyte in the presence of the hole scavenger Na2SO3, (9)and, (10)where JKOH and JSO32− are the photocurrent densities achieved in the aqueous electrolytes of 1 M KOH and 1 M Na2SO3 + 1 M KOH, respectively.59 Moreover, Jabs is the photocurrent density assuming that all absorbed photons can be converted into current, (11)
As shown in Fig. 6a and b, both ηinj and ηsep increase after the electrochemical treatment due to the high catalytic behavior of the passivation layer and facilitate electron–hole separation in the bulk, respectively. Furthermore, the H2 and O2 gases from the TFO and EP-TFO electrodes are collected and quantified. Fig. 6c shows that the amount of evolved H2 and O2 linearly increases with time for the EP-TFO electrode. In contrast, TFO shows a non-linear trend assigned to the low stability of the photocurrent (the photoelectrochemical stability will be discussed in the following section). The inset of Fig. 6c reveals that the H2–to–O2 ratio is ∼2, which is close to the theoretical value. The discrepancy with the theoretical value can be assigned to the gaseous product dissolution in the electrolyte.60 Moreover, the faradaic efficiency (ηF(T)) is determined by using (12)and, (13)where F = 96485Cmol−1, T = 4 h, and YH2 are the Faraday's constant, time, and the amount of evolved H2, respectively. The results show that ηF ≈ 79% and ηF ≈ 88% for the TFO and EP-TFO electrodes, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical performances. (a) Surface charge injection efficiency, (b) bulk charge separation efficiency, and (c) reaction time courses for PEC H2 and O2 evolution over TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes. The inset of (c) shows the H2–to–O2 ratio versus the reaction time. 
2.6. Photoelectrochemical stability tests

Fig. 7a and b show the PEC cycling tests of the TFO and EP-TFO photoanode under one sun irradiation for 10 h (short-term stability test) and 96 h (long-term stability test).
 Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical stability. (a) and (b) Chronoamperometry cycling tests of the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes under one sunlight irradiation for 10 h, respectively. (c) Chronoamperometry cycling tests of the EP-TFO photoanodes under one sunlight irradiation for 96 h. The first 12 h is the chronoamperometry of the TFO photoanode as the reference. 
Short-term stability test: there are two types of decays: (i) average photocurrent decay in each cycle defined by , where the “brackets”, J0 and Jsso represent an ensemble average, instantaneous, and steady-state photocurrents, respectively. The results show that α1h is about 33% and 15% for the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes. Several factors such as surface charge accumulation, degradation of the photoanode, and oxygen bubble formation on the electrode surface could be responsible for photocurrent decay in each cycle. Chen et al. have demonstrated that the self-oxidation state of Fe2O3 is between the conduction and valence bands near and slightly more positive than the O2/H2O level.61 It implies that photocorrosion in high pH electrolytes is the main reason for the photocurrent drop of the hematite-based electrodes. Therefore, (ii) overall photocurrent decay is a more realistic quantity that can illustrate the long-term stability of a photoanode, which is defined by , where Jiss and Jfss are the steady-state photocurrents of the initial and final cycles. The PEC results show that β10h is about 30% and <1% for the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes, respectively. So, the ultrathin layer could successfully passivate the surface leading to a stable hematite-based photoanode for PEC water splitting. Furthermore, we checked the morphology, crystal structure, and charge-transfer properties of the EP-TFO photoanode by using SEM, XRD, and EIS analyses after the short-term PEC cycling test, respectively. Fig. S27 (ESI) and S28 (ESI†) show that the surface morphology and crystal structure of the film do not change during the cycling test. However, Fig. S29 (ESI†) shows that the shape of the Nyquist plot is the same after the cycling test, implying that the equivalent circuit still contains the Rct,ss∥Css and Rct,st∥Cst loops series with a little larger overall charge transfer.
Long-term stability test: Fig. 7c shows the PEC cycling tests of the EP-TFO photoanode under one sun irradiation for 96 hours. Rather than the superior stability of the photoanode with α12h ≈ 36% and β96h ≈ 5%, it reveals that successive in situ passivation processes (passivation processes) can keep the photoanode stable longer. Fig. S30 and S31 (ESI†) further illustrate that the surface morphology and crystal structure of the photoanode do not change after the long-term stability test. However, the overall charge-transfer resistance of the photoanode increased (Fig. S32, ESI†). To investigate the reason behind this enhancement, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) measurements were performed (Fig. S33, ESI†). It shows that the leaching rate of Fe and Ti ions is significantly decreased after the first activation process. Moreover, other successive activation processes could not keep the ion leaching less as compared with the first one. This could be the reason for the observed enhancement in the charge-transfer resistance of the photoanode after a few days. Nevertheless, Table S1 (ESI†) presents that the reported high-performance hematite-based photoanodes still suffer from the stability problem. It shows that our demonstrated method surpasses the best reports on the passivated hematite-based systems in terms of stability and cost of the fabrication method.
2.7. Charge-transfer mechanism
Regarding the aforementioned analyses, we suggest the following charge-transfer mechanism at the electrode–electrolyte interface for photoelectrochemical water oxidation. Scheme 1a illustrates that photogenerated electrons–holes can go through several pathways: (i) bulk recombination (Rbulk), (ii) surface charge recombination (Rsurf), (iii) photocorrosion (kpc), and (iv) charge transfer to the electrolyte (kct). The results show that the surface charge recombination and photocorrosion are the major problems of the pristine Ti-doped Fe2O3 photoanode, which decreases the probability of charge transfer to the electrolyte. Furthermore, surface potential fluctuation hinders the charge carrier transport at the interface, which can be an additional drawback in increasing the surface charge recombination. Scheme 1b shows that the uniform ultrathin Ti/K co-doped α-Fe2O3−x layer can address several bottlenecks detailed below. The ultrathin layer passivates the surface states, prevents the direct interaction between the electrolyte ions and Ti-doped Fe2O3 absorber, and reduces the surface potential fluctuation. On the other hand, this layer reduces the overpotential of the water oxidation reaction and charge-transfer resistance at the electrode–electrolyte interface. This results in a much higher photocurrent density and excellent long-term PEC stability of the photoanode.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the charge-transfer mechanism of photoelectrochemical water oxidation. (a) and (b) TFO and EP-TFO electrodes, respectively. Insets show the corresponding HRTEM images of the surfaces. 
3 Conclusions
In summary, we reported the optimization of the Ti content in a Ti-doped Fe2O3 (hematite) photoanode based on its photoelectrochemical performance. Next, we introduced a facile and low-cost in situ electrochemical method to form a uniform ultrathin defective passivation layer on the surface of the photoanode. The results show that this layer passivates the surface states, alleviates the surface potential fluctuation, slightly reduces the water oxidation overpotential, and prevents direct contact between the absorber and electrolyte ions. Under one sun irradiation, the combination of these factors resulted in an average of ∼60% enhancement in the photocurrent density, i.e., ∼2.0 mA cm−2, at 1.4 VRHE and outstanding photocurrent retention of ∼99% and ∼95% after 10 and 96 h, respectively. The archived long-term photoelectrochemical stability surpasses the values for the best reported passivated hematite-based photoanodes. In more detail, it should be noted that the cathodic potentials, required in some experiments such as Mott–Schottky analyses, can be destructive and have a large impact on the surface properties of iron oxide-based semiconductors. Therefore, our observations suggest that the surface properties of potential photoanodes should be checked after applying cathodic potentials.
In general, this work introduces a novel industrially scalable method to engineer the surface of the hematite-based photoanode. In future work, we plan to perform the same passivation process on high-surface-area photoanodes, e.g., highly porous nanostructures or branched nanorods. We believe that this can result in a much higher PEC response close to the theoretically predicted photocurrent density. However, the optimization and control of the passivation layer formation and properties such as thickness, dopants, and concentration of oxygen vacancies in doped hematite photoanodes can further boost the photoelectrochemical performance and achieve much longer stability.
Author contributions
Milad Fathabadi: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, and writing – original draft. Mohammad Qorbani: conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing – original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization, and supervision. Amr Sabbah: methodology and data curation. Shaham Quadir: methodology and data curation. Chih-Yang Huang: methodology and data curation. Kuei-Hsien Chen: resources and writing – review & editing. Li-Chyong Chen: validation, resources, writing – review & editing, and supervision. Naimeh Naseri: conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing – review & editing, visualization, supervision, and project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Center of Atomic Initiative for New Materials (AI-Mat), National Taiwan University (109 L9008 and 110 L9008), through the Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) of Taiwan.
Notes and references
B. F. Chao, Y. H. Wu and Y. S. Li, Science, 2008, 320, 212–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Eliasson, Nature, 2015, 517, 6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Dunham and B. D. Iverson, Renew. Sustain. Energy. Rev., 2014, 30, 758–770 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kang, S. K. Choi, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji, W. Choi, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2638–2643 RSC .
N. Naseri, A. Esfandiar, M. Qorbani and A. Z. Moshfegh, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3151–3159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faraji, M. Yousefi, S. Yousefzadeh, M. Zirak, N. Naseri, T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and A. Z. Moshfegh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 59–95 RSC .
S. Quadir, M. Qorbani, Y.-R. Lai, A. Sabbah, H. T. Thong, M. Hayashi, C. Y. Chen, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100441 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamal Hussien, A. Sabbah, M. Qorbani, M. Hammad Elsayed, P. Raghunath, T.-Y. Lin, S. Quadir, H.-Y. Wang, H.-L. Wu, D.-L. M. Tzou, M.-C. Lin, P.-W. Chung, H.-H. Chou, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132853 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sabbah, I. Shown, M. Qorbani, F.-Y. Fu, T.-Y. Lin, H.-L. Wu, P.-W. Chung, C.-I. Wu, S. R. M. Santiago, J.-L. Shen, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106809 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. C. Xu, J. H. Zhang, H. X. Zhang, L. Y. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. J. Hu, H. Jiang and C. Z. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5228–5259 RSC .
D. Zhang, H. Li, A. Riaz, A. Sharma, W. Liang, Y. Wang, H. Chen, K. Vora, D. Yan, Z. Su, A. Tricoli, C. Zhao, F. J. Beck, K. Reuter, K. Catchpole and S. Karuturi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 185–195 RSC .
M. Bajdich, M. Garcia-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Norskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521–13530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batzill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3275–3286 RSC .
M. Qorbani, N. Naseri, O. Moradlou, R. Azimirad and A. Z. Moshfegh, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 210–216 CrossRef CAS .
R. Irani, P. Plate, C. Hohn, P. Bogdanoff, M. Wollgarten, K. Hoflich, R. van de Krol and F. F. Abdi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5508–5516 RSC .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
S. H. Shen, S. A. Lindley, X. Y. Chen and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2744–2775 RSC .
A. G. Tamirat, J. Rick, A. A. Dubale, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, S. H. Shen, P. Liao, I. S. Cho, O. Zandi, Y. S. Liu, K. Lashgari, G. Westin, J. H. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, E. A. Carter, X. L. Zheng, T. W. Hamann, B. E. Koel, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3100–3121 RSC .
K. D. Malviya, H. Dotan, D. Shlenkevich, A. Tsyganok, H. Mor and A. Rothschild, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3091–3099 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Mao, P. Chen, M. Xiao, S. A. Monny, S. Wang, M. Konarova, A. Du and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Hsu, Y. C. Chen and Y. G. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14157–14162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1522–1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Z. F. Liu and S. C. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118580 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, H. M. Li, S. S. Yi, M. Z. You, H. J. Jing, X. Z. Yue, Z. T. Zhang and D. L. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120406 CrossRef CAS .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681–7688 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Ahmed, I. E. Kretschmer, T. A. Kandiel, A. Y. Ahmed, F. A. Rashwan and D. W. Bahnemann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24053–24062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
S. C. Zhang, Z. F. Liu, D. Chen and W. G. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119197 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. H. Park, W. J. Byun, M. H. Song and J. S. Lee, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10436–10444 RSC .
O. Zandi, B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 634–642 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7626–7636 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Hamann and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Serrano, J. F. Fernandez, O. R. de la Fuente and M. A. Garcia, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 4, 64–72 CrossRef .
B. M. Klahr, A. B. Martinson and T. W. Hamann, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 461–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. P. Marder, Condensed Matter Physics, Wiley,  2010, p. 536 Search PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zachaus, F. F. Abdi, L. M. Peter and R. van de Krol, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3712–3719 RSC .
A. P. Grosvenor, B. A. Kobe, M. C. Biesinger and N. S. McIntyre, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36, 1564–1574 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Taucher, I. Hehn, O. T. Hofmann, M. Zharnikov and E. Zojer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3428–3437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, K. Williams, M. Wei, A. Johnston, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Vafaie, J. M. Pina, A. H. Proppe, Y. Hou, G. Walters, S. O. Kelley, W. A. Tisdale and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 412–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. H. Kim, O. S. Hutter, L. J. Phillips, J. Tan, J. Park, H. Lee, J. D. Major, J. S. Lee and J. Moon, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 RSC .
B. S. Zou and V. Volkov, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2000, 61, 757–764 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leonard, N. Dumas, J. P. Causse, S. Maillot, N. Giannakopoulou, S. Barre and W. Uhring, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 4338–4343 RSC .
M. Qorbani, A. Sabbah, Y.-R. Lai, S. Kholimatussadiah, S. Quadir, C.-Y. Huang, I. Shown, Y.-F. Huang, M. Hayashi, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 7239–7253 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, K. K. Ghuman, L. He, K. Liao, Q. Qiao, L. M. Reyes, Y. Zhu, M. A. El-Sayed, C. V. Singh and G. A. Ozin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E8011–E8020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hayes, R. G. Hadt, J. D. Emery, A. A. Cordones, A. B. F. Martinson, M. L. Shelby, K. A. Fransted, P. D. Dahlberg, J. Y. Hong, X. Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Kong, R. W. Schoenlein and L. X. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3754–3769 RSC .
Z. Zhang, I. Karimata, H. Nagashima, S. Muto, K. Ohara, K. Sugimoto and T. Tachikawa, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4832 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Su, J. S. Baskin, W. Zhou, J. M. Thomas and A. H. Zewail, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4916–4922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 3–16 CrossRef .
Y. J. Wang, S. R. Zhao, Y. C. Wang, D. A. Laleyan, Y. P. Wu, B. Ouyang, P. F. Ou, J. Song and Z. T. Mi, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Dogutan and D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3143–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Yi, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1801902 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Kawashima, X. Yang, X. Yin, F. Zhan, M. Liu, X. Qiu, W. Li, C. B. Mullins and J. Li, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2002563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta03792kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Electrochemical passivation of the photoanode. (a) CV cycles for the applied potential windows and (b) photocurrent density under light irradiation versus the potential difference. (c) Different CV cycles in the potential window of 0 to −1.2 VAg/AgCl and (d) photocurrent density under light irradiation versus the cycle number. (e) LSV curves in the dark and under light irradiation of the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes. (f) Nyquist plots and (g) the corresponding equivalent circuit of the TFO (blue circuit) and EP-TFO (red circuit) photoanodes. ZIm and ZRe stand for the real and imaginary parts of the complex impedance.	 
Z(f) = Rs + [[Rtrap + [Rct,ss∥Css]]∥CPEbulk],	(1)
Z(f) = Rs + [[Rtrap + [Rct,ss∥Css] + Zsl]∥CPEbulk],	(2)
Zsl = [Rct,sl∥Csl].	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Bulk characterization. (a) and (b) Top-view FE-SEM and HRTEM images of the TFO and EP-TFO electrodes, respectively. (c) to (e) SAED (with the corresponding planes of each ring), XRD patterns, and Raman scattering carried out by using a continuous-wave laser with a wavelength of 532 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface characterization. (a) to (c) HRTEM images, XPS signals (Fe 2p, O 1s, Ti 2p, and K 2p spectra), and KPFM topography map of the TFO and EP-TFO samples. Insets of (c) show the corresponding surface topographies. The surface potential and height profiles of the region marked by the dashed line are shown in Fig. S18 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 4  Amorphous passivation layer. (a) BF STEM image of the in situ derived passivation layer. (b) Filtered STEM images from the corresponding regions of (a). Red and green colours show the amorphous passivation layer and crystalline bulk regions, respectively. (c) ADF STEM image of the in situ derived passivation layer. (d) High-resolution EDX elemental mapping images of the Fe, O, and Ti elements. The right image of (d) shows the Ti and Fe signals together. The dashed line shows the interface of the bulk and passivation layer.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optical transitions of passivated Ti-doped Fe2O3. (a) and (b) UV-visible absorption and PL (at ∼293 K) spectra of TFO and EP-TFO, respectively. (c) and (d) Colour map of the intensity-dependent PL spectra and TRPL curves at different wavelengths of EP-TFO at 80 K, respectively. (e) The proposed electronic transitions and charge recombination processes in EP-TFO.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical performances. (a) Surface charge injection efficiency, (b) bulk charge separation efficiency, and (c) reaction time courses for PEC H2 and O2 evolution over TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes. The inset of (c) shows the H2–to–O2 ratio versus the reaction time.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical stability. (a) and (b) Chronoamperometry cycling tests of the TFO and EP-TFO photoanodes under one sunlight irradiation for 10 h, respectively. (c) Chronoamperometry cycling tests of the EP-TFO photoanodes under one sunlight irradiation for 96 h. The first 12 h is the chronoamperometry of the TFO photoanode as the reference.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the charge-transfer mechanism of photoelectrochemical water oxidation. (a) and (b) TFO and EP-TFO electrodes, respectively. Insets show the corresponding HRTEM images of the surfaces.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta03792k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
