The high open-circuit voltage of perovskite solar cells: a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00663D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00663D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3171-3222The high open-circuit voltage of perovskite solar cells: a review

        
          
            Zhanglin 
            Guo
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ajay Kumar 
            Jena
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gyu Min 
            Kim
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tsutomu 
            Miyasaka
          
        
      *a
aGraduate School of Engineering, Toin University of Yokohama, 1614 Kuroganecho, Aoba, Yokohama, Kanagawa 225-8503, Japan. E-mail: guo_zhanglin@outlook.com; miyasaka@toin.ac.jp
bFaculty of Food Biotechnology and Chemical Engineering, Hankyong National University, Anseong, Gyeonggi-Do 17579, Republic of Korea
Received 
      27th February 2022
    , Accepted 16th June 2022First published on 20th June 2022AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) have made incredibly fast progress in the past years, with the efficiency approaching 26%, which is comparable to those of the best silicon solar cells. One of the features of PSCs that make them stand out among all photovoltaics (PVs) is their high open-circuit voltage (VOC) although they are made by solution processes. Compared to other solution-processed PVs such as organic photovoltaics and dye-sensitized solar cells, and vacuum-processed PVs like CdTe and CIGS, the loss in VOC caused by non-radiative recombination in the case of PSCs is considerably low, which is even as low as that observed for vacuum-processed Si. The defect-tolerant nature of perovskites helps in preventing non-radiative recombination and therefore yields high VOC in PSCs. By comparing the achieved performance with the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limits, it can be determined that while the photocurrent of PSCs reaches almost the theoretical limit, there is still room to improve the VOC, especially in the case of all-inorganic and tin-based perovskites. Hence, improving the VOC becomes critical for promoting device efficiency further. In this review paper, we focus our discussion on the recent development of VOC of PSCs by beginning with a theoretical review highlighting the critical role of VOC enhancement and the necessity of non-radiative recombination suppression for device performance improvement. As the recombination both in the bulk of the perovskite and on the surface/interfaces with charge transport layers is important, different methods depending on the perovskite composition and the nature of the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport material (HTM) have been developed to minimize recombination in the perovskite and at the interfaces. We provide a comprehensive review of different reported strategies for reducing undesirable recombination in the perovskite film and at the interfaces, by dividing our discussion into four parts based on the light absorbers used: organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites, tin-based perovskites, and bismuth-based perovskites (analogs). Finally, a summary with an outlook on how reducing perovskite film defects and developing more suitable charge transport layers can further promote the VOC and expand the practical application prospects of PSCs is presented.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced a high-speed development in the past decade, establishing themselves as a leading photovoltaic technology with high efficiency and low cost. The high open-circuit voltage (VOC) is one of the characteristics that distinguish them from other photovoltaics. PSCs have lower VOC loss than other solution-processed photovoltaics such as organic and dye-sensitized solar cells, as well as vacuum-processed CdTe and CIGS solar cells. However, in most cases, the VOC of PSCs still has room for improvement. Given that the photocurrent is approaching the theoretical limit and the fill factor is often quite high, increasing the VOC is crucial for further enhancing the efficiency. Here we provide a comprehensive review of strategies for improving VOC by dividing our discussion into four parts depending on the light absorbers used: organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites, tin-based perovskites, and bismuth-based perovskites (analogs). We also present a summary with an outlook on how minimizing perovskite film defects and developing more suitable charge transport materials can further increase the VOC and therefore expand the application prospects of PSCs. This review will help the researchers better understand how VOC loss generates and provide suggestions for designing efficient PSCs with improved VOC and efficiency.

1 Introduction
Since the demonstration of the first silicon solar cell, only a limited number of single-junction photovoltaic (PV) technologies could reach a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20%.1 Among these technologies, halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered to have the potential to approach the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit of efficiency. Since the first report by Miyasaka and co-workers,2 PSCs have attracted extensive attention, which can be witnessed from the numerous publications in this field, and over 15000 citations for the pioneering article. Now, the record efficiency of PSCs (25.7%, certified by NREL) is approaching that of the best silicon solar cells (26.7%). The noteworthy fact is that a PCE of above 25% was achieved only in ∼10 years, while silicon solar cells took about four decades to reach a PCE above 26%.1 On one hand, this amazing progress of PSCs is a result of the “magic” properties of perovskites, such as their high light absorption coefficients (∼105 cm−1) backed by direct bandgaps, easy bandgap tunability, long carrier diffusion lengths even in polycrystalline films (>1 μm), and the generation of free charges by photoexcitation, defect-tolerance nature, etc.3 On the other hand, it should be attributed to the lessons learned from other solution-processable photovoltaic technologies including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic photovoltaics (OPV). As a result of their impressive development, perovskite-based single junction or perovskite-involved tandem cells such as perovskite/Si and perovskite/perovskite are regarded as having a great possibility to be commercialized. Several companies such as Oxford PV (UK), Microquanta (China), UtmoLight (China), Saule Technologies (Poland), and Toshiba (Japan), with the support of huge investment, are already on their way to exploring commercialization by manufacturing and testing large-area PSC single-junction (rigid or flexible) or perovskite/Si tandem photovoltaic panels.
PSCs have several attributes that give them an edge over other PVs. One of such traits of PSCs is their relatively high open-circuit voltage (VOC) achieved despite the solution process. Like in most cases of solution-processed materials, it is anticipated that perovskites prepared by solution processes will end up with a large number of defects, structural disorders, and chemical inhomogeneity. And, these defects cause a great loss in performance, apparently through a significant drop in VOC and FF. However, in reality, the VOC values demonstrated by PSCs, especially hybrid perovskites, are reaching almost the theoretical limit. For instance, a PSC working with a PCE of 25.2% shows a VOC of 1.193 V for a perovskite absorber with a bandgap of 1.56 eV, showing only 0.367 eV loss from the bandgap and only 0.034 V loss from the radiative VOC limit (i.e. S–Q limit) of 1.270 V.4 Moreover, the cells, when measured without an aperture mask under open circuit conditions for about 15 seconds, show a steady state maximum VOC of 1.225 V, against the radiative VOC limit of 1.227 V. As another example, Kirchartz et al. promoted the VOC to 1.26 V for a 1.60 eV perovskite-based solar cell, by suppressing the defects in both the perovskite bulk and surface.5 Our group reported a hybrid perovskite cell with a 1.51 eV bandgap, yielding a VOC of 1.19 V and a small energy loss of 0.32 eV.6 In general, in terms of VOC loss, in comparison to other PVs, PSCs (hybrid perovskites) stand matching with Si (0.3–0.4 eV loss from Eg) and far ahead of solution-processed PVs like OPV (about 0.6 eV loss) and DSSCs (about 0.7 eV loss). There is increasing evidence that such high VOC, especially in the case of hybrid perovskites, results from the “defect-tolerance” nature of perovskites, which is discussed in the latter part of this section. It must be noted that the “defect-tolerance” property, which essentially refers to the crystal defects or chemical inhomogeneity, is an intrinsic property but Eloss in a device can also come from imperfections in the device (the poor perovskite film, or the carrier transport layers (CTLs)) or physical and electrical imperfections at the interfaces. Hence, immense efforts have been made to improve the quality of the films and interfaces to eventually minimize energy loss and achieve high VOC. All the major methods/approaches toward this goal of achieving high VOC are discussed in detail in the sections on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites, tin perovskites, and bismuth perovskites (analogs).
1.1 Theoretical background of VOC
Although the PCE of PSCs has surpassed 25%, the record efficiency is still behind the theoretical limit (33% for a 1.4 eV perovskite) estimated by the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) theory (also called the detailed balance limit of efficiency) for single-junction solar cells.7 As photovoltaic panels of the entire PV system constitute only a small portion of the total cost, reducing the cost of solar cells has little impact on the installation costs while increasing the efficiency has a tremendous impact on the cost per kilowatt hour.8 The PCE of solar cells is determined by the recombination process of photoexcited charge carriers. The charge carriers can recombine radiatively or non-radiatively, where the energy of recombined excess electrons and holes is eventually transferred as either a photon or phonon, respectively.9 In the S–Q theory, an ideal case is assumed that the only recombination mechanism in a solar cell is radiative, without any non-radiative recombination. It is this radiative recombination that determines the detailed balance limit for efficiency. The theoretical limitations of the efficiency of solar cells concerning the bandgap of light absorbers (PSCs and other PVs) are shown in Fig. 1a. Though the highest PCE (over 25%) of PSCs surpasses those of most PVs, the efficiencies of other PSCs are not so outstanding and also have huge room for improvement compared with the S–Q limits. For achieving higher efficiency in approaching the S–Q limits, understanding the loss in each parameter of PSCs and what causes the loss is necessary.
 Fig. 1  (a) Efficiencies of various photovoltaics relative to the S–Q limit under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions. (b) Current density relative to the maximum possible current density, under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions, versus minimum dark recombination current density relative to the recombination current derived for the record cells.10 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the Fermi level splitting in a solar absorber material with increasing light intensity. EF represents the intrinsic Fermi level.  and  are the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes, respectively, where light absorption results in electrons populating the conduction band (CB) and holes populating the valence band (VB).11 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). 
Essentially, the total loss in the solar cell is composed of loss in the light (inefficient light management) and loss in the carriers (poor carrier management). A comparison between the short-circuit current density (JSC) (i.e. measured short circuit current of the cell) and maximum possible current JSQ (by the S–Q limit) can quantify the photocurrent loss, which is mainly from the photons trapped inside the cell and light absorption by inactive regions of the cell.10 The value of j, calculated by j = JSC/JSQ, represents light management and a larger value means better light management, e.g., lower photocurrent loss. As shown in Fig. 1b, the j value of PSCs is over 0.95, meaning close-to-perfect light management and a little room for improvement. The carrier recombination losses of a photovoltaic cell can be confirmed by the ratio of the lowest possible recombination current at the material's bandgap (i.e. the radiative limit), J0,SQ, to the dark recombination current, J0.10 A low j0 = J0,SQ/J0 indicates that better carrier management by reducing bulk and surface recombination is necessary. Fig. 1b shows that j0 for PSCs lies in the range of 10−3–10−2, which is lower than those of other solar cells such as GaAs (10−1–1).
The fill factor (FF) is defined as the ratio of the maximum power from the solar cell to the product of VOC and JSC. An empirical expression for the FF is:12  Here, n is the ideality factor, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, and q is the elementary charge. The n value is a measure of the junction quality and the type of recombination in a solar cell, which will be introduced in the following part. This equation demonstrates the importance of the n of a solar cell: the lower n gives a higher FF and vice versa. Note that this equation represents the maximum possible FF, and the actual FF is also affected by the parasitic resistive loss. From the above discussion, it's clear that the non-radiative recombination in PSCs is particularly important in determining their photovoltaic performance. Thus, understanding and suppressing the non-radiative recombination in solar cells is the key to enhancing efficiency.
According to the basic physical process of photovoltaic technology, under sunlight illumination, electrons are excited from the valence band (VB) of a semiconductor to its conduction band (CB), leaving holes in the former. In this case, the Fermi level of the semiconductor in the thermal equilibrium state is not suitable anymore and will be split into quasi-Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp), as shown in Fig. 1c. In the S–Q limit theory, the difference between quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes sets the achievable value of VOC for a solar cell. That is to say, ideally, the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) and VOC are two interchangeable quantities that are considered to be equal to each other. The VOC of a solar cell in terms of the classical diode equation can be written as:13  It can also be transformed into the following equation:  The above equations show that VOC depends on the dark saturation current of the solar cell and the light-generated current. The JSC of PSCs has a small variation because of the almost-perfect light management and fixed light intensity. However, the dark saturation current depending on the non-radiative recombination in the solar cell may vary by order of magnitude. Therefore, any non-radiative carrier recombination could reduce the QFLS and contribute to the VOC reduction.14 The equation also indicates the logarithmic dependence of VOC on the light intensity. For comparing solar cells with different light absorbers (different Eg), a prefactor, the diode ideality factor n was introduced, which can be determined from a measurement of VOC as a function of light intensity I:  Here, I0 is a constant with the same unit as I. The experimentally determined n is now popularly used directly to identify the non-radiative recombination properties in solar cells.15
From the above discussion, we can find that non-radiative recombination is a decisive factor in the photovoltaic parameters and the final efficiency of a solar cell. Among the three parameters, VOC is most heavily affected by non-radiative recombination. Though an extremely high VOC of 1.18 V has been achieved in high efficiency (25.2%) PSCs,4 the VOC values in most cases are not so satisfactory. A summary of champion VOC values for PSCs employing different perovskites and the champion VOC values of other PVs is shown in Fig. 2a. Here, the achieved VOC values of PSCs, especially the hybrid ones, are closer to the theoretical values compared to other PVs, which makes PSCs produce high performances. On the other hand, the VOC values for wide-bandgap and narrow-bandgap perovskites diverge from the line of theoretical VOC. For example, using the wide-bandgap (1.91 eV) CsPbI2Br perovskite, we achieved an unprecedented VOC of 1.43 V, which still has an energy loss (Eloss = Eg − eVOC) of 0.48 eV.16 The highest VOC of 1.33 V was obtained for CsPbI3 (Eg = 1.71 eV), showing an Eloss of 0.38 eV.17 For narrow-bandgap tin-based PSCs, the champion VOC is 0.94 V using a tin perovskite with an Eg of 1.39 eV, exhibiting an Eloss of 0.45 eV.18 For further boosting the performance of PSCs toward the S–Q limit, it is essential to understand the non-radiative recombination types and minimize the recombination for achieving a better VOC output.19,20 We also summarized the FF and JSC of the devices with the best VOC (Fig. 2b and c) and found that for all PSCs the FF is lower than the theoretical value, while most JSC values except for tin-based PSCs approach JSQ. This means for solar cells already with high VOC, improving the FF is regarded as an effective way to further promote efficiency.5 As discussed above, the FF is affected by the resistance and the non-radiative recombination in the solar cells. Therefore, if a high VOC with low recombination is achievable, a good FF and high efficiency are also expected to be achieved.
 Fig. 2  (a) VOC, (b) FF, and (c) JSC of various photovoltaics relative to the S–Q limits under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions. The values are derived from the cells with record VOC. 
1.2 Defects and non-radiative loss
The non-radiative recombination limiting the VOC occurs at both the intragap recombination centers (defects and traps) of a single perovskite layer and the heterojunctions between the perovskite and the transport layers. It can be divided into several types including defect-assisted recombination (Shockley–Read–Hall, SRH, recombination), Auger recombination, band-tail recombination, and interface recombination.21–23 The recombination processes are depicted in Fig. 3a. Defect-assisted recombination depends on the energy depths and the density of defects in perovskite films. Auger recombination is a process of thermal dissipation where the excess energy from the electron–hole recombination is transferred to electrons or holes that are subsequently excited to higher energy states within the same band instead of giving off photons (radiative recombination). Therefore, the same as radiative recombination, Auger recombination is also an intrinsic recombination process.24 Auger recombination mainly occurs for perovskite films with high carrier concentrations (>1017 cm−3),3 while it might not be a major process in perovskites with low carrier concentrations (under AM 1.5G illumination, carrier concentrations ∼1013 to 1015 cm−3).25 Therefore, it is believed that Auger non-radiative recombination has a negligible influence on the photovoltaic performance of the final device.24 Band-tail states arise from continuous energetic disorder, caused by the rotational freedom of the polar organic cations in the perovskite, such as formamidinium (FA) and methylammonium (MA).26,27 They are in an energetic distribution in energy-band edges rather than well-defined defect levels in the energy-band of the perovskite. Band-tail recombination is associated with charge-carrier relaxation from the energy-band edges to the band-tail states via the release of photons, which results in a loss of VOC output.21,28 These band-tail states appear to be shallow trap states, which can possibly be reduced by increasing the crystallinity of the perovskite and tuning the degree of the energetic disorder by substitution of the organic cation with inorganic Cs+ or Rb+.28,29 Therefore, Auger recombination and band-tail recombination are less important and not universal for all types of PSCs. In this review paper, we will mainly focus on the SRH recombination in the perovskite and interface recombination since they significantly and universally affect the Eloss and VOC output,22 as shown in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 3  (a) Generalized recombination dynamics of the photo-generated carriers, including radiative, defect-assisted, and direct and indirect Auger recombination. Ec is the conduction band minimum and Ev is the valence band maximum.21 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). (b) Electron (hole) charge current density as a function of free energy. Solid lines represent the electron (hole) current Je(h)(μ) = Jsun − Jrec. The dotted lines mark the point of maximum extraction of electrical power. Red curves and circles: electron (hole) current density in the double heterojunction; recombination is dominated by interface electron and hole annihilations. Cyan curves and circles: electron (hole) current density in the single hybrid perovskite layer; recombination is due to electron and hole SRH annihilations alone. Dashed lines: Je(h)(μ) in the S–Q limit.23 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 
In PSCs, the photogenerated electrons and holes must be sufficiently collected by the n-type electron transport layer (ETL) and p-type hole transport material (HTM), respectively, before being trapped by defects in the perovskite, e.g., SRH recombination.30 The mainly studied defects are point defects including interstitials,31 vacancies,32 and antisites33 in perovskites. They are almost-positively or almost-negatively charged and holes or electrons can be localized near the defects. Some of the defects have high forming energy (deep-level defects) and work as deep-level recombination centers, which are the predominant sources of non-radiative recombination losses. In contrast, shallow-level defects with low forming energy have a negligible impact on non-radiative decays.34 As a solution-processed film with a variety of compositions and fabrication processes, the defects in perovskites are quite a complex topic. For example, electron–phonon interaction popularly appears in perovskite materials and it is also a source of non-radiative recombination loss.22 However, the working mechanism and the role of this interaction in determining the final VOC output are still unclear. Though the defect physics is quite complex, researchers have proved some helpful strategies for minimizing the SRH non-radiative recombination. For instance, improving the perovskite film quality, enlarging the crystal size, and passivating the defects in both the bulk and surface have been widely studied.35–37
Interface recombination is the non-radiative recombination caused by mismatched energy level alignment, surface defects, and carrier back transfer.14,38–40 In general, in a perovskite photovoltaic device, the photo-generated electrons should be selectively extracted by the ETL, which also blocks the holes through a large Schottky barrier at the perovskite/ETL interface. At the same time, the holes should be extracted by the HTM, which also blocks electrons. Hence, the imperfect charge transfer and blocking will cause charge recombination at the interface, resulting in energy loss. For example, the QFLS of perovskites continuously increases with increasing light intensity, while VOC shows a saturation.11,41 A possible reason is the reduced selectivity of the hole-extracting contact that gives rise to the interface recombination. Hence, perovskite/transport layer interface non-radiative recombination also plays an extremely important role in governing Eloss in PSCs. As shown in Fig. 4, there are four types of recombination at the interface.21 In the first type, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or CB of the ETL is a little higher than that of the perovskite, which is associated with charge recombination within the perovskite layer. In the second type, the LUMO of the ETL is much higher than that of the perovskite, resulting in electron accumulation at the interface and recombination in the perovskite layer. When the energy barrier at the interface is over 0.2 eV, the electron extraction will be blocked.42 The third and fourth types represent the situation where the LUMO of the ETL is lower than that of the perovskite, resulting in good energy alignment and charge extraction efficiency. While the electrons injected into the ETL can recombine with holes at the VB of the perovskite (back transferred from the ETL) because of the small difference between these energy levels. This is quite popular in the normal structure (n–i–p) of tin-based PSCs. In addition, the undesirable surface defect in the ETL could also cause electron recombination (fourth type). More importantly, the too low CB of the ETL, meaning large energy offset at the perovskite/ETL interface, will lower the quasi-Fermi level of electrons, resulting in low VOC output. Similar recombination processes occur at the perovskite/HTM interface. The recombination processes at both the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTM interfaces significantly contribute to the external VOC deviation from the internal QFLS of the perovskite.
 Fig. 4  Diagrams showing the origins of interface-induced recombination losses, including deep-level defects within the perovskite absorber (type I), unfavorable band alignment at the interface and defects in the perovskite (type II), back-transfer-induced recombination (type III), and defect-assisted recombination in the ETL (type IV). The recombination processes occur similarly at the perovskite/HTM interface. HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital.21 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 
1.3 Quantifying non-radiative loss
Using optoelectronic measurements to quantify the non-radiative VOC loss can help us better understand the energy loss of a complete device. Electroluminescence (EL), photoluminescence (PL), transient photoluminescence (TRPL), photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), transient photovoltage (TPV), and space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements have been used to evaluate defects and the non-radiative recombination. Knowing the contribution of each layer and interface to the total non-radiative VOC loss (ΔVOC,nrad) is more significant than knowing the general information on the defect level and the loss of the whole device. This is because by figuring out the origin of non-radiative VOC loss, we can design tailored strategies to suppress the recombination and boost the VOC output. The PLQY has proven to be useful in estimating the ΔVOC,nrad of each layer and interface.43
The maximum VOC calculated using the S–Q theory (VOC,S–Q) is based on the assumptions that (1) all the photons with energy greater than the Eg of the light absorber can be absorbed and (2) radiative recombination is the only recombination type. Because of the material's finiteness, not all the photons can be absorbed in a real light absorber, which reduces the VOC,S–Q to its radiative limit (VOC,rad). Due to the existence of non-radiative loss, the measured VOC is smaller than VOC,rad, and their relationship with ΔVOC,nrad can be stated as:VOC = VOC,rad − ΔVOC,nradUnder an excitation intensity equivalent to one sun, a quantitative relationship between the PLQY and ΔVOC,nrad can be described with the formula:24  Then the relationship between the measure VOC and the PLQY can be written as:  The PLQY of a PSC sample depends on factors such as the quality of the perovskite film, the energy level of the CTLs, and additional recombination pathways at the perovskite/CTL interfaces.21 The non-radiative loss in the perovskite can be quantified by measuring the PLQY of an isolated perovskite film, and when CTLs contact the perovskite layer, the fall in PLQY reflects the recombination loss at the interfaces.
Hagfeldt et al. determined the contributions of different recombination processes to the total non-radiative loss.44 In their research, a molecule was used to passivate the perovskite surface (the side contacting with the HTM, top surface) defects. By measuring the PLQY of the perovskite film on the ETL and the complete device, the losses caused by different processes were calculated using the following equations: ΔVOC,nrad (perovskite/ETL interface + bulk) = VOC,rad − VOC,PLQY,film; ΔVOC,nrad (perovskite/HTM interface) = VOC,PLQY,film − VOC,PLQY,device; ΔVOC,nrad (energetics, etc.) = VOC,PLQY,device − VOC,measured. The ΔVOC,nrad (perovskite/ETL interface + bulk) of both the control and target samples is 89 mV. The ΔVOC,nrad (perovskite/HTM interface) in the control device is 44 mV, while surface passivation reduces it to 4 mV in the target device. The measured VOC difference agrees with the value of 40 mV, indicating that the VOC improvement is mostly due to the reduction in perovskite/HTM interface non-radiative loss, a result of the surface passivation.
1.4 Defect-tolerance properties
As defects can cause a significant drop in the open-circuit voltage of solar cells, minimizing/eliminating defects is perhaps the only way to increase the VOC of the cells. The solution-processed polycrystalline perovskite films, as expected, have quite a high density of defects (1015–16 cm−3) (the defect density of silicon is in the order of 108 cm−3), but fortunately, these defects do not do much damage to the performance. In other words, the defects in perovskites seem to be benign. Several studies have shown that the types of defects such as MAi, VPb, MAPb, Ii, VI, and VMA, which are most likely to be present in the perovskite because of their low formation energy, create only shallow trap states, about 0.05 eV above/below the VB/CB (Fig. 5a and b) (or even within the bands), resulting in a subdued chance of carrier trapping.45–49 On the other hand, defects like IPb, IMA, Pbi, and PbI, which can form deep trap states and thus cause carrier loss, have high formation energies, and therefore are not prevalent in the perovskite film. Another surprising fact about PSCs is that compositions including multiple cations and multiple halide ions, which must be prone to chemical inhomogeneity, often work with high performance. Recently, Stranks et al. found pieces of evidence supporting the fact that chemical heterogeneity in the solution-processed mixed-cation, mixed-halide FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite rather helps in preventing the carriers from getting trapped.50 The existence of Br and I induces the formation of beneficial local heterostructures that bestow enhanced defect tolerance on these materials. In these regions, charge-carrier generation and radiative recombination occur through a rapid wide-to-narrow bandgap funneling process (Fig. 5c), which is more efficient than in the chemically homogeneous regions. The chemical disorder in these regions helps in the effective capture of diffusing carriers over micrometer-length scales to lead to radiative recombination, outcompeting the capture of carriers in more electronically disordered and trap-rich regions, thus resulting in strong luminescence and high performance. Studies authenticating the defect tolerance of perovskites with mixed B-cations are also coming out. For instance, from computational studies, Sargent et al. recently identified a defect-tolerant region spanning a Sn content of 30–70% in mixed Pb–Sn perovskites and experimentally observed notably longer carrier lifetimes in 50% Sn mixed perovskite films than at other Sn contents. The composition FA0.75Cs0.25Pb0.5Sn0.5(I0.9Br0.1)3 achieves increased carrier lifetimes of >1 μs (Fig. 5d).51 Although all-inorganic perovskites are lagging a bit behind the hybrid perovskites in achieving high VOC with minimum Eloss, a recent theoretical study revealed that the CsPbI3 can be more defect-tolerant than MAPbI3.52 The VOC loss in all-inorganic perovskites must be linked to the phase stability/impurity. Hence, it can be anticipated that the VOC of all-inorganic perovskite solar cells can approach the theoretical limit by addressing the issues of phase stability and impurities under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Calculated transition energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3. The formation energies of neutral defects are shown in parentheses. The acceptors/donors are ordered by the formation energies (from left to right).48 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy-band diagram of the perovskite-based device representing the electronic transitions between the traps and the conduction and valence bands in a two-stage model for deep states.49 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Transient absorption microscopy of FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite films correlated with local chemical mapping. At the top, line scan of the Br:Pb nXRF intensity ratio (black dots) and normalized PL intensity (red squares) of the region used for correlation. In the middle, transient absorption microscopy line scan showing the center-of-mass value of the ground state bleaching as a function of time after excitation. The Br-rich and Br-poor regions are denoted with blue and grey rectangles, respectively. At the bottom, schematic of the proposed model showing carriers funnelling into highly emissive low bandgap regions in Br-rich regions, outcompeting carrier trapping in Br-poor regions.50 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021). (d) Time-resolved PL spectra of FA0.75Cs0.25Pb(1−X)SnXI3 perovskite films and schematic diagram of the defect tolerance behaviors in mixed Pb–Sn and mixed Pb–Sn–Ge alloys.51 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
The above discussion presents the importance of VOC output and Eloss in controlling the efficiency of PSCs. By combining the mechanism and current development in VOC of PSCs, we can deduce that there is still room for improving the VOC output as well as the efficiency. In this review paper, we will discuss the current progress in VOC enhancement for PSCs employing different light absorbers including organic–inorganic hybrid lead perovskites, all-inorganic lead perovskites, tin-based perovskites, and bismuth-based perovskites and their analogs. Through different strategies adopted in enhancing the VOC, we can better understand how the imperfection in PSCs works and what methods can be used for further increasing the VOC. It is apparent that in the current stage, the VOC increment is a promising way to further promote the efficiency towards the S–Q limit, especially for PSCs employing all-inorganic lead perovskites, tin-based perovskites, and bismuth-based perovskites and their analogs as light absorbers. More importantly, a higher VOC is extremely desired for all-inorganic CsPbX3 and tin-based PSCs, which suffer from severe energy loss, because they can work as a top-cell or a bottom-cell in a perovskite/Si or perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cell, where VOC is the sum of the voltages of the top and bottom cells, and a low voltage of a single cell will limit the total voltage output. In addition, CsPbX3 solar cells have the potential to work as indoor photovoltaics to power the Internet of Things (IoT) nodes because of their good matching with the indoor light spectra. In comparison with other indoor photovoltaics, such as DSSCs, the remarkable advantage of PSCs is the high VOC potential. However, most indoor PSCs, even using wide-bandgap absorbers, hardly achieve VOC over 1.0 V, which will lower their prospects for practical indoor application. In summary, the VOC of PSCs still needs to be increased and the strategies summarized here in different systems could bring some ideas to researchers in designing more efficient PSCs with higher VOC and efficiency.
2 Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells
Despite the short history of PSCs, their PCEs have steadily increased, recording over 25%. High-efficiency PSCs (over 20%) are mostly based on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. In general, in all these cases, high PCEs mainly result from improved JSC in addition to relatively higher FFs, while their VOCs fall a little short of the limit estimated by the S–Q theory. At the early stages of research on hybrid PSCs, the perovskite layer itself was considered to be a primary factor in realizing high VOC. In the very first report by the Miyasaka group, organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs consisting of methylammonium lead halides (MAPbI3 or MAPbBr3) in DSSC configurations exhibited low PCE, which was mainly due to their low VOC. The extremely unstable perovskite in the liquid electrolyte environment prevented them from achieving high VOC. After the development of solid-state PSCs based on solid hole transport materials, the processes to obtain high-quality perovskite films became the mainstream of PSC studies. A VOC of over 1.0 V was easily obtained by using a 3:1 molar ratio of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead chloride (PbCl2), recording over 19% of PCEs within a couple of years since the first solid-typed PSCs entered the stage.53 Generally, among the photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC, FF), the FF and JSC are relatively consistent regardless of different batches with the same experimental conditions. The highest PCEs updated in the reports primarily result from the enhancement of VOC. Although the importance of the realization of high VOC has been emphasized, the exact mechanism for determining the VOC in organic–inorganic PSCs has still not been fully uncovered.54 A variety of methods to obtain high-quality perovskite films has been developed including two-step spin coating, anti-solvent dripping, and additive-including perovskite precursors.55–58 Although these methods contributed to enhancing the VOC, the value saturated at some point lower than the S–Q limits.41,59 Along with the circumstances where the anti-solvent method in which orthogonal solvents are dripped during spin-coating is considered to be mature technology to minimize the defects of perovskite layers, the space to further enhance the quality of films has become limited. Also, the quality of perovskite films is high enough to achieve high performance even though they have slight defects, a property of perovskite called defect-tolerance.60,61 Faced with limitations of perovskite layers themselves, the study to maximize the PCEs of organic–inorganic PSCs has been shifted to interface engineering and charge transport layers. In this regard, we briefly review the recent methodologies followed to increase the VOC of hybrid PSCs in the following sections categorized as (i) perovskite layers, (ii) ETLs and interfaces, and (iii) HTMs and interfaces.
2.1 Optimizing hybrid perovskite film preparation

2.1.1 Anti-solvent method for hybrid perovskites. 
Following the trend of anti-solvent dripping that has been a major stream of fabrication of high-quality perovskite films, many studies have focused on the anti-solvent by varying the kind of antisolvent, modifying the dripping conditions, or using different additives to the antisolvent. While chlorobenzene is the most popular antisolvent, we found that diisopropyl ether is more effective in realizing high-quality hybrid (FAPbI3)0.85(CsPbBr3)0.15 perovskite films. As a result, it enhanced the VOC output, in comparison to the former (i.e. chlorobenzene).62 It must be noted that although diverse anti-solvents have been attempted for hybrid perovskites, accurate classification of anti-solvents, depending on perovskite compositions, is still ambiguous. Indeed, most research groups recognized the importance of precise control of the dripping speed of anti-solvents as the quality of films strongly depends on the dripping speed, which is hard to control when done manually and differs by batch and person. In addition, as the specific methodologies are not described accurately in most of the reports, other research groups often confront difficulties in reproducing the same performances. Very recently, Alexander et al. provided a general approach to sorting anti-solvents by dividing them into fast and slow dripping ones.63 In this report, three types of anti-solvents were suggested based on the degree of solubility of perovskite components in the DMF/DMSO mixture. The optimized dispensing techniques of antisolvents improve the quality of polycrystalline perovskite films in terms of void-less dense morphology with a flatter surface and reduced grain boundary area with an array of large grains. Such high-quality films lead to enhanced performance, mostly resulting from their improved VOC. While different antisolvents have been used to improve the film quality, some studies also used additives in the antisolvent to control the crystallization. For instance, Xing et al. suggested regulating the kinetics of crystal growth of perovskite films by incorporation of the n-type semiconductor 1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi) into the chlorobenzene anti-solvent.64 The resultant high-quality Cs0.05FA0.88MA0.07PbI2.79Br0.21 perovskite film was considered to block possible hole movements toward the ETL (Fig. 6a), and the inverted PSCs (Fig. 6b) based on this film recorded a high PCE of 21.79%, which was mainly due to the significant improvement in VOC, from 1.03 to 1.15 V (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of energy levels of perovskite films with and without 1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi), and a PC61BM film. (b) Schematic structure of an inverted PSC. (c) J–V curves of various PSCs with different amounts of TPBi. (a–c) Ref. 64, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.2 Additives to hybrid perovskites. 
Adding additives to perovskite precursor solutions is also an effective method for enhancing the quality of perovskite films. At the beginning of this additive-approach research, hydrochloric acid was incorporated into the perovskite precursors directly, smoothing the films.65,66 Although there is no clear understanding that can help us to choose a suitable additive, a wide range of additives such as organic and inorganic compounds, small and large molecules, and even polymers have been applied to improve grain growth, resulting in enhanced power conversion efficiency and stability as well in most cases.67–69 The interaction of the functional groups of the additives with the perovskites, and with the transport layers, has been considered to cause defect passivation and ion immobilization, improving the device performance and stability. As an example of a polymer additive, polyaniline has been found to result in outstanding performances. Here, the increase in VOC was conspicuous, enhanced by 12%, compared to PSCs without additive.70 The addition of an excess amount of PbI2 to perovskite precursors has also been considered to be a possible approach for increasing VOC, due to its passivation effect at grain boundaries.71,72 This effect is also promising for an inverted structure. Recently, Wu et al. added 5 mol% extra PbI2 to the FAPbI3 perovskite precursor, which resulted in better performance in the inverted structure owing to the increase in VOC.73 Moreover, they found that the efficacy of excess PbI2 depends on the HTM and the effect was more prominent on MeO-2PACz than on other HTMs including PEDOT:PSS, NiOX, and PTAA. This demonstrates that inverted PSCs have a lot of potential for perovskite precursor engineering.
Materials related to A-site cations in perovskites are also promising candidates as additives in precursors. Halides of methylammonium (MA), such as MAI and MACl, have been confirmed by several independent studies to be effective when incorporated in precursor solutions with slightly excessive amounts.75 Especially, MACl has been a prerequisite additive to most organic–inorganic-based perovskite precursors. The incorporation of MACl plays a critical role in making high-quality films, especially when FA is dominant in the precursors.76 It has also been shown that MACl successfully induces the formation of an intermediate to the pure FAPbI3 α-phase without annealing.77 Most of the PSCs with the highest efficiencies have been based on perovskite precursors including MACl.78 The major factor that enhances the overall performances by incorporating MACl is the improved VOC, while the high value of JSC is maintained. Before MACl was predominant, the addition of Br into precursors was the main concept to realize high VOC because the band-gap of perovskites widens with a high ratio of Br to I in the X site in perovskites. On the other hand, there is a trade-off between the increase in VOC and the decrease in JSC by the addition of Br, preventing PSCs from recording high efficiencies. However, MACl, which is eventually evaporated during annealing, hardly affects the bandgap of perovskites, and therefore allows the accomplishment of high VOC even though the Br content is small. In fact, Seo et al. successfully achieved 25.2% PCE with extremely small amounts of Br (<1 mol%) in a mixed-halide–mixed-cation perovskite. The high VOC of 1.198 V was obtained with the composition of (FAPbI3)0.992(MAPbBr3)0.008 with the help of MACl.4 Different from the reports in which MACl is used as the only main additive that improves the film quality and hence the performance, in one of our studies, we found that MACl helped in incorporating Ge in a mixed-cation–mixed-halide perovskite.74 Ge, one of the candidates for B site cations, was rarely used in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. Based on our experiments, we realized that one of the challenges to incorporating GeI2 into perovskite precursors lies in the fact that GeI2 is insoluble in standard perovskite precursor solutions (Fig. 7a). However, volatile MACl promotes non-volatile GeI2 to be homogeneously dissolved in the precursors. These two volatile and non-volatile additives acted complementing each other, producing high-quality films and increased VOC output (Fig. 7b) caused by MACl and passivation effects caused by GeI2. A high PCE of over 22% was obtained using a K0.03Cs0.05(FA0.87MA0.13)0.92(Ge0.03Pb0.97)(I0.9Br0.1)3 perovskite owing to its significantly increased VOC (1.18 V) (Fig. 7c). Fully replacing I with Br (e.g., MAPbBr3) has also been studied because of its extremely high VOC potential (Eg = 2.30 eV, VSQOC = 1.98 V) and semi-transparent properties.79,80 Sun and co-workers, for example, reported a high VOC of 1.57 V (8.70% efficiency) for a pure MAPbBr3 solar cell by using carbon as the electrode material.81 Grätzel et al. recently enhanced this value to 1.65 V (10.33%) by employing a methylamine vapor treatment to eliminate the corrugations at the TiO2/perovskite interface.79 A similar solvent annealing method was developed to improve the MAPbBr3/ICBA interface, which allows the ICBA to penetrate the MAPbBr3 film's defects/voids, resulting in a high VOC of 1.60 V.80 The efficacy of dual additives was also reported very recently by In et al. who used MACl and CsCl simultaneously.82 Here, although it is not explicitly stated that CsCl is non-volatile, it can be easily reckoned based on its high boiling points that Cs stays in the film, while MACl is evaporated. Thus, in other words, volatile and non-volatile additives were also used in this study. The optimized MACl/CsCl ratio in (FAPbI3)0.96(MAPbBr3)0.04 perovskite precursors for device efficiency was found to be 2:1, although the highest average VOC was achieved when only CsCl serves as the additive (Fig. 8a). In this optimum case, a high VOC of 1.1726 V was obtained while keeping a high value of JSC (24.91 mA cm−2), recording a PCE of 23.22% (Fig. 8b). The incorporation of isopropyl ammonium chloride (iPAmHCl) into perovskite precursors has also been found to be effective.83 The iPAmHCl as a Cl-containing additive works positively in PSCs due to its volatile properties during thermal treatments after spin coating, thereby not affecting the final perovskite compositions. In the report, a high VOC of 1.16 V was achieved despite the low bandgap of the perovskite (FAPbI3). Kirchartz and co-workers reported high VOC exceeding 1.26 V (Fig. 8c) for MAPbI3-based PSCs made by adding lead acetate and PbCl2 into the perovskite precursor, which resulted in a smooth film with large grains, reducing the perovskite bulk recombination.5 Simultaneously, the suppressed perovskite surface or interface recombination by optimization of the CTLs is also an important reason for such high VOC.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photographs of FA0.83MA0.17GexPbE1−x(I0.9Br0.1)3 (x = 0.03) precursor solution with and without MACl, and the resultant films with various concentrations of GeI2 (x = 0-0.07). (b) Box chart of VOC values for PSCs fabricated from precursors containing or not containing MACl with various GeI2 concentrations. (c) J–V curves for the best performance cells with and without GeI2 based on quadrupole cation-based perovskites (i.e. K0.03Cs0.05(FA0.87MA0.13)0.92(Ge0.03Pb0.97)(I0.9Br0.1)3). (a–c) Ref. 74, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 8  (a) VOC for PSCs based on (FAPbI3)0.96(MAPbBr3)0.04 perovskite films prepared using dual additives (MACl and CsCl) with different mixing ratios. (b) Reverse scanned J–V curve of the best performing PSC employing a perovskite film formed using the dual additive with [MACl]/[CsCl] = 2. (a and b) Ref. 82, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) J–V curves of MAPbI3 solar cells. Device A (blue) was optimized for a high open-circuit voltage, and device B (red) was also optimized for efficiency by increasing the thickness of the absorber layer and making the PTAA layer thinner.5 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Although the advent of compositional engineering in which various components in A-site cations and X-site halides are used in diverse ratios in perovskite precursors has led to the astonishing accomplishment of achieving high PCEs, the analysis and uncovering of the mechanism of PSCs have become more complex. In most papers dealing with additive engineering and anti-solvent methods to optimize efficiencies, the compositions and components of perovskites are fixed. In other words, the methods seemed to be specific to compositions and environmental conditions. We have often experienced that the methods introduced in other reports are not reproducible in our systems/laboratories. While different environmental conditions such as temperature, pressure, and humidity may lead to the failure of experiments, different perovskite compositions may also lead to reproducibility issues as the chemical or physical interactions of additives or anti-solvents change by various cations and halides in the perovskite precursors. We recently reported that perovskite films are largely affected by the evaporation kinetics of perovskite precursors during annealing when using the anti-solvent method.84 Moreover, we also found that the sensitivity of the evaporation kinetics of precursors strongly depends on the perovskite composition. It was evident that the film quality strongly depends on the conversion of intermediates, which vary with composition, to perovskites during annealing. Hence, optimization of the evaporation kinetics is important for achieving high PCE. As witnessed in our system, the resulting high PCEs with optimized evaporation kinetics are mainly caused by the improved VOC. Another research study regarding improved VOC by control of perovskite formation was conducted by Fan et al. who tried to form perovskite films under high relative humidity in addition to a DMSO-atmosphere during annealing.85 Although the specific kinetic mechanism in the above case was not manifested, the resulting perovskite films showed superior VOC, explained by induced self-passivation of perovskites that minimize surface defects and lattice distortion. Similarly, our group reported that the exposure of perovskite films to DMSO enables small fragments of perovskite crystals to be fused.86 The mechanism behind this is called the Ostwald Ripening effect.87–89 The Wu group tried to incorporate gadolinium fluoride (GdF3) as an additive in perovskite precursors in parallel with aminobutanol vapor, thereby accelerating the Ostwald Ripening effect.90 This dual approach applying additive and solvent annealing resulted in improved PCE caused by an increase in VOC, recording 1.17 V.
From the above discussion, we can deduce that improving the perovskite film quality by optimizing the anti-solvent, incorporating appropriate additives, and controlling the perovskite crystallization process is an effective way to promote the VOC output for hybrid PSCs. Although obtaining hybrid perovskite films with good morphology is not a challenge at the current stage, exploration of further improvement of film quality as well as reduction of the defects continues to hold great significance as a research topic. Recent studies found that high-quality perovskite films with enhanced VOC always have long-term stability against air and electrical stress. This is because the high-quality perovskite films made by improved perovskite crystallization are likely to accompany dense films with few defects, preventing intrusion of moisture and leading to overcoming stability issues. Also, we believe that the use of certain additives helps in the distribution of the various components (A and X ions) across the film more uniformly, resulting in better chemical homogeneity.

2.2 Improving ETLs and interfaces
The dense films with large grains/fewer grain boundaries that are also passivated with molecules (additives) in some cases work with higher VOC due to reduced non-radiative recombination of carriers in the bulk of the film but carriers can also recombine at the interfaces of the perovskite with either the ETL or the HTM. Indeed, in some cases, this interfacial recombination, depending on the energy level matching and traps in the ETL or HTM, can be more significant than the bulk recombination. Therefore, the interfaces are equally important for improving the VOC. TiO2 has been widely used as an ETL in organic–inorganic hybrid-based PSCs. The best performances based on TiO2 are seen in the cases where dual layers consisting of compact-TiO2 and mesoporous-TiO2 are used as the ETL. A great amount of work has also been done to modify the TiO2 to form a better interface with the perovskite and hence improve the VOC. As an example, Hong and co-workers modified the surface of mesoporous-TiO2 with a Nb2O5 layer deposited by the atomic layer deposition technique.91 They found that the ultrathin Nb2O5 layer improved the optoelectronic properties and morphology of the deposited perovskite films, enhanced the charge transfer, and suppressed the recombination at the interface. As a result, solar cells using Cs0.1FA0.9PbI3 as the light absorber showed a higher VOC of 1.147 V and PCE of 21.04%, compared with 1.118 V and 19.11%, respectively, for the bare TiO2 based device. Aranda et al. doped Li+ into TiO2 for MAPbBr3 solar cells, which resulted in a significant increase in VOC from 1.36 to 1.58 V.92,93 They discovered that Li+ doping helps in modifying the electronic charge distribution at the TiO2/perovskite interface, which could suppress the undesired non-radiative recombination and enhance the radiative recombination in the perovskite. Despite their high efficiency, the sintering process requiring over 500 °C to form anatase-TiO2 can add to the overall cost of the device, leading to high cost-performance.94–97 Moreover, such a high-temperature process cannot be applied to flexible PSCs, which is considered to give PSCs an advantage over other rigid inorganic PVs, in the view of commercial success. Hence, the development of SnO2, which can be made relatively at low temperatures and by simple solution methods, for use as an ETL in PSCs has received a lot of attention recently.98 Many research groups are focusing on optimizing SnO2 to achieve high VOC and efficiency.
In addition to optimization of the coating and annealing methods to form SnO2 or SnOX, efforts have been made to modify/passivate the surface of SnO2 or SnOX as further improvement toward achieving higher VOC. Recently, Mao et al. obtained high VOC by spin coating RbF aqueous solution on a SnO2 film.99 The Rb+ cations actively escape into the interstitial sites of the perovskite lattice to inhibit migration and reduce non-radiative recombination. Here, with the help of the introduction of 2D perovskite materials on the perovskite layer, meaning the synergetic effect of the ETL and passivation layers, the authors could achieve an astonishingly high VOC of 1.213 V with a small Eloss of 0.347 eV (Fig. 9a). Introduction of 3-(formamidinothio)-1-propanesulfonic acid (FTPS) into SnO2 is also effective for achieving high VOC.101 SnO2 + FTPS precursor solutions can be simply prepared by mixing FTPS dissolved in water with colloidal SnO2 dispersed in water. The commercially available SnO2 colloidal precursors should be handled with care as SnO2 particles are easily aggregated by exposure to solvents except for water due to the malfunctioning of functional groups attached to SnO2 for better dispersion in water. Thus, typically doping materials should be prepared in water that is homogeneously mixed with SnO2 without aggregation. In this regard, FTPS is adequate due to its extremely high solubility in water. As confirmed, the electrical resistance of the ETL is reduced, while the transparency of ITO and the light absorption ability of the perovskite are hardly affected. The resulting performance of FA1−xMAxPbI3-based PSCs using SnO2 + FTPS recorded 22.3% PCE with a VOC of 1.141 V, while only 1.098 V was obtained for the reference using only SnO2 as an ETL. Similarly, the mixing of trimethylene phosphonic acid (ATMP) and KOH with SnO2 precursor was reported to increase the VOC. The effect of these doping materials on the PSC was manifested as the minimization of Pb leakage from perovskite layers through Pb2+ ions being absorbed by ATMP, KOH-modified SnO2.102 In addition, ATMP could passivate oxygen vacancies in SnO2 by reducing hydroxyl groups residing in the ETL, thereby realizing optimized conditions at the ETL/perovskite interface. Also, UPS measurement revealed that the work function of the ETL was shifted upward by ATMP to reduce the loss of energy during electron transfer. Overall, water-soluble acids such as FTPS and ATMP, which are easily blended with SnO2, work well towards enhancing the electrical properties of the ETL by either reducing defects of SnO2 or shifting the energy level. Besides coating an additional layer/material on SnO2, incorporation of the additional layer beneath SnO2 has also been reported.100,103 For example, Zhang et al. recently revealed the effectiveness of a dual ETL in which an In2O3 layer was coated beneath SnO2 (Fig. 9b).100 First, the In2O3 layer is made on ITO by coating a precursor consisting of indium nitrate pentahydrate, which does not require a sintering step (low-temperature process) and is followed by coating commercially available colloidal SnO2. Using this bilayer ETL, a high VOC of 1.17 V (showing a low Eloss of 0.36 eV) and an efficiency of 23.24% were achieved with PSCs employing a 1.53 eV-perovskite as the absorber (Fig. 9c). For the cases using single In2O3 and SnO2, lower VOC values of 1.10 and 1.13 V were observed, respectively. The main reason for the improved VOC in the case of the bilayer was thought to be the enhanced charge transfer from the perovskite to ETL, due to the shallower CB of In2O3 than the working function of the ITO electrode, meaning better energy alignment at the device interface. Moreover, the presence of In2O3 results in uniform, compact, and low-trap-density perovskite films, which also accounts for the enhanced VOC and PCE. Therefore, in the SnO2-including bilayer ETL, the additional layers on SnO2 work as an interfacial enhancer to optimize charge transfer between the ETL and perovskites, while supplementary layers beneath SnO2 tend to facilitate the quality of perovskite films driven by the smooth ETL surface.
 Fig. 9  (a) J–V curves of 2D-3D champion PSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2/RbF. The inserted structure is the doubly-passivated perovskite model.99 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy level diagram of PSCs based on In2O3/SnO2. (c) J–V curves from reverse and forward scanning for In2O3, SnO2, and In2O3/SnO2-based devices. (b and c) Ref. 100, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to commercial SnO2, many research groups have prepared a SnO2 ETL using the starting materials of SnCl2. For example, Seo and co-workers prepared the SnO2 layer by the chemical bath deposition method and found that the pH of the freshly prepared chemical bath deposition solutions increases (from pH = 1) with a longer reaction time (Fig. 10a) as urea decomposes and releases OH−.4 At the stage where pH = 1.5, the solution produced a complete and conformal coverage of the SnO2 layer on the FTO substrate (Fig. 10a), which strongly prevents interfacial recombination. The solar cells (perovskite composition of FAPbI3 with 5 mol% MAPbBr3) based on this ETL showed a high VOC of 1.195 V, with a PCE of 24.23% (Fig. 10b). Upon reducing the MAPbBr3 amount to 0.8 mol% (Eg = 1.56 eV), the PCE was further increased to 25.2% (Fig. 10c). Li et al. recently reported remarkable improvement in the VOC of PSCs using a perovskite with a bandgap of 1.54 eV by replacing commercially available SnO2 with newly synthesized ligand-tailored SnO2 quantum dots (QDs).104 The SnO2 QD ETL with multi-functional terminal groups refines the buried interfaces with both the perovskite and transparent electrode via enhanced interface binding and perovskite passivation. The perovskite crystallization direction was well controlled and the interface defects were reduced, leading to suppressed non-radiative recombination and a long carrier lifetime. The PSC using SnO2 QDs as an ETL demonstrated a VOC of 1.205 V (Fig. 11a), but only 1.161 and 1.156 V for the devices employing the SnO2 ETL made from SnCl2 and commercial SnO2 nanoparticles, respectively. In addition, the SnO2 QD ETL also produced a high VOC of 1.242 V for a perovskite with Eg = 1.613 eV. Such high VOC values for organic–inorganic hybrid-based PSCs using SnO2 QDs have also been obtained for blade-coated perovskites, prepared by a low-temperature sintering process, facilitating mass production of PSCs. The organic ligand used in this experiment was 2-(2-aminoethyl)isothiourea dihydrobromide (2AT) having amine terminal groups. Double layer concepts using SnO2 are usually combined with interfacial engineering as the upper layer on SnO2 is in direct contact with perovskites, enhancing the ETL/perovskite interface. Multiple functional groups in 2AT such as –NH2, –NH, and –Br groups promoted stabilization of interfaces with multifunctional ligand-tailored groups in newly synthesized SnO2 QDs (Fig. 11b). The results show not only superior PCEs contributed by high VOC but also better electrical stability compared to the cells with pristine SnO2.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction progress with the photograph of the reaction solution at each stage and the progress of the reaction highlighting stage A-ii as the ‘magic region’, which exhibits ideal film coverage, morphology, and chemical composition. (b) Quasi-steady-state J–V curve of the best-performing device (stage A-ii) certified at Newport (MKS Instruments). The perovskite composition is FAPbI3 with an added 5 mol% MAPbBr3. (c) J–V curves of the champion device measured at Newport, showing both the conventional J–V sweep and the certified quasi-steady-state measurements. The perovskite composition is FAPbI3 with an added 0.8 mol% MAPbBr3. (a–c) Ref. 4, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021). 
 Fig. 11  (a) Best-performing J–V curves with reverse and forward scans of PSCs with a SnO2 QD ETL. Inset: Stabilized VOC as a function of time. (b) Schematic illustration of proposed in situ interfacial defect passivation induced by utilizing ligand-tailored SnO2 QDs. (a and b) Ref. 104, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021). 
Based on the aforementioned results, we can conclude that SnO2 is becoming the most promising ETL for hybrid PSCs for achieving high VOC and efficiency. While a single SnO2 layer is not perfect, some modification materials or layers are necessary to reduce the defects in SnO2 and enhance the interface interaction by minimizing the non-radiative recombination and tuning the energy alignment for better carrier transfer. One more advantage of modification of the SnO2 ETL is the control of perovskite growth, resulting in high-quality perovskite films and high VOC of the solar cells.
2.3 Improving HTMs and interfaces
In a similar manner to ETLs, tremendous developments in HTMs have been made to improve the overall performances of PSCs. As mentioned earlier, in the early stage of the development of PSCs the research was primarily focused on perovskites and ETLs to realize high performance.105 Since the light management of PSCs nearly approached S–Q limits, further enhancement in photocurrent of PSCs became challenging. Different from ETLs in PSCs that are mostly metal oxides such as TiO2 and SnO2, which show stable and high PCEs, various types of HTMs have been used in PSCs that include metal oxides, small organic molecules, and polymers.106–111 In other words, there are more choices for HTMs than for ETLs. However, the most commonly used HTM in PSCs in conventional structures is spiro-OMeTAD, which can be categorized under small molecules. The high solubility of spiro-OMeTAD in aprotic solvents makes the fabrication process easy. To maximize the potential of spiro-OMeTAD, dopants such as Li-TFSI, FK209, and tBP as additives are used to increase the conductivity of the HTM. Otherwise, its intrinsic low hole mobility, owing to its small molecular structure, prevents PSCs from recording high performance. In general, high hole mobility and a HOMO level close to the VBM of the perovskite are the necessary conditions for an HTM to work with high efficiency. Better HOMO level matching causes effective transfer of holes from the perovskite to the HTM, and high hole mobility in the bulk of the HTM helps in transporting them to the contact without loss. Although many high-efficiency PSCs are made with spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM that included the dopant (Li-TFSI), issues with the long-term stability of the cells arising from the diffusion of Li (from Li-TFSI) into the perovskite and ingression of moisture caused by the hygroscopic nature of Li-TFSI have made the HTM less popular recently.

2.3.1 Modification of spiro-OMeTAD HTM. 
To tackle the stability issue associated with spiro-OMeTAD, modification of spiro-OMeTAD or introduction of newly synthesized small molecules that are similar to spiro-OMeTAD has been applied to PSCs in the recent past. For example, Nam et al. slightly modified spiro-OMeTAD by synthesizing a fluorene-terminated HTM (DM), the structure of which is shown in Fig. 12a.112 DM has a deeper HOMO than spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 12b), which is beneficial for the reduction of energy loss at the interface. Although Li and tBP dopants are also used here, the optimized amounts of dopants for DM were less than those used for the same molar amounts of spiro-OMeTAD, despite the resemblance of their main structures. The optimized concentration of DM is also much less than that of spiro-OMeTAD, implying its cost-effectiveness. The resulting PCE by using DM was over 22% for (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05-based perovskites. This high performance was mainly caused by the enhancement of VOC from 1.07 V to 1.11 V, while other parameters (JSC and FF) were similar in both cases (Fig. 12c). Similarly, two fluorinated isomeric analogs of spiro-OMeTAD were developed and used as HTMs in hybrid PSCs.113 The fluorinated spiro-mF and spiro-oF have lower HOMO values than spiro-OMeTAD, which better match with that of the perovskite (FAPbI3) and thus could reduce the energy loss at the perovskite/HTM interface. As a result, the PSCs employing FAPbI3 (1.48 eV) perovskite showed an enhanced VOC of 1.164 V (24.82% efficiency) for spiro-mF HTM and 1.161 V (24.50% efficiency) for spiro-oF HTM, respectively, demonstrating only ∼0.3 eV Eloss.
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structure of a fluorene-terminated HTM (N2,N2′,N7,N7′-tetrakis(9,9-dimethyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)-N2,N2′,N7,N7′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetraamine) (abbreviated as DM). (b) Energy level diagram of DM and spiro-OMeTAD. The CBM and VBM denote the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum, respectively. (c) J–V curves of the average measured efficiency for the spiro-OMeTAD and DM-based devices. (a–c) Ref. 112, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (d) J–V curves of the devices employing M(TFSI)n as a dopant for spiro-OMeTAD.114 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Replacing dopants prevalently used in spiro-OMeTAD with new dopants is also an efficient method for changing/improving the cell performance as the complex synthetic procedure of novel HTMs is not necessary. Wang et al. attempted to replace Li in Li-TFSI with alkaline-earth bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) additives to form Mg-TFSI2 and Ca-TFSI2.115 The difference in initial performance between PSCs with Mg-TFSI2 and Ca-TFSI2 and PSCs with Li-TFSI was marginal, showing similar VOC and JSC. However, the steady-state power output (SPO) measured for Mg-TFSI2 was much greater than those of PSCs with Li-TFSI, resulting in higher PCEs after light and electrical stresses. Due to the more hydrophobicity of Mg-TFSI2 and Ca-TFSI2 than Li-TFSI, the electrical stability of the PSCs improved. The device using Mg-TFSI2 retained the high VOC after long-term ambient-air aging, which helps to maintain the initial performance. This indicates that when considering high VOC in PSCs, VOC after long exposure to light and electrical bias should be considered more important because the PSCs in real use are going to operate continuously during the daytime. In a similar manner to the aforementioned study, Seo et al. recently reported the use of M(TFSI)n in spiro-OMeTAD, where M = Li, Zn, Ca, Cu, and Sc.114 All these five metallic components used in this study showed sufficiently high performance, higher than Li-TFSI, and similar performance for Ca, Cu, and Sc-TFSI when used in PSCs employing (FAPbI3)0.87(MAPbBr3)0.13 perovskite. It was expected that redox-active dopants such as Cu(TFSI)2 would facilitate hole conduction in spiro-OMeTAD by generating radical cation species. However, the results of Cu-TFSI did not show obvious improvement compared to other metallic components; rather, Zn(TFSI)2 displayed the highest PCE, owing to the increase of VOC from 1.11 V (Li) to 1.15 V (Zn) (Fig. 12d). PL emission spectra revealed that Zn-containing spiro-OMeTAD led to the minimum value of the PL lifetime, implying more effective hole transfer from the perovskite to the HTM.
Although it is understood that the kind of dopant in the HTM determines the overall VOC and quite a good amount of work has been done to improve the VOC by choosing suitable dopants, negative effects regarding the long-term stability of PSCs have been uncovered in most cases. In this regard, attempts have been made to fabricate PSCs without dopants in spiro-OMeTAD. Methods have been developed to solve the intrinsic problem of extremely low hole mobility of spiro-OMeTAD without dopants. For instance, replacing the chlorobenzene solvent that is widely used for dissolving spiro-OMeTAD with pentachloroethane has been a relatively simple method to solve the problem.116 Surprisingly, the performances of PSCs based on spiro-OMeTAD without dopants in pentachloroethane (PCE > 16% for cells with an active area of 1 cm2) were comparable to those of PSCs using spiro-OMeTAD with dopants in chlorobenzene. High VOC and JSC were simultaneously obtained with even better air stability. The authors claimed that chlorine radicals from pentachloroethane transfer partially to spiro-OMeTAD and are retained in the HTM layer, resulting in improved conductivity (comparable to the HTM with dopants). Pentachloroethane has also been used by Nishimura et al.117 for checking the performance of newly synthesized π-conjugated small molecules (TOP-HTM-α1, TOP-HTM-α2, TOP-HTM-α3) without dopants. All these HTMs have a lower HOMO level than spiro-OMeTAD, showing higher VOC than that achieved with the latter, even when they are dopant-free. Though PCEs were higher with the introduction of dopants such as Li-TFSI, the dopant-free π-conjugated HTMs showed adequate performances with better stability. PCEs over 16% were obtained by TOP-HTM-α3 without dopants, while only 12.1% was observed for dopant-free spiro-OMeTAD-based PSCs. Here, pentachloroethane was also used for TOP-HTM-α3 only when dopants were not used, while chlorobenzene was used for incorporating dopants in the HTM. The authors found that the use of dopants with pentachloroethane had negative effects in terms of performance, the mechanism of which was not discussed in the report. However, they observed severe color change of TOP-HTM-α3 in pentachloroethane-based precursor solutions with dopants. Conclusively, in conjunction with the results regarding dopant-free spiro-OMeTAD with pentachloroethane, it is conjectured that the positive effect of pentachloroethane on HTMs can be seen only when dopants are not used. As HTMs with different molecular structures (spiro-OMeTAD, TOP-HTM-α3) displayed similar trends of VOC improvements by pentachloroethane without dopants, further studies regarding various solvents for dopant-free HTMs should be conducted for possible enhancement of PCEs driven by the increase in VOC. Among the three molecules, TOP-HTM-α1 and TOP-HTM-α3 are now commercially available so that the researchers can study further on the HTMs.


2.3.2 Modification of perovskite/HTM interfaces. 
It is well known that the performance of PSCs is/can be significantly altered by changing the HTM by using different molecules, different dopants, or even different solvents, as discussed above. All these changes eventually affect the carrier management (i.e. hole transfer and conduction), which is considered to be a critical factor in enhancing the VOC. We have discussed the significant role of HTMs in carrier (hole) management in PSCs in conventional structures so far. However, it must be noted that the properties of the perovskite/HTM interface, which can be strongly influenced by the surface of the perovskite, can also affect the carrier management (hole transfer and interfacial recombination) and ultimately the device performance remarkably. In our experience, we have often encountered the saturation value of VOC though we have tried various fabrication conditions of HTMs. Many research groups insisted that the reason behind this lies in the fact that defects existing on the perovskite surface induce charge trapping at the perovskite/HTM interface, thereby limiting the overall efficiency.119–123 As the surface passivation of perovskites is a conspicuous approach to overcome this issue, tremendous efforts related to surface passivation have been made. Nazeeruddin et al. developed a perovskite surface passivation strategy using perhydropoly(silazane).124 They demonstrated that this passivation layer regulates the Fermi-level of the perovskite surface, causing band-bending between the surface and bulk of the perovskite, which enhances the hole extraction from the perovskite bulk to the HTM side. Using a 1.61 eV hybrid perovskite, the VOC was increased from 1.07 to 1.14 V (efficiency from 20.5% to 22.1%). Later, the authors reported a similar band-bending strategy for enhancing the VOC using an organic polymer.125
As pioneering work, Jiang et al. applied phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) to the interface between the perovskite layer and spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 13a).118 The optimum concentration of PEAI dissolved in 2-propanol was 20 mM, which led to a PCE of over 23% for PSCs based on FA1−XMAXPbI3 perovskites (1.53 eV). The major contribution to such high PCE was the improvement in VOC recorded at 1.18 V despite the low bandgap of the perovskite (Fig. 13b). Interestingly, thermal treatment of PEAI on perovskites degraded the performance, while PEAI that was not thermally annealed worked better. The authors insisted that the formation of 2-dimensional (2D) perovskites by reacting PEAI with perovskites on thermal treatment is not ideal for the purpose. The exact mechanism for this phenomenon was not fully uncovered in this report but this study triggered passivation engineering using phenethylammonium-based halides due to their ability to form 2D perovskites with the underlying perovskite active layer. Contrary to the above work stating the merit of unannealed PEAI, several other studies insisted that phenethylammonium (PEA) halides (X) with thermal treatments on perovskite layers have a positive impact on the overall performances, explained by the decrease in defect density of perovskites by the 2D perovskite formed on top.126,127 Based on these contradicting results, regarding whether thermal treatment of PEAX is effective in the improvement of VOC, the clarification of how PEAX works at the perovskite/charge transport layer interface is important.
 Fig. 13  (a) Device structure with phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) used for post-treatment of the perovskite surface. (b) J–V curves of the device with PEAI (20mM) and without PEAI treatment. (a and b) Ref. 118, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2019). 
In a recent study, we attempted to understand this.6 To precisely analyze how PEAX work on perovskites, we synthesized novel HTMs (HTM-1, HTM-2) consisting of donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D)-type small molecules. The new HTMs were suitable to study the working mechanism of PEAX because the dynamic change in performance of the PSCs based on the HTMs was not pronounced, while PSCs with spiro-OMeTAD showed gradual improvements in PCEs by increasing VOC and FF over time after fabrication, which is explained by oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD by exposure to oxygen and air. Interestingly, only high performances were obtained only when PEAX were incorporated between perovskites and the new HTMs. In other words, PSCs using these HTMs without PEAX showed lower performances with PCEs of less than 15% due to their low FF and VOC. To verify whether PEAX act as surface passivators, we carried out PEAX treatment in different ways in our PSCs to create situations where the PEAX does/does not come into contact with the perovskite. The blocking of the direct contact of PEAX with the bottom or top layer was done by inserting poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) at the perovskite/PEAX or PEAX/HTM interface. Surprisingly, the incorporation of PEAX that was in direct contact with neither the perovskite nor the HTM was also effective in enhancing the overall performances of PSCs, equivalent to the PEAX that was directly coated on the perovskite surface. This indicated that the working mechanism for enhancing the VOC using PEAX does not result from passivating the perovskite surface. Through ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and Kelvin probe Force Microscope (KFM) measurements, the formation of dipole moments caused by arrangements of cations and anions that PEAX have was confirmed (Fig. 14a). The degree of dipole moments relies on halide components in PEAX with the order of Br > I > Cl, which follows that of the performances of PSCs with different halides. From the results, it is reasonable to say that the primary factor for performance improvement by the introduction of PEAX is not perovskite surface passivation, but the electric field driven by PEAX at the perovskite/HTM interface. This can explain why PSCs with PEAX perfectly work with the blocking layer at each interface because the dipole moments still exist regardless of PMMA. This, in turn, means that the device structure (conventional and inverted PSCs) should be carefully considered when using PEAX as the dipole moments are directional. We also attempted to fabricate inverted PSCs including PEAX and observed that the performance of inverted PSCs with PEAX at the perovskite/PCBM interface was poor (less than 3% PCE), resulting from a significant reduction in VOC, which is also an indicator of the formation of dipole moments. The direction of the electric field induced by the dipole moments created by PEAX is not preferred in inverted structures as the energy level offset between the LUMO level of the perovskite and that of the ETL increases, leading to energy loss during electron transport. As we mentioned earlier, however, the performance improvements were often reported in inverted structure PSCs using PEAX, which is not in accordance with our results. By scrutinizing the experimental sections of these reports, we newly found that all PEAX in inverted structures reported up to now were thermally treated. We conjectured that heat treatment of PEAX on perovskites promotes the formation of 2D perovskites, thereby losing dipole moments. Several reports revealed that the formation of 2D perovskites using PEAX effectively blocks the penetration of moisture and oxygen into the perovskite layer, improving the stability of devices. Conclusively, when using PEAX in PSCs, we have to approach two mechanisms depending on the structure of PSCs: (1) formation of dipole moments without heat treatment and (2) passivation with 2D perovskites formed by heating. Furthermore, we observed the synergetic effect of PEAX/PMMA at the perovskite/new HTM interface, which might be due to the strong interaction of PEAX with PMMA through hydrogen bonding, increasing the degree of dipole moments and the device VOC (Fig. 14b). The champion PCE with this structure recorded 22.26% with a VOC of 1.19 V (Fig. 14c). Considering the low bandgap (1.51 eV) of the perovskite we used, an extra-low Eloss (0.32 eV) was accomplished by this HTM interface engineering. Note that the 0.32 eV Eloss, to the best of our knowledge, is the lowest energy loss achieved among all kinds of PSCs.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the energy level of each layer with the insertion of phenethylamine halides (PEAX). (b) VOC distribution of PSCs for different concentrations of poly(methyl methacrylate) on vacuum dried phenethylammonium bromide (PEABr). (c) J–V curves of the best performance PSC with optimized conditions. (a–c) Ref. 6, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Because several CTLs, such as PTAA and ZnO, can be employed in both normal and inverted configurations, the influence of the device configuration on VOC must be considered. Here we take PTAA as an example. In general, a PTAA-involving inverted structure is more popular than the normal structure and the former's champion efficiency (23.8%)128 is also higher than that of the latter (22.6%).129 The energy alignment of PTAA with the perovskite is the same in both normal and inverted structures, and the key concern is the interface contact properties. In the normal structure, the PTAA works similarly to spiro-OMeTAD, where additives or dopants are necessary to improve the intrinsic low conductivity and the HTM must fully cover the rough perovskite surface. Jia and co-workers, for example, proposed a novel fluorinated iron(III) porphine dopant for PTAA and achieved a VOC of 1.11 V and an efficiency of 21.73% using a (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite.130 When used in an inverted structure, PTAA always produces a higher VOC and promoted efficiency. For instance, using a 1.59 eV hybrid perovskite, the Jen group obtained a remarkable VOC of 1.21 V and a high PCE of 22.31%.131 In the inverted structure, the perovskite is deposited on PTAA and its hydrophobic feature makes it difficult to produce the continuous perovskite. However, large perovskite grains (low bulk defects) were formed on the hydrophobic PTAA surface,132 which helps in enhancing the VOC. The interface between the perovskite and PTAA is always modified with an extra layer,131,133,134 whereas the working mechanism differs depending on the configuration. In the normal structure, the interface modification primarily serves to strengthen hole extraction and suppress carrier recombination. On the other hand, in the inverted structure, the modification layer additionally guides the perovskite growth, resulting in fewer perovskite defects and a physically continuous heterojunction.131 Therefore, the effect of the device configuration on VOC mainly lies in the perovskite quality and interface contacting properties.
Due to technical challenges such as the wettability of perovskite precursors on HTMs, HTMs utilized for inverted PSCs are relatively scarce as compared to the normal structure.135 To address these difficulties, new HTMs for inverted PSCs have been recently highlighted. For example, molecules containing carbazole backbones and phosphonic acid (2PACz, MeO-2PACz) have been found to be efficient HTMs in inverted PSCs, with over 21% efficiency.136 Unlike conductive polymer and metal oxide HTMs (PEDOT:PSS, PTAA, and NiOX), these small molecules form self-assembled monolayers (SAM) on different oxides, resulting in an energetically favorable interface between ITO and the perovskite. The superiority of these small molecules was conspicuous for monolithic CIGSe/perovskite tandem solar cells recording 23.26% efficiency on a 1 cm2 cell. They also performed excellently on PEDOT:PSS, resulting in a high PCE (23.3%) for Pb–Sn mixed (1.25 eV) PSCs due to the enhanced VOC (0.88 V).137
In summary, for achieving high VOC, research on HTMs or perovskite/HTM interfaces has been focused on the replacement of popular doped spiro-OMeTAD HTM with new HTMs and optimization of the carrier transfer at the interface. Among these studies, we believe that developing new HTMs and interface modification are more promising for realizing high-performance and stable hybrid PSCs. As we discussed here, dopants are always necessary for spiro-OMeTAD, while these dopants are always hygroscopic and diffusive, which will negatively affect the long-term stability of the device.138 By developing new HTMs, especially dopant-free HTMs, this problem of dopants can be eliminated. More importantly, people can design new HTMs with appropriate HOMO levels that can better match the energy levels (VBM) of perovskite materials, reducing the energy loss in the hole transfer from the perovskite to HTM. The interface between the perovskite and HTM needs more attention because although many interface strategies have been developed, the mechanisms underlying the VOC enhancement are still not clear. A better understanding of the mechanisms will help us exploit more interfacial engineering that further promotes the VOC and FF, and finally the efficiency of hybrid PSCs.
Although the VOC of the best hybrid PSCs is approaching the S–Q limit, the VOC of PSCs using perovskites with larger bandgaps still has room for improvement (Fig. 2a). As is most widely studied, it seems that every layer of hybrid PSCs is nearly perfect, while the study on the contact interfaces of these stack layers is still inadequate and will be the key to further performance improvement. For instance, Hu et al. used a high work function MoOX to modify the NiOX/MAPbBr3 interface and an atomic ZrO2 layer to modify the MAPbBr3/PCBM interface.139 With the minimized energy barrier height due to MoOX and the hole-blocking effect of ZrO2 (suppressed carrier recombination and enhanced QFLS), the VOC was promoted from 1.101 to 1.653 V. However, it is still not high enough considering the large bandgap of MAPbBr3 perovskite (2.30 eV). As JSC is nearly saturated with EQE > 90%, the main contributors of the recent high-efficiency PSCs are the VOC and FF. As we discussed earlier, in the attempts of obtaining high VOC, the non-radiative recombination in the device should be suppressed, which also benefits the FF improvement and finally the PCE. Since the loss in FF is more severe than VOC for hybrid PSCs (Fig. 2b), even a small degree of improvement in VOC with low recombination might be highly beneficial for the FF. The gap between the S–Q limit for hybrid PSCs (i.e. PCEs over 30%) and current world-record efficiency (nearly 26%) will be further narrowed by VOC and FF enhancement.

3 All-inorganic perovskite solar cells
Not all marriages are perfect. Although the marriage between organic and inorganic counterparts leads to magic properties of hybrid perovskites, the issues of instability, especially thermal stability, have been confirmed to arise from the organic part. For instance, MAPbI3 decomposes into lead iodide and organic molecules when exposed to temperatures as low as 80 °C.140,141 Mixing inorganic Cs with the MA and FA can improve the composition and structural stability at a higher temperature (100 °C), but it is still weak upon long-term heating.142,143 Replacing the organic cations entirely with Cs cations is a fundamental solution to the instability problem because of the excellent thermal stability of all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = I, Br) perovskites. It has been proved that the photo-active phase of CsPbX3 is stable over 400 °C, fully eliminating the concern about thermal instability.144 The Snaith group presented CsPbI3 PSCs for the first time, showing a PCE of 2.9%.145 Since then, CsPbX3 such as CsPbI3, CsPbI2Br, CsPbIBr2, and CsPbBr3 have attracted tremendous attention while making rapid progress in PCE that has pushed the champion efficiency over 20% in only about six years.146–148 This rapid development certainly should be attributed to the techniques and lessons learned from developed hybrid PSCs. However, all-inorganic PSCs are still facing two main challenges. The first challenge lies in stabilizing the photo-active phase (black phase) at room temperature for a longer time. At room temperature, the black phases (α, β, and γ phases) easily transform into a photo-non-active yellow phase (non-perovskite, δ phase), which arouses researchers’ interest in developing efficient methods for stabilizing the black phase.148 The second challenge is further enhancing the device's efficiency. By a quick review of the photovoltaic parameters of all-inorganic solar cells, it can be noticed that the JSC (EQE) and FF are already quite high, comparable with the S–Q limits. For example, JSC values of 16.79 and 16.78 mA cm−2, which were reported by different groups for CsPbI2Br (Eg = 1.91 eV) solar cells,149,150 are even higher than the S–Q limit of around 16.5 mA cm−2. High FFs over 0.80 have been easily achieved in many reports, and Xue et al. achieved even a very high FF of 0.852 for all-inorganic PSCs.151 On the other hand, for the VOC, as summarized in Fig. 2a, the champion values deviate more from the theoretical VOC than those of narrow bandgap perovskites, implying larger energy loss. This underachieved VOC output is the reason for the gap between the theoretical limit and the achieved efficiency of all-inorganic PSCs. Therefore, a lot of efforts have been made to develop methods for enhancing the VOC, which are summarized in this part.
Different methods have been developed to reduce different recombination types. Trap-assisted SRH recombination in the perovskite bulk has been reduced largely by improving the film quality/morphology, by either enhancing the crystallinity or increasing the grain size, or by incorporating additives, and by metal doping. Surface recombination has been reduced by several treatments of the perovskite film surface. Recombination loss at the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTM interfaces, which seem to be quite a significant contributor to the overall loss, has been addressed by interface engineering.
3.1 Reducing bulk recombination

3.1.1 Controlling CsPbX3 perovskite film growth. 
The crystal growth of all-inorganic perovskites is not fully the same as that of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. In the one-step fabrication process of CsPbX3 perovskite films, the anti-solvent is not necessary; while stepwise annealing is often adopted for obtaining high-quality films. For instance, You et al. prepared a uniform and phase pure α-CsPbI3 film via solvent-controlled growth of a spin-coated precursor film by leaving it to stand for several ten minutes at room temperature before annealing at high temperature.152 The DMSO with a high boiling point of 189 °C could not completely escape from the spin-coated film. During the slow solvent evaporation at room temperature, the mass transport is enhanced and the precursor film is transformed from the δ-phase to β-phase. Then, the uniform and high-quality pure α-phase CsPbI3 film is formed after high-temperature annealing (Fig. 15a). This stepwise annealing method yields a high PCE of 15.7% with a VOC of 1.08 V, while the direct high-temperature annealing method delivers only 8.58% PCE and 0.91 V VOC (Fig. 15b). Similar results have also been reported for stepwise annealing of CsPbI2Br, CsPb(I0.85Br0.15)3, CsPbIBr2, and CsPbBr3.153–156
 Fig. 15  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of CsPbI3 perovskite precursor films and annealed films without and with solvent-controlled growth (SCG). (b) J–V curves of the devices using CsPbI3 as the absorber layer, while the CsPbI3 without and with SCG. (a and b) Ref. 152, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (c) Schematic of adsorbed oxygen molecule passivation and oxygen atom passivation. (d) J–V curves and photovoltaic performance of the devices fabricated in air (with oxygen atom passivation) and a glove box (reference). (c and d) Ref. 160, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Adding additives to the perovskite precursor for controlling the crystallization process, improving the film quality, and thereby reducing the bulk defects in CsPbX3 films is also a method that results in VOC improvement in devices. The Meng group added urea–ammonium thiocyanate (UAT) into the CsPbI3 precursor and found that NH4+–urea bonding increases the cation size and weakens the coulombic bonding of SCN−, and increasing the coordination ability of SCN− with the Pb–I octahedron.147 This enhanced coordination improves the film morphology and suppresses defects and the non-radiative charge recombination in the film remarkably, resulting in a champion PCE of 20.08% with VOC enhanced from 1.06 to 1.15 V. Yin et al. reported a π-conjugated small molecule, 4-guanidinobenzoic-acid hydrochloride (4-GBACl), which serves as a cross-linker to retard the fast crystallization of CsPbI2Br and cross-link the neighboring Pb–X framework effectively.157 This cross-linking inhibited ion migration and the functional groups of the molecule passivated the defects at the grain boundaries and on the surface. With suppressed non-radiative recombination, the VOC remarkably improved from 1.13 to 1.28 V, accompanied by an enhanced PCE of 15.59%. Recently, ionic liquids started to be used in CsPbX3 precursors because of their strong interaction with Pb2+, through which the crystallization process can be retarded.158,159 High-quality perovskite films with fewer defects also promoted the VOC of the cells. In conclusion, careful control of crystallization by optimizing the annealing process and manipulating the intermediate phases is efficacious in obtaining high-quality all-inorganic perovskite films with suppressed non-radiative recombination in the bulk of the film.
Fabrication conditions/environments also have a substantial influence on the carrier recombination in CsPbX3 perovskites. Oxygen (O2) in the ambient environment was proved to act as a passivator of hybrid perovskites, helping in suppressing the non-radiative recombination by strongly binding to halide vacancies on the perovskite surface.161–163 However, O2 also accelerates the degradation of hybrid perovskites by deprotonating the organic cations of MA+ or FA+, forming MA or FA due to the strong hydrogen bonds between O and organic cations.164,165 Applying oxygen passivation in CsPbX3 can maintain the positive influence and remove the negative influence because of the organic-free property of CsPbX3 perovskites. Hu et al. prepared an O-passivated (rather than O2) CsPbI2Br perovskite under dry-air conditions (15% RH), where O2 is dissociated into O during the perovskite annealing process and then gets incorporated into the whole perovskite (Fig. 15c), passivating the halide vacancies, which is different from the passivation effect of an oxygen molecule by surface absorption at room temperature.160 Compared with the cells fabricated in the glove box (O2-free), the defect density and non-radiative recombination in the device prepared under the dry-air conditions were efficiently reduced and the VOC improved from 1.13 to 1.18 V with an efficiency promotion to 15.17% (Fig. 15d). The importance of dry air in realizing oxygen atom passivation was also proved by the work of the Liu group.166 Specifically, the developed in situ hot oxygen cleansing passivation method for CsPb(I2.85Br0.149Cl0.001) films only works well in the low humidity range of 10–20% and it does not work under higher humidity conditions (over 30%). Besides reducing defects and passivating halide vacancies by forming a Pb–O bond, this treatment can also promote the removal of dimethylammonium (formed by the reaction between hydroiodic acid additive and DMF solvent), avoiding its deterioration in device performance and stability. Finally, the PCE was increased from 17.15% (in the glove box) to 19.65% (in dry-air) with the VOC enhancement from 1.14 to 1.23 V. This indicates that in studies where people have fabricated all-inorganic PSCs under dry-air conditions,16,167 although they didn’t deliberately take advantage of oxygen atom passivation, the passivation possibly helps in promoting the device performance.


3.1.2 Metal doping into CsPbX3 perovskites. 
Suppression of the non-radiative recombination in CsPbX3 films can also be realized by metal doping. Up to now, lots of metal ions have been incorporated into CsPbX3 materials and Pb-site doping is more popular than Cs- and X-site doping.168 Besides stabilizing the black phase of CsPbX3,168,169 metal doping also plays a role in reducing the defects and improving the device performance. With the same valence state and similar properties, Sn2+ and Ge2+ were employed to dope into CsPbX3 and substitute Pb2+. For instance, a Pb/Sn mixed inorganic perovskite, CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2, was developed by replacing 10% PbBr2 with SnBr2 in the CsPbIBr2 precursor.170 The bandgap of CsPbIBr2 perovskite was reduced from 1.90 to 1.79 eV, which is easily seen from the color change of the films (Fig. 16a). Using carbon as the electrode, a high VOC of 1.26 V and PCE of 11.33% were achieved for CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 solar cells, while only 1.08 V VOC was obtained for wider bandgap CsPbIBr2 (Fig. 16b), which indicates that the defect density and the recombination in the perovskite were highly suppressed by Sn2+ doping. However, the bandgap (1.90 eV) of CsPbIBr2 reported in this study was different from those in other reports (over 2.0 eV) and matched those of iodine-rich CsPbX3 perovskites. It means the perovskite composition here needs to be further confirmed. The germanium ion (Ge2+), in the same main group with Pb and Sn, was also doped into an all-inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite.171 A VOC of 1.27 V and a PCE of 10.8% were achieved for CsPb0.8Ge0.2I2Br based solar cells, in comparison to 1.02 V and 5.3% for pristine CsPbI2Br cells. Moreover, a higher VOC of 1.32 V was obtained for CsPb0.7Ge0.3I2Br based devices but they suffered from JSC and FF loss, showing a poorer PCE of 9.0%. Although Sn2+ and Ge2+ can substitute Pb2+ due to the similarity in element properties, the oxidation of Sn2+ and Ge2+ to their respective +4 oxidation states, which is inevitable, and especially its effect on device performance and stability needs to be understood well. In Sn/Ge-mixed perovskites, Padture et al. proved that a native oxide layer of GeO2 doped with a small portion of Sn was formed on CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 perovskite film as soon as it was exposed to air.172 This native oxide layer not only encapsulates the perovskite from moisture but also suppresses the recombination of carriers at the interface between the perovskite and HTM. Therefore, it is believed a similar tin oxide or germanium oxide layer can be formed in Sn2+ or Ge2+ doped CsPbX3 perovskites, which contributes to enhanced VOC output.
 Fig. 16  (a) Optical images of CsPbBr3, CsPbIBr2, and CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 films and (b) J–V curves of the corresponding devices.170 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of α-CsPbI3 phase stabilization by incorporation of Eu3+. (d) J–V curves of a set of CsPbI3:xEu cells with 4, 5, and 6 mol% EuCl3. (c and d) Ref. 173, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Other divalent metal ions such as Mn2+, Sr2+, Mg2+, Ba2+, Fe2+, Zn2+, and Eu2+ have been proved to be substitutes for Pb2+ and helpful for promoting the device VOC output due to the suppressed non-radiative recombination.174–181 Differently, Hagfeldt and co-workers demonstrated that Ba2+ can’t be incorporated into the CsPbI2Br lattice. Instead, it segregates into Ba-based non-perovskite phases (Br-rich), leaving a perovskite with more iodide and a smaller bandgap. Specifically, with 20% Ba2+ (vs. Pb2+), the Eg of the initial CsPbI2Br (1.92 eV) decreased to 1.86 eV, identical to that of CsPbI2.27Br0.73. Here, the iodide-rich perovskite acts as a light-harvesting species, whereas the Ba-based non-perovskite phases, located at the surface or grain boundaries, prohibit non-radiative recombination in the perovskite. Therefore, although the addition of Ba results in a smaller Eg of the perovskite with a lower theoretical VOC, it leads to a significant improvement in VOC, from 1.12 V for undoped CsPbI2Br cells to 1.33 V for Ba-doped CsPbI2Br. Phase segregation of mixed-halide perovskites into iodide-rich and bromide-rich domains is a challenge for the cells working under continuous light irradiation.182,183 The iodide-rich domains always act as recombination centers and deteriorate the device performance. Nevertheless, in the case of Ba2+ induced phase segregation, an enhanced performance was achieved. One possible reason is that the light-induced phase segregation is different from Ba2+-induced segregation. Another reason can be the passivation effect of Ba-based non-perovskite phases, turning the negative effect of the iodide-rich perovskite into a positive role. The positive effect of Ba-based non-perovskite phases has been confirmed by enhanced performance, while how they reduce the carrier recombination and boost VOC output needs further investigation. Besides divalent metal ions, some trivalent ions have also been incorporated into CsPbX3 perovskites. For instance, incorporation of Bi3+ into CsPbI3 perovskite has been reported to partially substitute Pb2+ and the extra charge is compensated for by a slightly larger iodine component.184 The smaller size of Bi3+ causes the larger τ and micro-strain in the perovskite by lattice distortion, which stabilizes the α-CsPbI3 at room temperature. Moreover, an enhanced PCE of 13.21% with a VOC of 0.97 V was achieved in the CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 solar cell, much better than the control sample (8.07% and 0.89 V). However, a recent work proposed that CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 is not a thermodynamically favored black phase system, though it has a larger τ.185 CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 with compositional disorder and crystal strain can transform into Cs4PbI6 under activation with enough thermal energy. Hence, the stabilization of the CsPbI3 black phase by Bi3+ incorporation can be mainly because of the tailored colloid size in the solvent system. Following the Bi3+ doping, many other trivalent metal ions including Sb3+, In3+, Y3+, and lanthanide ions have been incorporated into CsPbX3 with a positive effect on the VOC and efficiency of the solar cells.186–189 Our group first explored the inclusion of Eu3+ into CsPbI3 and examined its effect on the stabilization of the perovskite phase and the photovoltaic properties of devices.173 We found that the addition of a certain amount of EuCl3 into the precursor of CsPbI3 stabilizes the perovskite phase at room temperature and under ambient conditions, while the reference shows a pure δ-CsPbI3 at the same temperature (Fig. 16c). Eu3+-incorporated CsPbI3 PSCs showed a PCE of over 6.0% with a VOC of over 0.8 V (Fig. 16d). In very recent work, we confirmed that Eu incorporation promotes the formation of γ-CsPbI3 at a low temperature of 80 °C.190 The main roles of Eu in CsPbI3 are (1) assisting the formation of the γ-phase either by substituting Pb or by occupying interstitial positions in the CsPbI3 lattice; and (2) indirectly promoting the formation of fine grains wherein the high surface area-to-volume ratio makes the establishment of the δ-phase unfavorable. Liu et al. took advantage of Eu3+ and acetate (Ac−) by incorporating Eu(Ac)3 into CsPbI2Br perovskite to not only improve the CsPbI2Br film quality but also increase the built-in potential, resulting in VOC improvement.191 They proposed an interesting conclusion that Pb2+ was substituted with Eu3+, while I− was replaced with Ac−. These research studies indicate that CsPbX3 perovskite has quite high tolerability to metal ions with different valences, even though many questions about metal doping remain unanswered. In an attempt to answer the question about the crystal site of the location of the metals, Kim et al. proposed that divalent metal cations stabilize the α-phase of CsPbI3 by replacing the Pb2+, while trivalent cations stabilize the β-phase of CsPbI3 by inducing stress on the crystal lattice, rather than replacing the Pb2+ sites.192 This may apply to trivalent and pentavalent ion incorporation, which were proved to be effective, while the working mechanism was unclear.156,193 In addition, monovalent cation tuning is also helpful to increase the device VOC output. For example, the Tang group doped a variety of alkali metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+, and Rb+) into the CsPbBr3 perovskite.194 Here, the dopants are supposed to enter the interstitial site and prevent the formation of defects in the perovskite.194,195 The perovskite crystal size is also enlarged, leading to a suppressed trap-dominated recombination. Besides, the energy level of perovskites can be tuned by mixing A-site ions, through which the energy barrier can be reduced and the recombination can be eliminated. The champion VOC of 1.514 V was achieved using Cs0.92K0.08PbBr3 based solar cells with a PCE of 8.61%. Rb+ doping into CsPbI2Br was also studied, where Rb+ is responsible for higher perovskite film quality, resulting in a high VOC of 1.32 V and PCE of 17.16%.196
From the above discussion, we can conclude that metal doping always benefits CsPbX3 cells by suppressing the non-radiative recombination and enhancing the VOC output. However, how they interact with the perovskite host and how the valence state, electronegativity, and size of the metal ions generally affect the non-radiative recombination in the perovskite need to be understood.


3.1.3 Constructing 2D/3D heterostructures. 
The construction of 2D/3D heterostructures has also been regarded as a useful strategy for suppressing trap states of 3D perovskites. For instance, the You group added PEAI and Pb(OAc)2 into the CsPbI3 precursor to form a 2D perovskite, PEA2(CsPbI3)n−1PbI4 (Fig. 17a), which remarkably promoted the VOC to a record-value of 1.32 V (Fig. 17b).17 The 2D/3D heterostructure can be realized by mixing the precursors. But, it is difficult to obtain the structure by post-treatment of crystallized 3D CsPbX3 perovskite, because unlike in the case of hybrid perovskites, Cs would not exchange with the long-chain alkyl-ammonium halide cation spin-coated onto the crystallized 3D perovskite.197 Addressing this issue, the Lin group demonstrated an in situ growth method to form a 2D/3D heterostructure based on inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite.198 In this method, 1 vol% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was added to the butylammonium iodide (BAI) solution that was spin-coated on CsPbI2Br. During the spin-coating process, DMSO would dissolve a thin layer of the crystallized 3D CsPbI2Br film and facilitate the cation exchange process between BAI and Cs to form only a thin layer of 2D BA2CsPb2I6Br perovskite on the surface of the 3D CsPbI2Br perovskite (Fig. 17c). The authors found that this 2D/3D heterojunction promotes hole extraction and suppresses charge carrier recombination, resulting in higher VOC and efficiency (Fig. 17d).
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D perovskites with quasi-2D perovskite composition. (b) J–V curve of the PEA-CsPbI3 (2D/3D) based champion device. (a and b) Ref. 17, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustrations of the BAI treatment procedure and 2D/3D bilayer configuration. (d) J–V curves of devices based on pristine and 1, 3, 5, and 7 mg BAI treated CsPbI2Br films. (c and d) Ref. 198, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with organic-cation-based 2D perovskites, inorganic 2D perovskites can be more easily incorporated into the 3D CsPbX3 perovskite. A Cs2PbI2Cl2–CsPbI2.5Br0.5 2D/3D mixed-dimensional perovskite film was prepared by adding CsCl and an extra amount of PbI2 into the CsPbI2.5Br0.5 precursor.199 The Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) type 2D Cs2PbI2Cl2 has a good lattice matching with the CsPbI2.5Br0.5, giving rise to the (100) preferential crystal orientation (Fig. 18a). The lattice match between the two crystals favored defect passivation and the suppression of non-radiative recombination within the films, and the (100) orientation of the perovskite facilitated the carrier transport (Fig. 18b). The VOC of the CsPbI2.5Br0.5 (Eg = 1.82 eV) solar cells remarkably improved from 0.81 V to 1.21 V after the introduction of the 2D Cs2PbI2Cl2, as well as the efficiency enhanced from 7.30 to 15.09% (Fig. 18c). A 2D–3D–2D heterojunction was constructed by coating 3D CsPbI2Br on top of 2D Cs2PbI2Cl2 nanosheet modified TiO2 and then coating a layer of Cs2PbI2Cl2 on CsPbI2Br.200 It was found that the Cl of Cs2PbI2Cl2, located both under and above CsPbI2Br, can diffuse from 2D nanosheets into the 3D perovskite, resulting in Cl doping into CsPbI2Br, which is responsible for the passivation of perovskite surface trap states. Moreover, the 2D nanosheets notably altered the surface energy level of both TiO2 and the 3D perovskite, which is thought to facilitate the interface charge transfer. The device performance improved, while the working mechanisms, such as how Cl diffusion from 2D nanosheets to the perovskite happens and how it sharply changes the energy level of the ETL and perovskite, still need in-depth discussion. Moreover, the properties of the Cs2PbI2Cl2/CsPbI2Br interface including the lattice matching are also important since an imperfect interface may have a reverse effect. A dimensionally graded (3D–2D–0D) heterojunction, e.g. CsPbI2Br, which exists as the bulk, nanosheets, and quantum dots, was also constructed.201 This unique heterojunction, depending on dimensions rather than on hetero-materials, displayed an improved VOC of 1.19 V from 1.11 V for pure 3D perovskite cells, as a result of better energy level alignment. However, the judicious design of heterostructures is critical since inappropriate configurations may impede the charge transport across the device, lowering the efficiency.202
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic depicting the processes used to generate the Cs2PbI2Cl2–CsPbI2.5Br0.5 film. (b) Schematic depicting the band bending for the 2D–3D heterojunction under illumination. (c) J–V curves of the 3D and 2D–3D based PSCs. (a–c) Ref. 199, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Minimizing perovskite surface and interface recombination
In addition to bulk recombination, interface non-radiative recombination is a significant source of energy loss. For suppression of this recombination in CsPbX3 solar cells, efforts have been made to modify the perovskite surface, optimize the contact quality between the perovskite and CTL, and tune the interface energy level alignment. The perovskite surface, differing from the bulk composition and morphology, is enriched with undercoordinated ions or mobile species.33,203 These defects could introduce electronic trap states that act as fast channels for the non-radiative charge recombination, causing energy loss and poor VOC output.204 Recently, an increasing number of works have been dedicated to addressing the issue of recombination at the perovskite surfaces.205–207 CsPbX3 PSCs, with serious energy loss, definitely need effective perovskite surface passivation to reduce the non-radiative recombination.
Hou and co-workers introduced the diethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC) molecule as a chelating agent for the surface engineering of CsPbI2Br perovskite.208 It was found that the DDTC molecule strongly coordinated to surface Pb cations via bidentate chelating bonding (Fig. 19a). Such a chelating structure enabled excellent and persistent passivation of surface defects of the perovskite, resulting in a significantly enhanced efficiency of 17.03% for CsPbI2Br solar cells with a VOC of 1.34 V (Fig. 19b). A champion VOC of 1.37 V was achieved with a PCE of 16.51%, indicating highly suppressed recombination after the DDTC molecule passivation. Liu and co-workers’ study proved that the predominant defect on the surface of CsPbX3 is iodine vacancy.209 For passivating the vacancy, they used histamine for perovskite surface post-treatment (Fig. 19c). The histamine bonded to the iodine vacancy via a Lewis-base–acid interaction, which was further strengthened by the formed hydrogen bond. The number of undercoordinated Pb2+ and Pb clusters was also reduced. With the passivation of undesirable surface trap density and the facilitation of interfacial hole transfer, the histamine post-treatment improved the VOC from 1.195 to 1.233 V and boosted the PCE to 20.8% (Fig. 19d), which is the highest efficiency for CsPbX3 PSCs. Jen and co-workers developed a passivation strategy by using a Lewis base, π-conjugated 6TIC-4F, for CsPbIxBr3−x films.210 The 6TIC-4F was dissolved into the antisolvent and spin-coated onto the perovskite film during the perovskite coating process. The molecule exists at the surface and the grain boundaries of CsPbIxBr3−x films, with a gradient distribution with the highest concentration at the perovskite surface. The electron-rich CN group in 6TIC-4F interacts with the exposed Pb on the perovskite surface through coordination bonds to passivate the trap states and delocalize the valence electron density from the Pb-exposed surface to bulk (Fig. 20a and b), which is beneficial for suppressing the non-radiative recombination. Meanwhile, the LUMO of 6TIC-4F creates a better energy-level alignment between the CB of the perovskite and ZnO in an inverted device structure (Fig. 20c) and thus improves the charge extraction. With the passivation, the efficiency improved from 13.69% (VOC = 1.10 V) to 16.10% (VOC = 1.16 V) for an inverted structure CsPbIxBr3−x (Eg = 1.78 eV) solar cell (Fig. 20d). Hayase et al. reported the use of delocalized organic ammonium molecules for passivation of the CsPbI2Br surface.211 They found that the amino-thiazolium iodide containing sulfur atoms can effectively passivate defects arising from vacancies of halide ions or Cs+ on the perovskite surface, suppressing trap-assisted recombination. Moreover, the π-electrons from delocalized molecules could occupy the vacuum orbitals of lead atoms, which promoted the charge extraction from the perovskite to HTM. As a consequence, the VOC of the fabricated solar cells improved from 1.10 V to 1.19 V by the passivation process. Tang et al. inserted a layer of multicarbazolyl-substituted benzonitrile (4t-5CzBn) between CsPbI2Br and spiro-OMeTAD to tune the interfacial energy level alignment.212 The 4t-5CzBn with an intermediate energy level could form a uniform stepped interfacial energy level structure, which is helpful in reducing the Eloss and boosting the hole extraction. The best device showed a high VOC of 1.335 V and a PCE of 17.34%.
 Fig. 19  (a) Atomic structure of an optimized CsPbI2Br(001) surface with the lead diethyldithiocarbamate (Pb(DDTC)2) molecule. (b) J–V curves of PSCs with different concentrations of Pb(DDTC)2. (a and b) Ref. 208, Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). (c) Device structure and (d) J–V curves of the devices with and without histamine (HA) passivation.209 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of a possible passivation mechanism of 6TIC-4F and potential interaction sites on the perovskite. (b) Energy-level diagram of the trap states passivated with 6TIC-4F. (c) Device architecture of the inverted CsPbIxBr3−x PSC and (d) J–V curves of the champion PSCs with (orange) and without (green) 6TIC-4F passivation. (a–d) Ref. 210, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 
As a popular surface passivator in hybrid perovskites, PEAI was also studied in CsPbI3 solar cells.118,197 Unlike forming a 2D perovskite layer in the case of hybrid perovskites,213 the PEAI can only contribute to forming an organic cation surface termination of the CsPbI3 surface. A modified PEAI molecule, 4-trifluoromethyl phenethylammonium iodide, was also reported to passivate the surface of CsPbI2Br perovskite.214 Here, an enhanced VOC of 1.23 V and an extremely high FF of 84.65% were obtained after passivation. The enhanced VOC was attributed to the interaction between F and Pb, which reduces the trap density and non-radiative recombination of the perovskite surface.215 Several other organic iodides have been studied as surface passivators for all-inorganic perovskites. For example, Zhao et al. reported the passivation of the CsPbI3 surface with choline iodide, which has been used previously in hybrid perovskites.32,216 This surface passivation boosted the VOC of β-CsPbI3 solar cells from 1.05 to 1.10 V, and the PCE from 15.1 to 18.4%, which is attributed to the increased charge-carrier lifetime and the improved energy-level alignment between the perovskite and CTLs. The surface treatment of CsPbI3 with phenyltrimethylammonium bromide (PTABr) forms a Br-richer phase at the surface through the Br/I halide exchange.217 In addition, the PTA organic cation plays a role in surface passivation, leading to better charge transport and decreased charge recombination. As a result, the PTABr–CsPbI3 solar cell showed a high PCE of 17.06% with a VOC of 1.10 V, surpassing the performance of the control device (13.59% and 1.05 V). Similarly, guanidinium bromide (GABr) post-treatment formed a Br-rich region on the CsPbI2Br surface, which reduced the defects, accelerated the hole extraction, and regulated the Fermi level of the perovskite to achieve better band matching with the HTM.218 As a result, the champion device exhibited a high VOC of 1.31 V and an efficiency of 16.97%. Some other halides such as phenyltrimethylammonium chloride219 and octylammonium iodide146 were also proved to be useful in reducing the perovskite surface defects and promoting the device VOC.
Besides the organic molecules summarized above, some inorganic thin layers have been also introduced to modify the interface. The You group introduced an insulated shunt-blocking layer of lithium fluoride (LiF) on top of the SnO2 ETL (Fig. 21a) for interface defect passivation and better energy level alignment with CsPbI3−XBrX perovskite (Eg = 1.77 eV).220 The high work function of LiF enhanced the built-in potential within the device and reduced the interfacial recombination. Consequently, the VOC increased from 1.08 to 1.18 V, while the FF improved from 67.89% to 78.26%. Furthermore, when an appropriate amount of PbCl2 was added to the perovskite, the VOC and efficiency further improved to 1.25 V and 18.64%, respectively (Fig. 21b), as a result of the improved film crystallinity and suppressed charge recombination in the perovskite. This work emphasized again the equal importance of interface and perovskite bulk recombination in determining the VOC output of a solar cell. Brabec and co-workers proposed that, in CsPbI3 solar cells, the defects at the interface are evenly distributed on the SnO2 surface, whereas the defects in the bulk of the CsPbI3 film are present as islands (such as point defects, grain boundaries, and non-perovskite phases).222 For reducing the bulk defects, a molecular additive, trioctylphosphine oxide, was introduced into the bulk of CsPbI3, and for reducing the interfacial defects, a surface modifier, Ba(OH)2, was introduced into the SnO2/CsPbI3 interface. With reduced defects and suppressed non-radiative recombination, a high VOC of 1.17 V and a PCE of 14% were obtained. 2D WS2 nanoflakes used to modify the surface of the ETL in a CsPbBr3 solar cell work as a growth template of van der Waals epitaxy for a high-quality CsPbBr3 perovskite film owing to the matched lattices (Fig. 21c).221 Moreover, the layer-translational feature of WS2 allows the interfacial perovskite lattice movement without restraint during annealing and cooling processes, reducing the interfacial tensile strain. Thanks to the improved carrier transfer and suppressed non-radiative recombination related to strain relaxation, an ultrahigh VOC of 1.7 V was achieved, higher than that of the pristine device showing 1.59 V (Fig. 21d). However, the roles of WS2 which are not clear yet need to be further studied. The peaks in the GIXRD patterns of the perovskite on WS2 still show a shift that is similar to the pristine perovskite film when changing the incident angle, which indicates that the strain relaxation is questionable. In addition, the rough surface of the ETL with WS2 might generate a nonuniform effect on perovskite growth. A MoO3 thin layer, introduced as an interfacial layer between spiro-OMeTAD and the Ag electrode, reduces the voltage loss and charge carrier recombination in CsPbI2Br cells.223 The better-matching energy level of MoO3 facilitates the hole transfer and blocks the electrons, minimizing the possible charge recombination loss at the anode. However, the J–V curves show serious hysteresis and a big difference in VOC, which were also observed in CsPbI3 solar cells with a LiF interfacial layer.17,220 Here, the hysteresis was attributed to the accumulation of ions resulting from external electrical bias and light-induced phase segregation. The mobile ions can pile up at the interface, resulting in the formation of larger injection barriers, hampering carrier extraction and leading to J–V hysteresis in solar cells.224 It must be noted that the explanation for hysteresis based on ion accumulation is not universal because, in our research on mesoporous-TiO2-based CsPbI2Br cells, we have found that the hysteresis can be fully removed.167 Hence, it is very likely that the ion accumulation at the interface and the formation of carrier injection barriers depend on the device structure and fabrication conditions.
 Fig. 21  (a) The scheme of the device architecture of CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs; LiF was used to modify the SnO2 surface. (b) J–V curves of PSCs with and without the LiF interlayer. (a and b) Ref. 220, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of an all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC; WS2 is an interlayer between the ETL and perovskite. (d) J–V curves of PSCs with and without WS2 modification. (c and d) Ref. 221, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In summary, interface engineering including perovskite surface modification and insertion of the interfacial layer is a promising method for reducing the surface defects and the non-radiative recombination occurring at the interface. Choosing an appropriate molecule for perovskite surface passivation is still the primary task. Besides the passivation effect, the mobility, conductivity, semiconductor type, and energy structure of the molecule also need to be considered because it also works as a channel of charge transportation. In this context, strong bonding with perovskites, good physical properties, and an appropriate energy level of the molecule are desired for steady carrier transfer. On the other hand, in some cases, the additional interfacial layer caused severe J–V curve hysteresis and a remarkable VOC difference. This may be attributed to the side effects of the interfacial layer, such as the accumulation of ions and poor carrier extraction at the interface. This problem must be solved because it will greatly reduce the reliability of the device's performance.
3.3 Tuning charge transport layers
CTLs, including ETLs and HTMs, also significantly affect the VOC output of all-inorganic PSCs. This is because the poor carrier extraction capability of CTLs will make carriers recombine before being extracted from perovskites. More importantly, the ETL and HTM that are popular for hybrid perovskites are not perfectly aligned with the energy level of all-inorganic perovskites, showing a large energy offset. For example, the CB of CsPbI3 is 0.66 eV higher than the CB of TiO2,216 and 0.41 eV higher than that of SnO2.225 On the other hand, the popular HTM spiro-OMeTAD has a high HOMO of −5.22 eV, which is 0.55 eV higher than the VB of CsPbI2Br,16 and 0.77 eV than that of CsPbIBr2.226 Similar energy offsets also exist in inverted structures, where the values between HTMs (NiOX, PEDOT:PSS, etc.) and CsPbX3 perovskites are as large as 0.9 eV.227,228 These energy offsets will lower the QFLS of the perovskites, resulting in poor VOC and large energy loss. Therefore, many efforts have been made to design novel ETLs and HTMs specifically for CsPbX3 perovskites.

3.3.1 Improving ETLs and energy alignment. 
In most all-inorganic PSCs, conventional TiO2 is still the most popular ETL. High VOC and performance have been reported by using both TiO2-based mesoporous and planar structures. For example, Hong et al. obtained a high VOC of over 1.3 V for CsPbI2Br cells with a compact and mesoporous TiO2 ETL.196,229 In a compact TiO2-based planar structure, He et al. also obtained a high VOC of 1.34 V in the champion device with a PCE of 17.03%.208 However, in these cases, perovskite doping and surface passivation engineering were also employed, which were the main reasons for such high VOC. SnO2, with a better energy matching with CsPbX3 and a simple low-temperature preparation process, is thought to be a replacement for TiO2. You et al. used the SnO2 ETL in all-inorganic PSCs, as an extension of their work in hybrid PSCs.152 It was found that the smaller perovskite/SnO2 interfacial energy offset could result in a higher VOC but a worse FF than that of TiO2 because of the poorer electron extraction.230 For better energy alignment and more efficient electron extraction, Yip et al. inserted a ZnO layer in between the SnO2 and CsPbI2Br perovskite.231 The higher CB of ZnO (−4.21 eV) facilitates the desirable cascade energy level alignment between the perovskite and SnO2/ZnO bilayered ETL with stronger electron extraction capability than that based on a single SnO2 layer (−4.43 eV). This bilayered ETL increases the VOC and FF simultaneously, achieving a high VOC of 1.23 V with a PCE of 14.6%. Solvothermally-synthesized ZnO@SnO2 core–shell nanoparticles, which also show a higher CB than only SnO2 and have a better energy alignment with CsPbI2Br, work with an enhanced VOC (1.11 V).232 It seems ZnO has the potential to be an efficient ETL because of its appropriate energy level and high electron mobility,232,233 especially in all-inorganic PSCs because the disadvantage of its use in hybrid PSCs, which is deprotonation of MA+ and FA+ leading to degradation, can be fully eliminated when used in all-inorganic PSCs.234,235 Wang et al. developed a ZnO ETL using zinc acetate as the Zn source, where they could control the residual content of acetate ions in the final ZnO film.236 The acetate could conduce the good crystallinity of CsPbI2Br perovskite and passivate the perovskite through the interaction between cesium and acetate. The ZnO film with the optimal amount of residual acetate, obtained at 150 °C, promoted the device performance to 16.84% with a VOC of 1.24 V. Tang et al. further tuned the energy level of ZnO by doping it with Cs2CO3, CsF and K2CO3, and the results showed that Cs2CO3 has the best doping effect because Cs+ ions partially replace Zn2+ ions, which generates the dangling bond of O2− and dissociative Cs+ ions, forming a dipole moment pointing to Zn2+ at the ZnO surface.237 Compared with bare ZnO, Cs2CO3 doping contributes to the energy level shift from −4.0 to −3.7 eV, resulting in an enhanced built-in potential across the perovskite layer and significantly suppressed charge recombination loss. The VOC and PCE improved to 1.28 V and 16.42% (reverse scan), respectively. However, under the forward scan, only 1.23 V and 15.06% were obtained, showing serious hysteresis. The carrier transport properties and carrier traps in the ZnO ETL need to be considered in the future development of ZnO-based PSCs with suppressed hysteresis.238
As a modification of SnO2, we first developed a SnCl2 passivation method for the widely used SnO2 nanoparticle ETL.155 Specifically, the commercially available SnO2 colloid was diluted with water and was spin-coated on an ITO substrate followed by annealing, forming a SnO2 nanoparticle layer. Then the SnCl2 solution using ethanol and a trace amount of H2O as the solvent was spin-coated onto the SnO2 nanoparticle layer followed by annealing to form a SnOX layer. We found that this surface passivation can effectively suppress the recombination at the interface between the perovskite and SnO2. Using carbon as the electrode, a champion VOC of 1.31 V was achieved in an HTM-free CsPbIBr2 solar cell. A similar structure was also reported, where SnCl2-induced SnO2 is at the bottom, while SnO2 nanoparticles are at the top.239 This strategy also works well by reducing the defects in the SnO2 nanoparticle layer, facilitating the charge extraction, increasing the crystallinity and orientation of CsPbI2Br films, and forming a cascade energy level in the device. Consequently, the Eloss of CsPbI2Br PSCs was remarkably reduced, delivering a high VOC of 1.31 V with an excellent PCE of 16.10%. In our recent research, we found an interesting phenomenon that leads to amazingly high VOC output.16 The process was simply aging the prepared SnCl2 solution (ethanol and a trace amount of H2O as the solvent) in air for several days and then using the aged SnCl2 solution to make an amorphous SnOX film as an ETL for all-inorganic solar cells. Here we used CsPbI2Br as the light absorber and dopant-free poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD) polymer as the HTM (described below). We found that the device VOC gradually increased upon prolonging the aging time: from 1.21 V for the fresh solution to 1.40 V for the solution aged for more than two days (Fig. 22a). We achieved a high VOC of 1.41 V (Fig. 22b), which is the record-high value for CsPbI2Br based cells reported in the literature, regardless of doping, additive and passivation engineering. The VOC enhancement has very high reproducibility, showing an average device VOC of 1.39 V, much higher than its counterpart (1.19 V) using fresh SnCl2 solution (Fig. 22c). Importantly, this A-SnOX ETL also has good universality for all-inorganic PSCs with different light absorbers. As a reason accounting for the high VOC of A-SnOX ETL-based devices, we found that during the aging process, the initially generated large particles, e.g. Sn(OH)2 and Sn(CH3CH2O)2, by hydrolysis and alcoholysis of SnCl2, gradually dissolve into the EtOH solvent, resulting in smaller nuclei, helping in uniform growth of a SnOX film. Moreover, the SnOX film obtained from the aged SnCl2 (A-SnOX) contains pure Sn4+, while that from fresh SnCl2 (F-SnOX) contains Sn2+ impurity as well as higher Cl residues. This difference accounts for the different energy levels: A-SnOX has a higher CB than CsPbI2Br, forming a spike structure, which remarkably suppresses the charge recombination at the A-SnOX/CsPbI2Br interface (Fig. 22d), resulting in a high VOC output. Alternatively, as inspired by  the work of Nazeeruddin et al.,124 a band-bend between the perovskite bulk and surface (buried interface) may form here, which can enhance the electron extraction from the perovskite bulk to the A-SnOX side. Using spiro-OMeTAD with a higher HOMO level (−5.22 eV) and P3HT (−5.00 eV) as an HTM, the devices showed lower VOC values of 1.37 and 1.32 V, respectively. Therefore, it is believed that the HOMO level of the HTM, e.g., energy offset at the perovskite/HTM interface, becomes the key factor determining the VOC, after the recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface is highly suppressed by the 5 nm A-SnOX barrier layer, which blocks the electron back transfer to the perovskite. In other words, developing more suitable HTMs with matching energy levels as well as high mobility and conductivity is important for achieving high VOC output for CsPbX3 solar cells.
 Fig. 22  (a) Device performances of CsPbI2Br solar cells using SnCl2 aging for different days. (b) J–V curves of the champion devices using fresh and aged SnCl2 solution. (c) VOC distribution and box chart of solar cells using fresh and aged SnCl2 solution. (d) Energy level diagrams of the components in the CsPbI2Br solar cells. F-SnOX and A-SnOX represent films made using fresh and aged SnCl2 solutions, respectively. (a–d) Ref. 16, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2 Improving HTMs and energy alignment. 
Though spiro-OMeTAD with dopant is still the most popular HTM for CsPbX3 solar cells,146,147,158,240 it is not suitable for CsPbX3 perovskites mainly because CsPbX3, especially the iodine-rich perovskite, are very sensitive to humidity and the hygroscopic Li-TFSI dopant used in spiro-OMeTAD can introduce moisture and induce the phase transition of CsPbX3. For example, as found by Hu et al., spiro-OMeTAD causes the conversion of the photoactive perovskite phase to a photo-inactive phase within 10 min under ambient conditions, leading to an efficiency plunge from 14.87% to 0.14%.154
For solving the stability issue and increasing the device performance, efforts have been made to develop new dopant-free HTMs with excellent properties, which are summarized in this part. The Hu group used the dopant-free P3HT as the HTM for CsPbI2Br cells, showing a comparable efficiency to that of spiro-OMeTAD with dopants.154 The PCE was further promoted to 15.50% (VOC = 1.26 V) after introducing a buffer layer, which tuned the energy level between the perovskite and P3HT. However, the large energy offset (0.93 eV) at the CsPbI2Br/P3HT interface still lowered the QFLS and limited the VOC output. As a solution, the authors inserted a small molecule SMe-TATPyr layer between the perovskite and P3HT, which lowered the P3HT HOMO level to −5.03 eV, slightly alleviating the mismatch.242 More importantly, the SMe-TATPyr molecule breaks the long-range ordering of “edge-on” P3HT and induces the formation of “face-on” clusters, and improves the hole mobility. Meanwhile, the sulfur-rich molecule works as a passivator for reducing the perovskite surface defect density through the Pb–S interaction. All of these advantages significantly promoted the performance of CsPbI2Br solar cells, resulting in an impressive VOC of 1.38 V and a champion efficiency of 16.93% (reverse scan). Nevertheless, severe hysteresis in the performance, showing only 1.28 V and 14.89% under the forward scan, remained a significant drawback. Such a hysteresis property leads to erroneous estimation of photovoltaic performance, and the reliability during actual performance becomes questionable, which will be a serious obstacle from the commercialization perspective.243 The hysteresis, though less serious, was also observed in our research employing P3HT as an HTM.244 It is believed that the unbalanced charge extraction and the interfacial trap-assisted charge recombination need to be considered for alleviating the hysteresis in P3HT-based CsPbI2Br solar cells.245,246 For thoroughly eliminating the drawback of P3HT, other dopant-free HTMs with better energy level alignment with CsPbX3 perovskite have been developed. Yip and co-workers developed several squaraine-based polymers with deeper HOMO levels than those of spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT (Fig. 23a).241 The polymers were synthesized by polymerizing squaraines into pseudo-2D p–p conjugated polymers, using N,N-diarylanilinosquaraines as the co-monomers. This rational design endows the polysquaraines with ultra-high hole mobility approaching 0.01 cm−2 V−1 s−1. Moreover, these polysquaraines, inheriting from the squaraines, also have a passivation effect on the perovskite surface through the interaction between Pb2+ and carbonyl groups and oxygen ions of polysquaraines. As a consequence, the champion PCE of 15.5% with a VOC of 1.27 V has been accomplished (Fig. 23b), exceeding that of doped spiro-OMeTAD-based devices (14.4% with 1.22 V).
 Fig. 23  (a) Energy levels of polymer HTMs relative to CsPbI2Br perovskite. (b) J–V curves of best-performing CsPbI2Br PSCs with different HTMs. (a and b) Ref. 241, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram presenting energy levels of CsPbI2Br with respect to the HOMO and LUMO levels of the different HTMs.167 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
We also developed a dopant-free HTM, poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD), with a deep HOMO of −5.44 eV, well matching with that of CsPbI2Br perovskite (Fig. 23c).167 This donor–acceptor type random copolymer was synthesized by a Kosugi–Migita–Stille cross-coupling reaction. We found that this polymer, used as an HTM in CsPbI2Br solar cells with an FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/1% lead propionate-CsPbI2Br/poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD)/Au structure, worked with a champion efficiency of 14.58% and a VOC of 1.15 V and the J–V curves were hysteresis-free. Moreover, by further increasing the additive amount to 5%, an impressive VOC of 1.36 V was obtained, while the JSC decreased obviously due to the low crystallinity of the film. By changing the substrate to ITO and the ETL to A-SnOX, the poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD) enabled an extremely high VOC of 1.41 V and a high efficiency of 15.53% (Fig. 22b).16 Here, though a decent efficiency was achieved, the JSC and FF were not satisfactory, compared to other reports.
For further enhancing the JSC and FF, we modified the molecular structure of poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD) but kept the HOMO level for maintaining the high VOC of the final device (1.42 V with certification).244 In poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD), the bithiophene part easily twists, which reduces π-conjugation and polymer planarity, decreasing the carrier mobility and carrier injection efficiency. To restrict such twisting, we introduced the Si atom into the bithiophene moiety and the resultant silole moiety could enhance the planarity of the polymer backbone and increase the interchain π–π overlapping. The newly designed polymer PDTDT (Fig. 24a) has a predominant face-on orientation, as proved by GIWAXS measurements, which is favorable for hole transport in PSCs. With the enhanced planarity of the backbone, increased interchain π–π overlapping, and face-on orientation, PDTDT exhibits a high hole mobility of 3.14 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher than those of poly(DTSTPD-r-BThTPD) (1.50 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and P3HT (1.67 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). With PDTDT HTM, we achieved increased JSC and FF without any sacrifice of VOC, and finally, a PCE of 17.36% was accomplished (Fig. 24b). The dopant-free P3HT showed an inferior VOC of 1.32 V and an efficiency of 15.22%. By looking into the VOC output order: PDTDT (−5.44 eV) > spiro-OMeTAD (−5.22 eV) > P3HT (−5.00 eV) (Fig. 24c), we could confirm again that the HOMO level of the HTM determines the VOC of the solar cells. Moreover, the high VOC achieved with PDTDT HTM reflects suppressed trap-assisted carrier recombination in the device, which manifests its potential for indoor application. Also, the 1.91 eV bandgap of CsPbI2Br is almost the optimum value for indoor photovoltaics because of its matching with the room light spectrum. Then we checked the indoor photovoltaic performance of the devices using a LED light source. Under 200, 400, and 1000 lux light illumination, the device using PDTDT shows efficiencies of 34.20%, 32.29% and 32.60%, respectively (Fig. 24d). The PCE of 34.20% is the highest value for CsPbI2Br solar cells and is higher than those of most indoor perovskite photovoltaics. Encouragingly, we also obtained ultra-high VOC: 1.14 V under 200 lux, 1.18 V under 400 lux, and 1.23 V under 1000 lux. Regarding the voltage requirement (1.0 V) of a single junction indoor photovoltaic, the high VOC achieved here emphasizes the potential of CsPbX3 cells working as indoor devices to power the Internet of Things ecosystem. Some other novel dopant-free HTMs have also been developed for CsPbX3 solar cells.247–251 As can be summarized here, a good dopant-free HTM for PSCs should have three merits including high hole mobility, good energy alignment with the perovskite, and passivation effects on the perovskite surface. We expect that, if these dopant-free HTMs can be mass-produced at a low cost, their prospects for commercialization of all-inorganic CsPbX3 PSCs, especially for application as indoor photovoltaics, will be certainly high.
 Fig. 24  (a) Molecule structure of PDTDT polymer HTM. (b) J–V curves of champion target and reference CsPbI2Br solar cells. (c) Energy level of CsPbI2Br perovskite and HOMO levels of HTMs. (d) J–V curves of target and reference CsPbI2Br solar cells under LED light illumination with different light intensities. Target: device using PDTDT as an HTM; reference: device using P3HT as an HTM. (a–d) Ref. 244, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 


3.3.3 Improving inverted structure CsPbX3 solar cells. 
Another solution for avoiding the limitation of spiro-OMeTAD is to use an inverted (p–i–n) architecture. The inverted structure is also advantageous for CsPbX3 utilization in tandem solar cells because most all-perovskite tandem cells are manufactured in an inverted form.252,253 However, CsPbX3 solar cells with an inverted structure are still uncommon and their device performance is lower than those with a normal (n–i–p) structure.210,227,228,254–256 One of the main reasons that impede the efficiency is the imperfect interface charge transfer and undesired charge recombination caused by the large energy offset at the perovskite/CTL interface. Specifically, the energy offset between the PEDOT:PSS and CsPbI2Br is as large as 0.98 eV and that between NiOX and CsPbIBr2 is 0.86 eV.227,228 Yip et al. developed TPE-S, a novel small molecule HTM based on tetraphenylethylene (TPE), which lowered the energy offset from 0.98 eV in the PEDOT:PSS case to 0.79 eV.228 As a result, the VOC improved from 1.15 to 1.26 V, pushing the efficiency to 15.4%. Ma et al. inserted N749 dye into the interface between NiOX and CsPbIBr2 for tuning the energy alignment.227 The appropriate HOMO level of N749 facilitated the carrier transport and suppressed the carrier recombination. The VOC was remarkably boosted from 0.86 to 1.22 V, resulting in an efficiency improvement from 6.28 to 9.49%. Similarly, the large energy offset at the perovskite/ETL interface has been decreased to improve VOC. For instance, the Jen group used 6TIC-4F (described above) to passivate the CsPbIXBr3−X perovskite (1.78 eV), which also tuned the energy alignment between the perovskite and ZnO.210 With the reduced energy offset from 0.76 to 0.65 eV, the VOC of the inverted CsPbIXBr3−X solar cell was enhanced from 1.10 to 1.16 V.
In conclusion, the inverted structure should be more promising for CsPbX3 photovoltaic cells due to its low-temperature processibility and compatibility with tandem solar cells. Similar to the normal structure cells, the inverted CsPbX3 cells suffer from a huge energy offset and poor VOC output. Up to now, there have been only a few HTMs available for inverted cells, which partly makes them less popular. We believe that finding more suitable HTMs228,255,256 to reduce the large interface energy offset is critical to the development of inverted CsPbX3 solar cells.

4 Tin perovskite solar cells
As an element sitting just above Pb in group 14 of the periodic table, Sn is a possible replacement for Pb, and Sn-based perovskites (ASnX3; A = FA, MA, Cs; X = I, Br) adopt structures similar to those of Pb counterparts, which leads to analogical photovoltaic characteristics, such as high absorption coefficients, small exciton binding energy, and high carrier mobility.257,258 In general, Sn-based perovskites have lower bandgaps than their Pb-counterparts. Compositions like MASnI3 and FASnI3 with Eg values of 1.25 and 1.4 eV, respectively, match the optimum bandgap range for maximum efficiency estimated by the S–Q limit. Therefore, Sn-based PSCs are expected to work better than their Pb-counterparts. Following the seminal work from the Kanatzidis group259 and the Snaith group,260 tin-based PSCs have been drawing increasing attention due to their promise for efficient and environment-friendly Pb-free PSCs. However, compared with Pb-based counterparts, Sn-based PSCs always suffer more severe energy loss. For example, FASnI3 perovskite has an Eg of 1.40 eV, while most reported VOC values are lower than 0.9 V, with an Eloss of over 0.5 eV, which is quite large for narrow-band perovskites. Though recent works have achieved VOC over 0.9 V,18,261 it still has a gap between the theoretical VOC of over 1.1 V according to the S–Q limit. The Eloss is due to the non-radiative charge recombination in the device, which can be attributed to (i) the poor film quality because of rapid crystallization (no intermediate state),260,262 resulting in a high defect density of ∼1016 cm–3;263 (ii) the easy oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, leading to too high background carrier (hole) density and Sn vacancies;258 and (iii) the short carrier diffusion length of the tin perovskite and disadvantageous energy level alignment with common charge transport layers, causing poor carrier extraction efficiency.263,264
4.1 Improving tin perovskite film quality

4.1.1 Controlling tin perovskite film growth. 
Like in Pb-perovskites, improving the film quality by precisely controlling the crystal growth, including optimization of the fabrication process by varying the perovskite precursor and perovskite film composition, results in enhanced VOC in Sn-perovskites. For instance, the Wakamiya group developed a hot antisolvent treatment (HAT) process that resulted in a higher VOC for FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskite.262 The HAT, where hot chlorobenzene was used instead of the room temperature solvent, increased the number of nuclei and thus improved the coverage, homogeneity, and grain size of the final film. This integrated technique promoted the VOC from 0.36 to 0.55 V with an enhanced PCE of 7.2%. In contrast, Han et al. found that a decrease in the number of nuclei is more favorable for tin perovskite crystal growth.265 Specifically, a cold perovskite precursor was used for spin-coating, where the nucleation rate was retarded and the number of nuclei was decreased, leaving more space and time for crystal growth, resulting in FASnI3 perovskite crystals with large grain size and preferential orientation as well as better device performance (Fig. 25a and b). This film with the post-treatment with n-propylammonium iodide (PAI) solution worked with a high PCE of 12.11% and VOC of 0.77 V in the best device (Fig. 25c). Although the perovskites and solvent systems were different in the above two studies, which could be the reason why the film quality was improved by the two opposite approaches, it can be comprehended from the two studies that cold solution generates fewer nuclei and larger grain size, while hot solution generates more nuclei and smaller grain size. It seems that the controlled perovskite crystal growth resulting in a uniform pinhole-free film is more important than the perovskite grain size.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the nucleation mechanism for FASnI3 perovskite films with different precursor temperatures. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing PSCs based on FASnI3-0 °C and FASnI3-20 °C films. (c) J–V curve of the champion device based on an n-propylammonium iodide (PAI) post-treated FASnI3-0 °C film. (a–c) Ref. 265, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) J–V curves of the champion devices containing pure 3D FASnI3 and 2D/3D perovskites with different 4-fluoro-phenethylammonium bromide (FPEABr) concentrations.266 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides controlling the Sn compound properties in the precursor, the Sn perovskite crystal growth can be regulated through coordination interactions. For example, n-butylammonium acetate (BAAc) ionic liquid could tune the tin coordination with O⋯Sn chelating bonds and N–H⋯X hydrogen bonds.267 These interactions were able to slow down the crystal growth rate, generating high-quality, Sn4+-fewer FASnI3 films with preferential crystal orientation. In consequence, the VOC was promoted to 0.65 V (PCE = 10.4%) from 0.60 V (8.6%). With the same working mechanism, formamidine acetate (FAAc) ionic liquid was also studied in FASnI3 PSCs, achieving 9.96% efficiency.268 The interaction between ammonium and the halide seems to be an effective way to control the Sn perovskite growth. Diau et al. introduced ethylenediammonium diiodide (EDAI2) into FASnI3 perovskite to slow down the crystal growth via the interactions between the ammonium functional groups and tin perovskite.269 With 1% EDAI2 additive, dense and pinhole-free perovskite films, suppressed Sn2+ oxidation, and reduced defect states were achieved. The modified device achieved a high initial efficiency of 7.4% and VOC of 0.52 V, higher than the reference with 4.0% and 0.36 V, respectively. More interestingly, the efficiency of the 7.4%-device slowly increased to 8.9% (VOC of 0.58 V) during storage in a glove box, which was attributed to the slow relaxation of crystal strain induced by the EDAI2 additive. Such VOC and efficiency increments during storage have also been observed in other studies on Sn-based solar cells.270–272 Light soaking was also proved to improve VOC and PCE. Mora-Sero et al. added dipropylammonium iodide and NaBH4 into the FASnI3 and tested the device stability under continuous illumination under one sun with a UV cut-off filter.273 They discovered that the initial efficiency of both pristine and modified cells increased due to the substantial increase in VOC and that the modified PSC continued to increase for 500 h. However, the mechanism of the light-soaking-induced VOC increase has yet to be discovered. A large organic ammonium molecule, butylammonium iodide (BAI), added to FASnI3 perovskite has been found to alter the orientation of the perovskite crystal and improve the connectivity of the crystal grains. Here, the optimal amount of BAI was 15%, and upon increasing the amount to 20%, a BA-based 2D structure was detected. Thus, it is believed that the formed 2D structure possibly benefits the cell by enhancing its performance. Up to now, many long-chain organic ammoniums such as phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI),274–277n-propylammonium iodide,278 triethylphosphine,279 and thienylethylammonium280 have been used to assist the oriented tin perovskite growth or form beneficial 2D tin perovskites. A very recent work reported the highest efficiency of 14.81% (VOC of 0.84 V) for tin-based PSCs with 2D/3D structure, made by using FPEABr that substitutes FAI in FASnI3 perovskite (Fig. 25d). In this case, the high performance was attributed to the preferential crystal orientation, suppression of Sn2+ oxidation, and decreased defect density.266 The Ning group introduced removable pseudohalogen ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) to manipulate the crystal growth process of tin perovskites, leading to the formation of a 2D–quasi-2D–3D hierarchical structure.281 Because of the 2D layer on the surface, the air stability was remarkably enhanced and the carrier density was reduced, and the VOC also slightly improved from 0.58 to 0.61 V. Similar to the 2D capping layer, other passivation layers on the tin perovskite surface have also been proved to be sufficient to enhance the device performance. For instance, Hayase et al. developed a post-treatment method of tin perovskites with edamine Lewis base.282 They found that the amine group in edamine bonds to the undercoordinated tin, passivating the dangling bonds and defects and suppressing the Sn2+ oxidation, leading to suppressed charge carrier recombination. Finally, with the help of VOC improvement by 0.11 V, the efficiency surpassed 10%, which was the first report with PCEs above 10% for any Sn-based PSCs. Therefore, besides the bulk properties, the surface properties of Sn perovskites are also equally important because the surface can suffer from more defects and more severe Sn2+ oxidation. This puts forward higher demands for interface charge extraction; the carriers need to be efficiently extracted from the perovskite before recombination.


4.1.2 Preventing Sn2+ oxidation. 
Uniform, pin-hole-free films with large grains are essential but not sufficient for achieving high VOC. Although high-quality perovskite films were obtained in the above studies, the quantum efficiency of the solar cells was still low, indicating severe non-radiative recombination in the perovskite. Specifically, the Sn2+ oxidation could induce heavy self-doping and increase the background carrier density in the perovskite, leading to severe charge recombination and a short carrier lifetime. The oxidation of Sn2+ can happen very quickly upon exposure to air and moisture. Therefore, Sn-based PSCs are only assembled in an inert gas (N2 or Ar)-filled glove box. Moreover, the use of degassed solvents and pure precursors is also important. Sn4+ impurities in the raw materials can deteriorate the performance. For example, Wakamiya et al. found about 10 wt% SnI4 impurities in SnI2 (99.9%, trace metals basis, purchased from Kojundo Chemical Laboratory Co., Ltd).283 The impurities were sublimed by heating and pure SnI2 was recrystallized, generating colorless crystalline needles of [SnI2(DMF)] and [SnI2(DMSO)]. The FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskite films made from these pure Sn precursors showed energy levels different from that of the unpurified SnI2. Furthermore, 1,4-bis(trimethylsilyl)-2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-dihydropyrazine (TM-DHP) reductant was added to the FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskite precursor containing 10 mol% SnF2.264 TM-DHP can selectively reduce the SnF2, forming Sn(0) nanoparticles, which scavenge Sn4+ impurities in the precursor (Fig. 26a). Finally, the Sn4+ ratio on the perovskite film surface was reduced and the bulk became Sn4+-free. Here, the selective reduction of SnF2, attributed to the strong affinity of fluoride, is the key factor in the Sn4+ removal, which emphasizes the necessity of SnF2 additive to the tin perovskite. By employing this Sn4+-free film in the p–i–n device structure, the VOC was promoted to 0.63 V (PCE = 9.9%) (Fig. 26b). And, after perovskite surface treatment with ethylene diamine (EDA) and by minimizing the interfacial energy gap using PCBM, the efficiency and VOC were further promoted to 11.5% and 0.76 V, respectively (Fig. 26c and d). A more simple method by adding Sn(0) powder to the perovskite precursor was also reported, in which metallic Sn works as a reductant to convert Sn4+ to Sn2+, suppressing the recombination loss and promoting VOC from 0.19 to 0.58 V (PCE = 6.75%).258 Although the reduction reaction between Sn(0) and Sn4+ can compensate for Sn2+ in the system, the SnF2 additive is still necessary for high-performance cells. The roles of SnF2 additive in tin perovskites were recently elucidated by Abate et al.284 They found that fluoride anions show a stronger affinity to Sn4+ over Sn2+, selectively complexing it as SnF4. The SnF4 has a lower tendency to be included in the perovskite structure than SnI4, hence preventing the inclusion of Sn4+ in the final film. Fluoride also has a strong influence on the colloidal chemistry of precursor dispersions, directly affecting perovskite crystallization.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the Sn(IV) scavenging method. 1,4-Bis(trimethylsilyl)-2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-dihydropyrazine (TM-DHP) is added to the tin perovskite precursor solution. Sn(0) nanoparticles formed by the reduction of SnF2 by TM-DHP scavenge residual Sn(IV) impurities. (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskite prepared by adding different amounts of reductant TM-DHP. (c) J–V curves of Sn-based PSCs with or without surface treatment using ethylene diamine (EDA) and PC61BM. (d) Energy level diagram of the cell components. (a–d) Ref. 264, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 
The importance of Sn adducts in controlling the tin perovskite film properties was studied by the Ning group.261 They prepared a SnI2·(DMSO)X adduct by the reaction between Sn(0) and I2 in DMF/DMSO solvent. The adduct is well-dispersed in the precursor solution, avoiding needle-shaped SnI2 segregation and enabling uniform perovskite films with increased out-of-plane crystal orientation (Fig. 27a). The solar cells (structure in Fig. 27b) showed a high efficiency of 14.6% with a VOC of 0.91 V and a JSC of 20.6 mA cm−2 (Fig. 27c). The high JSC, in this case, was due to the enhanced diffusion length owing to the orientation of the perovskite film. On the other hand, in the case where synthesized SnI2 was dissolved into the solvent, an even higher VOC of 0.96 V was obtained. But, a lower PCE (12.2%) in the latter case was due to the lower JSC (Fig. 27c) possibly because of the large voids in the perovskite film. It seems that the better morphology of the tin perovskite film is favorable for higher JSC, but it doesn’t necessarily guarantee less non-radiative recombination in the film. On the other hand, similar to the case of excess PbI2 in lead perovskites,285 the SnI2 cluster may also play a positive role in achieving high voltages, which needs more study to confirm.
 Fig. 27  (a) One-step synthesis (OSS) and two-step synthesis (TSS) methods for SnI2 precursor and perovskite film preparation. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of OSS and TSS devices. (c) J–V curves of the champion devices based on the tin–perovskite prepared by OSS and TSS methods. (a–c) Ref. 261, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Minimizing interface recombination

4.2.1 Tuning energy alignment in inverted structures. 
The biggest interfacial problem is the energy level mismatch between tin perovskites and the charge extraction materials that are more suitable for lead perovskites. There is always a large energy level offset between the perovskite and ETL/HTM, which restricts the attainable voltage output of the cells. For example, in the inverted structure of tin-based PSCs, PEDOT:PSS is the most widely used HTM, which has a work function (WF) of −5.0 eV, much higher than the VB of FASnI3 (−5.59 eV).286 This inferior band alignment of the tin perovskite with the HTM results in poor hole extraction and a lower voltage. To improve the band alignment, efforts have been made to modify the energy structure of the perovskites to match those of the charge extraction layers. For example, Wakamiya et al. prepared a series of FAXMA1−XSnI3 perovskites and found that FA-rich perovskites have larger bandgaps than MA-rich ones, and FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 has the optimized alignment with PEDOT:PSS.262 Diau and co-workers incorporated a nonpolar organic cation, guanidinium (GA+), into the FASnI3 perovskite (with 1% EDAI2).287 Here, the VB of FASnI3 gradually decreases with increasing GA+ amount and Eg slowly increases. With 20% GA+, the perovskite exhibits the optimal alignment with PEDOT:PSS, showing an enhanced VOC of 0.62 V (PCE = 9.6%).
Hayase et al. followed a compositional engineering method by adding ethylammonium iodide (EAI) into the tin perovskite to form (FA0.9EA0.1)0.98EDA0.01SnI3.271 The EA+ cation incorporation aligned the energy levels of the perovskite to match those of PEDOT:PSS and C60 (Fig. 28a), which helped in improving the built-in potential. EAI also works for suppressing the formation of traps and defects and reducing the lattice disorder of the perovskite. Additionally, with the help of a post-treatment with edamine, the efficiency of the solar cells was promoted to 13.24% with a high VOC of 0.84 V (Fig. 28b). Similarly, the larger size divalent cation ethylenediammonium (en) incorporated into the tin perovskite lattice288–290 serves as a cation of 3D structure but creates a high density of SnI2 vacancies, forming a hollow 3D structure, which shows a larger bandgap, lower trap-state density, a much longer carrier lifetime and finally enhanced performance, compared with reference cells. In the trial of modifying the energy level of perovskites, the change in Eg is always inevitable, which may cause the deviation from optimal Eg, affecting the efficiency. In this context, constructing gradient energy alignment may facilitate the charge transfer without the necessity of altering the Eg of the light absorber. Han et al. reported a perovskite graded heterostructure, where a narrow-bandgap FASnI3 dominates at the bulk and a wide-bandgap 2D TFBA2SnI4 (TFBCF3C6H5CH2NH3+) is distributed with a gradient from bulk to the surface.291 This heterostructure helps the electron extraction at the perovskite/C60 interface as a result of the improved energy alignment between FASnI3 and C60. The large steric hindrance effect of the TFBA molecule was thought to serve as an energy barrier to suppress the permeation of oxygen molecules and the subsequent oxidation of Sn2+, which reduced the electronic trap states and the non-radiative recombination in FASnI3 perovskite. As a result, the VOC of 0.58 V with an efficiency of 8.53% improved to 0.70 V with an efficiency of 10.96%. Larger molecules have also been introduced into the tin perovskite precursor to form a bulk heterojunction and facilitate the charge transfer.286,292 A semiconducting molecule, PTN–Br, with a HOMO level of −5.41 eV added to the FASnI3 perovskite precursor was found to be located at the grain boundaries of the final perovskite crystals and the HOMO level of the molecule creates a gradient band alignment between the perovskite (−5.59 eV) and PEDOT:PSS (−5.0 eV), promoting the hole transportation and VOC output.286 Pushing down the WF of PEDOT:PSS to match with the energy level of the perovskite can also avoid the change in Eg. For instance, a p-type dopant, F4TCNQ, deposited onto a PEDOT:PSS film pushed down the WF of PEDOT:PSS from −5.04 to −5.18 eV, exhibiting more favorable hole extraction.293 This layer also suppressed the trap density at the perovskite/HTM interface as a result of molecular interaction with the perovskite. Compared with the approach of modifying perovskites, constructing gradient energy alignment at the perovskite/HTM interface and modifying the HTM look more promising. This is because (1) the optimal Eg of the perovskite can be maintained; and (2) some molecules with appropriate energy levels and certain functional groups can simultaneously work for controlling perovskite growth and reducing interfacial defects.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the energy band levels for inverted tin halide PSCs. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing PSC-based tin perovskite with EA0.1-EDA passivation. EA represents ethyl ammonium and EDA represents ethylene diammonium. (a and b) Ref. 271, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Most research studies on band alignment for Sn-based PSCs are focused on the perovskite/HTM interface in an inverted structure, while the perovskite/ETL interface has not been given much attention. This can be attributed to the shorter hole diffusion length of Sn-perovskites than that of the electron,294 which makes the hole extraction at the perovskite/HTM interface more critical. However, there is also an energy level mismatch between perovskites and ETLs, such as C60 and PCBM.270,287 This energy level offset can be a reason for lowering the photovoltage. Elevating the LUMO level of the ETL is possible to improve the VOC of tin-based PSCs. Recently, an indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), used in OPV and Pb PSCs,80,295–297 with a shallower energy level (−3.74 eV) than that of PCBM (−3.91 eV) was employed as an ETL in PEAXFA1−XSnI3 (NH4SCN as an additive, Eg = 1.39 eV)-based PSCs (Fig. 29a).18 Its better energy alignment with tin perovskites promises a larger attainable voltage. In addition, the shallow LUMO of ICBA prevents the electron injection from iodide, giving rise to less electron density and suppressed interface carrier recombination, while the high electron density of PCBM, caused by remote doping from iodide (ion migration), aggravates the interface carrier recombination with p-type tin perovskite films.298 As a result, an unprecedentedly high VOC of 0.94 V was accomplished with an efficiency of 12.4%, while the case using PCBM only shows a VOC of 0.60 V and an efficiency of 7.7% (Fig. 29b). This work emphasized the imperfection of the tin perovskite/ETL interface, such as energy level mismatch and carrier recombination. These problems are also observable for the Sn-perovskite/ETL interface of the normal (n–i–p) structure.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic illustration of energy levels. Dashed lines represent the quasi-Fermi levels of ICBA (EFn-I), PCBM (EFn-P), and PEDOT (EFp). (b) J–V curves of the certified PEA15-SCN device with ICBA and a champion device of a PEA15-SCN film with PCBM. (a and b) Ref. 18, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 


4.2.2 Tuning energy alignment in normal structures. 
In tin-based PSCs, the inverted (p–i–n) structure is much more popular than the normal (n–i–p) structure (more popular in Pb-based PSCs). Among the reported works, only approximately 10% of the total reports employed a normal structure, where the VOC and efficiency are always lower. From the point of view of the intrinsic properties, the shorter hole diffusion length (193 nm) than that of electrons (279 nm) of tin perovskites makes the inverted structure more suitable for tin perovskites. However, with the popular additive SnF2, the carrier diffusion lengths of tin perovskites can exceed 500 nm, which means the device architecture should not limit the device performance.294 Some reasons accounting for the poor performance of tin-based PSCs in a normal structure have been reported. The most significant one, as mentioned above, is the large conduction band offset at the perovskite/ETL interface. For example, there are big offsets between the CBs of tin perovskites and those of popular TiO2 and SnO2 ETLs.300 Given that the VOC of a solar cell is partly determined by the energy difference between the ETL's CB and the perovskite's VB, the too deep CB of the ETL would limit the VOC output.301 Moreover, the electrons injected into the ETL could recombine with the holes in tin perovskites, lowering the quasi-Fermi level of electrons. This easily happens because tin perovskites exhibit p-type semiconductor properties with a high background hole density, stemming from Sn2+ oxidation to Sn4+. Unlike the case of Sn-PSCs, the perovskite/ETL energy offset does not affect the VOC strongly in the case of Pb-based PSCs. Lead perovskites are n-type semiconductors and the n–p junction formed at the perovskite/HTM interface leaves fewer holes for recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface. This means the energy offset at the perovskite/HTM interface is more important for lead perovskite solar cells, while the perovskite/ETL interface is critical for tin perovskite solar cells.259,300 This agrees with our recent research on CsPbI2Br solar cells, where PDTDT HTM with a smaller energy offset than P3HT displayed a much higher VOC output. Therefore, TiO2 and SnO2 ETLs that are commonly used in lead PSCs are not suitable for tin-based solar cells because of their too deep CB and poor hole blocking ability. For reducing the energy offset, Nb2O5 with a much higher CB has been used as an ETL in FASnI3 cells, where the conduction band offset could be minimized to almost zero and a much-enhanced VOC of 0.42 V was achieved.300 The Kanatzidis group reported a cascade structure of the ETL by coating ZnS onto mesoporous TiO2 in FASnI3 cells.301 ZnS has a CB of −3.5 eV, much higher than that of TiO2 (−4.2 eV), which matches well with that of FASnI3 perovskite (−3.3 eV), and significantly reduces the interfacial recombination and enhances the VOC to 0.38 V. A C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid (CPTA)-modified SnO2 used as an ETL in an n–i–p planar structure (en)FASnI3 cell reduces the energy loss during electron transfer and efficiently suppresses charge recombination (block the holes) at the perovskite/SnO2 interface (Fig. 30a).299 As a result, a high VOC of 0.72 V was achieved, while bare SnO2-based devices showed only 0.2 V (Fig. 30b). One more possible reason that accounts for the low performance can be the formation of undesirable Ti–O–Sn bonds when the tin perovskite contacts with TiO2, which act as traps and charge recombination centers.302 This problem can be solved by inserting a fullerene layer between TiO2 and tin perovskites to avoid their direct contact.
 Fig. 30  (a) Energy band alignment diagram of tin-based PSCs. (b) J–V curves of tin-based PSCs with and without CPTA. CPTA represents C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid. (a and b) Ref. 299, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In most research using normal structures, the large energy offset at the perovskite/ETL (metal oxide) interface is regarded as the main problem, while the offset at the perovskite/ETL (fullerene) interface in the inverted structure is also quite large. For example, the energy offset in the case of GeI2-doped (FA0.9EA0.1)0.98EDA0.01SnI3/C60 is as large as 0.65 eV, which is comparable to or even larger than that of FASnI3/TiO2.271,300,301 In addition, the LUMO of C60 (−4.5 eV) is lower than those of metal oxide ETLs in the normal structure, meaning a high possibility of recombination between injected electrons and holes in p-type tin perovskites. Nonetheless, a very high VOC of 0.84 V was achieved in the former case even with a 0.65 eV energy offset.271 Though the carrier transport mechanism between normal and inverted structures is not the same, the carrier recombination caused by energy offset can be similar. Therefore, we believe that the energy offset at the perovskite/ETL interface in the normal structure might not be the single and decisive factor for low VOC and efficiency. Moreover, the properties of perovskite/metal oxide interfaces such as chemical bonds, electron transportation efficiency, and Sn2+ oxidation accelerated by oxygen vacancies on metal oxide surfaces should be considered for the further development of normal structure tin-based PSCs.302,303 As summarized above, efforts have been made to optimize the inverted structure devices to improve VOC and PCE. If adequate attention can be paid to normal structure Sn cells, high performance might also be achievable, which could provide more options in designing single-junction and tandem solar cells. We also noted in the two seminal works on the normal structure, high VOC values (0.68 and 0.88 V) were already achieved using MASnI3 (Eg = 1.30 and 1.23 eV),259,260 while they were not able to be repeated even by the same group.288,301,304 This poor repeatability can be attributed to the poor air stability of tin perovskites as well as some unknown reasons for tin-based solar cells. This poor stability also leads to diverse energy levels reported for the same tin perovskite. As we know, tin perovskites are extremely sensitive to air and solar cells were fabricated in an inert gas-filled glove box. But, for measuring PYS or UPS to determine the energy structure, tin perovskites have to be moved out of the glove box. This can result in different Sn2+ oxidation levels of the same tin perovskite, leading to diverse energy levels reported by different groups.305 In other words, the reported energy levels may not accurately reflect the energy match situation at the interfaces of tin perovskite solar cells.
In general, even though tin perovskites with narrower bandgaps have smaller theoretical Eloss according to the S–Q limit, they suffer from severe Eloss. The main reasons lie in the high defect level caused by Sn2+ oxidation in the tin perovskite and poor interfacial carrier transportation caused by energy level mismatch, both of which lead to serious non-radiative recombination and low VOC output. As summarized above, methods for controlling the crystal growth, suppressing the Sn2+ oxidation, and optimizing the interfacial energy alignment have been developed, which have promoted VOC towards 1.0 V. For further enhancing the VOC and efficiency for tin-based PSCs, on one hand, the defects in perovskites need to be minimized. The fast crystallization of tin perovskites can be retarded using additives, generating films with much better morphology. However, better morphology doesn’t always mean fewer defects and less non-radiative recombination. Besides the well-known Sn2+-oxidation-related defects, other defects including vacancies, undercoordinated ions, and ion migration that can play important roles must be studied. On the other hand, the interfacial carrier transport/properties need intensive studies to have an accurate understanding. As mentioned above, the widely accepted energy level mismatch at the perovskite/HTM and perovskite/ETL interfaces may not be reliable because of the inevitable change in the perovskite during measurement. The interface properties related to the non-radiative recombination such as perovskite surface defects and undesirable interaction between perovskite and carrier extraction layers need to be investigated. This is quite important for a better understanding of the reasons why tin perovskites are more suitable for inverted structures rather than normal structures. We believe that with adequate study and effort, the energy loss of tin-based solar cells can be further reduced and higher VOC will be achieved. This is also quite meaningful for tin perovskites working as bottom-cells of tandem cells, offering a higher contribution to the total VOC output.

5 Bismuth perovskite (analog) solar cells
As the adjacent element to Pb in the periodic table, the trivalent Bi3+ cation has a similar electronic configuration and ionic radius to Pb and Sn, and therefore has been used to partly substitute the Pb2+ cation at the B sites of lead perovskites.184,185,306 For example, in an earlier study, Bi3+ doping of CsPbI3 was reported to improve the performance of CsPbI3 solar cells although a recent study found that the Bi3+ doped CsPbI3 is not a thermodynamically favored system despite its better tolerance factor.185 Pure Bi3+-occupied B site, neutral perovskites with the formula ABX3 (A = Cs, MA; X = I, Br, Cl) are not possible because of the +3 valence state.306 Instead, CsPbI3 forms ternary Bi3+-based perovskites that exist in structures with the formula A3Bi2X9 (A = MA+, Cs+ or Ag+, and X = I− or Br−), where three Pb2+ ions are replaced by two Bi3+ ions to maintain the charge neutrality, and they form a 2D or 0D structure with face-sharing octahedra, unlike 3D CsPbI3 or MAPbI3 perovskite that exist in corner-sharing octahedra. In addition, several Bi-based halides with structures different from cubic perovskites, and even with non-perovskite structures have been found to work as replacements for toxic lead perovskite light absorbers.144,307,308 All of these reported Bi-based halides can be divided into four kinds according to the formula: BiX3, A3Bi2X9, A2AgBiX6, and AgaBibXa+3b. This section summarizes recent advances in improving the VOC of Bi-based halide solar cells.
The application of BiX3 in photovoltaics was reported over 50 years ago.307 Among all three halides of Bi, BiI3 is much more popular than BiBr3 and BiCl3 in the photovoltaic area, but its development is still quite slow, with the champion efficiency reaching only 1.21% with a VOC of 0.61 V so far. Such low PCE is mainly attributed to its Eg of ∼2.0 eV,309 and its short carrier lifetime (1 ns), meaning the short diffusion length of carriers and heavy recombination before extraction.309,310
5.1 Low-dimensional A3Bi2X9 solar cells
Two-dimensional (2D) or zero-dimensional (0D) A3Bi2X9 materials such as MA3Bi2I9, FA3Bi2I9, and Cs3Bi2I9 have been used as light absorbers because of their high humidity stability. Research efforts have been made to enhance the device performance by optimizing the fabrication method, precursor, and additive engineering.144,311–313 Though the highest PCE of 3.2% has been achieved for Cs3Bi2I9 cells,314 the rest of the reports have shown PCEs below 1%.307 As the wide bandgap of A3Bi2X9 was considered to be one of the factors that limit the performance, attempts have been made to decrease the bandgap. Sulfur incorporation is regarded as an effective way to decrease the bandgap of A3Bi2X9 materials. For instance, Hayase et al. incorporated sulfur into MA3Bi2I9 through in situ thermal decomposition of Bi(xt)3 (xt = ethyl xanthate), which remarkably reduced the Eg from 2.1 to 1.45 eV.315 A similar process was reported by Yao et al., where Eg was decreased to 1.67 eV but the efficiency was still as low as 0.15%.316 Therefore, Eg may not be the decisive factor for poor performance. Instead, the physical properties of A3Bi2X9 materials including their low-dimensional structures, indirect bandgaps, high Wannier–Mott exciton binding energy, and high background charge carrier densities make them not suitable light absorbers for photovoltaic applications.317–321
5.2 A2AgBiX6 double perovskite solar cells
In addition to A3Bi2I9, A2AgBiX6 double perovskites where two B-site divalent cations are replaced with a monovalent cation (Ag+) and a trivalent cation (Bi3+) have attracted quite a good amount of attention in recent years.322 A2AgBiX6, especially Cs2AgBiBr6, have been studied as light absorbers because of their merits of toxicity-free, good moisture stability, and, more importantly, the expected similarities between their properties and the properties of APbX3 analogs, such as long carrier lifetimes.323,324 Cs2AgBiBr6 has been incorporated into both normal and inverted configurations, showing PCEs in the range of 1–3%.307 Perovskite film quality is an important factor determining the device's performance. For preparing good Cs2AgBiBr6 films, both spin-coating and vacuum deposition processes have been explored.325–327 In a comparative study, Yang et al. found that a solution-processed Cs2AgBiBr6 film has higher crystallinity, a narrower bandgap, a longer photoexcitation lifetime, and higher mobility than the vacuum-sublimed one.327 As a result, an enhanced PCE of 2.51% was achieved, where JSC was the main contributor, while the VOC (1.01 V) was slightly lower than that of the vacuum-processed one (1.05 V). Wang and co-workers reported several chlorophyll derivatives working as HTMs or ETLs in Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells.328,329 They achieved a champion PCE of over 3% where the main contribution also came from photocurrent rather than VOC. However, a remarkable VOC enhancement was realized using inorganic Cu2O as the HTM.330 Because of its good electrical properties and well-matched energy level with Cs2AgBiBr6, the VOC was promoted to a record-high value of 1.20 V from 1.08 V observed in the case of Spiro HTM. But the PCE (1.52%) in the case was not impressive due to the lower JSC than other reported values.307,328 The high VOC achieved with Cu2O implies the importance of interface charge transportation, and the carrier extraction materials developed for Pb-based PSCs don’t perfectly match with Pb-free materials. For instance, the energy offset at the Cs2AgBiBr6/Spiro interface approaches 1.0 eV.325 It is believed that by employing HTMs with suitable energy levels and an excellent carrier extraction ability, higher VOC and efficiency can be achieved. Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells with an inverted structure have also been reported. Wu and co-workers developed an inverted structure of ITO/Cu-NiO/Cs2AgBiBr6/C60/BCP/Ag achieving a remarkable PCE of 2.23% and a VOC of 1.01 V.331 Besides Cs2AgBiBr6, the formation of another double perovskite, Cs2NaBiI6, has also been reported.332,333 However, this has not been used in the solar cell, except for in one study, because of its poor stability. It has been observed that over half of the target material, Cs2NaBiI6 powder, synthesized by a hydrothermal method, easily decomposes to Cs3Bi2I9 during the cooling process, indicating the thermal instability of Cs2NaBiI6. Finally, only a mixture of Cs2NaBiI6 and Cs3Bi2I9 remains and this has been used as a light absorber. The device showed a PCE of 0.42%, which is quite similar to that of Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells. In summary, double perovskites can be promising Pb-free candidates, but the efficiency is still quite low. Though they have wide Eg, considerable JSC should be achievable as long as efficient carrier separation and transport are promised. According to the S–Q limit, Cs2AgBiBr6 with a direct bandgap of ∼2.2 eV should be able to work with an efficiency of ∼18%. The VOC of ∼1.0 V, which is a rather low value for a material that absorbs at energies >2.2 eV and shows a PL peaking between 610 and 630 nm (2 eV), suggests high non-radiative recombination losses. In a recent study where Maximilian et al. compared the performance of Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells made with different architectures and hole transport materials, it was evident that significant carrier loss (recombination) occurs at selective contacts, i.e. the HTM or ETL.334 Hence, we believe that better interfacial energy alignment and suppressed recombination are critical to achieving higher VOC, which may be realized by developing more suitable HTMs.
5.3 3D AgaBibXa+3b perovskite solar cells

5.3.1 Making high-quality AgaBibXa+3b films. 
AgaBibXa+3b materials, with a 3D crystal structure, are the most popular Bi-based light absorbers. According to the AgI/BiI3 stoichiometric ratio, AgaBibXa+3b has compositions of AgBi2I7, AgBiI4, Ag2BiI5, and Ag3BiI6. Though these ternary bismuth iodides have different crystal structures (space groups),307 they have similar Eg ∼1.80 eV, which makes them suitable for photovoltaic applications.335–337 Sargent et al. first reported AgBi2I7 based devices and obtained a PCE of 1.22%, where n-butylamine was used as the solvent for AgI and BiI3.338 However, the VOC of 0.56 V achieved here was low and the efficiency was not reproducible because of the compositional change at high annealing temperature.339 In one of our earlier studies, we changed the solvent to DMSO and annealed the active layer at a low temperature (100 °C).340 Compared with the case of n-butylamine, the film obtained using DMSO as the solvent showed uniform grains without pinholes and smooth interfaces with neighboring charge transport layers (Fig. 31a). As a result, the PCE was promoted to 2.2% with a VOC of 0.62 V (Fig. 31b). It was also found that the remnant BiI3 in the film plays an important role in enhancing efficiency and stability. While high-quality Ag–Bi–halide film preparation by a solution process looked a little difficult, Mitzi et al. used a two-step co-evaporation/annealing approach to form high-quality AgBi2I7, AgBiI4, and Ag2BiI5 films.341 Initial studies on the photovoltaic performance showed that the AgBiI4 (Eg = 1.80 eV) based device exhibited quite a high VOC of 0.84 V, but the PCE was only 0.89%. The Xiao group achieved a high VOC of 0.83 V (maintaining the high efficiency of 2.80%) by introducing Li-TFSI into the AgBiI4 precursor for obtaining high-quality films and using PTAA as the HTM (Fig. 32a and b).342 A higher VOC of 0.88 V was obtained with a thicker AgBiI4 film, but it showed lower JSC, indicating the short carrier diffusion length of AgBiI4.
 Fig. 31  (a) The top and cross-sectional SEM images of AgBi2I7 films obtained from n-butylamine and DMSO. (b) J–V curves of the best performing devices based on the AgBi2I7 films obtained from n-butylamine and DMSO. (a and b) Ref. 340, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 32  (a) Band alignment diagram of AgBiI4 solar cells. (b) J–V curves of solar cells based on AgBiI4 with various Li-TFSI additive concentrations. (a and b) Ref. 342, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


5.3.2 Tuning energy alignment with CTLs. 
Similarly, in our recent research, we found that cells employing a semi-transparent (thin) Ag2BiI5 film show much better JSC and VOC than cells employing a non-transparent (thick) Ag2BiI5 film. With an amorphous SnOX as the ETL and a polymer with an appropriate HOMO level working as an HTM, this semi-transparent Ag2BiI5 light absorber can work with a high VOC of 0.88 V and PCE of 2.65%. It is to be noted that this SnOX layer which produced high VOC in our CsPbI2Br cells also worked well for Ag2BiI5 cells, indicating the universality of the amorphous SnOX ETL. More importantly, the energy alignment between the light absorber and HTM always plays a crucial role. Although we have not yet thoroughly verified the performance of this Ag2BiI5 solar cell with other HTMs like P3HT, some preliminary experiments show that polymer HTM with a better HOMO level matching with Ag2BiI5 works better than P3HT. Nevertheless, we also believe that the optimum conditions of any HTM on Ag2BiI5 can vary with the other layers like the ETL in the device. We are now trying to understand further this specificity of the device structure towards HTMs/ETLs. Nonetheless, semitransparent Ag2BiI5 cells, which we considered good for indoor or windows applications, also showed an encouraging low-light performance. For example, a cell working with a PCE of 1.6% under one sun was found to work with an efficiency of 5.7% under 1000 lux. This PCE is comparable to that of recently reported Cs3Sb2ClXI9−X solar cells,343 but the Ag2BiI5 cells in our case demonstrated a higher VOC (0.64 V). We are presently trying to further improve the performance of this semitransparent cell by improving the compositional/phase purity, which we suspect to be a major issue with this material. As indoor photovoltaics have a stringent requirement of non-toxic materials because the appliance would be closer to our daily life, and the bandgap of 1.8 eV of AgaBibXa+3b is optimum for indoor light (spectrum match), more efforts should be put into the development of these materials/devices. Besides developing advanced encapsulation techniques for Pb-containing cells, developing Pb-free indoor photovoltaics is certainly a wise choice, considering their practical application.
In summary, bismuth halides, especially AgaBibXa+3b, are potential substitutes for lead perovskites because of their high environmental stability and non-toxicity. But, the incomparably low efficiency of the cells employing these halides creates a cloud over the actual potential of these materials. As of now, the highest efficiency for the device using a pure bismuth-halide compound (Ag3BiI6) is 4.3%,335 which was improved to 5.56% by doping it with sulfur, i.e. Ag3BiI5.92S0.04.344 However, all these values fall far behind the theoretically estimated values for silver-bismuth halides. According to the S–Q limit, these halides with an Eg of 1.8 eV can work with PCEs of above 25%. Roughly, it can be estimated that these devices suffer a loss of 13 mA cm−2 photocurrent and 1.0 V open-circuit voltage. Despite their strong absorption and Eg of 1.8 eV, such low performance can be due to the intrinsic defects in the material. As we have observed, Ag2BiI5 which works with a PCE of 2% does not show any photoluminescence, indicating significant carrier loss by non-radiative recombination. Hence, investigation of possible defects and their generation during the processing of these halides is very important at the present stage. Besides, quite a few reports have presented the measured band levels, carrier types, and carrier densities of these halides. This is also important to find more suitable ETLs and HTMs for making an efficient device. The VOC is quite an important parameter for indoor photovoltaics because under indoor light only a small quantity of carriers are generated and severe non-radiative recombination (reflected by low VOC under sunlight) consumes most of them, leaving few carriers for the photovoltaic performance. Therefore, the low VOC values of bismuth halide-based cells show that they still have a long way to go. For further improving the device performance, it is believed that the following aspects need to be considered. Firstly, the properties of light absorption materials should be modified by compositional engineering, such as sulfur doping, for achieving narrower Eg and longer diffusion length. Secondly, a high-quality film with suppressed SRH recombination is necessary, which can be realized by more suitable fabrication processes. Most importantly, the phase purity and compositional homogeneity in polycrystalline films, which we believe to be a serious issue with these halides, must be checked for finding correct approaches for further improvement. Finally, similar to the problem in tin PSCs, charge transporting materials, especially previously developed HTMs, seem not to be suitable for bismuth-halide materials. The mismatched energy levels between HTMs and light absorbers must be one reason for poor VOC output. Novel HTMs with appropriate energy levels and a good hole transporting ability should be developed to further enhance the performance. With increased VOC output, bismuth halide cells will be more promising for indoor application than working under sunlight.

6 Summary and outlook
6.1 Current research summary
In comparison to PV technologies like CdTe, DSSCs, and OPV that use absorbers with bandgaps similar to those of perovskites, PSCs show remarkably high VOC, or minimum energy loss. Fig. 33 shows a summary of the reported champion VOC values for PSCs using perovskites with varied bandgaps. Pb-based hybrid PSCs have a substantially lower Eloss (<0.4 eV) than other types of PSCs. The PSCs employing Sn and Sn/Pb-based perovskites with narrower bandgaps and theoretically smaller Eloss than hybrid solar cells always show more severe Eloss (as large as 0.81 eV). The PSCs using wide bandgap all-inorganic perovskites, despite their high VOC compared to PV cells with similar bandgaps (a-Si and DSSC), still suffer from large Eloss (0.38–0.69 eV). Although it is anticipated that solution-processed perovskites would have a lot of defects and suffer from severe performance loss linked to these defects, their defect-tolerant nature helps them achieve high VOC with minimum energy loss. However, it must be noted that the defect tolerance properties of perovskites only refer to the intrinsic crystal defects in perovskites but extrinsic defects like pinholes and grain boundaries in polycrystalline films, and interfacial imperfections at ETLs and HTMs can influence the overall device performance significantly.
 Fig. 33  Summary of champion VOC values for various kinds of perovskite-based solar cells. 
Hence, to minimize the energy loss (VOC loss), methods have been developed to make high-quality perovskite films with no pinholes and fewer grain boundaries (large grains) and different strategies have been followed to passivate the surface and interfacial defects. Solvent and compositional engineering, controlled crystallization, and the use of additives in the precursors lead to the formation of films with large grains, resulting in improved VOC. In many studies on hybrid perovskites, MACl has been added in excess to improve the film quality and thus the performance. We also found that the addition of MACl to mixed-halide–mixed-cation perovskites could help in the incorporation of Ge into the mixed perovskites, resulting in better VOC and PCE. Here, Ge at the grain boundaries and on the surface passivates the defects and thus improves the VOC by suppressing the recombination loss. Many methods similar to those followed in the case of hybrid perovskites have been used for fabricating high-quality all-inorganic and Sn-based perovskites. For example, intermediate controlling, metal doping, and the use of additives like MACl, EDAI2, and NH4SCN have been found to improve the morphology of the perovskite film by removing pinholes and enlarging the grains, and thus increase the VOC. However, in general, the film quality of hybrid perovskites is often superior to that of all-inorganic and Sn-perovskites. One important reason is that a much larger number of studies have been done on hybrid perovskites than that undertaken for the latter, by improving the crystallization process to optimize the film morphology. This can partly explain why the VOC values of hybrid PSCs approach the theoretical values in some cases, while those of other perovskites lag behind. In other words, the recombination in other perovskite films is still a problem. For Sn and Sn/Pb perovskites, the fast crystallization results in poor film quality with a lot of defects, and the easy oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ further aggravates the defect situation. Additionally, with the short lifetime and diffusion length of carriers in Sn perovskites, most photon-generated carriers are trapped and recombined in the perovskite film before being extracted, resulting in poor device performance. For all-inorganic perovskites, careful control of the intermediate phase and stepwise annealing are critical to fabricating uniform films. Another challenge with all-inorganic perovskites is the easy transition of the perovskite phase to the non-perovskite phase, which can act as the carrier recombination center, harming the voltage output. Although a recent theoretical study shows that all-inorganic perovskites can be even more defect-tolerant than hybrid perovskites like MAPbI3, relatively more energy loss in the former must be linked to the phase instability. Therefore, forming phase pure all-inorganic perovskites and keeping the photoactive phase under ambient operational conditions are going to be the key to enhancing the VOC further. In the case of Bi-based halides like AgaBibXa+3b, the energy loss is huge, even more than 1.0 eV. One of the reasons for such poor performance of Ag–Bi–halides is relatively poor film quality in comparison to perovskites. But, although there is hardly any study about the intrinsic defects in these materials, it seems that these materials suffer severely from intrinsic defects, which seeks serious attention.
While suppressing non-radiative recombination in the bulk of the perovskite film is important to minimize the energy loss, recombination occurring at the interfaces between CTLs and perovskites, which lowers the QFLS and restricts the VOC output, also holds great significance in improving the VOC. Generally, the ETL should extract the electrons and block the holes at the perovskite/ETL interface. The small interfacial Schottky barrier and the defects in ETLs can lead to a poor blocking effect and more carrier recombination. We found that an ultra-thin dense SnOX ETL with a higher CB could suppress the interface recombination. With the good hole blocking effect of the SnOX ETL, high VOC is achievable in different cells using hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites, as well as bismuth-based light absorbers. Another factor giving rise to energy loss is the energy level mismatch between perovskites and CTLs. The well-developed ETLs and HTMs are more suitable for hybrid perovskites but do not perfectly match other light absorbers such as Sn-based, Sn/Pb-based, CsPbX3 perovskites, and bismuth-based materials. The imperfect energy level alignment lowers the QFLS of the light absorber, generating poor VOC output. In one of our studies, we found that P3HT with a HOMO of −5.00 eV, when used as the HTM for CsPbI2Br (VB of −5.77 eV) solar cells, yields a champion VOC of 1.32 V. On the other hand, in the case of spiro-OMeTAD with a lower HOMO of −5.22 eV, the VOC increases to 1.37 V, and a newly developed HTM (PDTDT) with a HOMO of −5.44 eV promotes the VOC to 1.42 V. This work convincingly verifies the importance of energy level matching between the perovskite and CTLs, which must be paid attention for reducing the energy loss. As a solution, new ETLs and HTMs that well match different light absorbers must be explored for suppressing the interfacial recombination and maintaining the QFLS from the light absorber. In other words, for reducing the energy loss, the carrier extraction from the perovskite and transfer through the interfaces are equally important to the carrier separation and transport in the perovskite.

Fig. 34 depicts the techniques for achieving champion VOC for various types of perovskite-based solar cells. Though perovskite quality (composition, defects, and morphology) is significant, the perovskite surface and the interfaces with CTLs are becoming increasingly important in promoting the VOC output. Many efforts have been made to passivate the perovskite surface defects, optimize the interface charge transport, and develop more appropriate CTLs. In the future, we anticipate that reducing carrier non-radiative recombination at interfaces will be more promising than that in the light absorber bulk for increasing VOC.
 Fig. 34  Approaches to achieving champion VOC for various kinds of perovskite-based solar cells. 
High VOC is a prerequisite for developing high-performance perovskite module cells. As is known to all, when comparing the PCE values of small-area cells and large-area modules, a considerable discrepancy is observable. Although the VOC gap is the smallest among the three photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC, and FF),345–347 it becomes severe when the module size exceeds 100 cm2. The main reason for VOC reduction is the reduced shunt resistance, which is caused by several factors, including (1) pinholes, (2) particulates, (3) interconnects (P1 and P3 are not clean/resistive enough; the P3 process damages the surrounding perovskite, causing leakage), (4) nonuniformity (if a particular area in a particular layer is too thin), and (5) a lack of proper edge isolation patterning (P4).347 Therefore, making uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films, as well as refining the structure and quality of module cells, would help in improving the VOC for industrially-friendly deposition processes.
High VOC will also benefit the application of PSCs as indoor photovoltaics. Under weak indoor light (1% intensity of the sunlight), only a small number of carriers are generated, and most of them can be trapped by the defects, leaving few carriers for photovoltaic output. That is to say, indoor photovoltaics are more sensitive to defect levels (dark leakage current) and even a small leakage current can have a big influence on VOC reduction. The high VOC of PSCs (under sunlight) represents a low defect level and low dark leakage current, which means the indoor light-generated carriers can be collected and transported efficiently over the interfaces. Perovskite light absorbers with the advantage of Eg tunability can match well with the spectra of various light sources such as a fluorescent lamp and an LED lamp. It is known that the Eg values of 1.8 eV and 1.9 eV are optimum for indoor applications with LED and fluorescent lamps as illumination sources respectively. Several perovskite compositions match these values. As long as the high voltage of these PSCs is retained, indoor perovskite photovoltaics will be a very promising application. We recently studied the indoor performance of CsPbI2Br (1.91 eV) solar cells. Thanks to the highly suppressed recombination by the SnOX layer (high VOC of 1.42 V under sunlight), we achieved 1.23 V VOC under 1000 lux indoor LED light (300 μW cm−2) and over 32% PCE. The value of PCE was maintained at 34% under 200 lux illuminance (60 μW cm−2) with a VOC of 1.14 V. Under indoor illumination, amorphous SnOx is thought to act as an insulating thin layer, decreasing the leakage current. Notably, VOC exceeding 1.1 V is rarely obtained for both indoor and commercialized high-performance PV cells. This situation manifests the potential of indoor PSCs as energy harvesters for the self-powered Internet of Things.
Measuring a reliable VOC output for cells employing strategies to reduce interfacial recombination is important because many studies reporting high VOC also present the J–V curves with severe hysteresis, showing the substantial difference in the VOC values measured under forward and reverse scan directions. This certainly leads to erroneous estimation of performance and unfair comparison to other studies. To reduce the non-radiative recombination in perovskites and at the interface, some extra layers, molecules, or ions are introduced into the device. These materials were proved to be effective in suppressing the recombination, but may also hinder the charge transfer and result in charge accumulation at the interface, causing unbalanced charge transport and finally severe hysteresis. Thus, in the development of strategies for promoting VOC, the negative effects of the materials being employed in the device should also be considered.
In summary, improving VOC is the key to further promoting the efficiency of PSCs and expanding their application prospects. Strategies that suppress the non-radiative recombination in the light absorber and the interfaces have been proven to be effective in reducing energy loss. We believe that with the further enhancement of VOC and efficiency, the commercial prospects of perovskite photovoltaics will be enhanced. It is believed that the serious non-radiative recombination caused by defects in perovskites and interfaces is the main reason for Eloss. Note that non-radiative recombination is also partly responsible for the FF loss. That is to say, suppressing recombination can lead to the improvement of VOC and FF simultaneously. Therefore, VOC enhancement is critical to further improvement of the performance of PSCs.
6.2 Future outlook
The GaAs crystalline cell (Eg = 1.42 eV) that shows VOC (1.2 V) close to the S–Q limit is the engineering model of high VOC best PV cells. In the future, thoroughly reducing charge recombination loss inside the perovskite bulk by minimizing defect density (impurity) as well as at the hetero-junction interfaces is necessary to improve the VOC of PSCs. Making high-quality light absorber films will still be required, especially for all-inorganic and tin perovskites. For all-inorganic perovskites, the stepwise annealing, which is often followed for obtaining a uniform film, might generate compositional inhomogeneity as well as defects. Moreover, the phase transition to the photo-nonactive phase from the perovskite phase, even not detectable by XRD, must be critically affecting the VOC output. Therefore, we believe, direct measurements of composition distribution and crystal phase impurity in the films, which have not received much attention, are going to help us find ways to improve the VOC as well as PCE of inorganic PSCs further. For Sn and Sn/Pb perovskites, the fast crystallization of perovskites results in low film quality, which needs to be improved. The suppression of Sn2+ oxidation to Sn4+ that introduces defects is another obstacle to be overcome for achieving higher VOC and efficiency. The high quality of bismuth halide films is also important for developing efficient lead-free solar cells. However, the intrinsic property studies of bismuth halides are more urgent to better understand how the big loss in VOC and PCE is generated. Though the Eloss in hybrid PSCs is quite low, further suppressing the non-radiative recombination is still meaningful for efficiency enhancement since the undesirable recombination is also partly responsible for the FF loss, which now is the biggest weakness of hybrid PSCs in achieving efficiency approaching the S–Q limit.
The equally important issue is interface recombination. Thermodynamically, the Eloss of ca. 0.2 eV is inevitable at room temperature for enabling unidirectional carrier transfer at the interface. As a result, the minimal Eloss that occurs at the ETL/perovskite and perovskite/HTM interfaces is 0.4 eV in total. In other words, we must reduce the interfacial Eloss to 0.2 eV to minimize the VOC loss. One approach is to build a physically continuous heterojunction without producing defects or impurities, which also needs a flat perovskite polycrystal surface. The current (charge transfer) rectification ability of CTLs should also be enhanced to minimize interface recombination. The widely used ETLs and HTMs borrowed from other PVs such as DSSCs and OPV do not perfectly match perovskite photovoltaics. As previously stated, the hole blocking ability of ETLs (such as amorphous SnOX layers) as well as the electron blocking ability of HTMs, and the energy level matching with perovskites are important in suppressing the recombination. Therefore, exploring more suitable CTLs that enable efficient extraction and suppress non-radiative recombination of photogenerated carriers would also be very helpful.
Though numerous strategies for producing high VOC of various PSCs have been established, research on the mechanisms that drive such processes is still insufficient. For example, metal ion doping has been used to inhibit perovskite bulk recombination, and the same metals have been utilized in different types of perovskites. However, the fundamental question of where foreign ions are located remains unanswered and the actual working mechanisms are still unclear. Furthermore, trap passivation engineering has been widely documented for perovskite and CTL surfaces, but the mechanisms are unclear in most studies. “Passivation” is an over-used word in most research where people introduce some materials into PSCs and show they help in improving VOC and attribute the result to “defect passivation”. In other words, most studies are methodologies and only a few reports go to the heart of the mechanism. We believe that understanding how perovskites or device interfaces evolve and what is exactly going on from a physical–chemical point of view is more essential than doing the same thing over and again in different PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
Our studies discussed in this review were financially supported by the Japanese Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) with Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No. 20K15385, No. 19H05636).
References
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies-rev211214.pdf.
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17042 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Krückemeier, B. Krogmeier, B. Klingebiel, J. A. Márquez, S. Levcenko, S. Öz, S. Mathur, U. Rau, T. Unold and T. Kirchartz, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Kim, H. Sato, Y. Ohkura, A. Ishii and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102856 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
C. Case, N. Beaumont and D. Kirk, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2760–2762 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1515–1525 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrler, E. Alarcón-Lladó, S. W. Tabernig, T. Veeken, E. C. Garnett and A. Polman, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3029–3033 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, B. Wenger, M. G. Christoforo, Y.-H. Lin, M. T. Klug, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 855–861 CrossRef CAS .
PV Education Fill Factor, https://www.pveducation.org/pvcdrom/solar-cell-operation/fill-factor.
PV Education Open-Circuit Voltage, https://www.pveducation.org/pvcdrom/solar-cell-operation/open-circuit-voltage.
M. Stolterfoht, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, J. Nordmann, S. Zhang, D. Rothhardt, U. Hörmann, Y. Amir, A. Redinger, L. Kegelmann, F. Zu, S. Albrecht, N. Koch, T. Kirchartz, M. Saliba, T. Unold and D. Neher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2778–2788 RSC .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. Correa Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 151–165 RSC .
Z. Guo, A. K. Jena, I. Takei, G. M. Kim, M. A. Kamarudin, Y. Sanehira, A. Ishii, Y. Numata, S. Hayase and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9725–9734 CAS .
Q. Ye, F. Ma, Y. Zhao, S. Yu, Z. Chu, P. Gao, X. Zhang and J. You, Small, 2020, 16, 2005246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, H. Li, Y. Shang, W. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Cheng, Q. Chen, L. Chen and Z. Ning, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Wei and Z. Ning, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 060502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, N. Li, C. J. Brabec and H. L. Yip, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, T. P. Xiao and E. Yablonovitch, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1703–1711 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. De Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700860 CrossRef .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Du, J. Kim, J. Ngiam, S. Xu, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant and M. A. McLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801808 CrossRef .
J. Fu, N. F. Jamaludin, B. Wu, M. Li, A. Solanki, Y. F. Ng, S. Mhaisalkar, C. H. A. Huan and T. C. Sum, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803119 CrossRef .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581–4610 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
E. Aydin, M. Bastiani and S. Wolf, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900428 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902650 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. B. Mohd Yusoff, M. Vasilopoulou, D. G. Georgiadou, L. C. Palilis, A. Abate and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2906–2953 RSC .
L. Fu, H. Li, L. Wang, R. Yin, B. Li and L. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4017–4056 RSC .
C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Głowienka, D. Zhang, F. Di Giacomo, M. Najafi, S. Veenstra, J. Szmytkowski and Y. Galagan, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104186 CrossRef .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, T. Unold, B. Rech, S. Albrecht and D. Neher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901631 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Zhu, W. Sun, X. Miao, Z. Ma, C. Yang, B. Liu, S. Li, R. Ma and C. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 176, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, D. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Kirchartz, W. Tress, H. Yao, J. Yuan, M. Hülsbeck, M. Zhang and Y. Zou, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 799–806 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krishna, H. Zhang, Z. Zhou, T. Gallet, M. Dankl, O. Ouellette, F. T. Eickemeyer, F. Fu, S. Sanchez, M. Mensi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger, G. N. Manjunatha Reddy, A. Redinger, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5552–5562 RSC .
R. E. Brandt, J. R. Poindexter, P. Gorai, R. C. Kurchin, R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Nienhaus, M. W. B. Wilson, J. A. Polizzotti, R. Sereika, R. Žaltauskas, L. C. Lee, J. L. Macmanus-Driscoll, M. Bawendi, V. Stevanović and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4667–4674 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Ono, S. Liu and Y. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6676–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Landi, H. C. Neitzert, C. Barone, C. Mauro, F. Lang, S. Albrecht, B. Rech and S. Pagano, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700183 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Frohna, M. Anaya, S. Macpherson, J. Sung, T. A. S. Doherty, Y.-H. Chiang, A. J. Winchester, K. W. P. Orr, J. E. Parker, P. D. Quinn, K. M. Dani, A. Rao and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 1–7 CAS .
J. Xu, A. Maxwell, M. Wei, Z. Wang, B. Chen, T. Zhu and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4220–4227 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. E. Turiansky and C. G. Van de Walle, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100604 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kirchartz, L. Krückemeier and E. L. Unger, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 100702 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Xia, C. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Guo, D. Luo and S. Wen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34989–34996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef .
M. Adnan and J. K. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, Y. Kato, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18742–18745 RSC .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, Y. Amir, A. Paulke, L. Perdigón-Toro, P. Caprioglio and D. Neher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1530–1539 RSC .
Z. Bi, X. Rodríguez-Martínez, C. Aranda, E. Pascual-San-José, A. R. Goñi, M. Campoy-Quiles, X. Xu and A. Guerrero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19085–19093 RSC .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Numata, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1069–1077 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Taylor, Q. Sun, K. P. Goetz, Q. An, T. Schramm, Y. Hofstetter, M. Litterst, F. Paulus and Y. Vaynzof, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, T. Liu, B. Wang, J. Li, D. Li, G. Wang, Q. Lian, A. Amini, S. Chen and C. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, T. Zhang and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19674–19678 RSC .
W. Zhou, P. Zhou, X. Lei, Z. Fang, M. Zhang, Q. Liu, T. Chen, H. Zeng, L. Ding and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1897–1908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Q. Han, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, F. Yu, C. Li, X. Cai, L. Gao, C. Zhang and T. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131838 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, L. Gao, Z. Xu, S. Teo, C. Zhang, Y. Kamata, S. Hayase and T. Ma, Small, 2018, 14, 1802738 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, Q. Xiong, Y. Li, P. Gao, B. Xu, H. Lin, X. Li and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1574–1582 RSC .
H. Zheng, X. Xu, S. Xu, G. Liu, S. Chen, X. Zhang, T. Chen and X. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4441–4448 RSC .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, D. Huang, Q. Liu, G. Yan, Z. Xiao, D. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, C. Peng, H. Li, M. Zhang, W. Zhang, L. Duan and Y. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 66, 152–160 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Guo, F. Ye, S. Liu and Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2200174 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Kim, A. Ishii, S. Öz and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903299 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liao, J.-a Yang, C. Li, T. Li and F. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39882–39889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Odysseas Kosmatos, L. Theofylaktos, E. Giannakaki, D. Deligiannis, M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 2, 79–92 CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, L. Pan, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. A. Hope, O. Ouellette, A. Q. M. Alanazi, J. Gao, T. P. Baumeler, X. Li, S. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, Y. Liu, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1112–1119 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang and S. H. Chang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4077–4085 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Wang, C. Mu, S. Wang, X. Wang, D. Xu and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701159 CrossRef .
I. S. Yang and N. G. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100396 CrossRef CAS .
B.-w Park, H. W. Kwon, Y. Lee, M. G. Kim, G. Kim, K.-j Kim, Y. K. Kim, J. Im, T. J. Shin and S. I. Seok, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 419–428 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim, E. S. Oh, A. K. Jena and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26248–26255 RSC .
F. Zhang, Q. Huang, J. Song, S. Hayase, J. Qu and Q. Shen, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Numata, A. Kogo, Y. Udagawa, H. Kunugita, K. Ema, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18739–18747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, D. Yao, W. Martens, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 476–487 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, B. Puthen-Veettil, F. Haque, M. Wright, C. Xu, A. Pivrikas and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, Y. Wang, F. Li, X. Zhou, J. Yang, B. Lv, X. Wang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 7856–7865 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Guo, X. Liu, W. Sun, Y. Wei, Y. Huang, Z. Lan, M. Huang, J. Lin, H. Chen and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Chavan, N. Parikh, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, A. Kalam, P. Yadav, P. H. Bhoite and C. K. Hong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100177 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aranda, A. Guerrero and J. Bisquert, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 741–746 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Alvarez, R. Arcas, C. A. Aranda, L. Bethencourt, E. Mas-Marzá, M. Saliba and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 8417–8423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, G. Fang, J. Wang, P. Qin, H. Tao, H. Lei, Q. Liu, X. Dai and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15959–15965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sanehira, N. Shibayama, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15175–15182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Singh, S. Öz, A. Sasinska, R. Frohnhoven, S. Mathur and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706287 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, L. Gao, C. Zhang, Z. Xu and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4572–4589 RSC .
Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and J. You, Small, 2018, 14, 1801154 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhuang, P. Mao, Y. Luan, N. Chen, X. Cao, G. Niu, F. Jia, F. Wang, S. Cao and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010385 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, R. Li, B. Chen, F. Hou, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Wu, X. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Yan, L. Chen, G. Li, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Z. Lan, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 886, 161352 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, R. Li, S. Apergi, P. Wang, B. Shi, J. Jiang, N. Ren, W. Han, Q. Huang and G. Brocks, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100464 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, L. Yang, S. Jiang, H. Lin, N. Wang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4960–4970 RSC .
Z. Ren, K. Liu, H. Hu, X. Guo, Y. Gao, P. W. Fong, Q. Liang, H. Tang, J. Huang and H. Zhang, Light Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 RSC .
J. Zhang, W. Mao, X. Hou, J. Duan, J. Zhou, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Sun and X. Chen, Sol. Energy, 2018, 174, 1133–1141 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Scheideler, N. Rolston, O. Zhao, J. Zhang and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803600 CrossRef .
T. Wang, D. Ding, H. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu and W. Shen, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900045 CrossRef .
T. H. Schloemer, J. A. Christians, J. M. Luther and A. Sellinger, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1904–1935 RSC .
X. Niu, N. Li, C. Zhu, L. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ge, Y. Chen, Z. Xu, Y. Lu and M. Sui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7338–7346 RSC .
X. Wen, J. Wu, M. Ye, D. Gao and C. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11355–11358 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. I. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi, J. Lee, J.-H. Bae, S. K. Kwak, D. S. Kim and C. Yang, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Seo, S. Akin, M. Zalibera, M. A. R. Preciado, H. S. Kim, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. V. Milić and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102124 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Pham, J. Shang, Y. Yang, M. T. Hoang, V. T. Tiong, X. Wang, L. Fan, P. Chen, L. Kou and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, X. Wu, W. L. Tan, B. Tan, A. D. Scully, L. Ding, C. Zhou, Y. Xiong, F. Huang and A. N. Simonov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8260–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishimura, I. Okada, T. Tanabe, T. Nakamura, R. Murdey and A. Wakamiya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32994–33003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photon., 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uratani and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, B. Anand, L. Liu, S. Sampat, B. E. Bearden, A. V. Malko and Y. J. Chabal, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1627–1634 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Palotas, X. Yuan, T. Hou, H. Lin, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2060–2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, T. M. Koh, S. S. Lim, T. W. Goh, X. Guo, S. W. Leow, R. Begum, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21292–21297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, Z. Lian, Y. Li, S. Wang and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4221–4226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, A. J. Huckaba, Y. Lee, S. Paek, N. Klipfel, C. Roldán-Carmona, V. I. E. Queloz, G. Grancini, Y. Zhang, M. Abuhelaiqa, K. T. Cho, M. Li, M. D. Mensi, S. Kinge and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1222–1230 RSC .
H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, M. Abuhelaiqa, S. Paek, R. Kaneko, N. Klipfel, A. A. Sutanto, C. R. Carmona, A. J. Huckaba, H. Kim, C. Momblona, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17113–17119 RSC .
L. Zeng, Z. Chen, S. Qiu, J. Hu, C. Li, X. Liu, G. Liang, C. J. Brabec, Y. Mai and F. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104099 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zervos, M. Tountas, K. Chatzimanolis, C. Polyzoidis and E. Kymakis, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7143–7148 RSC .
S. Wu, Z. Li, J. Zhang, X. Wu, X. Deng, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, C. Zhi, X. Yu, W. C. H. Choy, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, F. Lin, J. Xia, H. Yang, R. Zhang, H. A. Malik, H. Shu, Z. Wan, K. Han, R. Wang, X. Yao and C. Jia, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105751 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Li, D. Liu, M. Qin, S. H. Cheung, X. Lu, D. Lei, S. K. So, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Joule, 2020, 4, 1248–1262 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Bi and J. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Degani, Q. An, M. Albaladejo-Siguan, Y. J. Hofstetter, C. Cho, F. Paulus, G. Grancini and Y. Vaynzof, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabj7930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, E. Y. Park, B. S. Ma, D. J. Kim, H. H. Park, Y. Y. Kim, S. S. Shin, N. J. Jeon, T. S. Kim and J. Seo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003382 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H.-R. Liu, F. Yang, J.-E. Yang, J. Song, M. Li, Z. Li, W. C. Tsoi, M. Chinweokwu Eze, Z.-Y. Liu, H. Ma, M. Gao and Z.-K. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227420 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Ashouri, A. Magomedov, M. Roß, M. Jošt, M. Talaikis, G. Chistiakova, T. Bertram, J. A. Márquez, E. Köhnen, E. Kasparavičius, S. Levcenco, L. Gil-Escrig, C. J. Hages, R. Schlatmann, B. Rech, T. Malinauskas, T. Unold, C. A. Kaufmann, L. Korte, G. Niaura, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3356–3369 RSC .
G. Kapil, T. Bessho, Y. Sanehira, S. R. Sahamir, M. Chen, A. K. Baranwal, D. Liu, Y. Sono, D. Hirotani, D. Nomura, K. Nishimura, M. A. Kamarudin, Q. Shen, H. Segawa and S. Hayase, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 966–974 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1760–1761 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X.-F. Jiang, X. Xing, L. Nian, X. Liu, R. Huang, K. Wang, H.-L. Yip and G. Zhou, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800083 CrossRef .
N.-K. Kim, Y. H. Min, S. Noh, E. Cho, G. Jeong, M. Joo, S.-W. Ahn, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, K. Ihm, H. Ahn, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Smecca, Y. Numata, I. Deretzis, G. Pellegrino, S. Boninelli, T. Miyasaka, A. La Magna and A. Alberti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13413–13422 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca and E. Mosconi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
G. Zhou, J. Wu, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Shi, Y. Li, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9503–9513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyasaka, A. Kulkarni, G. M. Kim, S. Öz and A. K. Jena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902500 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
S. M. Yoon, H. Min, J. B. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee and S. I. Seok, Joule, 2021, 5, 183–196 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, J. Shi, S. Tan, Y. Cui, W. Zhao, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13436–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiang, S. Liu and W. Tress, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2090–2113 RSC .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, W. Chai, D. Chen, J. Ma, D. Chen, H. Xi, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Xue, Y. Hou, S.-C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J.-S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Fan and Y. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3825–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Li, S. C. Liu, F. Z. Qiu, Z. Y. Zhang, D. J. Xue and J. S. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000501 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, S. Teo, Z. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Kamata, S. Hayase and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1227–1232 RSC .
Z. Guo, S. Zhao, A. Liu, Y. Kamata, S. Teo, S. Yang, Z. Xu, S. Hayase and T. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19994–20003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Hao, B. Chang, Z. Li, L. Wang, L. Pan, X. Chen and L. Yin, ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 40489–40501 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Ran, X. Liu, H. Gu, S. Zuo, W. Hui, H. Lu, B. Sun, X. Gao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13354–13361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Wen, Z. Liu, Y. Che, J. Xu, J. Wang, D. Xu, N. Yuan, J. Ding, Y. Duan and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2103019 CrossRef .
S.-C. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, X. Wang, Y.-X. Chen, D.-J. Xue and J.-S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18075–18082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, H. Wei, J. Yang, G. R. Blake, J. Huang, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600534 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Anaya, J. F. Galisteo-López, M. E. Calvo, J. P. Espinós and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3891–3896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, M. Peter, E. Unger, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, V. Sundström and I. G. Scheblykin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24978–24987 RSC .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Gao, Z. Xu, Q. Tian, X. Gu, L. Zhang, S. Zhang, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101568 CrossRef CAS .
S. Öz, A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, K. Mouri, T. Yokoyama, I. Takei, F. Ünlü, S. Mathur and T. Miyasaka, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1292–1299 CrossRef .
K. Wang, W. S. Subhani, Y. Wang, X. Zuo, H. Wang, L. Duan and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, P. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, L. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14009–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, D. Hirotani, G. Kapil, M. A. Kamarudin, C. H. Ng, Y. Zhang, Q. Shen and S. Hayase, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 12927–12931 CrossRef .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, H. F. Garces, A. D. Carl, L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash, Y. Zhang, T. Shen, Y. Qi, R. L. Grimm, D. Pacifici, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Z. Liu, L. Qiu, Z. Hawash, L. Meng, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800504 CrossRef .
Z. Yao, W. Zhao, S. Chen, Z. Jin and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5190–5197 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. J. Lau, M. Zhang, X. Deng, J. Zheng, J. Bing, Q. Ma, J. Kim, L. Hu, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2319–2325 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, W. Li, J. Yu and X. Han, Sol. Energy, 2021, 222, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajal, G.-H. Kim, C. W. Myung, Y. S. Shin, J. Kim, J. Jeong, A. Jana, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21740–21746 RSC .
T. Ozturk, E. Akman, A. E. Shalan and S. Akin, Nano Energy, 2021, 106157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Long, C. Wang, X. Liu, J. Wang, S. Fu, J. Zhang, Z. Hu and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 2145–2155 RSC .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
L. A. Frolova, S. Y. Luchkin, Y. Lekina, L. G. Gutsev, S. A. Tsarev, I. S. Zhidkov, E. Z. Kurmaev, Z. X. Shen, K. J. Stevenson and S. M. Aldoshin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, F. Bai, X. Liu, Q. Ji, X. Miao, T. Qiu and S. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2219–2227 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Q. Han, S. Liu, J. Liao, C. Long, Y. Li, G. Dai, J. Yang and X. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 6927–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiang, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu and H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9996–10004 RSC .
C. Liu, W. Li, H. Li, H. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip, J. Fan, R. E. I. Schropp and Y. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803572 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, A. K. Baranwal, M. A. Kamarudin, Y. Kamata, C. H. Ng, M. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20390–20397 RSC .
J. Duan, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Wang, B. He and Q. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802346 CrossRef .
A. Alberti, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, G. Mannino, C. Bongiorno, S. Valastro, S. Sanzaro, G. Fisicaro, A. K. Jena, Y. Numata, Z. Guo, C. Spinella, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Adv. Energy Sustainable Res., 2021, 2, 2100091 CrossRef .
S. Yang, H. Zhao, Y. Han, C. Duan, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kajal, J. Kim, Y. S. Shin, A. N. Singh, C. W. Myung, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000296 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27176–27183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Duan, H. Yuan, Y. Zhao, B. He and Q. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800164 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Patil, S. S. Mali and C. K. Hong, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, T. Wang and Y. Zhao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2065–2075 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tai, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, J. Han, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22675–22682 RSC .
Z. Li, X. Liu, J. Xu, S. Yang, H. Zhao, H. Huang, S. F. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4138–4146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, W. Liu, Y. Han, Z. Liu, W. Zhao, C. Duan, Y. Che, H. Gu, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002882 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahesh, J. M. Ball, R. D. J. Oliver, D. P. McMeekin, P. K. Nayak, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 258–267 RSC .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472–3481 RSC .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, Q. Han, L. Wang, S. Yang, X. Cai, C. Zhang and T. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100404 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, J. Liu, Y. Hou, Y. Wang, S. Yang and H. G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gu, W. Xiang, Q. Tian and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 23348–23354 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Q. Xue, X. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. K. Baranwal, M. Akmal Kamarudin, P. Zhang, G. Kapil, T. Ma and S. Hayase, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Luo, F. M. Xie, J. D. Chen, H. Ren, J. K. Wang, X. Y. Cai, K. C. Shen, L. Y. Lu, Y. Q. Li, Y. N. Luponosov and J. X. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103316 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Li, H.-H. Yeh, Y.-H. Chiang, U. S. Jeng, C.-J. Su, H.-W. Shiu, Y.-J. Hsu, N. Kosugi, T. Ohigashi, Y.-A. Chen, P.-S. Shen, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801401 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-C. Chen, D. Wang and Q. Zheng, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000321 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Chen, S. Zhang and Q. Zheng, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Gao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Z. Lin, X. Guo, L. Zhou, J. He, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, S. Liu and J. Chang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 558–565 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Kan, J. Shi and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16691–16696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ye, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, F. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Chu, Z. Yin, P. Gao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, J. Duan, X. Yang, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 22181–22185 CrossRef .
W. Meng, Y. Hou, A. Karl, E. Gu, X. Tang, A. Osvet, K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Du, J. Garcia Cerrillo, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Lin, J. Ma, J. Su, Z. Hu, C. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Chang and Y. Hao, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sheng, A. Mei, Q. Wang, D. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383–2391 RSC .
X. Chang, J. Fang, Y. Fan, T. Luo, H. Su, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, L. Tsetseris, T. D. Anthopoulos and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Z. Guo, L. Gao, F. Yu, C. Zhang, M. Fan, G. Wei and T. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900212 CrossRef .
S. Yang, L. Wang, L. Gao, J. Cao, Q. Han, F. Yu, Y. Kamata, C. Zhang, M. Fan, G. Wei and T. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13931–13940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, J. Wang, F. Wu, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, G. Zhang, Z. Zhu, H. Yan, L. Zhu and H. L. Yip, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, P. S. Shinde, G. de Miguel and C. K. Hong, Matter, 2020, 1–19 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, F. Zu, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, M. Stolterfoht, M. Li, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, N. Koch, D. Neher and A. Abate, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2343–2348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Q. Xue, M. Liu, Z. Zhu, J. Tian, Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Yan, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802509 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, R. Wang, J. Xue, X. Xing, C. Yu, T. Huang, J. Chu, K.-L. Wang, C. Dong, Z. Wei, Y. Zhao, Z.-K. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17610–17616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schutt, P. K. Nayak, A. J. Ramadan, B. Wenger, Y. H. Lin and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900466 CrossRef CAS .
R. Azmi, S. Hwang, W. Yin, T.-W. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S.-Y. Jang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1241–1246 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Mao, H. Zhang, F. Ye, D. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Shen, J. D. Chen, Y. Tian, Y. X. Luo, Y. Shen, Q. Sun, T. Y. Jin, G. Z. Shi, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, W. Chen, Y. Shen, S. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14555–14565 RSC .
Y. Han, H. Zhao, C. Duan, S. Yang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909972 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, J. Tian, Q. Xue, J. Wang, B. Xiong, M. Han, Z. Li, Z. Zhu, H. L. Yip and Z. A. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17724–17730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Li, J.-Y. Shao, Y. Jiang, F.-Z. Qiu, S. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Han, J. Tang, F. Wang, Z. Wei, Y. Yi, Y.-W. Zhong and J.-S. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 16524–16529 CrossRef .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 476–509 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, A. K. Jena, I. Takei, M. Ikegami, A. Ishii, Y. Numata, N. Shibayama and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Shen, D. Walter, D. Jacobs, T. Duong, J. Peng, L. Jiang, Y. B. Cheng and K. Weber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6807–6813 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Wang, M. Jeong, S. M. Lee, B. Du, Y. Mao, F. Ye, H. Zhang, D. Li, D. Liu, C. Yang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8507–8514 RSC .
X. Li, W. Chen, S. Wang, G. Xu, S. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010696 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, J. A. Steele, S. R. Rondiya, N. Y. Dzade and C. K. Hong, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 778–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, X. Ling, D. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhou, J. Shi, Y. Qian, J. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Gao, S. Duhm, Q. Zhang and W. Ma, Joule, 2018, 2, 2450–2463 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, J. Duan, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 16147–16151 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yu, H. Wei, X. Xiao, Z. Ni, B. Chen, Y. Deng, S. N. Habisreutinger, X. Chen, K. Wang, J. Zhao, P. N. Rudd, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4498 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lin, K. Xiao, Z. Qin, Q. Han, C. Zhang, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, J. Xu, M. Xiao, A. Li, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 864–873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Chen, Z. Qian, G. Ren, J. Wu and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25336–25344 RSC .
L. Chen, L. Wan, X. Li, W. Zhang, S. Fu, Y. Wang, S. Li, H.-Q. Wang, W. Song and J. Fang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9032–9039 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu, W. Zhang, X. Li, J. Guan, W. Song and J. Fang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3661–3668 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang and P. Gao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700331 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gu, S. Ye, Z. Zhao, H. Rao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800136 CrossRef .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photon., 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
X. Jiang, H. Li, Q. Zhou, Q. Wei, M. Wei, L. Jiang, Z. Wang, Z. Peng, F. Wang, Z. Zang, K. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Teale, W. Zhou, R. Si, X. Gao, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10970–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Ozaki, S. Yakumaru, T. Handa, R. Nishikubo, Y. Kanemitsu, A. Saeki, Y. Murata, R. Murdey and A. Wakamiya, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 13405–13409 CrossRef .
T. Wu, X. Liu, X. Luo, X. Lin, D. Cui, Y. Wang, H. Segawa, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Joule, 2021, 5, 863–886 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, S. Yakumaru, M. A. Truong, K. Kim, J. Liu, S. Hu, K. Otsuka, R. Hashimoto, R. Murdey, T. Sasamori, H. D. Kim, H. Ohkita, T. Handa, Y. Kanemitsu and A. Wakamiya, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cui, X. Liu, T. Wu, X. Lin, X. Luo, Y. Wu, H. Segawa, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang and L. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100931 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, B. Han, G. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Du and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Su, M. Li, F. Yang, M. H. Aldamasy, J. Pascual, F. Yang, H. Liu, W. Zuo and D. D. Girolamo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101539 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, H. Dong, P. Li, X. Cao, H. Li, J. Li and Z. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 33218–33225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jokar, C.-H. Chien, A. Fathi, M. Rameez, Y.-H. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2353–2362 RSC .
K. Nishimura, D. Hirotani, M. A. Kamarudin, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31105–31110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nishimura, M. A. Kamarudin, D. Hirotani, K. Hamada, Q. Shen, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104858 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, W.-W. Zuo, Y.-G. Yang, M. H. Aldamasy, Q. Wang, S. H. T. Cruz, S.-L. Feng, M. Saliba, Z.-K. Wang and A. Abate, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1923–1929 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sanchez-Diaz, R. S. Sánchez, S. Masi, M. Kreĉmarová, A. O. Alvarez, E. M. Barea, J. Rodriguez-Romero, V. S. Chirvony, J. F. Sánchez-Royo and J. P. Martinez-Pastor, Joule, 2022, 6, 861–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sandhu, R. Singh, K. Yoo, M. Kumar and J.-J. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2021, 491, 229574 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xi, W. Gao, F. Yuan, T. Lei, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 713–721 CrossRef CAS .
W.-G. Choi, C.-G. Park, Y. Kim and T. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3461–3467 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Wu, J.-Y. Chen, X. Meng, X. He, T. Noda, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Segawa, Y. Wang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2896–2902 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T.-B. Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 982–990 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Lin, T.-C. Chu, D.-G. Chen, Z.-X. Huang, H.-C. Chen, C.-S. Li, C.-I. Wu, P.-T. Chou, C.-W. Chiu and H. M. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 2041–2048 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Shang, H. Liu, J. Wei, W. Zhou, H. He, W. Liu and Z. Ning, Joule, 2018, 2, 2732–2743 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kamarudin, D. Hirotani, Z. Wang, K. Hamada, K. Nishimura, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5277–5283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ozaki, Y. Katsuki, J. Liu, T. Handa, R. Nishikubo, S. Yakumaru, Y. Hashikawa, Y. Murata, T. Saito, Y. Shimakawa, Y. Kanemitsu, A. Saeki and A. Wakamiya, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 7016–7021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pascual, M. Flatken, R. Félix, G. Li, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, M. H. Aldamasy, C. Hartmann, M. Li, D. Di Girolamo, G. Nasti, E. Hüsam, R. G. Wilks, A. Dallmann, M. Bär, A. Hoell and A. Abate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21583–21591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J.-E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tu, X. Hu, Z. Huang, X. Meng, J. Yang, X. Duan, L. Tan, Z. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808059 CrossRef .
E. Jokar, C.-H. Chien, C.-M. Tsai, A. Fathi and E. W.-G. Diau, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804835 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, M. Zhu, L. Mao, I. Spanopoulos, J. Liu, O. Y. Kontsevoi, M. Chen, D. Sarma, Y. Zhang, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701293 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, I. Spanopoulos, L. Mao, M. Chen, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14800–14806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, Q. Tu, I. Hadar, X. Li, G. S. Shekhawat, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8627–8637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, D. Cui, X. Liu, X. Meng, Y. Wang, T. Noda, H. Segawa, X. Yang, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Q. Dong, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Liu, Z. Dai, A. D. Carl, B. Bahrami, A. H. Chowdhury, R. L. Grimm, Y. Shi, Q. Qiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2223–2230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, K. Cao, Y. Cheng, H. Shen, C. Du, Q. Wang, C. Chen, H. Cui, T. Lan, L. Liu, W. Shen and S. Chen, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100068 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, B. T. Phelan, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14750–14755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wheeler, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, T. Kirchartz, T. Watson, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13496–13506 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, Z. Yang, S. B. Jo, I. L. Braly, P. W. Liang, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702140 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wolff, F. Zu, A. Paulke, L. P. Toro, N. Koch and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700159 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Zhong, Y. Liang, L. Yang, X. Liu, Q. Li, J. Zhang and D. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903621 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokoyama, Y. Nishitani, Y. Miyamoto, S. Kusumoto, R. Uchida, T. Matsui, K. Kawano, T. Sekiguchi and Y. Kaneko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27131–27139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, J. L. Logsdon, M. R. Wasielewski, Y. Yan, G. Fang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14998–15003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hamada, R. Tanaka, M. A. Kamarudin, Q. Shen, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, T. Toyoda, T. Ma, D.-W. Kang and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17776–17782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W.-G. Diau, E. Jokar and M. Rameez, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1930–1937 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, P. Priyanka, S. Vegiraju, C. C. Stoumpos, I. Spanopoulos, C. M. M. Soe, T. J. Marks, M.-C. Chen and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 388–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, F. Gu, Y. Li, W. Sun, S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700204 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kang, S. Kang and S. Han, Mater. Today Adv., 2019, 3, 100019 CrossRef .
C. Wu, Q. Zhang, G. Liu, Z. Zhang, D. Wang, B. Qu, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902496 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, Z. Zhang, J. Xiu, H. Song, T. Gatti and Z. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16166–16188 RSC .
D. Tiwari, D. Alibhai and D. J. Fermin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1882–1886 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Brandt, R. C. Kurchin, R. L. Z. Hoye, J. R. Poindexter, M. W. B. Wilson, S. Sulekar, F. Lenahan, P. X. T. Yen, V. Stevanović, J. C. Nino, M. G. Bawendi and T. Buonassisi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4297–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lan, J. Luo, S. Zhao, C. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Hayase and T. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 701, 834–840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lan, G. Liang, S. Zhao, H. Lan, H. Peng, D. Zhang, H. Sun, J. Luo and P. Fan, Sol. Energy, 2019, 177, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ünlü, A. Kulkarni, K. Lê, C. Bohr, A. Bliesener, S. D. Öz, A. K. Jena, Y. Ando, T. Miyasaka, T. Kirchartz and S. Mathur, J. Mater. Res., 2021, 36, 1794–1804 CrossRef .
F. Bai, Y. Hu, Y. Hu, T. Qiu, X. Miao and S. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vigneshwaran, T. Ohta, S. Iikubo, G. Kapil, T. S. Ripolles, Y. Ogomi, T. Ma, S. S. Pandey, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, T. Minemoto and S. Hayase, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6436–6440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Chen, C. Zhao, M. Salma Maneno, B. Zhang and J. Yao, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900218 CrossRef .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghosh, B. Wu, H. K. Mulmudi, C. Guet, K. Weber, T. C. Sum, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35000–35007 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Lehner, D. H. Fabini, H. A. Evans, C.-A. Hébert, S. R. Smock, J. Hu, H. Wang, J. W. Zwanziger, M. L. Chabinyc and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7137–7148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Öz, J.-C. Hebig, E. Jung, T. Singh, A. Lepcha, S. Olthof, F. Jan, Y. Gao, R. German and P. H. van Loosdrecht, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 195–201 CrossRef .
X.-G. Zhao, J.-H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S.-H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Eyre, F. Wei, F. Brivio, A. Sadhanala, S. Sun, W. Li, K. H. L. Zhang, J. L. Macmanus-Driscoll, P. D. Bristowe, R. H. Friend, A. K. Cheetham and F. Deschler, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800464 CrossRef .
E. Greul, M. L. Petrus, A. Binek, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19972–19981 RSC .
M. Wang, P. Zeng, S. Bai, J. Gu, F. Li, Z. Yang and M. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800217 CrossRef .
F. Igbari, R. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, X.-J. Ma, Q. Wang, K.-L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L.-S. Liao and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2066–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, L. Yang, C. Dall'Agnese, A. K. Jena, S.-I. Sasaki, T. Miyasaka, H. Tamiaki and X.-F. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000166 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, N. Li, L. Yang, C. Dall’Agnese, A. K. Jena, S.-I. Sasaki, T. Miyasaka, H. Tamiaki and X.-F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2207–2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, Y. Tan, Z. Yi, Y. Luo, Q. Jiang and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 37027–37034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, C. Ran, J. Xi, B. Jiao, W. Zhang, M. Wu, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, K. Yamamoto, S. Iikubo, S. Hayase and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2018, 117, 117–121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Teo, Z. Guo, Z. Xu, S. Zhao and T. Ma, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2419–2428 RSC .
M. T. Sirtl, F. Ebadi, B. T. Gorkom, P. Ganswindt, R. A. J. Janssen, T. Bein and W. Tress, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100202 CrossRef CAS .
I. Turkevych, S. Kazaoui, E. Ito, T. Urano, K. Yamada, H. Tomiyasu, H. Yamagishi, M. Kondo and S. Aramaki, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3754–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni, F. Ünlü, N. Pant, J. Kaur, C. Bohr, A. K. Jena, S. Öz, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, M. Ikegami, K. Miyano, Y. Tachibana, S. Chakraborty, S. Mathur and T. Miyasaka, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100077 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ghosh, B. Wu, X. Guo, P. C. Harikesh, R. A. John, T. Baikie, A. T. Wee, C. Guet, T. C. Sum and S. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802051 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, Z. Yang, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, G. H. Kim, M. Liu, L. N. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Comin and J. Z. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9586–9590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaee, K. Sardashti, J.-P. Sun, H. Zhou, C. Clegg, I. G. Hill, J. L. Jones, D. C. Lupascu and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3538–3544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kulkarni, A. K. Jena, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4031–4034 RSC .
M. Khazaee, K. Sardashti, C.-C. Chung, J.-P. Sun, H. Zhou, E. Bergmann, W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Q. Han, I. G. Hill, J. L. Jones, D. C. Lupascu and D. B. Mitzi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2095–2105 RSC .
Q. Zhang, C. Wu, X. Qi, F. Lv, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Wang, B. Qu, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3651–3656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, T. N. Huq, J. Mei, L. Portilla, R. A. Jagt, L. G. Occhipinti, J. L. Macmanus-Driscoll, R. L. Z. Hoye and V. Pecunia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002761 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pai, J. Lu, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Seeber, A. S. R. Chesman, L. Jiang, D. C. Senevirathna, P. C. Andrews, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and A. N. Simonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803396 CrossRef .
M. Yang, D. H. Kim, T. R. Klein, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, J. J. Berry, M. F. Van Hest and K. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 322–328 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 333–350 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, S. He, L. K. Ono, S. Liu and Y. Qi, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2147–2167 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced a high-speed development in the past decade, establishing themselves as a leading photovoltaic technology with high efficiency and low cost. The high open-circuit voltage (VOC) is one of the characteristics that distinguish them from other photovoltaics. PSCs have lower VOC loss than other solution-processed photovoltaics such as organic and dye-sensitized solar cells, as well as vacuum-processed CdTe and CIGS solar cells. However, in most cases, the VOC of PSCs still has room for improvement. Given that the photocurrent is approaching the theoretical limit and the fill factor is often quite high, increasing the VOC is crucial for further enhancing the efficiency. Here we provide a comprehensive review of strategies for improving VOC by dividing our discussion into four parts depending on the light absorbers used: organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites, tin-based perovskites, and bismuth-based perovskites (analogs). We also present a summary with an outlook on how minimizing perovskite film defects and developing more suitable charge transport materials can further increase the VOC and therefore expand the application prospects of PSCs. This review will help the researchers better understand how VOC loss generates and provide suggestions for designing efficient PSCs with improved VOC and efficiency.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Efficiencies of various photovoltaics relative to the S–Q limit under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions. (b) Current density relative to the maximum possible current density, under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions, versus minimum dark recombination current density relative to the recombination current derived for the record cells.10 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the Fermi level splitting in a solar absorber material with increasing light intensity. EF represents the intrinsic Fermi level.  and  are the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes, respectively, where light absorption results in electrons populating the conduction band (CB) and holes populating the valence band (VB).11 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018).	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  (a) VOC, (b) FF, and (c) JSC of various photovoltaics relative to the S–Q limits under standardized AM 1.5 illumination conditions. The values are derived from the cells with record VOC.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Generalized recombination dynamics of the photo-generated carriers, including radiative, defect-assisted, and direct and indirect Auger recombination. Ec is the conduction band minimum and Ev is the valence band maximum.21 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). (b) Electron (hole) charge current density as a function of free energy. Solid lines represent the electron (hole) current Je(h)(μ) = Jsun − Jrec. The dotted lines mark the point of maximum extraction of electrical power. Red curves and circles: electron (hole) current density in the double heterojunction; recombination is dominated by interface electron and hole annihilations. Cyan curves and circles: electron (hole) current density in the single hybrid perovskite layer; recombination is due to electron and hole SRH annihilations alone. Dashed lines: Je(h)(μ) in the S–Q limit.23 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagrams showing the origins of interface-induced recombination losses, including deep-level defects within the perovskite absorber (type I), unfavorable band alignment at the interface and defects in the perovskite (type II), back-transfer-induced recombination (type III), and defect-assisted recombination in the ETL (type IV). The recombination processes occur similarly at the perovskite/HTM interface. HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital.21 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 
VOC = VOC,rad − ΔVOC,nrad

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Calculated transition energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3. The formation energies of neutral defects are shown in parentheses. The acceptors/donors are ordered by the formation energies (from left to right).48 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy-band diagram of the perovskite-based device representing the electronic transitions between the traps and the conduction and valence bands in a two-stage model for deep states.49 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Transient absorption microscopy of FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite films correlated with local chemical mapping. At the top, line scan of the Br:Pb nXRF intensity ratio (black dots) and normalized PL intensity (red squares) of the region used for correlation. In the middle, transient absorption microscopy line scan showing the center-of-mass value of the ground state bleaching as a function of time after excitation. The Br-rich and Br-poor regions are denoted with blue and grey rectangles, respectively. At the bottom, schematic of the proposed model showing carriers funnelling into highly emissive low bandgap regions in Br-rich regions, outcompeting carrier trapping in Br-poor regions.50 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021). (d) Time-resolved PL spectra of FA0.75Cs0.25Pb(1−X)SnXI3 perovskite films and schematic diagram of the defect tolerance behaviors in mixed Pb–Sn and mixed Pb–Sn–Ge alloys.51 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of energy levels of perovskite films with and without 1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi), and a PC61BM film. (b) Schematic structure of an inverted PSC. (c) J–V curves of various PSCs with different amounts of TPBi. (a–c) Ref. 64, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photographs of FA0.83MA0.17GexPbE1−x(I0.9Br0.1)3 (x = 0.03) precursor solution with and without MACl, and the resultant films with various concentrations of GeI2 (x = 0-0.07). (b) Box chart of VOC values for PSCs fabricated from precursors containing or not containing MACl with various GeI2 concentrations. (c) J–V curves for the best performance cells with and without GeI2 based on quadrupole cation-based perovskites (i.e. K0.03Cs0.05(FA0.87MA0.13)0.92(Ge0.03Pb0.97)(I0.9Br0.1)3). (a–c) Ref. 74, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) VOC for PSCs based on (FAPbI3)0.96(MAPbBr3)0.04 perovskite films prepared using dual additives (MACl and CsCl) with different mixing ratios. (b) Reverse scanned J–V curve of the best performing PSC employing a perovskite film formed using the dual additive with [MACl]/[CsCl] = 2. (a and b) Ref. 82, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) J–V curves of MAPbI3 solar cells. Device A (blue) was optimized for a high open-circuit voltage, and device B (red) was also optimized for efficiency by increasing the thickness of the absorber layer and making the PTAA layer thinner.5 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) J–V curves of 2D-3D champion PSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2/RbF. The inserted structure is the doubly-passivated perovskite model.99 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy level diagram of PSCs based on In2O3/SnO2. (c) J–V curves from reverse and forward scanning for In2O3, SnO2, and In2O3/SnO2-based devices. (b and c) Ref. 100, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction progress with the photograph of the reaction solution at each stage and the progress of the reaction highlighting stage A-ii as the ‘magic region’, which exhibits ideal film coverage, morphology, and chemical composition. (b) Quasi-steady-state J–V curve of the best-performing device (stage A-ii) certified at Newport (MKS Instruments). The perovskite composition is FAPbI3 with an added 5 mol% MAPbBr3. (c) J–V curves of the champion device measured at Newport, showing both the conventional J–V sweep and the certified quasi-steady-state measurements. The perovskite composition is FAPbI3 with an added 0.8 mol% MAPbBr3. (a–c) Ref. 4, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Best-performing J–V curves with reverse and forward scans of PSCs with a SnO2 QD ETL. Inset: Stabilized VOC as a function of time. (b) Schematic illustration of proposed in situ interfacial defect passivation induced by utilizing ligand-tailored SnO2 QDs. (a and b) Ref. 104, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2021).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structure of a fluorene-terminated HTM (N2,N2′,N7,N7′-tetrakis(9,9-dimethyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)-N2,N2′,N7,N7′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetraamine) (abbreviated as DM). (b) Energy level diagram of DM and spiro-OMeTAD. The CBM and VBM denote the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum, respectively. (c) J–V curves of the average measured efficiency for the spiro-OMeTAD and DM-based devices. (a–c) Ref. 112, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (d) J–V curves of the devices employing M(TFSI)n as a dopant for spiro-OMeTAD.114 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Device structure with phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) used for post-treatment of the perovskite surface. (b) J–V curves of the device with PEAI (20mM) and without PEAI treatment. (a and b) Ref. 118, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2019).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the energy level of each layer with the insertion of phenethylamine halides (PEAX). (b) VOC distribution of PSCs for different concentrations of poly(methyl methacrylate) on vacuum dried phenethylammonium bromide (PEABr). (c) J–V curves of the best performance PSC with optimized conditions. (a–c) Ref. 6, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of CsPbI3 perovskite precursor films and annealed films without and with solvent-controlled growth (SCG). (b) J–V curves of the devices using CsPbI3 as the absorber layer, while the CsPbI3 without and with SCG. (a and b) Ref. 152, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (c) Schematic of adsorbed oxygen molecule passivation and oxygen atom passivation. (d) J–V curves and photovoltaic performance of the devices fabricated in air (with oxygen atom passivation) and a glove box (reference). (c and d) Ref. 160, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Optical images of CsPbBr3, CsPbIBr2, and CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 films and (b) J–V curves of the corresponding devices.170 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of α-CsPbI3 phase stabilization by incorporation of Eu3+. (d) J–V curves of a set of CsPbI3:xEu cells with 4, 5, and 6 mol% EuCl3. (c and d) Ref. 173, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D perovskites with quasi-2D perovskite composition. (b) J–V curve of the PEA-CsPbI3 (2D/3D) based champion device. (a and b) Ref. 17, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustrations of the BAI treatment procedure and 2D/3D bilayer configuration. (d) J–V curves of devices based on pristine and 1, 3, 5, and 7 mg BAI treated CsPbI2Br films. (c and d) Ref. 198, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic depicting the processes used to generate the Cs2PbI2Cl2–CsPbI2.5Br0.5 film. (b) Schematic depicting the band bending for the 2D–3D heterojunction under illumination. (c) J–V curves of the 3D and 2D–3D based PSCs. (a–c) Ref. 199, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Atomic structure of an optimized CsPbI2Br(001) surface with the lead diethyldithiocarbamate (Pb(DDTC)2) molecule. (b) J–V curves of PSCs with different concentrations of Pb(DDTC)2. (a and b) Ref. 208, Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). (c) Device structure and (d) J–V curves of the devices with and without histamine (HA) passivation.209 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of a possible passivation mechanism of 6TIC-4F and potential interaction sites on the perovskite. (b) Energy-level diagram of the trap states passivated with 6TIC-4F. (c) Device architecture of the inverted CsPbIxBr3−x PSC and (d) J–V curves of the champion PSCs with (orange) and without (green) 6TIC-4F passivation. (a–d) Ref. 210, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The scheme of the device architecture of CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs; LiF was used to modify the SnO2 surface. (b) J–V curves of PSCs with and without the LiF interlayer. (a and b) Ref. 220, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of an all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC; WS2 is an interlayer between the ETL and perovskite. (d) J–V curves of PSCs with and without WS2 modification. (c and d) Ref. 221, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Device performances of CsPbI2Br solar cells using SnCl2 aging for different days. (b) J–V curves of the champion devices using fresh and aged SnCl2 solution. (c) VOC distribution and box chart of solar cells using fresh and aged SnCl2 solution. (d) Energy level diagrams of the components in the CsPbI2Br solar cells. F-SnOX and A-SnOX represent films made using fresh and aged SnCl2 solutions, respectively. (a–d) Ref. 16, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Energy levels of polymer HTMs relative to CsPbI2Br perovskite. (b) J–V curves of best-performing CsPbI2Br PSCs with different HTMs. (a and b) Ref. 241, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram presenting energy levels of CsPbI2Br with respect to the HOMO and LUMO levels of the different HTMs.167 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Molecule structure of PDTDT polymer HTM. (b) J–V curves of champion target and reference CsPbI2Br solar cells. (c) Energy level of CsPbI2Br perovskite and HOMO levels of HTMs. (d) J–V curves of target and reference CsPbI2Br solar cells under LED light illumination with different light intensities. Target: device using PDTDT as an HTM; reference: device using P3HT as an HTM. (a–d) Ref. 244, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the nucleation mechanism for FASnI3 perovskite films with different precursor temperatures. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing PSCs based on FASnI3-0 °C and FASnI3-20 °C films. (c) J–V curve of the champion device based on an n-propylammonium iodide (PAI) post-treated FASnI3-0 °C film. (a–c) Ref. 265, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) J–V curves of the champion devices containing pure 3D FASnI3 and 2D/3D perovskites with different 4-fluoro-phenethylammonium bromide (FPEABr) concentrations.266 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the Sn(IV) scavenging method. 1,4-Bis(trimethylsilyl)-2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-dihydropyrazine (TM-DHP) is added to the tin perovskite precursor solution. Sn(0) nanoparticles formed by the reduction of SnF2 by TM-DHP scavenge residual Sn(IV) impurities. (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskite prepared by adding different amounts of reductant TM-DHP. (c) J–V curves of Sn-based PSCs with or without surface treatment using ethylene diamine (EDA) and PC61BM. (d) Energy level diagram of the cell components. (a–d) Ref. 264, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) One-step synthesis (OSS) and two-step synthesis (TSS) methods for SnI2 precursor and perovskite film preparation. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of OSS and TSS devices. (c) J–V curves of the champion devices based on the tin–perovskite prepared by OSS and TSS methods. (a–c) Ref. 261, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the energy band levels for inverted tin halide PSCs. (b) J–V curves of the best-performing PSC-based tin perovskite with EA0.1-EDA passivation. EA represents ethyl ammonium and EDA represents ethylene diammonium. (a and b) Ref. 271, Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic illustration of energy levels. Dashed lines represent the quasi-Fermi levels of ICBA (EFn-I), PCBM (EFn-P), and PEDOT (EFp). (b) J–V curves of the certified PEA15-SCN device with ICBA and a champion device of a PEA15-SCN film with PCBM. (a and b) Ref. 18, reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Energy band alignment diagram of tin-based PSCs. (b) J–V curves of tin-based PSCs with and without CPTA. CPTA represents C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid. (a and b) Ref. 299, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) The top and cross-sectional SEM images of AgBi2I7 films obtained from n-butylamine and DMSO. (b) J–V curves of the best performing devices based on the AgBi2I7 films obtained from n-butylamine and DMSO. (a and b) Ref. 340, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Band alignment diagram of AgBiI4 solar cells. (b) J–V curves of solar cells based on AgBiI4 with various Li-TFSI additive concentrations. (a and b) Ref. 342, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Summary of champion VOC values for various kinds of perovskite-based solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 34  Approaches to achieving champion VOC for various kinds of perovskite-based solar cells.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
