Nanobelt– carbon nanotube cross-junction solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03409C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03409C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6119-6125Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanobelt–carbon nanotube cross-junction solar cells†

        
          
            Enzheng 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingqi 
            Nie
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojun 
            Qin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjun 
            Li
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Luhui 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Peixu 
            Li
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Jia
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Fang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Weizhong 
            Qian
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Wei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn
bBeijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R China
cBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, National Laboratory of Rare Earth Material Chemistry and Application, Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China
dNational Center for Nanoscience and Technology, 11 Beiyitiao Street, Zhongguancun, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
eKey Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China
Received 
      8th December 2011
    , Accepted 17th January 2012First published on 18th January 2012Abstract
Nanostructures such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and semiconducting nanowires are promising candidates for developing next-generation photovoltaics. Here, we report solar cells using individual single-walled or double-walled CNTs and CdSe nanobelts arranged in simple cross-junction configurations. The CNT and CdSe nanobelts form reliable line contacts at their intersections, resulting in efficient heterojunction solar cells with power conversion efficiencies up to 1.87% and stable performance in air over long periods. Both semiconducting and metallic CNTs can form solar cells with CdSe nanobelts, with similar open-circuit voltages but different short-circuit current densities. We can integrate multiple CNTs in parallel with a single nanobelt to construct an array of cross-junction solar cells simultaneously, with scaled current output, indicating the possibility of parallel device connection and large-scale production. Our results show the potential of utilizing one-dimensional nanostructures to design and fabricate high performance photovoltaic devices with well-defined and scalable structures.

Broader context
Solar energy is one of the most promising renewable energy sources and the research on developing third-generation solar cells that can convert sunlight into electricity in an efficient and low-cost way has received tremendous interest in the past decade. With the fast developments in nanotechnology and exploration of its applications in energy and environmental fields, nanostructures are now considered as potential materials for manufacturing innovating photovoltaic devices with new working mechanisms. Fundamental study at the individual nanostructure level is important to provide insights that might lead to high-efficiency devices in the future. Here, our group reports a simple and basic cross-junction device made by carbon nanotubes with semiconducting nanobelts. Our results demonstrate a robust and flexible approach for making reliable and efficient nanoscale solar cells, which might be further integrated into high density devices using well-established layer-by-layer self-assembly methods of one-dimensional nanostructures.

Introduction
Recently, there has been tremendous interest in using nanostructures to develop next-generation photovoltaics that could potentially lead to low-cost manufacturing and high performance devices.1,2 During the past decade, we have seen sustained efforts in exploring various nanostructures and creating innovated device structures, resulting in more understanding of fundamental mechanism and continuous improvement of device efficiency. Nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes (CNTs) can be simply added into a polymeric matrix to facilitate exciton dissociation and charge transport in organic solar cells.3–8 More importantly, a variety of nanostructures have formed new structured photovoltaics based on nanoparticle thin films,9–11 three-dimensional nanowire arrays,2,12nanowire core–shell or axial-junction structures,13–15nanowires or nanobelts overlapped by graphene or CNT films,16–19 and heterojunctions between CNTs and polymers or crystalline silicon.20–22 Previous studies show that there is great flexibility in choosing different nanomaterials (e.g., CNTs, graphene, CdSe, CdTe, PbS, Cu2O) and making diverse solar cell structures with optimized charge separation and transport processes, resulting in improved energy conversion efficiencies in the range of 1–6% and reasonable device stability.2,9–22
CNTs, semiconducting nanowires and nanobelts are one-dimensional structures that have been extensively studied. One of the advantages of their fabrication is that they can be assembled into cross-junction structures to make devices for different applications such as light-emitting diodes.23 Cross-junctions made by semiconducting nanowires (e.g., InP, Si, GaN) and CNTs have been reported, with tunable transport behavior owing to the formation of metallic–metallic (m–m), semiconducting–semiconducting (s–s), and m–s junctions.24–27 It is therefore possible to tailor the junction characteristics by selecting appropriate material pairs and controlling electronic properties in each material. In addition, the cross-junction only occupies a minimal area and high-density integrated devices can be fabricated by layer-by-layer self-assembly techniques with potential applications in non-volatile memories and nanoelectronic devices.26,27 Although there has been some studies on CNT–CNT or nanowire–nanowire cross-junctions,24,25 combination of one-dimensional nanostructures with different materials and morphologies has been rarely studied, and whether those structures can be used as photovoltaic devices remains unclear.
Results and discussion
Here, we report nanobelt–nanotube cross-junction solar cells by overlapping a semiconducting CdSe nanobelt with a single-walled or double-walled CNT or multiple CNTs, in which the CdSe is the light absorption material and the CNT is the hole-acceptor. The reason for choosing these two materials is that the CdSe nanobelt has a suitable band-gap (1.74 eV) for visible light absorption, and the CNT has very high carrier mobility, ideal for fast charge transport and collection. Preliminary tests on these devices show power conversion efficiencies up to 1.87% under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 75–100 mW cm−2). Furthermore, we show that multiple cross-junction solar cells can be fabricated along a single nanobelt and integrated in parallel connections.
Our solar cells consist of a single CdSe nanobelt laying perpendicularly across a CNT (bundle) or several parallel CNTs, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We synthesized mm-long CdSe nanobelts by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and cm-long horizontal CNTs (with single, double, or triple walls) also by CVD, as reported in our previous work (see the Experimental section in the ESI† for details).18,28 These macroscopically long nanostructures allow us to easily manipulate the formation of cross-junctions at pre-defined positions along the CNT. The as-grown individual CNTs lay on the Si substrate (with 300 nm oxide) in a straight formation, then a long CdSe nanobelt of 100 nm thickness is transferred directly onto the CNT in a perpendicular direction to make a solar cell (Fig. 1a). At their intersection, the CdSe nanobelt and the underlying CNT form a line-contact along the width of the nanobelt, resulting in a heterojunction interface responsible for charge separation. This line-contact is different from previous CNT–CNT and nanowire–nanowire junctions where point-contacts generally exist,24–27 and its increased junction area (compared to point-contacts) should be favorable for obtaining more stable interface and improved device performance. With the growth of two or more CNTs on the substrate, transfer of one nanobelt could result in multiple parallel cross-junctions at the same time (Fig. 1b). The nanobelt and CNT also serve as the charge transport paths in the solar cell, and electrode contacts were deposited on their respective ends at a controlled distance to the cross-junction.
 Fig. 1  
          Growth of CNTs and fabrication of CNT–CdSe cross-junctions. (a) Illustration of the CVD process for growing cm-long horizontal CNTs along a Si wafer at low density (a few CNTs per chip), and transfer of a CdSe nanobelt onto individual CNTs to make a cross-junction. (b) Different architectures of CNT–CdSe cross-junctions containing a nanobelt cross one, two and multiple parallel CNTs. 

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization shows a CdSe nanobelt lying perpendicularly on top of a long CNT, (Fig. 2a). Individual CNTs can be clearly imaged using reduced acceleration voltage (1.5 kV) of SEM. Both the nanobelt and nanotube are straight, continuous, and uniform along the length. The width of the nanobelt here, which is also the junction length, is about 30 μm. At enlarged magnifications, one can distinguish a slight curvature in the nanobelt when it crosses the underlying CNT, indicating good contact at the junction. Good contact was achieved by dropping and vaporizing ethanol on the nanobelt to flatten it onto the substrate during the transfer process.
 Fig. 2  CdSe-semiconducting CNT cross-junction solar cell. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt lying on top of a long CNT in perpendicular direction. (b) Raman spectra of the CNT shown in (a) recorded at excitation wavelengths of 532 nm and 633 nm, respectively. The inset shows the RBM peaks of this CNT. (c) AFM image of the CNT and (d) corresponding line scan across the CNT revealing the tube height. (e) I–V characteristics of this solar cell under an illumination intensity of 75 mW cm−2. (f) Illustration of the exciton diffusion length in CdSe nanobelt (D) and the nanobelt width (W) for calculating the active cell area. 
We also characterized this CNT by Raman spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Under an excitation wavelength of 633 nm, the Raman spectrum reveals two radial breathing mode (RBM) peaks at wave numbers of 122.5 and 162.5 cm−1 (Fig. 2b). Generally, we employ the formula (d = A/ω + B) to calculate the nanotube diameter (d) based on the RBM position (ω), and the values of constants A (ranging from 224 to 254) and B depend on the morphology and environment of the CNTs.29 However, it is rather difficult to determine the precise tube diameter from the Raman spectrum due to possible influence by the environment around the CNT and choice of constant values. Here, we believe this is a double-walled CNT because our previous study confirmed that a certain percentage of the CNTs are double-walled,28 and the two RBM peaks correspond to the outer and inner tubes, respectively. Furthermore, AFM mapping on this CNT reveals a tube height of about 2 nm, consistent with the outer tube diameter (Fig. 2c, 2d). In addition, based on the estimated CNT diameters (∼1.5 nm and 2.1 nm) and the electronic transition energies corresponding to 633 nm (Eii = 1.96 eV), both inner and outer tubes are assigned to be semiconducting species in the Kataura plot (Fig. S1, ESI†).30 Therefore this is probably a semiconducting double-walled CNT that forms a p–n type heterojunction with the CdSe nanobelt. Under illumination, according to the band diagram (Fig. S2, ESI†), the built-in electric field established across the CdSe–CNT heterojunction will drive electrons to the CdSe side and holes to the CNT, respectively.
We have measured the solar cell characteristics of the CdSe–CNT cross-junction under AM 1.5G, 75 mW cm−2 illumination, in which the CNT was connected as the positive electrode and CdSe nanobelt as the negative electrode. In the dark, there was no detectable photocurrent due to the large resistance in the nanobelt. Under illumination, the solar cell showed a short-circuit current (Isc) of 0.4 nA and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.4 V, indicating a pronounced photoresponse (Fig. 2e). The fill factor (FF) is relatively low (29.5%), which is reasonable given the high resistance of individual CNTs and nanobelts (on the order of MΩ). To estimate the power conversion efficiency (η), we adopted an exciton diffusion length of 500 nm in the CdSe nanobelt, obtained from photoluminescence measurement on CdSe quantum belts in a recent study.31 Although our nanobelts are much larger than those quantum belts, they both have a single-crystalline structure which should dominate the diffusion length. Therefore an effective region where excited electrons/holes can diffuse to the CdSe–CNT junction before recombination may be depicted by a rectangular box enclosing the junction with an area equal to the product of twice the diffusion length (2 × 500 nm) and the nanobelt width (28.6 μm), which is about 28.6 μm2 (illustrated in Fig. 2f). Free carriers produced within the nanobelt thickness (100 nm) are able to diffuse to the junction, but those generated outside this area can hardly reach the cross-junction due to limited diffusion length in the nanobelt. Photocurrent mapping on a graphene–CdS nanowire junction also showed a spatially confined photoresponse near their intersection, and regions farther away from the junction had a negligible contribution to the photocurrent.17 Our calculation based on the diffusion length of nanobelts would give a cell efficiency of 0.22%.
In addition to the CdSe-semiconducting CNT cross-junction described above, we also studied a CdSe-metallic CNT solar cell (Fig. 3a). We did not detect RBM peaks on this CNT by Raman spectroscopy, but its G-band showed a typical Breit–Wigner–Fano (BWF) line, which is observed only in metallic nanotubes (Fig. 3b).29AFM scanning showed a CNT height of about 2.5 nm, indicating this could be a single CNT or a small bundle (Fig. 3c). This metallic CNT therefore made a Schottky junction with the CdSe nanobelt, instead of a p–n junction in the case of semiconducting CNT. Under illumination, this solar cell showed an Isc of about 2.0 nA and a Voc of 0.40 V, and an estimated efficiency of 0.40% based on the same diffusion length (500 nm) in CdSe and a junction area of ∼67 μm2 (Fig. 3d). Compared with the semiconducting CNT (Fig. 2), the value of Voc has not changed while Isc has increased by 5-fold in the cell with the metallic CNT. The output current in our CdSe–CNT cells (0.4–2 nA) is comparable to previous core–shell Si nanowire cells (∼0.5 nA under 1-sun illumination), and the voltage of our cells (0.4 V) is higher than Si nanowire cells (0.26 V).13
 Fig. 3  CdSe-metallic CNT cross-junction solar cell. (a) SEM image of a cross-junction made by transferring a 67 μm-wide CdSe nanobelt to a CNT. The upper-right corner shows the silver paste for electrical contact. (b) Raman spectrum of the CNT from (a) recorded at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. (c) AFM image of this CNT and the line-scan of the tube height. (d) I–V curve of this solar cell under an illumination intensity of 80 mW cm−2. 
By growing two horizontal CNTs on a Si wafer and transferring a CdSe nanobelt to contact both CNTs simultaneously, we have constructed two cross-junction solar cells along a single nanobelt (Fig. 4a). The separation of these two junctions, or the distance between two CNTs, is about 160 μm. Raman spectra and AFM scanning show that the diameters of these two CNTs are in the range of 1.3–2.0 nm, where the upper CNT is a single-walled tube while the lower one is double-walled (Fig. S3, ESI†). Electrical contact was made on both CNTs for current–voltage (I–V) measurements, resulting in a device containing two CdSe–CNT sub-cells connected in parallel. Under illumination, the solar cell showed an Isc of 2.1 nA, a Voc of 0.46 V, and an efficiency of 0.24% based on the sum of two areas in which the nanobelt width is 52.6 μm at one junction and 48.5 μm at the second (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  
          CdSe–CNT cross-junctions formed between one CdSe nanobelt and two CNTs. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt lying across two parallel CNTs. The nanobelt widths at these two junctions are 52.6 and 48.5 μm, respectively. (b) I–V curve of the solar cell shown in (a) (80 mW cm−2). (c) SEM image of cross-junctions made by a tapered nanobelt lying on two parallel CNTs, with intersection widths of 7.8 and 2.8 μm, respectively. (d) I–V curve of the solar cell shown in (c) (100 mW cm−2). 
To study the effect of junction area on the output current, we fabricated another solar cell with a significantly reduced junction area, by depositing the tapered end of a CdSe nanobelt onto two parallel CNTs (Fig. 4c). The nanobelt widths at these two junctions are ∼7.8 μm and 2.8 μm, respectively, resulting in a total active junction area (diffusion length multiplied by the junction width) of 10.6 μm2, which is 10 times smaller than the cell in Fig. 4a made using the wider portion of a nanobelt (101 μm2). Note that the junction area is only affected by the nanobelt width (as opposed to CNT diameter) because the diffusion length is used to calculated the active device area (as illustrated in Fig. 2f). For this device, we observed a much lower Isc of about 0.093 nA, although the Voc remains large (0.54 V) (Fig. 4d). If we consider the difference in their junction areas, then the current densities of those two solar cells are still comparable (in the range of 1 to 2 mA cm−2). The results show that for our nanobelt–CNT cross-junction solar cells, the output current can be improved by increasing the junction area, while maintaining the current density.
We can integrate several solar cells conveniently by transferring a single nanobelt onto an array of parallel CNTs grown on a Si wafer. Fig. 5a shows a device containing cross-junctions between one nanobelt and 8 CNTs grown in aligned formation. Enlarged views on those 8 CdSe–CNT cross-junctions reveal good contact between the nanobelt and the CNTs underneath, although some of CNTs are not very straight (insets of Fig. 5a). Most of the CNTs have diameters of about 2 nm as measured by AFM scanning (Fig. S4, ESI†). We have put electrical contacts on both sides of the nanobelt to make three different solar cells at the same time, including one cell containing 8 CNTs contacted by Ag paste on the left side, one cell containing 6 CNTs with Ag paste at the right side, and a third cell containing the remaining 2 CNTs on the right (Fig. 5b). The junction area was calculated based on the diffusion length (500 nm) and the nanobelt–CNT overlapping lengths at all of the intersections (which are larger than the nanobelt width for curved CNTs), resulting in a total area of 400 μm2 for 8 junctions. The cell containing 8 CNTs showed an Isc of 9.5 nA, which increased to 10.9 nA after storage in air for a period of 55 days indicating good stability even without sealing (Fig. 5c). Measured under the same condition, the Isc was about 6.7 nA for the cell with 8 CNTs, about 6.2 nA for the cell with 6 CNTs, and about 4.6 nA for the cell with the remaining 2 CNTs (Fig. 5d). It shows that the increase in current is not proportional to the number of CNTs included in the cell. This is an indication that each CNT sustains different current flows, which might be due to their semiconducting or metallic properties. We could not obtain RBM peaks from all 8 CNTs to verify the properties of each CNT by Raman spectroscopy (Fig. S4, ESI†), but we think both semiconducting and metallic tubes exist here. The cell containing only 2 CNTs actually showed the highest current density and efficiency (1.0%) compared to the other two cells.
 Fig. 5  
          CdSe–CNT cross-junctions based on an array of multiple parallel CNTs. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt transferred to an array of 8 CNTs in parallel. The bottom-left corner shows the silver paste. The surrounding 5 insets show close view of each cross-junction formed by the nanobelt and 8 CNTs. Scale bars in insets are 50 μm. (b) Illustration of 3 different solar cells made by contacting selected CNTs, including 1) contacting all 8 CNTs by the Ag paste in the left side, Ag(L), 2) contacting CNTs 1 to 6 by the Ag paste in the right side, Ag (R2), and 3) contacting CNTs 7, 8 by Ag (R1). (c) I–V curves (100 mW cm−2) of the solar cell with 8 CNTs in their original state and after storing in air for 55 days. (d) I–V curves (75 mW cm−2) of the three solar cells containing 2, 6, and 8 CNTs as shown in (b). (e) Illustration of the CNT channel length (δ), which is the distance between the electrode and the CdSe nanobelt. (f) I–V curves of the solar cell with 2 CNTs (75 mW cm−2), measured at varying channel lengths of 600, 350, and 250 μm, respectively. 
We also studied the effect of CNT channel length by controlling the distance between the Ag paste and the CdSe–CNT junction in the solar cell containing the last 2 CNTs (Fig. 5e). The length of CNT in this portion (as hole transport channel) contributes directly to the internal series resistance of the solar cell. Ag paste was moved forward toward the junction progressively to obtain three different channel lengths of 600 μm, 350 μm, 250 μm, and I–V curves were measured at each step for comparison. The results showed that the Voc gradually increased from 0.38 V to 0.42 V, the Isc fluctuated in the range of 5.5 nA to 6.2 nA, and the cell efficiency increased from 1.24% to 1.87% with decreasing channel length (Fig. 5f). For the cell with the shortest CNT channel (250 μm), the fill factor was also improved slightly (from 26% to 32%), which might be due to the reduction of CNT length and series resistance. If advanced photolithography techniques can be used to make electrical contacts with minimal channel lengths along both CNTs and nanobelts, the solar cell performance should be further improved.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we reported a robust and flexible strategy to fabricate CdSe nanobelt–CNT cross-junction solar cells with power conversion efficiencies up to 1.87%. We demonstrated solar cells based on either semiconducting or metallic CNTs, and integrated devices along a single nanobelt by making a series of cross-junctions from a parallel array of individual CNTs. Key factors related to the cell performance, such as the junction area and the CNT channel length, have been studied. Our solar cells can be further improved by controlled fabrication of cross-junctions with optimized junction density and nanobelt/CNT size. It might be possible to achieve much larger output current and voltage by device integration based on self-assembly of nanostructure arrays, for example, by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique. Compared to current fabrication techniques such as bulk heterojunctions, cross-junction arrays might facilitate design and manufacturing of flat (in-plane) integrated solar cell systems with high-density active junctions.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the grant number of 51072005.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, H. Razavi, J. W. Do, A. Moriwaki, O. Ergen, Y. L. Chueh, P. W. Leu, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, L. A. Reichertz, S. Neale, K. Yu, M. Wu, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, M. J. Cho, D. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3984–3988 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu and G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1628–1631 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Ham, G. L. C. Paulus, C. Y. Lee, C. Song, K. Kalantar-zadeh, W. Choi, J.-H. Han and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6251–6259 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Hu and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, X. Pang, R. Adhikary, J. W. Petrich, M. Jeffries-EL and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2844–2849 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L.-Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, B. I. MacDonald, S. E. Watkins and P. Mulvaney, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2856–2864 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, X.-G. Zhang, C. M. Parish, H. N. Lee, D. B. Smith, Y. He and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4381–4385 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–890 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456–3460 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. Huo, S. Brittman, H. Gao and P. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 568–572 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, G. Meng, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Fang, U. K. Gautam, X. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8247–8249 RSC .
T. Dufaux, J. Boettcher, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Small, 2010, 6, 1868–1872 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, S. Wang, Z. Li, C. Ji, J. Wei, H. Zhu, K. Wang, D. Wu, E. Shi, Y. Fang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, Y. Dai, L. Dai, Z. Shi, N. Liu, F. Wang, L. Fu, R. Peng, X. Wen, Z. Chen, Z. Liu and G. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3406–3410 CAS .
Y. Jia, A. Cao, X. Bai, Z. Li, L. Zhang, N. Guo, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1901–1905 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, J. W. Shin, Y. B. Lee, M. Y. Cho, S. H. Lee, D. H. Park, D. K. Jang, C. J. Lee and J. Joo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4197–4205 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dissanayake and Z. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 286–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Small, 2005, 1, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Fuhrer, J. Nygard, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y. G. Yoon, M. S. C. Mazzoni, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2000, 288, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66–69 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 851–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Duan, Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wen, W. Qian, J. Nie, A. Cao, G. Ning, Y. Wang, L. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1867–1871 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, R. Saito and A. Jorio, Phys. Rep., 2005, 409, 47–99 CrossRef .
W. J. Blau and J. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 705–706 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Liu, V. L. Wayman, P. C. Gibbons, R. A. Loomis and W. E. Buhro, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 352–357 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03409cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy is one of the most promising renewable energy sources and the research on developing third-generation solar cells that can convert sunlight into electricity in an efficient and low-cost way has received tremendous interest in the past decade. With the fast developments in nanotechnology and exploration of its applications in energy and environmental fields, nanostructures are now considered as potential materials for manufacturing innovating photovoltaic devices with new working mechanisms. Fundamental study at the individual nanostructure level is important to provide insights that might lead to high-efficiency devices in the future. Here, our group reports a simple and basic cross-junction device made by carbon nanotubes with semiconducting nanobelts. Our results demonstrate a robust and flexible approach for making reliable and efficient nanoscale solar cells, which might be further integrated into high density devices using well-established layer-by-layer self-assembly methods of one-dimensional nanostructures.


 	Fig. 1  
          Growth of CNTs and fabrication of CNT–CdSe cross-junctions. (a) Illustration of the CVD process for growing cm-long horizontal CNTs along a Si wafer at low density (a few CNTs per chip), and transfer of a CdSe nanobelt onto individual CNTs to make a cross-junction. (b) Different architectures of CNT–CdSe cross-junctions containing a nanobelt cross one, two and multiple parallel CNTs.	 

 	Fig. 2  CdSe-semiconducting CNT cross-junction solar cell. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt lying on top of a long CNT in perpendicular direction. (b) Raman spectra of the CNT shown in (a) recorded at excitation wavelengths of 532 nm and 633 nm, respectively. The inset shows the RBM peaks of this CNT. (c) AFM image of the CNT and (d) corresponding line scan across the CNT revealing the tube height. (e) I–V characteristics of this solar cell under an illumination intensity of 75 mW cm−2. (f) Illustration of the exciton diffusion length in CdSe nanobelt (D) and the nanobelt width (W) for calculating the active cell area.	 

 	Fig. 3  CdSe-metallic CNT cross-junction solar cell. (a) SEM image of a cross-junction made by transferring a 67 μm-wide CdSe nanobelt to a CNT. The upper-right corner shows the silver paste for electrical contact. (b) Raman spectrum of the CNT from (a) recorded at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. (c) AFM image of this CNT and the line-scan of the tube height. (d) I–V curve of this solar cell under an illumination intensity of 80 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  
          CdSe–CNT cross-junctions formed between one CdSe nanobelt and two CNTs. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt lying across two parallel CNTs. The nanobelt widths at these two junctions are 52.6 and 48.5 μm, respectively. (b) I–V curve of the solar cell shown in (a) (80 mW cm−2). (c) SEM image of cross-junctions made by a tapered nanobelt lying on two parallel CNTs, with intersection widths of 7.8 and 2.8 μm, respectively. (d) I–V curve of the solar cell shown in (c) (100 mW cm−2).	 

 	Fig. 5  
          CdSe–CNT cross-junctions based on an array of multiple parallel CNTs. (a) SEM image of a CdSe nanobelt transferred to an array of 8 CNTs in parallel. The bottom-left corner shows the silver paste. The surrounding 5 insets show close view of each cross-junction formed by the nanobelt and 8 CNTs. Scale bars in insets are 50 μm. (b) Illustration of 3 different solar cells made by contacting selected CNTs, including 1) contacting all 8 CNTs by the Ag paste in the left side, Ag(L), 2) contacting CNTs 1 to 6 by the Ag paste in the right side, Ag (R2), and 3) contacting CNTs 7, 8 by Ag (R1). (c) I–V curves (100 mW cm−2) of the solar cell with 8 CNTs in their original state and after storing in air for 55 days. (d) I–V curves (75 mW cm−2) of the three solar cells containing 2, 6, and 8 CNTs as shown in (b). (e) Illustration of the CNT channel length (δ), which is the distance between the electrode and the CdSe nanobelt. (f) I–V curves of the solar cell with 2 CNTs (75 mW cm−2), measured at varying channel lengths of 600, 350, and 250 μm, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee03409c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
