Unambiguous determination of molecular packing in crystalline donor domains of small molecule solution processed solar cell devices using routine X-ra ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA13116E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13116E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3536-3542Unambiguous determination of molecular packing in crystalline donor domains of small molecule solution processed solar cell devices using routine X-ray diffraction techniques†

        
          
            Aurélien 
            Viterisi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Núria F. 
            Montcada
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Challuri Vijay 
            Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Francesc 
            Gispert-Guirado
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Eddy 
            Martin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eduardo 
            Escudero
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Emilio 
            Palomares
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16, Tarragona 43007, Spain. E-mail: epalomares@iciq.es; aviterisi@iciq.es
bUniv. Rovira i Virgili, Scientific Resources Service, Av. Països Catalans 26, Tarragona 43007, Spain
cCatalan Institution for Advanced Studies and Research (ICREA), Passeig Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona 08010, Spain
Received 
      7th August 2013
    , Accepted 16th December 2013First published on 18th December 2013AbstractThe crystalline phase in crystalline donor domains of squaraine-based small molecule (SM) solution processed organic solar cell (OSC) devices has been accurately characterized. The active layers consisting of solution processed bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) films of squaraine (SQ)-PC70BM blends and of pristine SQ thin films were characterized using a set of X-ray diffraction techniques, simple sample preparation methods, and routine least-square data refinement. The approach involves comparing experimental diffractograms recorded from active layers and from powdered active layers with those calculated from single crystal structures of the SQ molecule. The calculated diffractograms were fitted to the experimental powder diffractograms using least-square refinement routines, which allow assignment of crystalline phases with great accuracy, providing clear evidence that the packing in the active layer is similar in nature to that in the corresponding single crystal polymorphs. It was found that molecules of SQ exclusively pack into a P21/n phase in crystallites of BHJ active layer blends comprising PC70BM as the acceptor and into two distinct phases in the case of pristine SQ films, the P21/n phase and a polymorphic Pbcn phase. In the latter case, the predominance of one or the other phase depends on the solvent used in the deposition step, the annealing process employed and the substrate the active layer is deposited onto. This information, together with that obtained from grazing incidence X-ray diffraction GIXRD, provided precise structural information in the nano- and sub-nanometer range.
Introduction
The field of solution processed bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells has been dominated by π-conjugated polymer donors over the last decade,1 with record power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 9% on single junction devices.2 Small-molecule BHJ (SM-BHJ) devices have, until recently, attracted less attention as it is generally assumed that the inability of small molecules to form ordered domains in a blend would be a major limitation to charge transport.3 However, some recent reports on small molecule-based BHJ devices with record PCEs as high as 8.2% and with fill factors (FFs) well over 50% (ref. 4) have eventually demonstrated that small molecules, when suitably designed, can match and even exceed the performance of polymer-based BHJ OSCs. However, SMs have shown, to date, mixed results and highly efficient donor SMs are often discovered serendipitously rather than through rational design. In contrast to polymer based devices, SM-BHJ devices rely on a much more efficient hopping rate to achieve high charge mobility, therefore, the solid-state packing pattern of SM donors becomes critical. Whereas most studies have stressed the necessity of intermolecular π–π-stacking in the donor domains to favour charge hopping, in SM donor domains, little experimental data on the packing of SM donors in the active layer of SM BHJ devices are available. Indeed, determining the packing of the donor crystallites in the active layer films of SM-BHJ OSC devices is a very challenging task, limited by the size of such crystallites (typically smaller than 10 nm). In some rare cases, the packing of some small molecules in thin films could be determined with good accuracy, using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) and crystallographic data refinement methods.5 Nonetheless, this type of analysis requires a high brilliance synchrotron X-ray source and may be difficult to apply to active layers of BHJ devices, which are generally composed of a blend of at least two different types of molecules.
Herein we report on a simple experimental method to determine the molecular packing in crystalline domains of the donor material in solution processed active layers. The method relies on the use of a set of X-ray diffraction experiments carried out with home diffractometers on active layer films and on powdered active layers. The diffractograms obtained through the latter method were fitted to data obtained from single crystal structures of the donor material using least square refinement routines, allowing the matching of the crystalline phase of the thin films to that of the single crystal polymorphs. This method was applied to solution processed SQ:C60 and SQ:PC70BM BHJ systems. It was demonstrated that in the case of the solution processed pristine films of SQ, the molecules can pack into two different crystalline phases while in the case of the BHJ films only one phase was observed. Interestingly both phases display very distinct packing patterns with the first one displaying no π–π stacking interactions whereas the second one shows moderate π–π stacking.
Results
In the present paper we focused on a diisopropylamine-functionalized squaraine (SQ), which has been shown to provide efficiencies above 4% in both BHJ and bilayer solution processed devices (Fig. 1).6 In both types of devices it was demonstrated that when either dichloromethane11 or dichlorobenzene6a,b was used as the spin casting solvent followed by solvent vapour annealing (SVA) with CH2Cl2, the molecular packing in the thin film adopted a similar pattern to that of the reference powder solid from which the film was cast. These conclusions were drawn from matching the two diffraction peaks from the thin film diffractogram with the powder diffractogram of the solid material from which the crystalline space group (P2/m; a = 14.95, b = 9.35, c = 11.50 Å, β = 98.20°) was resolved using powder diffraction refinement techniques.6a However, since no single crystal structure of SQ was available, although the crystallites in the thin film could be deemed to adopt the same crystalline phase as in the powder, no information on the actual molecule packing was provided.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of the SQ donor. (b) Structure of solution processed BHJ samples analysed in Fig. 3. (c) Structure of solution processed pristine SQ samples analysed in Fig. 6. 
Recently, a single crystal structure of SQ was reported.7 Unfortunately, the space group (P21/n) did not correspond to that of the powder described in earlier reports, and therefore could not report on the actual packing pattern in the active layer film. Consequently, the primary focus of the following study was to carry out crystallization experiments in order to isolate single crystals of the P2/m space group polymorph as described above. Surprisingly, most of the crystallization experiments (see the Experimental section for details) produced crystals of the P21/n space group with the same cell parameters as previously reported. Some experiments yielded crystals of SQ packed into a different space group (Pbcn), however, no crystals with a P2/m phase could be isolated. Nonetheless, the structure of the crystal packing into the Pbcn phase was resolved (Fig. 2) and curiously, when the powder diffractograms were calculated from the two available single crystal X-ray diffraction data, some similarities could be seen with the experimental data recorded on thin films.
 Fig. 2  Single crystal structures of SQ ((a) shown in red, (b) in green, and (c) in blue). (a) P21/n polymorph:7 view of the unit cell, (b) upper and (c) side views, (d) Pbcn polymorph: view of the unit cell, (e) upper and (f) side views. 
For instance, Fig. 3 shows the diffractograms (Bragg–Brentano θ–θ configuration, out-of-plane incident beam) of thin film active layers of SQ:PC70BM blends spin coated from different solvents on top of different substrates, corresponding to conditions and structures employed in the literature for solar cell devices. A diffraction peak at a 2θ angle of 8.01° (KαCu radiation) and a faint peak at 2θ = 16.1° for the films spin coated from CHCl3 on top of glass, on top of PEDOT:PSS coated ITO, or on the top MoO3 coated ITO can be seen upon SVA. These peaks are also present for the layers spin coated from DCB, however, the main peak shows higher intensity and narrower shape, indicating the presence of significantly larger crystallites. However, no attempt was made to quantify either the size of the crystallites or the total crystalline volume, since this study is intended to focus on the characterization of the crystalline phases formed in the active layers rather than on the characterization of the morphology.
 Fig. 3  Stacked diffractograms of SQ:PC70BM (1:3) active layers spin coated from different solvents and on the top of different substrates. Thermal annealing (Th. A.) was carried out at 130 °C; SVA was carried out in a CH2Cl2 atmosphere. 
Additional GIXRD images of the same films provide clear evidence of a highly texturized film (Fig. 4). Therefore, the peaks appearing in the diffractograms as shown in Fig. 3 can be unambiguously attributed to reflections of the same (hkl) family of diffraction planes. More importantly, those peaks appear to be consistent with the presence of crystallites of SQ packed into a P21/n phase with a high degree of texture and thus with the (011) plane parallel to the substrate (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  GIXRD images of the solvent annealed and thermally annealed SQ:PC70BM (1:3) films cast from CHCl3 and DCB, corresponding to point detector diffractograms shown in Fig. 3. (a) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3b, (b) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3c, and (c) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3d. 
This evidence for the presence of a different crystalline phase in the active layer of films, with respect to previous results,6a,b,8 was further investigated by recording a diffractogram of powdered active layers. The powdered active layers were prepared as follows:9 several large area (50 cm2) thin films of SQ:PC70BM (1:3) were deposited onto glass substrates using similar conditions to those used for processing active layers in devices, and subsequently submitted to SVA for an extended period of time to allow for maximum crystallite growth (see ESI† for details). The resulting thin films were scraped off the glass substrate and the solid was used for the X-ray powder diffraction analysis. This simple method allows for the acquisition of missing information from the direct measurement of active layers due to the high degree of texture and provides an improved signal to noise ratio. The size of the crystallites and the crystalline volume of these powdered layers are not comparable to those of the active layers, and are used here only for crystalline phase assignment.10
Consequently, the appearance of several additional diffraction peaks in the diffractogram of the powdered sample confirmed the above-mentioned hypothesis whereby the experimental diffractogram appears to match both in 2θ angle value and in relative intensity the diffractogram calculated from the P21/n structure (Fig. 5b and c). The calculated diffractogram was further fitted to the experimental one using Rietveld refinements,11,12 in order to provide numerical evidence. The cell parameters, profile shape and scale factor were accounted for in the refinement routine while all structural parameters (atomic positions and temperature factors) were kept constant. Fig. 5b (red line) shows that the calculated diffractogram fits the experimental data from the powdered active layer film with good accuracy as demonstrated by the Rietveld R factors (Rexp: 0.86, Rwp: 1.21) and goodness of fit (GOF: 1.42), providing clear evidence of structural agreement between the single crystal and the powdered layer (see ESI† for details). Some discrepancies can be seen between the two diffractograms at 2θ = 22° and 2θ = 24°, however, those are due to peaks arising from the fullerene fraction of the active layer (see Fig. 5a). The unit cell shows some degree of expansion with respect to the single crystal with a magnitude inferior to 2% in the direction of maximum distortion, that is, along (c) (Fig. 5 caption). Such variation was to be expected due to the difference in the temperature during data acquisition, that is 143 K for the single crystal, from which the diffractogram was calculated, and 300 K for the powdered active layer.
 Fig. 5  (a) Pristine PC70BM powdered layer diffractogram, (b) SQ:PC70BM (1:3) powdered active layer diffractogram (black line) and refined diffractogram from the P21/n crystal structure of SQ (red line), and (c) calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a P21/n space group (143 K). 
A similar analysis was applied to films of the pristine SQ donor, whereby thin films of pristine SQ were deposited using conditions described in earlier reports and on top of various substrates. Direct XRD measurements on films provided rather different results from BHJ active layers. As seen in Fig. 6 the diffractograms vary greatly depending on the type of solvent used in the processing step and on the nature of the layer the film is deposited onto, as well as the type of annealing carried out. For instance, when films of pristine SQ were spin cast from CH2Cl2 and subsequently submitted to thermal annealing, only the peak characteristic to SQ packed into a P21/n phase appeared in the diffractogram, regardless of the under-layer or the substrate (Fig. 6f and g). When the films are deposited from CHCl3 and subsequently submitted to SVA, the dominant crystalline phase appears to be distinct from P21/n (Fig. 6i–k), presumably P2/m according to the assignment of the peak at 7.5° and 15.1° in previous reports,6a,b,8 while an intermediate trend is observed if thermal annealing is applied instead of SVA (Fig. 6c–e). In the latter case, the two crystalline phases are present, with relative proportion shown to vary significantly with the nature of the under-layer. Under these conditions the overall crystalline volume is seen to be greater (y axis not shown in Fig. 6) and the diffraction peak arising from the higher order family planes, at 15.1° and 16.2°, of the two polymorphs are now intense enough to be distinguished unequivocally.
 Fig. 6  Stacked diffractograms of SQ:PC70BM (1:3) active layers spin coated from different solvents and on top of different substrates and layers. Thermal annealing was carried at 130 °C; SVA was carried out in a CH2Cl2 atmosphere. 
Interestingly, the peaks that were previously assigned to a P2/m phase are shown to fit with the presence of textured crystallites packed into the Pbcn phase. The high degree of texture is confirmed experimentally by GIXRD images, shown in Fig. 7, and is consistent with crystallites of the Pbcn phases oriented with their (110) plane parallel to the substrate.
 Fig. 7  GIXRD images of the solvent annealed and thermally annealed pristine SQ films cast from CHCl3 and from CH2Cl2, corresponding to point detector diffractograms shown in Fig. 6. (a) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6c, (b) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6e, (c) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6f and (d) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6i. 
This hypothesis was further investigated by recording a diffractogram of a powdered active layer. The powdered active layer was prepared as described above, and provided a more complex diffractogram, with the highest intensity peaks at 7.5° and 8.0° matching those in Fig. 6, consistently with the presence of two crystalline phases. The resulting diffractogram was fitted with the refined diffractogram from the P21/n and Pbcn phases, providing unambiguous evidence for the presence of the two phases as seen from Fig. 8a. The refined unit cell parameters from the active layer film vary significantly with respect to those from the single crystal structure. This is attributed to the large difference in temperature in the acquisition of data, similar to the trend observed above. The unit cell of the P21/n phase shows a degree of expansion of a very similar magnitude to that observed in the case of BHJ active layers (see ESI† for details) with respect to the single crystal, while the unit cell of the Pbcn phase is slightly more distorted in the active layer (maximum variation along (a), approx. 3% deviation from the single crystal structure, see Fig. S5†). To verify that the distortion of the unit cell of the Pbcn phase is due to a difference in the temperature, a powder diffractogram of pulverized crystals of the Pbcn phase was recorded at room temperature and fitted with the calculated diffractogram from the Pbcn phase, using similar Rietveld refinement routines used for the powdered active layer. As seen in Fig. 8d, the apparent peak shifts in 2θ angle values are consistent with a distortion of the unit cell parameters of a very similar magnitude to those observed in the powdered thin film layers (Fig. 8, see Fig. S6† for refined unit cell parameters). Although the calculated diffractogram fits the experimental data accurately enough to provide for unambiguous assignment of the crystalline phases, the R factors indicate the presence of slight discrepancies in the fit (Fig. 8). This implies that the molecular packing in the active layer varies slightly with respect to that of the single crystals. The exact packing could be determined using advanced refinement routines including temperature and diffusion factors, however this lies beyond the scope of this article.
 Fig. 8  (a) Pristine SQ solvent annealed powdered active layer diffractogram (black line) and refined diffractogram of P21/n and Pbcn mixed phases (blue line). (b) Calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a P21/n space group (143 K). (c) Calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a Pbcn space group (100 K). (d) Powder diffractogram of a pulverized sample of Pbcn crystals (black line) and refined diffractogram from the Pbcn phase (green line). 
Discussion and conclusion
From the above results, we demonstrated that both the crystallinity of the active layers and the formation of one or the other crystalline phase in SQ-based active layers of solution processed devices are dependent on subtle changes under the processing conditions. Hence, in the presence of PC70BM, molecules of SQ are seen to pack into a unique crystalline phase of the P21/n space group. In the case of pristine SQ active layers, the processing conditions and the type of annealing have a very significant effect on promoting the SQ molecules to pack into one or another crystalline phase. Out of the two phases observed, the first one is consistent with molecules of SQ packed into the P21/n space group as in the case of BHJ active layers, whereas the second one, previously attributed to molecules packed into the P2/m phase, is shown to better fit with molecules packed into the Pbcn phase with very similar unit cell parameters as in the single crystal shown in Fig. 2.
The set of techniques employed herein, namely, out of plane XRD diffraction in Bragg–Brentano configuration, GIXRD 2D diffraction, and powder diffraction on powdered layers provided an extensive set of information ranging from the molecular packing adopted by donor molecules in active layers to the orientation of the arrangement with respect to the substrate. This arrangement is seen to be distinct in each of the crystalline phases. The SQ molecules in the P21/n phase arrange in a slipped stacked manner in the edges of the unit cell with a single molecule centred in the unit cell. There are no apparent π–π interactions between the SQ molecules, however the interatomic distances between the stacks are extremely short (2.97 Å). The molecules packed into the Pbcn space group are stacked in a twisted manner, with each stack twisted approximately 119° with respect to one another, consequently inducing weak π–π stacking and greater intermolecular distances (3.38 Å) (Fig. 2). The direction of the arrangement is seen to be uniform with respect to the substrate, as seen in the GIXRD pictures, although significant differences in texture are seen between films comprising crystallites of mixed phases and films comprising pure phases (Fig. 7a and bvs.Fig. 7c and d). Fig. 9 sums up the results obtained above in simplified cartoons.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of SQ:PC70BM and pristine SQ active layers (side view). (a) Crystalline BHJ active layers showing crystallites of the P21/n phase uniformly oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (b) Thermally annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CH2Cl2 showing crystallites of the P21/n phase partially oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (c) Solvent annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CHCl3 showing a vast majority of the Pbcn phase crystallites and a minority of P21/n phase crystallites partially oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (d) Thermally annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CHCl3 showing crystallites of the P21/n and Pbcn phases both uniformly oriented with respect to the substrate surface.13 
To conclude, previous attempts to link the crystalline packing in the active layer to that in the single crystal structures by comparison of the thin film diffractogram with the calculated diffractogram from the X-ray single crystal structure have relied on rather speculative assumptions. These assumptions arose from the scarcity of diffraction peaks recorded from the active layers, a problem circumvented in the present study by using conventional X-ray diffraction techniques that do not require synchrotron light sources. Rather, these techniques utilize simple sample preparation methods and routine least-square data refinement. In doing so, the packing in the active layer thin film could be matched with that in the single crystal with much greater accuracy, to the best of our knowledge, as has ever been achieved before in the field of solution processed SM OSCs. This, together with information obtained from area detector images taken in GIXRD mode, provides precise structural information in the nano- and sub-nanometre range, which will certainly pave the way towards a greater understanding of the structure–function relationships in SM-BHJ devices. The first step towards this goal has been achieved in the present study by confirming experimentally that, contrary to common beliefs, extensive π–π interactions between donor molecules may not be a prerequisite to lead to improved device characteristics. Further research is being carried out to characterize the fraction of amorphous domains and their importance in forming the D/A interface as well as to precisely determine the size of the crystallites under conditions of functioning devices, and to relate these parameters and the type of crystalline packing to OSC device characteristics.
Acknowledgements
John Clifford and James W. Ryan are greatly acknowledged for very helpful discussions. Marta Martínez is greatly acknowledged for X-Ray diffraction data recording. We also would like to thank the ICIQ, ICREA, and the Spanish MICINN, the project CTQ2010-18859 for financial support. EP also thanks the EU for the ERCstg Polydot and the Catalan government for the 2009-SGR-207 project.
Notes and references

  (a) C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef ; 
  (c) W. Cai, X. Gong and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994 RSC ; 
  (e) P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 593 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Tang, J. Hai, Y. Dai, Z. Huang, B. Lu, F. Yuan, J. Tang and F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Walker, C. Kim and T. Q. Nguyen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 470 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Li, Q. Guo, Z. Li, J. Pei and W. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1427 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245 RSC .

  (a) Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. S. van der Poll, J. A. Love, T. Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Zhou, X. Wan, Y. Liu, Y. Zuo, Z. Li, G. He, G. Long, W. Ni, C. Li, X. Su and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16345 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, J. Zhang, S. Chand, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, W. L. Leong, L. Ke, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4569 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) J. Zhou, Y. Zuo, X. Wan, G. Long, Q. Zhang, W. Ni, Y. Liu, Z. Li, G. He, C. Li, B. Kan, M. Li and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8484–8487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Schiefer, M. Huth, A. Dobrinevski and B. Nickel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10316 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. N. Krauss, E. Barrena, X. N. Zhang, D. G. de Oteyza, J. Major, V. Dehm, F. Würthner, L. P. Cavalcanti and H. Dosch, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12742 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Q. Yuan, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. L. Tang, M. F. Toney, J. Lüning and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Q. Yuan, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. L. Tang, M. Roberts, M. F. Toney, D. M. DeLongchamp and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2763 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Virkar, C. Reese, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2294 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. L. Tang and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Wei, S. Wang, K. Renshaw, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Wei, S. Wang, K. Sun, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 184 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. Wei, X. Xiao, S. Wang, K. Sun, K. J. Bergemann, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 972 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) G. Wei, X. Xiao, S. Wang, J. D. Zimmerman, K. Sun, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) X. Xiao, G. Wei, S. Wang, J. D. Zimmerman, C. K. Renshaw, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Hall, V. V. Diev, R. Haiges, G. Wei, X. Xiao, P. I. Djurovich, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4789 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, R. R. Lunt, K. Sun, S. Wang, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, J. Liu, J. Lin, A. B. Tamayo, B. Walker, G. Wu and T.-Q. Nguyen, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1699 CrossRef CAS .
The time of SVA has been shown to have only an impact on the crystallite size and crystalline volume, however phase equilibration between metastable and stable phases is also allowed to occur during SVA should the process be kinetically favoured. Additionally, when a metastable polymorphic structure is formed during SVA, equilibration to a more stable one after SVA is always favoured thermodynamically and could occur provided that enough energy is brought to the system. Therefore since the active layers used for powder diffractograms are annealed for longer times than those used for diffraction in reflexion mode, the probability that the second set of peaks in Fig. 6 (2θ = 7.5° and 15°) belongs to a metastable polymorph of SQ which rearranges to the Pbcn phase during the long annealing times of the powdered layers still exist. However, this probability is extremely low as for such rearrangement to occur in these time scales the crystalline metastable forms should be in very close equilibrium with one another.
H. Rietveld, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1969, 2, 65 CrossRef CAS .

          TOPAS, General Profile and Structure Analysis Software for Powder Diffraction Data, V4.2, Brüker AXS GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
The packing of SQ units inside the crystallites is symbolized by the black lines. The orientation of the crystallites is depicted with the (011) and (110) (for the P21/n and Pbcn phases respectively) planes parallel to the substrates as deducted from GIXRD analysis. The crystallites are shown embedded in an amorphous matrix of SQ or mixed SQ and PC70BM molecules, however the ratio between amorphous and crystalline phases is arbitrary as well as the size and shape of the crystallites. Although, the proportion between the crystallites of the Pbcn and P21/n phases in pictures (c) and (d) is shown to represent a very broad trend, no precise quantification task was attempted in this study.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Active layer fabrication and characterisation, powdered layer process description, SVA description, and additional XRD data. CCDC 863583 and 940816. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13116eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of the SQ donor. (b) Structure of solution processed BHJ samples analysed in Fig. 3. (c) Structure of solution processed pristine SQ samples analysed in Fig. 6.	 

 	Fig. 2  Single crystal structures of SQ ((a) shown in red, (b) in green, and (c) in blue). (a) P21/n polymorph:7 view of the unit cell, (b) upper and (c) side views, (d) Pbcn polymorph: view of the unit cell, (e) upper and (f) side views.	 

 	Fig. 3  Stacked diffractograms of SQ:PC70BM (1:3) active layers spin coated from different solvents and on the top of different substrates. Thermal annealing (Th. A.) was carried out at 130 °C; SVA was carried out in a CH2Cl2 atmosphere.	 

 	Fig. 4  GIXRD images of the solvent annealed and thermally annealed SQ:PC70BM (1:3) films cast from CHCl3 and DCB, corresponding to point detector diffractograms shown in Fig. 3. (a) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3b, (b) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3c, and (c) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 3d.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Pristine PC70BM powdered layer diffractogram, (b) SQ:PC70BM (1:3) powdered active layer diffractogram (black line) and refined diffractogram from the P21/n crystal structure of SQ (red line), and (c) calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a P21/n space group (143 K).	 

 	Fig. 6  Stacked diffractograms of SQ:PC70BM (1:3) active layers spin coated from different solvents and on top of different substrates and layers. Thermal annealing was carried at 130 °C; SVA was carried out in a CH2Cl2 atmosphere.	 

 	Fig. 7  GIXRD images of the solvent annealed and thermally annealed pristine SQ films cast from CHCl3 and from CH2Cl2, corresponding to point detector diffractograms shown in Fig. 6. (a) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6c, (b) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6e, (c) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6f and (d) GIXRD image of the sample from Fig. 6i.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Pristine SQ solvent annealed powdered active layer diffractogram (black line) and refined diffractogram of P21/n and Pbcn mixed phases (blue line). (b) Calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a P21/n space group (143 K). (c) Calculated powder diffractogram of SQ packed into a Pbcn space group (100 K). (d) Powder diffractogram of a pulverized sample of Pbcn crystals (black line) and refined diffractogram from the Pbcn phase (green line).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of SQ:PC70BM and pristine SQ active layers (side view). (a) Crystalline BHJ active layers showing crystallites of the P21/n phase uniformly oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (b) Thermally annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CH2Cl2 showing crystallites of the P21/n phase partially oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (c) Solvent annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CHCl3 showing a vast majority of the Pbcn phase crystallites and a minority of P21/n phase crystallites partially oriented with respect to the substrate surface. (d) Thermally annealed crystalline active layer of pristine SQ processed from CHCl3 showing crystallites of the P21/n and Pbcn phases both uniformly oriented with respect to the substrate surface.13	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Active layer fabrication and characterisation, powdered layer process description, SVA description, and additional XRD data. CCDC 863583 and 940816. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13116e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
