Improved charge transport and injection in a meso-superstructured solar cell by a tractable pre-spin-coating process   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP03803K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP03803K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24092-24097Improved charge transport and injection in a meso-superstructured solar cell by a tractable pre-spin-coating process†

        
          
            Nan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haoyuan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shufeng 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Liduo 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aKey Lab of Organic Optoelectronics and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, Department of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
Received 
      1st July 2015
    , Accepted 20th August 2015First published on 20th August 2015AbstractIn meso-superstructured solar cells (MSSCs), the state-of-the-art perovskite acts as both the light harvester and electron transporter due to its ambipolar properties. The inefficient pore filling and infiltration of perovskite directly affect the continuous distribution of perovskite in mesoporous Al2O3, resulting in discontinuous carrier transport in the mesoporous structure and insufficient electron injection to the compact TiO2 layer. Herein, we introduce a simple pre-spin-coating process to improve the infiltration and pore filling of perovskite, which results in higher light absorption and enhanced electron injection, as seen in UV-vis spectra and photoluminescence (PL) spectra, respectively. We first apply time of flight (TOF) experiments to characterize charge transport in MSSCs, and the results reveal that more continuous charge transport pathways are formed with the pre-spin-coating process. This effective method, with ease of processing, demonstrates obviously improved photocurrents, reaching an efficiency as high as 14%, and promotes the application of lead halide perovskite materials in the photovoltaics field.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) has been widely employed in the photovoltaics field as an ambipolar light harvester.1–5 A variety of mesoporous films are fabricated as scaffolds for the formation of perovskite films, such as TiO2,2 Al2O3,3 ZrO2,6 NiO,7 and SiO2.8 Mesoporous scaffolds can improve the coverage and thickness of perovskite films, control film formation9 and decrease hysteresis.10–12 In solar cells with the mesoporous structure, perovskite capacity is closely related to light absorption. In our previous work,13 we modulated the concentration of PbI2 solutions to improve perovskite capacity and coverage on mesoporous TiO2 films. Meng14 demonstrated a modified two-step deposition method to enhance the light harvesting of perovskite, by repeating the PbI2 spin-coating process. In the common meso-superstructured solar cells (MSSCs), low-temperature-prepared Al2O3 scaffolds replace mesoporous TiO2 to avoid high-temperature sintering and overcome the ultraviolet light instability of perovskite.15 However, Al2O3 is incapable of transporting electrons, due to its insulating properties.3 The photogenerated electrons can only be transported through perovskites in the mesoporous scaffold and subsequently be injected into the compact TiO2 layer. On the one hand, Snaith proposed that the electron injection from perovskite to the compact TiO2 layer is inefficient, and was improved by modifying C60-SAM at the perovskite/TiO2 interface.16 On the other hand, though perovskite could transport carriers itself, the inefficient pore filling in the mesoporous structure leads to discontinuity of perovskites, hindering smooth charge transport in internal perovskites, and being finally detrimental to charge injection and collection. Y. Ogomi modified HOCO–R–NH3+ between mesoporous Al2O3 and perovskite to passivate defects arising from the discontinuity of perovskites on Al2O3, and realized better electron transport.17
Herein, we introduce a pre-spin-coating perovskite solution method to increase the infiltration and pore filling of perovskites in mesoporous Al2O3 films with no redundant interface modification materials. With the pre-spin-coating process, a higher extent of pore filling is realized, leading to a higher capacity of the perovskite and enhanced light harvesting. We explore the electron injection by photoluminescence (PL) spectra, in order to disclose the fact that a greater extent of infiltration induces more efficient contact of perovskite and compact TiO2, giving rise to improved electron injection efficiency. Time-of-flight (TOF) measurements are employed to elucidate the charge transport in mesoporous structured perovskite solar cells for the first time, and the results validate the fact that more charge transport pathways are provided inside the mesoporous structure due to the enhanced infiltration and continuity of perovskites, decreasing the charge transport hindrance from the discontinuity of perovskites. Device performance is obviously improved, with the efficiency rising from 11.4% to 14.0%.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials
All solvents and reagents were used as received. PbCl2 (99.999%), an Al2O3 nanoparticle dispersion in isopropanol (<50 nm, 20 wt%), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI, 99.95%), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%) were all purchased from Sigma Aldrich. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spiro bifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp., Taiwan. CH3NH3I (MAI, 99.5%) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., China. Super dehydrated solvents N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) and chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%) were purchased from J&K. Before use, FTO glass was first washed with mild detergent, rinsed with distilled water several times and subsequently washed with acetone, ethanol and isopropanol in an ultrasonic bath, and finally dried under an air stream.
2.2 Device fabrication
First, a compact TiO2 layer was formed on clean FTO glass through an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method, followed by sintering at 500 °C for 1 h. Then the Al2O3 scaffold was spin-coated on the substrate at a rotation speed of 6000 rpm for 30 s, then dried at 150 °C for 30 min. For the control device, the perovskite layer was prepared by spin-coating from a homogeneous 40 wt% precursor solution (PbCl2:MAI = 1:3, in DMF) at a rotation speed of 2000 rpm for 90 s, and annealed at 100 °C for 60 min in a N2 glovebox. For the pre-spin-coating of perovskite, precursor solutions with different mass fractions of 8 wt%, 16 wt%, 40 wt% (PbCl2:MAI = 1:3, in DMF) were separately coated on the Al2O3 scaffold at a speed of 6500 rpm for 90 s and annealed at 100 °C for 30 min. Then 40 wt% precursor solution was again coated on the cooled film at a speed of 2000 rpm for 90 s, and the films were annealed at 100 °C for 60 min, as with the control. The hole transport material (HTM) was composed of 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 9.1 mg LiTFSI and 20 μL TBP in a solvent of 1 mL CB. After cooling down to room temperature, the HTM was spin-coated on top with a spinning speed of 2500 rpm for 60 s. Finally, a 50 nm gold electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask. The active area of the studied devices was 10 mm2.
2.3 Characterization
The morphologies of the perovskite layers were characterized by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (HR-SEM) (Jeol, JSM-7401F). The UV-vis absorption spectra were measured with a Hitachi Model U-3010 UV-vis spectrophotometer. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with smart lab instruments CuKα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). Photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves were measured with a ZAHNER CIMPS electrochemical workstation (Germany) under a solar simulator (xenon lamp, Oriel, AM 1.5), with incident light intensity calibrated by a standard crystalline silicon solar cell. Devices were scanned backward with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured in air with equipment developed by the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Steady-state PL spectra were tested with a fluorospectrophotometer (Jobin Yvon, FluroMax-3). The time-resolved PL spectra were recorded with a high resolution streak camera system (Hamamatsu C10910), with the samples excited by a 517 nm with 90 nJ cm−2 pulse at room temperature. The lifetime was obtained by fitting the PL signal with a bi-exponential decay function.18 In the time-of-flight (TOF) experiments, a nitrogen-pulsed laser (pulse width 5 ns, wavelength 337.1 nm, generated by UHSO KEC-160) was used as the excitation light source. The transient photocurrent signals were recorded with a digital storage oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS-3052C) with the background current being deducted. The laser radiated the sample from the FTO side to generate carriers. The FTO and Au were configured as the anode and cathode, respectively. The sample resistance was 50 ohm.
3. Results and discussion
To unveil the pore filling of the perovskites, we first performed pre-spin-coating of perovskite precursor solutions with concentrations of 8 wt%, 16 wt% and 40 wt% on mesoporous Al2O3 films. Evident differences between the pore filling and morphologies of the films are illustrated in Fig. 1(b)–(d). At a lower 8 wt% concentration, perovskites only form inside the mesoporous structure, resulting in a surface SEM image analogous to that of the bare mp-Al2O3 film (Fig. 1(a)). As the concentration increases, a very thin capping layer appears as the bright pattern in Fig. 1(c). At a higher 40 wt% concentration, isolated perovskite islands emerge. The UV-vis spectra illustrated in Fig. 2(a) reveal that the light absorption rises incrementally with the increasing solution concentration, and the film colour deepens from pale yellow to reddish brown, and finally black. It has been reported that a higher solution concentration leads to an increased pore filling fraction in the solution-processed films.3,18,19 From 8 to 16 wt%, the increased absorption is probably mainly caused by the greater extent of pore filling, and from 16 to 40 wt%, we consider that the microscale perovskite islands in the capping layer play an appreciable role in the enhanced absorption.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of the bare mp-Al2O3 film (a), and the perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film after pre-spin-coating with solutions of (b) 8 wt% (c) 16 wt% and (d) 40 wt% precursor solution. (e) UV-vis spectra of the perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film after pre-spin-coating with precursor solutions, the inset picture shows colour change with the increasing solution concentration. 
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the resulting perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film (a) without the pre-spin-coating process and (b) with pre-spin-coating with a 16 wt% precursor solution. (c) UV-vis spectra and (d) XRD patterns of the final perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film with and without the pre-spin-coating process. 
We subsequently compared the morphologies of the resulting films with and without the pre-spin-coating process. A 16 wt% perovskite solution was employed in the pre-spin-coating process since at such a concentration, the capping layer has appeared (Fig. 1(c)) with pores filled to an attainable extent, as discussed above. Incomplete coverage of perovskite crystals on mp-Al2O3 films is not critically important here since the contact of HTM and mp-Al2O3 is not as sensitive as the contact of HTM and mp-TiO2, which can cause a large degree of recombination.20 It is obvious that the pre-spin-coating process enhanced the continuity between perovskites. Except for the slightly increased coverage, we deduce that the continuity of perovskites inside the mesoporous structure is also improved and better contact between perovskites and the compact TiO2 layer is realized due to the enhanced infiltration and pore filling with the pre-spin-coating process. However, it is unfeasible for us to record high-resolution cross-sectional SEM images to distinguish the pore filling and contact between perovskites and TiO2 intuitively, due to a technical deficiency. We investigated TOF experiments together with PL spectra for the first time, to assist the exploration of charge transport and injection inside the mesoporous structure, as well as to attest the improved pore filling and contact between perovskites and TiO2, which will be discussed in the following section. The light absorption of the final film is also higher than that without the pre-spin-coating process, indicating that the perovskite capacity is increased. The different concentrations of the pre-spin-coating solution have no significant effect on the final perovskite capacity (Fig. S1, ESI†). We speculate that the second process, in which a higher 40 wt% precursor spin-coated with a lower rotation speed was employed, is enough to compensate for the loaded perovskite and achieves considerable absorption. XRD patterns (Fig. 2(d)) show that both the films with and without the pre-spin-coating process form the typical tetragonal perovskite structure,21 and the pre-spin-coating process doesn't have a significant effect on the crystallization of perovskite.
To confirm the discussion above, we first measured the steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite films to study the charge transport at the interface between perovskites and the compact TiO2. As illustrated in Fig. 3, we have measured steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films with and without the electron transport layer (ETL). In Fig. 3(a), with the pre-spin-coating process, the PL signal of the isolated perovskite film without the ETL is increased, indicating reduced nonradiative recombination. For the films with the ETL, the PL intensity of the pre-spin-coated film decreases obviously. Combined with the reduced nonradiative recombination in pre-spin-coated films, Fig. 3(b) reveals that the electron injection is significantly improved by performing the pre-spin-coating process. We also recorded time-resolved PL spectra (Fig. 3(c)) to further prove the enhanced electron injection. The lifetime was obtained by fitting the PL signal with a bi-exponential decay function.18 Detailed fitting data are tabulated in Table 1. With the pre-spin-coating process, the lifetime decreases from 17.36 ns to 12.79 ns, indicating that the photogenerated electrons in perovskites are injected into the compact TiO2 layer more effectively, which is in accordance with the steady-state PL results. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the film pre-spin-coated with a 16 wt% solution shows the lowest nonradiative recombination and the strongest electron injection among all the pre-spin-coated films. The enhanced electron injection can reduce carrier recombination before electrons are collected by the electrode, and can enhance the charge collection.
 Fig. 3  The steady-state PL spectra of (a) glass/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films and (b) FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films. (c) The time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films. 
Table 1 The time-resolved photoluminescence characterization of the two perovskite films




Sample

T
1 (ns)

A
1 (%)

T
2 (ns)

A
2 (%)
Average (ns)




Control
1.09
50.63
34.05
49.37
17.36


Pre-spin-coating with 16 wt% solution
1.12
54.06
26.52
45.94
12.79




Motivated by the desire to understand the charge transport process inside perovskites in the mesoporous scaffold, we investigated TOF experiments of devices with a structure of FTO/mp-Al2O3/perovskite/Au, in which the compact TiO2 layer was discarded to rule out the injection process. To the best of our knowledge, TOF measurements were employed to elucidate the charge transport in mesoporous structured perovskite solar cells for the first time. The laser radiated the sample from the FTO side to generate carriers. The FTO and Au were configured as the anode and cathode, respectively. As the excitation light, a nitrogen laser pulsed with width 5 ns was directed from the FTO side. A thin sheet of carriers (holes and electrons) near the FTO anode was generated. Electrons soon entered the anode and holes drifted towards the cathode under the influence of the electric filed. The transient current density curves over time are illustrated in Fig. 4. The double logarithm Jsc–t profiles can be separated into two regions, the plateau region and the decay region.22,23 As carriers are transported in the mesoporous structure, some flow to the electrode with little hindrance, corresponding to the plateau region, while some undergo winding transport pathways and move slowly, corresponding to the decay region. For the mp-Al2O3/perovskite system, since carriers can only be transported in perovskites due to the insulating properties of mp-Al2O3 films, the infiltration and pore filling of the perovskites directly affect the charge transport process. When perovskites present discontinuous distribution, carrier transport may be interrupted, and this would aggravate the decay of the current density. Fig. 4 shows that with the pre-spin-coating process, the current density undergoes slower decay, indicating more pathways and reduced hindrance for carrier transport, which are illustrated in the inset diagram. The black lines represent transport pathways for carriers. Without the pre-spin-coating process, the discontinuity of perovskites reduces transport pathways for carriers and increases the probability of ending the transport process. Moreover, the collected charge quantity, Q, calculated from the time integral of the photocurrent, corresponds to the number of carriers across the device.24Q increases by 12% by introducing the pre-spin-coating process. We propose that the increase in carriers across the device results from the decreased probability of ending the transport process.
 Fig. 4  TOF double logarithm Jsc–t profiles of devices. The device structure is FTO/mp-Al2O3/perovskite/Au. The inset diagram shows the increased charge transport pathways after introducing the pre-spin-coating process. 
PL measurements have indicated the enhanced injection at the interface between perovskites and compact TiO2. TOF experiments reveal that carrier transport in the mesoporous structure is also enhanced. To summarize the charge transport process, a schematic diagram of the electron transport can be seen in Fig. 5. Without the pre-spin-coating process, the incomplete contact between perovskite and TiO2 arising from the insufficient infiltration of perovskites in mesoporous Al2O3 hinders the injection of electrons into TiO2. The poor pore filling and discontinuity of perovskites decrease charge transport pathways and block charge transport inside the mesoporous structure. However, by introducing the pre-spin-coating process, better contact between perovskite and TiO2 and more charge transport pathways are realized, both of which facilitate charge transport and injection.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of charge transport and injection (a) without and (b) with the pre-spin-coating process. 
To study the affects of the pre-spin-coating process on device performances, we fabricated solar cells following the preparation method described in the Experimental section. Device performances were characterized by the J–V curves and IPCE spectra in Fig. 6. With the pre-spin-coating process, the photocurrent increases from 19.1 mA cm−2 to 22.0 mA cm−2, leading to the rise of photovoltaic efficiency from 11.4% to 14.0%. The IPCE values are significantly enhanced, which is consistent with the improvement of Jsc. Moreover, the decreased dark current density indicates reduced charge recombination.25 We propose that on the one hand, the improved pore filling of perovskites diminishes the probability for the contact between HTM and compact TiO2. On the other hand, more pathways are provided to transport carriers, which can hinder the recombination in the mesoporous structure due to the defects caused by the discontinuity of perovskites. The hysteresis of J–V curves, which is known to be more serious in MSSCs than in solar cells with mesoporous TiO2,10–12 is alleviated by the enhanced charge injection and transport (Fig. 6(d)).
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation, (b) IPCE spectra, (c) J–V curves in dark conditions and (d) hysteresis of J–V curves with forward scan and backward scan. 
Statistical data are summarized in Fig. 7 and the device performances show good repeatability of parameters. Fig. S3 (ESI†) indicates that devices with the pre-spin-coating process all show improved performances compared to the control, which indicates that the pre-spin-coating process is an effective method to enhance the conversion efficiency. Though the different solution concentrations in the pre-spin-coating process have no effective change for the absorption of the final films, they indeed influence the charge injection and transport, which is relevant to the perovskite infiltration and pore filling in the pre-spin-coating process. We conclude that one aspect responsible for the improved device performances compared to the control is the increased perovskite capacity in the mesoporous structure compared to the control, facilitating the light harvesting efficiency. Another aspect is the enhanced charge transport elucidated by photoluminescence (PL) measurements and time-of-flight (TOF) experiments. Both the enhanced continuity between perovskites inside the mesoporous structure and better contact between perovskites and the compact TiO2 layer enhance the injection and collection of carriers. As we know, IPCE is the product of light harvesting efficiency, electron injection efficiency and collection efficiency.26 The improvement of the aforementioned three parameters with the pre-spin-coating process brings a significant increase in photocurrent, which is the main origin for the enhanced power conversion efficiency revealed from the statistical photovoltaic data.
 Fig. 7  Performance parameters extracted from current density–voltage data for a batch of solar cells with and without the pre-spin-coating process. 
The pre-spin-coating process is probably effective in mesoporous-structured devices, whether the scaffold can transport carriers or not. On the one hand, the pre-spin-coating process can increase perovskite capacity in the mesoporous structure, resulting in higher light absorption. On the other hand, for devices using insulating mesoporous scaffolds, both the charge injection at the interface of c-TiO2/perovskite and the charge transport inside the mesoporous structure can be improved due to better contact of the c-TiO2/perovskite interface and the enhanced transport pathways. We have performed the technique in the conventional device structure based on mesoporous TiO2 scaffolds. Although the fabrication conditions are not optimized, with the pre-spin-coating process, the power conversion efficiency is significantly improved from 3.9% to 7.0% (Fig. S4, ESI†). Therefore, we believe that the pre-spin-coating process could potentially play an efficient role in the application of mesoporous-structured solar cells.
4. Conclusions
In MSSCs, perovskites act as both the light harvester and the charge transport material due to the insulating properties of the mesoporous Al2O3 scaffold. By pre-spin-coating perovskite precursor solutions on mesoporous Al2O3 films, we have improved the infiltration and pore filling of perovskites, which directly affects the charge transport process. Higher perovskite capacity is realized and this leads to improved light harvesting. Better contact between perovskite and TiO2 proven by PL spectra is conducive to enhanced electron injection at the interface between perovskite and TiO2. TOF experiments performed for the first time reveal that more charge transport pathways in mesopores are provided, facilitating the transport of carriers toward the electrode and reducing the recombination. The pre-spin-coating process obviously rises photovoltaic performances and alleviates the J–V hysteresis of the common MSSCs. This effective method, with ease of processing, expedites the improvement of device performance and promotes the application of lead halide perovskite materials in the photovoltaics field.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 51273104 and 91433205.
References
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, S.-J. Moon, L. Häggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762 RSC .
H. Tian, B. Xu, H. Chen, E. M. Johansson and G. Boschloo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2150–2153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Hwang, J. Roh, J. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16429–16433 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Y. Zhao, H. Li, G. Li, J. Pan, D. Xu, Q. Zhao and D. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3937–3945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Chen, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, H. Dong, H. Dong, J. Li, W. Li, G. Niu, X. Guo, Z. Wu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14973–14978 CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Luo, H. Wei, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, J. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9711–9718 CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C. Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16651–16659 CAS .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, B. Lauber, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1096–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .
C. Li, L. Duan, H. Li and Y. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10651–10660 CAS .
H. Scher and E. W. Montroll, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 2455–2477 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Duan, D. Zhang and Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 183301 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xue, Z. Hu, J. Liu, J. Lin, C. Sun, Z. Chen, C. Duan, J. Wang, C. Liao, W. M. Lau, F. Huang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19598–19603 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp03803kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of the bare mp-Al2O3 film (a), and the perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film after pre-spin-coating with solutions of (b) 8 wt% (c) 16 wt% and (d) 40 wt% precursor solution. (e) UV-vis spectra of the perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film after pre-spin-coating with precursor solutions, the inset picture shows colour change with the increasing solution concentration.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the resulting perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film (a) without the pre-spin-coating process and (b) with pre-spin-coating with a 16 wt% precursor solution. (c) UV-vis spectra and (d) XRD patterns of the final perovskite/mp-Al2O3 film with and without the pre-spin-coating process.	 

 	Fig. 3  The steady-state PL spectra of (a) glass/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films and (b) FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films. (c) The time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/perovskite films.	 

Control	1.09	50.63	34.05	49.37	17.36
Pre-spin-coating with 16 wt% solution	1.12	54.06	26.52	45.94	12.79

 	Fig. 4  TOF double logarithm Jsc–t profiles of devices. The device structure is FTO/mp-Al2O3/perovskite/Au. The inset diagram shows the increased charge transport pathways after introducing the pre-spin-coating process.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of charge transport and injection (a) without and (b) with the pre-spin-coating process.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation, (b) IPCE spectra, (c) J–V curves in dark conditions and (d) hysteresis of J–V curves with forward scan and backward scan.	 

 	Fig. 7  Performance parameters extracted from current density–voltage data for a batch of solar cells with and without the pre-spin-coating process.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp03803k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
