Electrical and thermal properties of a carbon nanotube /polycrystalline BiFeO 3 /Pt photovoltaic heterojunction with CdSe quantum dots sensitization  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR30084B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR30084B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2926-2930Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrical and thermal properties of a carbon nanotube/polycrystalline BiFeO3/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction with CdSe quantum dots sensitization

        
          
            Yongyuan 
            Zang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Xie
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tianling 
            Ren
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            David 
            Plant
          
        
      a
aElectrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2T8, Canada. E-mail: zangyythu@gmail.com
bInstitute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P.R. China. E-mail: xiedan@tsinghua.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory for Advanced Manufacturing by Material Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China. E-mail: hongweizhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
dCenter for Nano and Micro Mechanics (CNMM), Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China
Received 
      10th January 2012
    , Accepted 26th February 2012First published on 2nd March 2012AbstractElectrical and thermal properties of a carbon nanotube (CNT)/multiferroic BiFeO3 (BFO)/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction are investigated for the first time. Enhanced photovoltaic properties (Jsc ≈ 2.1 μA cm−2 and Voc ≈ 0.47 V), as compared to the traditional polycrystalline BFO with indium tin oxide (ITO) as the top electrode, are observed due to the unique properties of CNT. An equivalent electrical and thermal model is constructed based on the energy band diagram of the CNT/BFO/Pt heterojunction for the first time and the carriers' transportation behavior is depicted theoretically. The influence of CdSe quantum dots (QDs) sensitization on the photovoltaic properties is presented, and a clear improvement of ∼4 fold in photocurrent density is observed.
1 Introduction
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been extensively investigated and reported in diverse, technically demanding domains due to their remarkable mechanical, electrical and optical properties.1–3 Unique properties, such as uniformity, high optical transparency, large carrier mobility, and ballistic conduction, make CNTs a promising transparent and flexible electrode in many solar related applications.4,5 Further, the high aspect ratios and large effective surface area of the CNT electrode can be beneficial to the exciton dissociations and carrier transportation process and thus enhance the photovoltaic efficiency of the solar system.6,7
Recently, the photovoltaic effect in ferroelectric materials has drawn significant attention thanks to the high output photo-voltage and greater freedom of control of the photocurrent through mechanisms such as electricity, magnetism, heat, and stress, as compared with traditional silicon solar cell. Among all the ferroelectric materials, multiferroic BiFeO3 (BFO), with the emergence of small band gap energy and narrow domain walls, is reported to exhibit appreciable photoconductivity in the visible light region.8–13 Among the published works, T. Choi et al.8 first reported the photovoltaic effect and a direction of bulk electric polarization induced diode behavior in a single domain BFO crystal; S. Y. Yang et al.9 demonstrated the electrical field control over the domain structure in a BFO crystal and revealed the essence of the high photovoltaic voltage in the BFO material; W. Ji et al.10 studied the epitaxial BFO crystal by sputtering deposition and examined the polarization dependence of the photovoltaic performance; and B. Chen et al.14 presented the effect of the top electrode (ITO and Au) on the photovoltaic response of the polycrystalline BFO with work that endeavors to investigate the photovoltaic properties in the sol–gel derived BFO crystal. However, most of the photovoltaic studies are focused on the experimental aspect and few electrical or theoretical models have been proposed for depicting the carriers' transportation behavior. Furthermore, most of the work has used indium tin oxide (ITO) or metal (Au or Pt) as top electrodes, and searching for an alternative is a key goal in this application.14–16
In this paper, inspired by the outstanding properties of CNT, we investigate the photovoltaic effect in a CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction. An equivalent electrical and thermal model is proposed, for the first time, to explain carriers' transportation behavior theoretically. The enhancement in photoconductivity of the CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction is also investigated with CdSe quantum dots (QDs) sensitization.
2 Experimental details
A polycrystalline BFO thin film (∼300 nm) was fabricated using a sol–gel/spin coating method. Bi(CH3COO)3 and Fe(OC2H5)5 were used as the starting materials with CH3COOH and CH3OCH2CH2OH as the main solvent. Excess bismuth acetic of 10% was added to compensate the Bi loss during the thermal annealing process. Pt(180 nm)/Ti(20 nm)/SiO2(300 nm)/Si was employed as the substrate and ultrasonically cleaned in acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water prior to deposition. The spin rate was 2000 rpm for 1.5 min. To obtain the desired thickness, the spin coating process was repeated several times. The as-deposited BFO films were then introduced to a rapid thermal anneal (RTA) process (ramping rate: 120 °C s−1) at 550 °C for 1 min in oxygen atmosphere, followed by a crystallization process of post-annealing at 550 °C for 10 min in the air. A detailed preparation procedure can be found in our previous work.17 Macroscopic CNT films prepared by an improved chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method were transferred by a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film to the BFO substrate with a patterned insulating scotch tape layer. Silver paint was then applied to make a contact for electrical measurement. The area of the CNT top electrode is 0.096 cm2.
The CNT surface morphology was examined using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4700, Japan). The nanocrystallite of the CdSe QDs was characterized using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, FEI Tecnai F20, USA). The Raman spectrum of the CNT thin film was studied using Dilor X-Y spectrometer with an Ar+ laser excitation at 514.5 nm. The optical transmission and absorption spectra of the BFO and CdSe QDs were determined using a Lambda 19 spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer, USA). The surface roughness and conductive AFM (CAFM) of the BFO thin film were examined using atomic force microscopy with a TUNA module (Dimension/Veeco 3100, USA). The minority carrier lifetime of the BFO crystal was characterized using a WT-2000 system (Semilab, Hungarian). AM 1.5 illumination of 100 mW cm−2 generated by a solar simulator (Newport 91195, USA) was used as an excitation light source for the photovoltaic measurement. The current–voltage (I–V) curves were recorded using a Keithley 2601 SourceMeter.
3 Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a)–(c) show the characterization of the CNT transparent electrode. The high intensity ratio between the G and D bands in the Raman spectrum, the high transparency of ∼95%, and the uniform/dense surface morphology indicate the quality of the CNT film. Fig. 1(f)–(h) show the band diagrams of the CNT/BFO/Pt heterojunction.
 Fig. 1  Raman spectrum (a), UV-vis spectrum (b) and SEM top view morphology (c) of the as-deposited CNT film. UV-vis spectrum (d), optical absorption coefficient vs. photon energy (e) of the BFO thin film. Schematic energy band diagrams of the CNT/BFO/Pt solar cell in virgin state (f), under forward bias (g), reverse bias (h), and an equivalent electrical model (i). 
To construct the band diagrams, the work functions (Φ) of CNT and Pt are taken to be 4.8 and 5.6 eV, respectively.6 The electron affinity (χ) of BFO is estimated to be 3.3 eV.18 The band gap energy (Eg) of polycrystalline BFO thin film is determined to be 2.8 eV from the UV-vis transmission spectrum by using the Tauc relationship,19 as shown in Fig. 1(d) and (e).
Given the values listed above, and the metal–ferroelectric–metal nature of the CNT/BFO/Pt heterojunction, the band diagram scheme can then be constructed. When BFO and CNT or Pt are joined, two Schottky barriers will be formed with two built-in electrical fields in opposite directions. Such a band diagram is equivalent to that of two back-to-back diodes, and no current will be observed regardless of whether the applied voltage is positive or negative. This virgin state at zero bias is illustrated in Fig. 1(f). As reported by C. Wang and C. Ge et al.,20,21 the ferroelectric remnant polarization (Pr) will result in band bending under applied voltage. Meanwhile, the interface states between BFO and CNT/Pt will work together with the Pr to polarize the BFO thin film, forming a narrow electron region near the interface, resulting in a “band bending” at the interface. The “upward/downward bending” under forward/reverse bias is shown in Fig. 1(g) and (h). The CNT/BFO/Pt heterojunction can be regarded as a switchable diode in series with a variable resistance. The diode is attributed to the Schottky barrier, while the variable resistance comes from the Ohmic contact on the other side.
The current density can then be obtained from Poisson equation, as follows: (1)where VF is the junction bias,  = (8KBT/πmp)½ is the average thermal velocity, NC is the equivalent density of states, ϕBis the built-in potential, vD = μnE = μn(2qND(ϕi − VF)/ε0εs)½ is the carrier drift velocity, ϕi = (ECx=surf − ECx=xdc)/q represents the band bending, xdc is the junction width, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and ε is the relative dielectric constant of BFO.
Based on the band diagram model, an equivalent electrical model of the CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction is proposed in Fig. 1(i). It is noted that SDB1 and SDB2 are the Schottky barrier diodes, Rs1 and Rs2 are the variable resistances, Rc1 and Rc2 are the contact resistances of BFO with CNT and Pt, R‖ is the edge resistance caused by imperfect factors, and C1 to C4 are junction capacitances. Considering the impact of trapped charges at the interface, a voltage source Vsub is added to characterize the J–V curve offset at zero bias, and a current supply JR is employed to describe the leakage term in the heterojunction. From the equivalent electrical model and eqn (1), the dark current density can be plotted, and is shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), indicating a good agreement with the experimental result. The dark current density exhibits a substantial value of 0.02 μA cm−2 at zero bias, which can be attributed to the sub on-state of the diode caused by the ferroelectric polarization δ at the interface.
 Fig. 2  Experimental and simulated dark/photo current density for −3 to 3 V (a) and −1 to 1 V (b). Minority carrier lifetime map (c) and distribution (the inset of (c)) of BFO thin film. Surface topography of BFO measured by AFM (d) and corresponding current distribution under dark (e) and illumination (f) conditions characterized by CAFM. 
A noticeable photocurrent increase can be observed by applying illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5). The short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) is measured to be 2.1 μA cm−2 and the open circuit voltage (Voc) is about 0.47 V, higher than the values reported in PLD derived single crystalline BFO (∼40 mV)15 and sol–gel achieved polycrystalline BFO (∼0.08 V)14 with an ITO electrode. The open circuit voltage is lower than the PLD derived epitaxial BFO crystal reported by S. Y. Yang et al.16 (0.8–0.9 V) due to the polycrystalline nature of the BFO utilized in this experiment. However, the sol–gel process is more economical than the PLD method and more suitable for commercial manufacturing. The enhancement of the photovoltaic effect in polycrystalline BFO confirms the unique functionality of a CNT top electrode. The power efficiency is calculated to be ∼2.2 × 10−4%, smaller than the value (∼3 × 10−3%) reported by T. Choi et al.,8 while comparable to that (∼7 × 10−4%) reported by W. Ji et al.,10 indicating a relatively weak conversion efficiency in BFO material. In order to plot the photocurrent density under illumination, eqn (1) can be written as follows: (2)AE is the illumination area, AT is the cell area, jdk is the dark current density, β is the generation coefficient, Φ0 is the intensity of photons at wavelength λ, ρ is the reflectance, and α is the absorption coefficient.
From eqn (2), the simulated and measured photocurrent densities can be plotted and compared; these curves are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b) and exhibit a reasonable fit. Moreover, since the BFO/Pt potential barrier is higher compared to that of the CNT/BFO side, a larger built-in electrical field will be formed under forward bias, which serves as the reason why the J–V curve is asymmetric and a larger current can be found with forward bias. As an important parameter in determining the carrier diffusion length (L) and thus the theoretical photovoltaic efficiency of a solar device, the minority carrier lifetime of the BFO crystal was measured using microwave photoconductive decay (μ-PCD) technology via a WT-2000 system. It can be concluded from Fig. 2(c) that the minority carrier lifetime exhibits a random distribution from 11.5 to 15.7 μs and the weighted average lifetime is ∼13.4 μs, which is comparable to that of silicon, indicating that the BFO material could be a feasible alternative to silicon in solar related applications. A conductive AFM (CAFM) measurement was also employed to characterize the local current behavior of the BFO thin film under illumination. The scan size is 4 × 4 μm2 and the tip bias is 4 V for the CAFM measurement. It can be seen that the charge transportation paths increase significantly under illumination, confirming the photocurrent effect on a microscopic level. Further, the random distribution of leakage paths and carriers' lifetime confirms the polycrystalline nature of the BFO achieved in this experiment.
Since thermal properties such as pyroelectricity are of great interest in ferroelectrics, the thermal impact on the photovoltaic properties of the CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction is also studied. Fig. 3(a) shows the comparison of different J–V curves under temperature variations. It can be concluded that Jsc increases from 2.2 to 3.3 μA cm−2 and Voc decreases from 0.47 to 0.33 V, as the temperature increases from 313 to 393 K (bottom inset in Fig. 3(a)). A 3D curve inset at the top of Fig. 3(a) presents a clear description of this temperature dependence of J–V variation tendency. To explain this thermal impact on the photovoltaic effect, eqn (1) can be rewritten as: (3)where thermionic emissions dominate the current density and A* is the Richardson constant. As the temperature increases, the photocurrent increases correspondingly, resulting in a larger voltage drop over the resistance and thus less bias will be applied to the junction. Such a temperature dependent junction bias variation is also illustrated in the bottom right inset of Fig. 3(b). Incorporating the junction bias variation into eqn (3), the theoretical temperature dependence of the photocurrent density variation under different applied voltages is plotted in the bottom left inset of Fig. 3(b) and exhibits a reasonable consistency with the experiment, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Such agreement in the thermal effect further confirms the validity of our model achieved in this work.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves under different temperatures (300 to 373 K). The top inset is a 3D view of the temperature/voltage dependence of the photocurrent density variation. The bottom inset is a zoomed-in image of the short circuit photocurrent density variation. (b) Temperature dependence of photocurrent density variation under different applied voltages (−3 to 3 V). The bottom left inset is the simulated temperature dependence of J–V variation. The bottom right inset is the simulated temperature dependence of the junction bias variation. 
To improve the photovoltaic performance of the CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction, CdSe QDs (2.5 mg mL−1, exciton peak at 530 nm) were introduced with a dipping process. The sparse and porous structure of the CNT top electrode compared with ITO or graphene allows the feasibility of this QDs filling and sensitizing process. The nanocrystallite of the CdSe QDs was characterized by high resolution TEM (HRTEM) as shown in Fig. 4(a). It can be seen from Fig. 4(b) that the photocurrent increases by ∼4 fold, namely, from 2.1 μA cm−2 to 8.1 μA cm−2 after filling with QDs, indicating a considerable photoconductivity enhancement, which can be attributed to the QDs sensitization effect. By employing QDs, the small band gap (∼1.70 eV)22 and wide absorption band of QDs will help collect photons and increase the absorption coefficient/bandwidth of the sensitized CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction significantly, as shown in Fig. 4(c). This improved absorption capability serves as a principal contributor to the photovoltaic enhancement. Meanwhile, QDs act as a sensitizer/electron supplier and transporter; the excited electrons of the QDs are injected into the BFO crystal, and a redox couple process scavenges the holes. A schematic illustration of this process is presented in Fig. 4(d). As reported by I. Robel et al.,23 the rate of this QDs governed electron injection can reach 1010 s−1, indicating high transportation efficiency and thus implying good quantum efficiency in the application. Further, the impact ionization effect can also contribute to the photocurrent enhancement. In the QDs, multiple excitons can be stimulated from single photon absorption through an inversed Auger process, namely, impact ionization, and this phenomenon can lead to a judicious way to harvest excitons before recombination and thus increase the conversion efficiency. Moreover, compared with chemical treatments such as HNO3, which might cause damage and deteriorate with long operational time, filling with inorganic QDs exhibits long-term stability and robustness, features that make their use feasible for this application.
 Fig. 4  (a) HRTEM image of CdSe QDs; the inset is the color photograph of the CdSe QDs solution. Photocurrent (b) and absorption (c) variation before and after QDs sensitization. (d) Schematic illustration of the working principle in QDs sensitized CNT/BFO/Pt solar cell. 
4 Conclusions
In summary, enhanced photovoltaic properties are observed in a CNT/BFO/Pt photovoltaic heterojunction. The Jsc and Voc are measured to be 2.1 μA cm−2 and 0.47 V, respectively, higher than the values reported for polycrystalline BFO with ITO as the top electrode. Based on the energy band diagram of the CNT/BFO/Pt heterojunction, an equivalent electrical and thermal model was proposed and the carriers' transportation behavior was depicted theoretically. The influence of CdSe quantum dots (QDs) sensitization on the photovoltaic properties was presented, and a noticeable improvement in photocurrent density of ∼4 fold is observed.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and le Fonds québécois de la recherche sur la nature et les technologies (FQRNT), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61025021, 60936002, 51072089, 50972067, 61011130296, and 61020106006), the National Key Project of Science and Technology (2009ZX02023-001-3, 2011ZX02403-002), and Beijing NSF(3111002) for their financial support.
References
W. A. de Heer, A. Châtelain and D. Ugarte, Science, 1995, 270, 1179 CAS .
G. D. Nessim, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1306 RSC .
M. Pumera and Y. Miyahara, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 260 RSC .
Y. Jia, A. Y. Cao, X. Bai, Z. Li, L. H. Zhang, N. Guo, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu and D. H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1901 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maeda, K. Komoriya, K. Sode, J. Higo, T. Nakamura, M. Yamada, T. Hasegawa, T. Akasaka, T. Saito, J. Lu and S. Nagase, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3084 RSC .
J. Q. Wei, Y. Jia, Q. K. Shu, Z. Y. Gu, K. L. Wang, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo, A. Y. Cao and D. H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2317 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, Y. Jia, S. S. Wang, Z. Li, C. Y. Li, J. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, D. H. Wu, E. Z. Shi, Y. Fang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3583 CrossRef CAS .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S. W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C.-H. Yang, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y.-H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, III, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Katiyar, A. Kumar, G. Morell, J. F. Scott and R. S. Katiyar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 092906 CrossRef .
R. Guo, L. You, L. Chen, D. Wu and J. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 122902 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zang, D. Xie, X. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. X. Lin, M. H. Li, H. Tian, X. Li, Z. Li, H. W. Zhu, T. L. Ren and D. Plant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 132904 CrossRef .
B. Chen, M. Li, Y. W. Liu, Z. H. Zuo, F. Zhuge, Q. F. Zhan and R. W. Li, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 195201 CrossRef .
T. L. Qu, Y. G. Zhao, D. Xie, J. P. Shi, Q. P. Chen and T. L. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 173507 CrossRef .
S. Y. Yang, L. W. Martin, S. J. Byrnes, T. E. Conry, S. R. Basu, D. Paran, L. Reichertz, J. Ihlefeld, C. Adamo, A. Melville, Y.-H. Chu, C.-H. Yang, J. L. Musfeldt, D. G. Schlom, J. W. Ager, III and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 062909 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zang, D. Xie, Y. Chen, M. H. Li, C. Chen, T. L. Ren and D. Plant, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 61, 236 CrossRef .
S. J. Clark and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 132903 CrossRef .
M. N. Kamalasanan, S. Chandra, P. C. Joshi and A. Mansingh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 3547 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. J. Jin, H. T. Xu, L. Wang, C. Ge, H. B. Lu, H. Z. Guo, M. He and G. Z. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 192901 CrossRef .
C. Ge, K. J. Jin, C. Wang, H. B. Lu, C. Wang and G. Z. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 063509 CrossRef .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 6, 1467 CrossRef .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4136 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Raman spectrum (a), UV-vis spectrum (b) and SEM top view morphology (c) of the as-deposited CNT film. UV-vis spectrum (d), optical absorption coefficient vs. photon energy (e) of the BFO thin film. Schematic energy band diagrams of the CNT/BFO/Pt solar cell in virgin state (f), under forward bias (g), reverse bias (h), and an equivalent electrical model (i).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Experimental and simulated dark/photo current density for −3 to 3 V (a) and −1 to 1 V (b). Minority carrier lifetime map (c) and distribution (the inset of (c)) of BFO thin film. Surface topography of BFO measured by AFM (d) and corresponding current distribution under dark (e) and illumination (f) conditions characterized by CAFM.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves under different temperatures (300 to 373 K). The top inset is a 3D view of the temperature/voltage dependence of the photocurrent density variation. The bottom inset is a zoomed-in image of the short circuit photocurrent density variation. (b) Temperature dependence of photocurrent density variation under different applied voltages (−3 to 3 V). The bottom left inset is the simulated temperature dependence of J–V variation. The bottom right inset is the simulated temperature dependence of the junction bias variation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) HRTEM image of CdSe QDs; the inset is the color photograph of the CdSe QDs solution. Photocurrent (b) and absorption (c) variation before and after QDs sensitization. (d) Schematic illustration of the working principle in QDs sensitized CNT/BFO/Pt solar cell.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
