The role of excitons in 3D and 2D lead halide perovskites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC04292J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04292J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12006-12018The role of excitons in 3D and 2D lead halide perovskites

        
          
            Daniela 
            Marongiu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michele 
            Saba
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Quochi
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrea 
            Mura
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Giovanni 
            Bongiovanni
          
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, I-09042 Monserrato, Italy. E-mail: saba@unica.it; giovanni.bongiovanni@dsf.unica.it
Received 
      5th August 2019
    , Accepted 18th September 2019First published on 19th September 2019AbstractThe success of lead halide perovskites as active materials in solar cells and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is often traced back to the unique properties of their optical excitations. At room temperature and under all device operating conditions, photoexcitation of perovskites creates free carriers and not bound excitons, even in compounds with exciton binding energy several times larger than room temperature thermal energy. As a consequence, absorbed photons can be readily converted in an electric current of electrons and holes to be collected at perovskite edges, leading to efficient solar cells. A thorough review of the large body of experimental evidence on perovskite photophysics however leads to quite a different picture, where excitons are anything but negligible. First of all, they are responsible for the very large absorption coefficients close to the band gap, which can reach as much as 105 cm−1. The magnitude of such an effect depends on the exciton binding energy, whose value proved to be elusive and tricky to assess. Second and more surprising, excitons are responsible for most light emission in perovskites, in spite of being greatly outnumbered by free carriers. The resulting dynamics of optical emission is governed by the ratio between exciton formation through pairing of free carriers and exciton radiative recombination. When the importance of excitons is taken into account, new avenues in lead halide perovskites appear more clearly, particularly the rise of layered, bidimensional (2D) perovskites, where excitonic effects are further enhanced, without compromising the fact that free carriers are the majority of photexcitations.
Daniela Marongiu
Daniela Marongiu holds a PhD in nanotechnology from Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca (2011), has been a postdoc at Università di Sassari and is currently an assistant professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.
Michele Saba
Michele Saba holds a PhD from EPFL (2001), has been a postdoc at MIT and is currently an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.
Francesco Quochi
Francesco Quochi holds a PhD from EPFL (1999), has been a postdoc at Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, and is currently an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.
Andrea Mura
Andrea Mura is an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari and a vice director of the Physics Department.
Giovanni Bongiovanni
Giovanni Bongiovanni is a full professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari and a director of the Physics Department.
Introduction
The last few years have witnessed significant progress in the performance of solar cells1–9 and light emitting diodes10–17 based on metal halide perovskites. These achievements have stimulated research activity to understand the optoelectronic properties of these materials. Mastering their optical response, such as the absorption energy gap, light emission efficiency and strength of light–matter interaction, is a key requisite.18–20 Ongoing research aimed at specific applications provides some illustrative examples: while single-junction solar cells reach their best efficiency with a band gap 1–1.4 eV, perovskites for multi-junction solar cells in tandem with Si require a larger band gap of around 1.75 eV;21 all-perovskite tandem cells call instead for two materials, one with the absorption edge in the visible range, and the other one well in the infrared, ideally around 1 eV;9,22,23 light emitting diodes on the other hand require efficient radiative recombination and emission wavelengths covering the whole visible spectrum;24 solution-processed diode lasers could provide new coherent sources for integrated optical circuits or complement present technology of III–V semiconductors in the green spectral range;25,26 perovskites for quantum optics and photonics need instead strong and narrow optical resonances.27,28
Band-edge electronic excitations of a semiconductor mainly determine the properties of light emission, charge/energy transport, and nonlinear optics. These excitations can be electrons and holes, or Coulombically bound electron–hole states, namely excitons. Charged carriers and neutral excitons have different transport and emission properties, which should be carefully accounted for in devising optoelectronic and photonic devices.20 In this short review, we report on our present understanding of the intrinsic properties of band-edge excitations in hybrid perovskites with the specific aim to discuss them within a unitary and coherent conceptual framework, which tries to overcome the unavoidable fragmentation of knowledge and controversies that often result from reading the myriads of published experimental and theoretical results. The intrinsic optical properties and photophysical phenomena are discussed here.
1. Optical properties of band-edge states in 3D and 2D halide perovskites
1.1 Light absorption and emission spectra
Materials chemistry offers several approaches to control the optical gap of halide perovskites. Three-dimensional (3D) lead halide perovskites are the most investigated system, particularly prototypical methylammonium lead iodide CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). Halogen substitution allows tuning the energy gap from 1.65 eV for I to 3.15 eV for Cl. Fig. 1 shows the basic characteristics of the optical spectra of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 with energy gaps in the near infrared and green, respectively. The absorption onset is sharp in both materials, as expected for direct semiconductors. Photoluminescence is characterized by a single emission line, relatively narrow and quasi-resonant with the absorption edge. However, the lack of extrinsic intragap emission does not rule out the presence of intragap trap states. The emission quantum yield of hybrid perovskites can be much lower than unity, indicating a significant density of deep nonradiative defects. Only recently, different chemical strategies have been developed to passivate these traps, bringing the efficiency of light emission close to the radiative limit.29–34 The energy gap can be also controlled by substituting the A cation, although to a smaller effect than with halide substitution. The most widely investigated A cations are CH3NH3+, CH3(NH2)2+, Rb+, and Cs+. Mixing cations and halides has the important role of stabilizing the perovskite lattice, increasing the formation energy of nonradiative defects, thus reducing the defect density and improving considerably the light emission quantum yield and device performances.35–38 The substitution of lead with other bivalent cations, such as tin, moves the optical gap towards the infrared but the fabrication of efficient and stable devices still lags a step behind.39–43
 Fig. 1  Optical absorption (blue) and photoluminescence (red) spectra for three prototypical perovskite compounds, 2D Ba2PbBr4 (top panel) and 3D MAPbI3 (central panel) and MAPbBr3 (bottom panel), showing the correlation between band gap and excitonic peak enhancement. The dashed black lines overlaid on top of the photoluminescence spectra are the emission spectra predicted with the reciprocity relation, as explained in the main text. Insets depict sketches of perovskite crystal structures for two dimensional (2D) materials, layered compounds (top panel) and three-dimensional (3D) materials (bottom panel). Lead atoms are represented as red spheres, their coordination octahedra are highlighted in purple, and the planes they form are highlighted in bright green. 
Altering the three-dimensional periodicity of the lattice via suitable chemical routes, such as in 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, provides a different approach to control the electronic and optical properties of this class of solution-processed materials.44–50 In the left side of Fig. 1, the atomic spatial arrangements of 3D and of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite lattices are shown. In lower dimensional perovskites, the space between octahedral planes and the periodicity along the c axis are modified by inserting longer organic cations. Adjacent planes separated by the organic spacer are coupled by weak van der Waals interactions. The repeated unit of the superlattice generated in this way has the structure (RNH3)2An−1BnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2,…), where n is the number of coupled planes and R is an aromatic or aliphatic alkylammonium cation. For n = 1, the motif is constituted by a single octahedral sheet, sandwiched between two insulating organic layers with much higher electronic gap. The resulting heterostructure forms a sub-nm-thick quantum well. The image charge effect (or dielectric confinement effect),51 caused by the different dielectric constants of the well and barrier, together with quantum spatial confinement, pushes the optical gap to higher energies. As a demonstrative example, the absorbance of the layered 2D perovskite BA2PbBr4 (n = 1, BA = C4H9NH3) is reported in Fig. 1. The absorption spectrum has a well-resolved resonance, indicative of tightly bound excitons, peaked at 3.08 eV, about 0.7 eV above the energy onset of the corresponding 3D perovskite (MAPbBr3). The absorption coefficient at the excitonic peak, α = 4 × 105 cm−1, is one order of magnitude larger than in MAPbBr3. The tunability of the band gap can be easily obtained by varying the index n and therefore the width of the quantum well. Fig. 2 shows the absorption and emission spectra of a series of ultrathin crystalline layers of BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–5), obtained by mechanical exfoliation of pure-phase (with a fixed n) single crystals by Blancon et al.50 The family of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites is characterized by a rich chemical and structural flexibility, which allows tuning the optical, electronic and charge transport properties by controlling the width of the wells and barriers, as well as their composition. Besides these outstanding physical material properties, 2D perovskites are attracting increasing interest for their better environmental stability and photostability with respect to their 3D counterparts.52 The improved resistance against external agents, such as water and moisture, was attributed to the organic spacer (R), which acts as a barrier preventing oxidation of halides and metal cations.
 Fig. 2  Absorption (left) and PL (right) spectra of the 2D perovskite exfoliated crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. 
1.2 Exciton binding energy versus band gap
The optical absorption spectrum is closely related to the magnitude of the exciton binding energy: the step-like shape of the absorption onset in MAPbI3 transforms into a line-shape resonance in perovskite compounds with larger energy gap. This resonance is due to light absorption by excitons, which are neutral, bound states between an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band. The enhancement of the exciton oscillator strength in 3D perovskites with higher gap can be traced back to the dielectric constant, which is the parameter measuring the polarization properties of the electronic charge. The electron polarizability decreases with the increase of the semiconductor energy gap; screening of the Coulomb interaction thus becomes less efficient, leading to more tightly bound electron–hole states. This means that the radius of the electron–hole orbital motion becomes smaller and the absorption cross-section stronger, the latter being proportional to the probability of the electron and hole pairs to be at the same position. In 2D systems, spatial and dielectric confinements force electron and hole pairs to stay closer, leading to both the enhancement of the exciton oscillator strength and binding energy Eb. As both spatial and dielectric confinement increases for decreasing well-width, the exciton resonance becomes more intense for small n. Eb is the energy required to ionize an exciton into a free electron–hole pair and provides a measure of the effective strength of the electron–hole interaction, which is screened by the surrounding electron cloud and ion lattice. The equilibrium densities of both excitons and free carriers, the rate of exciton dissociation into free carriers and the inverse process, the electron–hole pairing, as well as light absorption and emission are all phenomena depending on the electron–hole interaction strength. Excitons are the solid-state analogues of the hydrogen atom. In the simplest approach in which the effective-mass approximation and constant dielectric function are assumed,53 the energies of the exciton states in 3D systems are given by (1)where Ry is the Rydberg constant, m the principal quantum number, μ the effective exciton mass and  the effective dielectric constant.
1.3 Electronic and lattice screening of the Coulomb interaction
Even though electronic screening of the Coulomb interaction and spatial/dielectric confinement provide a qualitative explanation of the light absorption behaviour of band-edge excitons versus band gap energies in both 2D and 3D hybrid perovskites, a deeper and quantitative understanding requires a critical analysis of the screening mechanisms of the Coulomb interaction, in particular the polarization dynamics of both the electron cloud and crystal lattice and the effects of spatial confinement in Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. Hybrid halide perovskites have in fact a rich vibrational spectrum, with frequencies falling in the frequency range of the internal electron and hole motion of 3D exciton states.
The theoretical behaviour of Ebversus band gap energy in 3D metal halide perovskites with different A, B and X cations and anions is reported in Fig. 3. As expected, the binding energy increases with increasing band gap energy. Eb was estimated from first-principles by Bokdam et al.55 by solving the relativistic Bethe–Salpeter equation for the relative motion of the electron–hole pair, accounting for the screening of the Coulomb interaction induced by the electron cloud only. The calculated dielectric function ε(ω) of MAPbI3 is also shown in Fig. 3. For energies ħω > 20 meV, ε(ω) is quite close to its value in the limit of infinite frequency, ε∞ ∼ 6–7, which means that screening of the Coulomb interaction in this frequency range is mostly accounted for by the electronic polarization response alone. Conversely, the lattice polarizability provides by far the dominant contribution to the dielectric response for energies below 20 meV. The solution of the Bethe–Salpeter equation for the exciton wavefunction would require the full accounting of the frequency dependence of the dielectric function, which is, however, a daunting computational task. As the charge polarization induced by the bound electron–hole pair oscillates at the frequency of the orbital exciton motion (ωb = Eb/ħ), the simplest and self-consistent approximation is to take an effective dielectric constant,  ∼ ε(ωb), which in the case of MAPbI3 means  ∼ ε∞. Under this approximation, first-principles calculations converge to Eb ∼ 45 meV55 (cubic crystal phase) and 27–30 meV56 (tetragonal phase) for MAPbI3. Yet, Umari et al. proposed another self-consistent approximation scheme,56 which gives  ∼ 12–13 and Eb ∼ 15 meV. Besides the sizable reduction of the estimated exciton binding energy, it is important to realize that screening by polar phonons is expected to drastically alter the 1/m2 dependence of the excitonic transition energies and the absolute and relative oscillator strengths of all band-edge excitations (bound and unbound electron–hole pairs), whatever self-consistent approximation is used. Let us consider, e.g., the m = 2 exciton. In the hydrogen-like picture, this state would have an ionization energy equal to Eb/22 ∼ 4–8 meV, but only assuming the effective dielectric constant used to calculate the energy of the ground-state exciton. Fig. 3, however, suggests that  ∼ 30 at these frequencies, leading to a vanishing binding energy of the m = 2 and higher energy states (≪1 meV), which should therefore be very unstable. The optical absorption coefficient α(ω) is also expected to be deeply affected by ion screening. α(ω) is in fact proportional to the density of the electron–hole states, weighted by the probability for electrons and holes to be at the same position, which critically depends on the strength of Coulomb attraction. If screening depends on the frequency of the relative electron–hole motion, the oscillator strengths of both excitons and band-to-band transitions are likely to deviate considerably from the Elliot's theory of optical absorption by Wannier excitons.53 In contrast with this scenario, the observation of optical transitions between exciton quantum states (1s → 2p, 3p…) in THz experiments has been claimed,57,58 even though only at extremely large excitation pulse fluences at which excited exciton states with small binding energies (m > 1) are not even supposed to exist. These issues call for further experimental and theoretical investigations to improve our current understanding of the band-edge exciton states in 3D halide perovskites.
 Fig. 3  (top panel) Calculated exciton binding energies and GW0 band gaps of twelve metal halide perovskites (OMX3, {O = MA, and FA, M = Pb, and Sn, X = I, Br, and Cl}); the gray dots represent measured, experimental values as reported in ref. 54. (bottom panel) Ionic and electronic contributions (εp, εe) to the dielectric function ε(ω) of MAPbI3. The top/bottom figure shows the real/imaginary part of ε(ω). The solid red and dashed blue lines are the results for T = 0 and 300 K, respectively. The inset shows a zoomed-in view of Re εp(ω) close to the Eb of 45 meV. Adapted from ref. 55 according to Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
The exciton binding energy in exfoliated nanosheets of 2D perovskites was experimentally assessed as higher excitonic transitions were spectroscopically accessible (see Fig. 4).59,60E2Db of (RNH3)2PbI4 (n = 1) was found to be as large as 470–490 meV, much higher than the expected value due to quantum confinement alone, i.e., E2Db = 4E3Db = 100–120 meV (E3Db = 27–30 meV for the tetragonal phase at room temperature56). For larger thicknesses of the quantum well, the measured exciton binding energy quickly decreases to around 125 meV (n = 5, see Fig. 5),60 in good agreement with 4E3Db, if the contribution of screening by phonons is neglected. This latter conjecture is quite reasonable, as low frequency vibrations can screen the Coulomb interaction between electron–hole pairs forming 3D excitons, but are unlikely to follow the much faster orbital motion of 2D excitons. Enhancement of the binding energy for n < 5 is therefore ascribed to the dielectric confinement effect, which plays a major role in ultrathin quantum wells. One has however to consider that in typical perovskites, for n > 3 the well width exceeds the exciton Bohr radius, softening the 2D confinement. Finally, exciton states with different quantum numbers have different penetration depths into the organic barrier, which results in an effective dielectric screening depending on m. As shown in Fig. 3,  ∼ 5 for m = 1 but  ∼ 2 for m ≥ 2.59 In other terms, while the effective dielectric function is expected to increase with increasing quantum number in 3D perovskites due to the stronger screening contribution by low frequency polar vibrations, dielectric confinement in 2D systems leads to the opposite behavior.
 Fig. 4  (a) Derivative of the absorption spectrum of exfoliated nanosheets of the organic–inorganic perovskite crystals at the temperature of T = 5 K. The data are rescaled in the spectral range of the ground state resonance for clarity. The optically active exciton states are denoted by 1s, 2s, 3s, and 4s. (b and c) Derivatives of the reflectance contrast spectra of two additional nanosheeet samples at T = 5 K. (d) Low-temperature reflectance spectrum of a thick bulk sample. The exciton ground state and the first excited state are indicated by 1s and 2s, respectively. (e) Energies of the excited states of the exciton relative to the 1s transition of the crystal nanosheet compared with the results for the bulk crystals (the literature data taken from ref. 21). The averaged data (open circles) are presented together with the results from individual measurements on different nanocrystal samples (closed circles). The quasiparticle band gap in the nanocrystals, obtained from the fit of n = 3, and 4 states, is indicated by the dashed line. (f) Effective dielectric screening for the measured exciton states. The error bars originate from the experimental uncertainties in the extracted 3s and 4s peak positions. The dashed lines indicate the averaged dielectric constant of fused silica substrate (ε = 2.13) and vacuum (ε = 1) at optical frequencies, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. 
 Fig. 5  Left: Evolution of the exciton ground state, first excited state 2s, and continuum energies with the 2D perovskite layer thickness (or n). Right: Corresponding experimental binding energy of the exciton ground state (1s) and the excited exciton states (2s, 3s, and 4s), and comparison to theoretical results for the exciton ground state. The gray open triangle corresponds to the 1s exciton binding energy calculated for the diamagnetic shift obtained by Tanaka et al.15 in a RPP with n equal to 1 with larger organic spacers. The values E1s–E2s provide a lower limit for the exciton binding energy. Error bars correspond to s.d. from the determination of the energy of the exciton features. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. 
1.4 Exciton binding energy as a function of temperature
Hybrid perovskites undergo two phase transitions by varying temperature, from cubic to tetragonal symmetry, and from the tetragonal to the orthorhombic phase.61 In the more symmetric structures, the cubic and tetragonal ones, the organic cations are free to rotate, while their motion is blocked in the orthorhombic phase.62,63 The dynamics of the polar A sublattice contribute to determining the ferroelectric/paraelectric response of these materials in the three crystal phases and could, in principle, also result in a temperature-dependent screening of the electron–hole interaction.64 Yet, the experimental determination of the value of Eb in MAPbI3 and its temperature dependence are still debated. Both negligible and strong dependence on temperature were reported, and binding energies ranging from a few meV to 50 meV were estimated by using different optical techniques, as diverse as absorption spectroscopy, THz spectroscopy and magneto-optics. Being Eb the difference between the energy of the onset of band-to-band absorption and the energy of the lowest exciton transition, its direct spectroscopic determination requires both transitions to be spectroscopically resolved. Yet, this condition is not met in 3D halide perovskites, neither at room nor at low temperature. Furthermore, the analysis of the optical measurements to estimate Eb is mostly based on the tacit assumption that excitons can be described by a hydrogen-like Hamiltonian with constant dielectric function. It is beyond the scope of this article to review the different experimental determinations of Eb, which can be found, e.g., in the review by Jiang et al.54 We instead discuss here a spectroscopic technique,65 based on an absorption F-sum rule, specifically conceived to study the optical response of excitons, and their temperature behaviour, without any a priori assumption on the microscopic mechanisms of Coulomb screening.
The basic idea of this approach is that it is easy to predict from Elliot's formula how the spectrally-integrated absorption close to the band-edge is affected by variations in exciton binding energy and exciton linewidth. If Eb increases, the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes also increases and so does the probability of an electron to be at the same place as a hole, leading to the enhancement of the photon absorption cross-section both for the exciton and the band-to-band transitions. This conclusion is quite general, and independent of any hypothesis on the electron–hole interaction. The integrated absorption up to an energy En above the band gap (F-sum) is a very sensitive probe of any temperature-induced variation of Eb. The argument still holds if the absorption coefficient is renormalized to its value at En, the upper extreme of the integration window, since the strength of the excitonic transition has a much stronger dependence on Eb than the band-to-band transitions, leaving the renormalized F-sum still to depend on Eb. The renormalized integrated absorption is very useful as it allows offsetting for, e.g., the dependence of the band-to-band optical dipole on temperature or the knowledge of its absolute value. Experimental absorption spectra of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 are shown as a function of temperature in Fig. 6. Spectra are (i) shifted in energy so as to compensate for the temperature shift of the exciton transition energy, and (ii) renormalized to the absorption coefficient of the band-to-band transition at 200 meV above the exciton energy. The exciton line narrows considerably for decreasing temperature; yet, the F-sum is remarkably constant over all the investigated temperature range, implying that the ratio between the oscillator strengths of excitons and band-to-band transitions is independent of temperature, and, consequently, so are the screening of the Coulomb interaction and Eb. Similar behaviour is observed in MAPbI3, except for a small jump at the orthorhombic–tetragonal phase transition, the origin of which is still to be clarified. The same results are obtained by analysing the temperature dependence of the integrated absorption spectrum reported by other research groups in films grown by vapour deposition, which are characterized by smooth surfaces and negligible light scattering.66 These experimental results are corroborated by ab initio calculations, which show how screening by phonons is almost temperature independent, and so is the contribution to screening by complex rotational dynamics of the A cations.56 Finally, can the F-sum rule also help determine the microscopic mechanisms of Coulomb screening? A possible strategy could be comparing the experimental F-sum directly with the one calculated by solving the relativistic Bethe–Salpeter equation, with and without inclusion of the screening induced by lattice vibrations. This approach would also represent a robust experimental bench test for the state-of-the-art quantum-chemical theories applied to excited states in hybrid perovskites.
 Fig. 6  Analysis of the experimental absorption spectra for MAPbBr3 films. UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 (a) and MAPbI3 (b) for different temperatures, normalized as explained in the text. (c) Spectrally-integrated absorbance as a function of temperature. 
2. Exciton and free carrier kinetics
2.1 The chemical equilibrium of excitons and free carriers
The exciton binding energy (Eb) is the key parameter that determines the equilibrium populations of excitons (nX) and unbound carriers (ne and nh for electrons and holes, respectively). Yet, Eb is not the only physical quantity on which the equilibrium populations of the two species depend, as it would be in the case of a non-degenerate two-level system with energy difference equal to Eb. The formation of excitons from free electrons and holes, and the reverse process, its dissociation into free charges, can be seen as a chemical reaction between three species, namely electrons (e), holes (h) and excitons (X)-according to the scheme e + h ⇔ X. Besides temperature, the equilibrium populations also depend on the overall concentration of the three species. For increasing optical (or electrical) excitations, the pairing of electrons and holes to form bound neutral states becomes more and more probable and excitons thus become the dominant species of the chemical reaction. Conversely, at low injection levels, unbound electrons and holes are unlikely to meet and to give rise to excitons, which therefore are the minority species. If the equilibrium condition of the chemical reaction is achieved, the chemical potential of electron–hole pairs equates to that of excitons. This condition is expressed quantitatively by the Saha equation: nenh = neqnX.67 The chemical quantity of interest is twice the equilibrium constant of the reaction (2)(μX is the reduced exciton mass), which determines the injected electron–hole density, ne(h) + nX = 2neq, above which the exciton population overcomes the population of free electrons and holes. At room temperature, 2neq is ∼1017, ∼5 × 1016 and ∼1016 cm−3 for MAPbI3, MAPbBr3 and MAPbCl3, respectively, where we have assumed μX = 0.1m068 for all perovskites and the exciton binding energies calculated from the Bethe–Salpeter equation accounting for electron screening (see Fig. 3). Screening by lattice phonons is expected to reduce Eb and increase 2neq, thus favouring the formation of an equilibrium electron–hole plasma at higher photoexcitation densities. Nevertheless, the main conclusions of this paragraph still remain valid. The photoexcited electron–hole pair concentration in perovskite solar cells can be assessed from the generalized mass-action law: (3)where μ is the chemical potential of the electron–hole pairs (bound and unbound) and ni the intrinsic concentration of free carriers in the dark. Perovskite-based solar cells with record photoconversion efficiencies supply a voltage ∼1.0 V at the working condition of maximum power, and ∼1.2 V for open circuit. The ensuing photoexcited electron–hole pair density is in the range 1013–1014 cm−3. For n = 1014 cm−3, the chemical equilibrium implies that excitons are a very tiny fraction of the overall electron–hole population, namely nX/n = ∼10−3, ∼4 × 10−3 and ∼10−2, for lead iodide, bromide and chloride perovskites, respectively. Perovskite light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency as high as 20% work at an injection current around 102 mA cm−2, which is roughly the same order of magnitude of the electron–hole injection level of a MAPbI3 solar cell under 1 sun illumination. Similar nX/n ratios as in photovoltaic devices are therefore expected. These numbers show that even though exciton binding energies of 3D lead halide perovskites are comparable or even significantly exceed the room-temperature thermal energy kBT, only a very small fraction of optical excitations form excitons. For 2D confined carriers (n = 1), the opposite scenario holds. According to the 2D Sahaequation, twice the equilibrium constant reads (4)For μX = 0.22m060 and Eb = 490 meV,59 2n2Deq = 1.4 × 104 cm−2. For a reference excitation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 at 440 nm, assuming an absorptance of 0.2 per well and a photoexcitation lifetime of 3 ns,59 the injected 2D density, n2Deh = 1.3 × 108 cm−2; by using the equilibrium condition, we get nX/n = 0.99, i.e., almost all electron–hole pairs form excitons. For increasing well thickness, a transition from an excitonic-excited state (n = 1) to a free-charge-excited state (the 3D limit) is expected. According to the Saha equation, however, this cross-over already occurs for n = 2, for which nX/n ∼ 0.48, in spite of a binding energy as large as 250 meV.60
2.2 Light emission in 3D and 2D perovskites: exciton and free-carrier contributions
If excitons and free carriers are in chemical equilibrium, the knowledge of the injected carrier density alone is sufficient to determine which of the two species is the majority one. Yet, it is not known a priori whether or not equilibrium is reached. The condition is that the characteristic times of electron–hole pairing and exciton ionization should be much shorter than the population lifetime. If these conditions are not satisfied, a non-equilibrium distribution ensues, in which the relative concentrations of bound and unbound carriers, each one with its own chemical potential (μeh ≠ μX), depend on the details of the relaxation kinetics.
We shortly discuss the case of 3D perovskites, namely MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3. If excitons and free carriers are in chemical equilibrium (μ = μeh = μX), light emission and absorptance spectra a(ħω) satisfy the reciprocity law, namely the generalized Planck–Kirchhoff law of radiation from a non-blackbody under optical (electrical) excitation.69 The photon flux J emitted into the external solid angle Ω is then given by: (5)The photoluminescence spectrum as obtained from the reciprocity relation, is shown in Fig. 1 (dashed black lines superimposed on the experimental spectra). The good agreement between the measured photoluminescence spectrum and the one obtained from the reciprocity relation indicates that the chemical equilibrium between the two species is established under continuous wave excitation at room temperature and at an illumination level of about 100 mW cm−2.
According to the discussion in the previous paragraph, the majority of photoexcitations in MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 are therefore free carriers under excitation conditions in which solar cells and light emitting diodes operate. The optical emission resulting from recombination of excitons or free carriers can be however discriminated based on their different energies: free carrier recombination is expected to produce photoluminescence with photon energies at the band gap, while excitons may emit photons with lower energy, below the band gap by an amount equal to the binding energy Eb.
Experimental photoluminescence spectra are invariably peaked close to the excitonic resonance and thus, emission appears to mainly involve excitonic transitions, in particular in MAPbBr3. Virtually no emission is detected at the energy expected from free carriers.
A peculiar scenario therefore appears, where excitons are a minority of optical excitations, but responsible almost entirely for optical emission. Its realization requires relaxation dynamics where the rate for direct bimolecular recombination of free carriers is significantly slower than the rates of exciton formation, which is also bimolecular, and exciton emission, which instead is monomolecular. In the following paragraph, the relevant rates will be estimated.
In mechanically-exfoliated thin crystals of pure-phase 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, again emission is resonant with the strong exciton absorption line (see Fig. 1 and 2) in all the samples. No emission is detected from free carriers. If chemical equilibrium was achieved in these experiments, thermalized photoexcitations were mostly excitons in n = 1 crystals, but an almost equal amount of excitons and free carriers for n = 2. As in 3D perovskites, a faint intensity of band-to-band light emission does not necessarily imply a negligible population of free carriers, the probability of the radiative decay of unbound pairs being much lower than that of excitons.
2.3 Formation of excitons
In light-emitting devices, the dependence of the photoluminescence intensity on the injected electron–hole pairs is a crucial issue. As discussed so far, in most hybrid perovskites photon emission is mainly due to excitons, even if they are the minority excited-state species. The radiative decay of excitons is a monomolecular process: the intensity of the emitted light is therefore given by PL = krnX, where kr is the radiative decay rate of excitons. If most of the thermalized excitations are free carriers (neh ≅ n), and the latter are in chemical equilibrium with excitons, the spontaneous light emission intensity reads: (6)This quadratic behaviour of the PL intensity stems from the bimolecular formation rate of excitons (dictated by the Saha equation), and it is not due to an effective bimolecular recombination decay of excitons into photons.
The quadratic behaviour of the photoluminescence intensity versus the injected electron–hole pair density could be in principle checked experimentally with steady-state optical experiments, by using continuous wave lasers. In this excitation regime, the effective electron–hole pair density is, however, difficult to estimate, as it depends on a complicated relaxation kinetics, mostly driven by extrinsic nonradiative recombination processes. To overcome this difficulty, we showed that time-resolved spectroscopy can be successfully used and probe the optical response over several orders of magnitude in the carrier density, from a few 1012 cm−3 up to over 1018 cm−3, thus spanning all the photoexcitation regimes of interest for applications (solar cells, LEDs and lasers). Following 100 fs pulse excitation, the instantaneous photoluminescence intensity (PL0) is directly proportional to the radiative recombination rate at the carrier density n0 injected by the optical pulses. PL0 is detected in a time window short enough (∼50 ps) that recombination processes are negligible. Measuring the power law dependence of PL0 as a function of n0 therefore discriminates monomolecular and bimolecular radiative recombination. At room temperature, PL0 follows a power law with exponent m = 2 under all accessible excitation conditions and for all 3D lead halide perovskites (see Fig. 7).70
 Fig. 7  Instantaneous photoluminescence intensity PL0 recorded right after impulsive femtosecond laser pulse photoexcitation in a 50 ps window. The power law for PL0 as a function of laser fluence (and therefore injected carrier density) is quadratic in 3D perovskites like MAPbI3 (solid red dots), indicative of bimolecular recombination, and linear in 2D Ba2PbBr4, indicative of monomolecular recombination of excitons. A linear power law due to direct recombination of excitons in 3D perovskites appears only at cryogenic temperatures and extremely low carrier densities (empty red circles). 
Only at cryogenic temperatures and for very low n0 (1012–1014 cm−3), a linear component was detected by Sestu et al. in PL0 as a function of laser fluence. Such linear component had the very same spectral shape as the quadratic emission, a single line resonant with the exciton absorption, which indicates that emission results from radiative decay of free excitons at all times. Such a component was rationalized in terms of the radiative emission from primary excitons (also called geminate excitons), namely bound electron–hole pairs generated directly by the absorption of one photon. As the energy of the exciting photons was well above the energy gap, light absorption by high-kinetic energy excitons was only possible through the contextual (coherent) contribution of a phonon providing the required extra momentum.71 The absorption cross-section of this indirect process is very small, yielding a very low concentration of geminate excitons, which quickly thermalize at the bottom of the exciton band and then are ionized or trapped. As the concentration of primary (non-equilibrium) excitons has a linear dependence on n0, while that of secondary excitons scales as n02 at low concentrations, the photoluminescence signal from geminate excitons was only observed in the regime of very low carrier injection levels, when most of the minority excitons were primary excitations.
At excitations above n0 > 2neq = 5.3 × 1016 cm−3, the Saha equation predicts a linear density dependence of PL0. In fact, the chemical equilibrium implies that all the primary photoexcited free carriers should quickly pair to form excitons, according to the reaction e + h ⇒ x, nX ≅ n and then PL0 = krnX ≅ krn0. Yet, a quadratic increase in PL0 was always observed, which indicates that exciton formation is not an instantaneous process, but longer than our time resolution and described by the equation dnx/dt = kLneh2 where kL is the Piermarocchi's constant.71 The picture that comes out is the following. In both electrical and optical excitations, the majority of primary photoexcitations in hybrid 3D perovskites are free electron–hole pairs. At low injection levels, the ones typically involved under one-sun illumination, chemical equilibrium can be more easily achieved as free carriers are also the majority population in chemical equilibrium and thus only a very small fraction has to be converted into excitons. On the contrary, at high injection levels (≫2neq), most of the primary free carriers should form excitons, but the inter-conversion rate cannot guarantee that chemical equilibrium between the two-species is achieved in ultrafast transient experiments. In this regime, the exciton and electron–hole populations are governed by the interplay of these processes: exciton dissociation, electron–hole pairing and photoexcitation recombination.72,73 It is also worth noting that in most of the analyses of the transient spectroscopic measurements reported so far, the kinetics of interspecies conversion has been overlooked.
Quite different dynamics are expected in 2D perovskites. Fig. 7 shows that the PL0 intensity in layered 2D perovskite BA2PbBr4 grows linearly for increasing n0. Excitons were resonantly injected and, as discussed previously, the chemical equilibrium between bound and unbound electron–hole pairs now foresees that geminate excitons are also the majority population in all the investigated excitation range, implying that only a negligible fraction of primary excitons ionizes (nX ≅ n0) and thus PL0 = krnX ≅ krn0. Concerning Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites with n > 1, to our knowledge no experimental study on the PL0 behavior has been reported.
2.4 The radiative decay rates of excitons and free carriers
The rate of light emitted from the surface of a thin perovskite film is given by eqn (5), which is nothing but the generalization of the Planck–Kirchhoff law to describe light emission from a semiconductor with all electronic excitations in chemical equilibrium. This law automatically includes the multiple sequential processes of photon emission and reabsorption that occur near the optical gap. Eqn (5) was used by several groups to estimate the open circuit voltage that can be achieved in hybrid perovskites in the limit of radiative decay only.74,75 Even though the majority of the electron–hole pairs are unbound in 3D hybrid perovskites, photon emission is predominantly due to the radiative decay of the minority population of secondary excitons. In this regime (neh ≅ n) and in chemical equilibrium, the rate of external photons emitted per unit of film volume is proportional to the square of the carrier density, PL = Bextneh2 = BextneqnX = kr,extnX,(7)where Bext is the external radiative bimolecular decay constant of the electron–hole pairs. Yet, it is worth stressing once more that photon emission is a two-step process, in which light emission mainly results from the radiative annihilation of excitons, according to the scheme: e + h ⇒ x ⇒ hν. The radiative decay rate of excitons is therefore given by: kr,ext = Bextneq. Bext can be derived from Planck–Kirchhoff law by taking into account the generalized mass-action law. In a free-standing thin film of thickness d, it takes the simple form (in the Boltzmann approximation valid at not too high excitation levels): (8)where ni is the intrinsic concentration of free carriers in the dark, and a the film absorptance. The Planck–Kirchhoff law can be reformulated to provide the rate of photons emitted per unit of volume inside the semiconductor, which excludes multiple reabsorption/emission of photons:69 (9)where α is the absorption coefficient. It is now easy to find an expression for the internal radiative bimolecular decay constant: (10)in which nr is the index of refraction, and an expression for the internal decay rate of excitons: kr,int = Bintneq. The ratio between the external and internal decay constants thus reads: (11)Bint is an intrinsic property of the materials,76 while Bext characterizes the specific emission response of a specific film. Ad hoc models to simulate multiple emission/reabsorption of photons in thin films were also proposed in the literature.77 Nano-structuring the emitting surface of thin films can be used to extract more light from the semiconductor, with beneficial effects on the performances of perovskite LEDs.78 Yet, a more efficient extraction of photons from the semiconductor has no consequence on the performances of solar cells. The reason is that the higher external light emission rate pushes the open circuit voltage of the device closer to the radiative limit value, but at the same time, this latter shrinks by the same amount.
A quick calculation demonstrates as much: JPL = J can be opportunely expressed in terms of the external photoluminescence quantum yield (EQYPL), defined as the ratio between JPL and the absorbed excitation photon flux, that is EQYPL = JPL/Jex. With this substitution, the Planck–Kirchoff law (eqn (5)) can be reformulated to explicitly link μ to EQYPL: (12)where J0,rad is that emitted by the semiconductor in thermal equilibrium with the environment (μ = 0).79
Nano-structuring the film surface indeed enhances the photon extraction rate, but causes JPL, and J0,rad to increase by the same amount and therefore the chemical potential does not vary, as the ratio JPL/J0,rad is not influenced by an improved photon extraction factor.

Eqn (10) can be also used to estimate the bimolecular decay constant due to radiative recombination of free carriers alone, Bint,eh, by using the absorption coefficient of band-to-band transitions, αeh.80 The bimolecular decay constant due to radiative recombination of free carriers alone, Bint,eh, can be written as: (13)where αeh represents the band-to-band absorption coefficient and can be assessed from a fit to the experimental absorption coefficient by using Elliot's theory for optical absorption close to the band-edge.53
So far, only the estimate of Bint,eh was reported in the literature.66,80 Yet, the quantity of interest for the materials is Bint, which actually determines the overall internal photon emission rate and not just that referred to band-to-band transitions alone, this latter being indeed a minor contribution. To estimate Bint from the absorption coefficient, the most critical quantity is the intrinsic concentration ni, which can be estimated theoretically.
Assuming chemical equilibrium between excitons and free carriers (μ = μeh = μX) and Lambert emission Ω = π,69 the Planck–Kirchhoff law of radiation, eqn (5), predicts the overall rate of external photons emitted per unit of photon energy and per unit of volume from a free-standing film of thickness d as: (14)where we have exploited the generalized mass-action law (eqn (3)). ni is the intrinsic concentration of free carriers in the dark: (15)in which De(h) is the density of states in the conduction (valence) band. In the calculation of ni2, we assumed the same electron and hole masses (0.2m0) and Eg = 1.647 eV.80,81 To account for broadening of each electronic level, we considered a Gaussian function with the linewidth provided by Sestu et al. for the m = 1 exciton state.82
For n ≪ 2neq, . Combining the previous equations, we get: (16)The absorption coefficient of the film reported in Fig. 1 and those measured in ref. 66 (light scattering effects are minimized in both experiments) together with the calculation of ni lead to Bint = 3.9 × 10−10 and 4.4 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1, respectively. The quantity Bint/Bint,eh = 4.6–4.8 represents the ratio between the overall emission intensity and that due to free carriers only in MAPbI3. It is worth pointing out that this conclusion is independent of the carrier injection density. Although it may sound counterintuitive, the reciprocity law provides a quantitative explanation for the overwhelming excitonic emission in hybrid lead halide perovskites, even if most of the photoexcitations are unbound electron–hole pairs.
The contribution of electron–hole emission to the overall photoluminescence intensity decreases exponentially with increasing exciton binding energy; consequently, it reduces considerably in MAPbBr3 and becomes completely negligible in 2D perovskites.
Finally, for the MAPbI3 film in Fig. 1, Bext = 2.7 × 10−11 cm−3 s−1, which gives Bint/Bext = 14.2, while kr,int = Bintneq = 2.7 × 107 s−1 and kr,ext = Bextneq = 1.9 × 106 s−1, where neq was evaluated neglecting lattice screening and thus taking Eb = 45 meV. The thermodynamic value of Bint calculated from the reciprocity law, 3.9–4.4 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1, compares favourably with the experimental ones, Bint ∼ 2.6–2.9 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1,31 obtained by a multi-parameter fit to time-resolved microwave conductivity in films with high photoluminescence quantum yield, and Bint ∼ 5 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1,66 provided by a complex fit analysis of transient THz measurements. We believe that the discrepancies between the thermodynamic and kinetic assessments of Bint are within the uncertainty actually involved in each of the two approaches.
3. Conclusions
In this review, we have critically analysed recent experimental and theoretical results concerning the intrinsic optical properties of 3D and 2D hybrid perovskites. The tunability of the band gap energy of this class of semiconductors is excellent, ranging without discontinuities from the near infrared to the ultraviolet. The shape of the optical spectrum is consistent with a direct band gap,83 in which light absorption by neutral states, excitons, becomes more and more intense as the energy gap increases. Tunability of the absorption threshold energy therefore goes with a parallel modification of the nature of band-edge photoexcitations.
In 3D perovskites, there exists a general consensus, supported by both experimental evidence and theory, that the majority of photoexcitations are free carriers, with only a small fraction of Coulombically bound electron–hole pairs under the typical working regimes of solar cells and LEDs. For this reason, the role of excitons in these materials is often overlooked, specifically in the discussion of the mechanisms of light emission. Recent experiments suggest, however, that excitons play a crucial role in light emission and absorption.70,80 The luminescence spectra of hybrid perovskites are well reproduced by the optical reciprocity law, which stems from the assumption that, at a given energy of the optical spectrum, photon emission is the reverse process of photon absorption. Emission spectra are however peaked at the energy of the exciton absorption, where contribution from band-to-band transitions is negligible, thus implying that luminescence is mainly due to recombination of excitons. In spite of being outnumbered by free carriers, excitons emit most of the light, as their faster radiative decay rate more than compensates for their lower density. The quadratic behaviour of the radiative decay rate of 3D perovskites on the photoexcitation density, as observed in several experiments, is not therefore an indication of bimolecular radiative recombination of free carriers, as early assumed, but rather the result of bimolecular pairing of the majority population of free carriers to form emitting bound exciton states. This intrinsic mechanism of light emission in perovskites has a direct impact on the performances of LEDs. If light emission was due to radiative recombination of free carriers alone, as usually assumed, the external photoluminescence quantum yield, and thus the efficiency of LEDs, would be much lower. The ratio between radiative recombination of excitons and free carriers in MAPbI3 is 4.6–4.8, much larger in MAPbBrI3 and in excess of 100 in 2D perovskites. The photoluminescence quantum yield is, however, limited by the extrinsic nonradiative decays of free carriers, the latter representing the majority population (see, e.g., the review of Jiang et al.54). The amount of experimental results available for spatially confined excitations in Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites is much less than that on 3D materials. In the typical working conditions of solar cells and LEDs, an insulating excitonic population is only expected for very narrow quantum wells, made by one perovskite layer (n = 1). For increasing well thickness, a transition to a free-charge-excited state is foreseen. Assuming a chemical equilibrium between excitons and free carriers, this cross-over could already occur for n = 2, even though the binding energy is about 250 meV. Yet, no experimental result has until now confirmed these counterintuitive expectations, which can heavily influence both the charge transport and emission properties of these low-dimensional materials.
This latter issue is directly connected to a central question concerning the photophysics of these materials: is the chemical equilibrium (namely, the Saha equilibrium) between excitons and free carriers achieved in hybrid perovskites? Several experimental evidences indicate that at low densities, the ones normally achieved in solar cells and LEDs, the chemical equilibrium is attained in 3D perovskites, probably favoured by the fact that free carriers are both the primary excitations and also the expected majority species. Yet, the experimental results at high excitation regimes, in which excitons should be the most abundant equilibrium species, clearly indicate that electron–hole pairing is not an instantaneous process.70 In other words, the populations of excitons and free carriers do not follow a sequence of quasi-chemical equilibrium states in transient experiments. The kinetics of interconversion between excitons and free carriers represent indeed a piece of the photophysics of these materials that is almost completely unexplored both in the 3D and 2D cases, except for some recent pioneer results.70,84 The value of the exciton binding energy in perovskites has been long discussed. Despite the non-negligible differences between the proposed estimates of Eb, whatever experimental value is used in the Saha equation, free carriers are always expected to be the majority population in 3D perovskites under the usual operating conditions of solar cells. Yet, a correct understanding of the bound electron–hole states does represent an important conceptual challenge, which requires further experimental and theoretical efforts. For this reason, we have here focussed on recent ab initio quantum-chemical theoretical approaches that address the electronic and lattice contributions to the screening of the Coulomb interaction, a central mechanism determining the exciton binding energy.56 In 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, the Eb issue has been less problematic, as the Rydberg excitonic series is experimentally accessible. The excited-state properties of these materials are, however, even more intriguing than those of the 3D counterparts. The large exciton binding energies of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites are by far in excess of the room-temperature thermal energy: this experimental evidence is implicitly taken as a justification to consider an insulating population of excitons as the stable excited-state in these systems. This conclusion is supported by the fact that light emission is essential due to radiative decay of excitons. Nevertheless, a simple analysis of the chemical equilibrium between excitons and free carriers depicts a completely different scenario: for quantum wells with n > 2, even if the exciton binding energy is in excess of 100 meV, free charged carriers should form the majority population. Like in 3D counterparts, light emission from the minority species, neutral excitons, is dominant. Due to the increasing importance of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites,40,50,52 this analysis calls for further experimental studies on the almost-unexplored phenomenology of the kinetics of exciton-free carrier interconversion, which plays a crucial role in the charge transport and light emission mechanisms of this class of semiconductors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues F. Congiu, A. Filippetti, A. Geddo Lehmann, A. Mattoni and G. Mula for fruitful discussions. This work was partially funded by Regione Autonoma della Sardegna through PO-FSE Sardegna 2007–2013, L.R. 7/2007, “Progetti di ricerca di base e orientata”, Projects no. CRP3-114, CRP-17571, CRP-18353, CRP-18013, and CRP-24978, and Delibera CIPE no. 31 del 20.02.2015 e deliberazione no. 52/36 del 28.10.2015 “Piano Strategico Sulcis”, through projects SULCIS-820889 and SULCIS-820947. Support is also acknowledged from the Italian Ministry of University and Scientific Research (MIUR) and by MIUR (Italian Ministry of University and Research) through PRIN PERovskite-based Solar cells: towards high Efficiency and lOng-term stability (PERSEO), project id 20155LECAJ and Fondazione di Sardegna – Convenzione triennale tra la Fondazione di Sardegna e gli Atenei Sardi, Regione Sardegna – L.R. 7/2007. We acknowledge access to research infrastructure in CeSAR – Centro Servizi di Ateneo per la Ricerca – at the Università degli Studi di Cagliari and thank Dr M. Marceddu for technical assistance.
Notes and references
J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, M. T. Hörantner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0095 CrossRef CAS .
S. Il Seok, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1–17 Search PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Il Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 3–12 Search PubMed .
W. Tress, K. Domanski, B. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, E. A. Alharbi, M. Graetzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, S.-H. Jeong, N. Myoung, A. Sadhanala, M.-H. Park, S. Yoo, T.-W. Lee, R. H. Friend, Y.-H. Kim and H. Cho, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1–27 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. Meng, P. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2–9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ban, Y. Zou, J. P. H. Rivett, Y. Yang, T. H. Thomas, Y. Tan, T. Song, X. Gao, D. Credington, F. Deschler, H. Sirringhaus and B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, S. Bai, V. Kim, R. Lamboll, R. Shivanna, F. Auras, J. M. Richter, L. Yang, L. Dai, M. Alsari, X. She, L. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Lilliu, P. Gao, H. J. Snaith, J. Wang, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and D. Di, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Petrozza and C. Soci, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4956–4969 RSC .
G. C. Papavassiliou, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1997, 25, 125–270 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. Hoe Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield, O. G. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, S. T. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. Zhao, M. M. Al-Jassim, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. C. Beard, S. E. Shaheen, J. J. Berry, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Harwell, G. L. Whitworth, G. A. Turnbull and I. D. W. Samuel, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and A. Nurmikko, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2486–2494 CrossRef CAS .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 182–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Su, C. Diederichs, J. Wang, T. C. H. Liew, J. Zhao, S. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Chen and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3982–3988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brenes, D. Guo, A. Osherov, N. K. Noel, C. Eames, E. M. Hutter, S. K. Pathak, F. Niroui, R. H. Friend, M. S. Islam, H. J. Snaith, V. Bulović, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Joule, 2017, 1, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, S. Zhang, C. J. Hages, D. Rothhardt, S. Albrecht, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, T. Unold and D. Neher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 847–854 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Braly, D. W. DeQuilettes, L. M. Pazos-Outón, S. Burke, M. E. Ziffer, D. S. Ginger and H. W. Hillhouse, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 1 Search PubMed .
S. G. Motti, D. Meggiolaro, A. J. Barker, E. Mosconi, C. A. R. Perini, J. M. Ball, M. Gandini, M. Kim, F. De Angelis and A. Petrozza, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 532–539 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, J. Liu, G. Portale, H.-H. Fang, G. R. Blake, G. H. ten Brink, L. J. A. Koster and M. A. Loi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702019 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, F. Gu, Y. Li, W. Sun, S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700204 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 1–4 CAS .
A. Abate, Joule, 2017, 1, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1958, 11, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, J. Takahashi and T. Goto, Solid State Commun., 1989, 69, 933–936 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, J. Takahashi and T. Goto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 11099–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Kgan, C. R. Mitzi and D. B. Dimitrakopoulus, Science, 1999, 286, 1–4 CrossRef .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3733–3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Blancon, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, C. M. M. Soe, K. Appavoo, M. Y. Sfeir, S. Tretiak, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2017, 355, 1288–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Kondo, T. Umebayashi, K. Asai and K. Ema, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045312 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elliott, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 1384–1389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1806671 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bokdam, T. Sander, A. Stroppa, S. Picozzi, D. D. Sarma, C. Franchini and G. Kresse, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 620–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundström and D. G. Cooke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700–3707 RSC .
L. Luo, L. Men, Z. Liu, Y. Mudryk, X. Zhao, Y. Yao, J. M. Park, R. Shinar, J. Shinar, K.-M. Ho, I. E. Perakis, J. Vela and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yaffe, A. Chernikov, Z. M. Norman, Y. Zhong, A. Velauthapillai, A. van der Zande, J. S. Owen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045414 CrossRef .
J. C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe, J. Kono, S. Tretiak, S. A. Crooker, C. Katan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. J. Crochet, J. Even and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. Swainson, R. P. Hammond, C. Soullière, O. Knop and W. Massa, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 176, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
I. Swainson, L. Chi, J. H. Her, L. Cranswick, P. Stephens, B. Winkler, D. J. Wilson and V. Milman, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2010, 66, 422–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11566–11572 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Davies, M. R. Filip, J. B. Patel, T. W. Crothers, C. Verdi, A. D. Wright, R. L. Milot, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Saha, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1921, 99, 135–153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .

          P. Wurfel, Wuerfel – Physics Of Solar Cells – From Principles To New Concepts, Wiley-VCH,  2005 Search PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, Q. Wang, M. A. Loi, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700839 Search PubMed .
C. Piermarocchi, F. Tassone, V. Savona, A. Quattropani and P. Schwendimann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 1333–1336 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kaindl, M. A. Carnahan, D. Hägele, R. Lövenich and D. S. Chemla, Nature, 2003, 423, 734–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Kaindl, D. Hägele, M. A. Carnahan and D. S. Chemla, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 045320 CrossRef .
K. Tvingstedt, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Baumann, C. Deibel, H. J. Snaith, V. Dyakonov and H. J. Bolink, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, P. Delugas and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24843–24853 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Pazos-Outon, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vru ini, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Science, 2016, 351, 1430–1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Richter, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Sadhanala, M. Tabachnyk, J. P. H. Rivett, L. M. Pazos-Outón, K. C. Gödel, M. Price, F. Deschler and R. H. Friend, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125203 CrossRef .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, Q. Wang, S. Masi, S. Colella, A. Rizzo, A. Gocalinska, E. Pelucchi, M. L. Mercuri, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701254 CrossRef .
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, E. M. Hutter, D. H. Cao, N. Renaud, C. C. Stoumpos, J. T. Hupp, T. J. Savenije, M. G. Kanatzidis and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26566–26574 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Daniela Marongiu
	Daniela Marongiu holds a PhD in nanotechnology from Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca (2011), has been a postdoc at Università di Sassari and is currently an assistant professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.

Michele Saba
	Michele Saba holds a PhD from EPFL (2001), has been a postdoc at MIT and is currently an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.

Francesco Quochi
	Francesco Quochi holds a PhD from EPFL (1999), has been a postdoc at Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, and is currently an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari.

Andrea Mura
	Andrea Mura is an associate professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari and a vice director of the Physics Department.

Giovanni Bongiovanni
	Giovanni Bongiovanni is a full professor in condensed matter physics at the Università di Cagliari and a director of the Physics Department.

 	Fig. 1  Optical absorption (blue) and photoluminescence (red) spectra for three prototypical perovskite compounds, 2D Ba2PbBr4 (top panel) and 3D MAPbI3 (central panel) and MAPbBr3 (bottom panel), showing the correlation between band gap and excitonic peak enhancement. The dashed black lines overlaid on top of the photoluminescence spectra are the emission spectra predicted with the reciprocity relation, as explained in the main text. Insets depict sketches of perovskite crystal structures for two dimensional (2D) materials, layered compounds (top panel) and three-dimensional (3D) materials (bottom panel). Lead atoms are represented as red spheres, their coordination octahedra are highlighted in purple, and the planes they form are highlighted in bright green.	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption (left) and PL (right) spectra of the 2D perovskite exfoliated crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 50.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (top panel) Calculated exciton binding energies and GW0 band gaps of twelve metal halide perovskites (OMX3, {O = MA, and FA, M = Pb, and Sn, X = I, Br, and Cl}); the gray dots represent measured, experimental values as reported in ref. 54. (bottom panel) Ionic and electronic contributions (εp, εe) to the dielectric function ε(ω) of MAPbI3. The top/bottom figure shows the real/imaginary part of ε(ω). The solid red and dashed blue lines are the results for T = 0 and 300 K, respectively. The inset shows a zoomed-in view of Re εp(ω) close to the Eb of 45 meV. Adapted from ref. 55 according to Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Derivative of the absorption spectrum of exfoliated nanosheets of the organic–inorganic perovskite crystals at the temperature of T = 5 K. The data are rescaled in the spectral range of the ground state resonance for clarity. The optically active exciton states are denoted by 1s, 2s, 3s, and 4s. (b and c) Derivatives of the reflectance contrast spectra of two additional nanosheeet samples at T = 5 K. (d) Low-temperature reflectance spectrum of a thick bulk sample. The exciton ground state and the first excited state are indicated by 1s and 2s, respectively. (e) Energies of the excited states of the exciton relative to the 1s transition of the crystal nanosheet compared with the results for the bulk crystals (the literature data taken from ref. 21). The averaged data (open circles) are presented together with the results from individual measurements on different nanocrystal samples (closed circles). The quasiparticle band gap in the nanocrystals, obtained from the fit of n = 3, and 4 states, is indicated by the dashed line. (f) Effective dielectric screening for the measured exciton states. The error bars originate from the experimental uncertainties in the extracted 3s and 4s peak positions. The dashed lines indicate the averaged dielectric constant of fused silica substrate (ε = 2.13) and vacuum (ε = 1) at optical frequencies, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 5  Left: Evolution of the exciton ground state, first excited state 2s, and continuum energies with the 2D perovskite layer thickness (or n). Right: Corresponding experimental binding energy of the exciton ground state (1s) and the excited exciton states (2s, 3s, and 4s), and comparison to theoretical results for the exciton ground state. The gray open triangle corresponds to the 1s exciton binding energy calculated for the diamagnetic shift obtained by Tanaka et al.15 in a RPP with n equal to 1 with larger organic spacers. The values E1s–E2s provide a lower limit for the exciton binding energy. Error bars correspond to s.d. from the determination of the energy of the exciton features. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 6  Analysis of the experimental absorption spectra for MAPbBr3 films. UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 (a) and MAPbI3 (b) for different temperatures, normalized as explained in the text. (c) Spectrally-integrated absorbance as a function of temperature.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  Instantaneous photoluminescence intensity PL0 recorded right after impulsive femtosecond laser pulse photoexcitation in a 50 ps window. The power law for PL0 as a function of laser fluence (and therefore injected carrier density) is quadratic in 3D perovskites like MAPbI3 (solid red dots), indicative of bimolecular recombination, and linear in 2D Ba2PbBr4, indicative of monomolecular recombination of excitons. A linear power law due to direct recombination of excitons in 3D perovskites appears only at cryogenic temperatures and extremely low carrier densities (empty red circles).	 
PL = Bextneh2 = BextneqnX = kr,extnX,	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
