Low dimensional nanocarbons – chemistry and energy/electron transfer reactions  - Chemical Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3SC51100F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3SC51100F
(Minireview)
Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4335-4353Low dimensional nanocarbons – chemistry and energy/electron transfer reactionsKonstantin Diriana, M. Ángeles Herranzb, Georgios Katsukisa, Jenny Maliga, Laura Rodríguez-Pérezb, Carlos Romero-Nietoa, Volker Straussa, Nazario Martín*bc and Dirk M. Guldi*aaDepartment of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Egerlandstrasse 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: dirk.guldi@chemie.uni-erlangen.debDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria s/n, 28040, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: nazmar@quim.ucm.es;  Fax: +34-91-394-4103;   Tel: +34-91-394-4227cIMDEA-Nanociencia, Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, SpainReceived 24th April 2013, Accepted 31st July 2013First published on 31st July 2013AbstractThis Minireview sheds light onto the electronic communication between, on one hand, low dimensional nanocarbons – single and multiwalled 1D carbon nanotubes and 2D graphene – and, on the other hand, a variety of electroactive species en-route to novel electron donor–acceptor conjugates and hybrids in relation to their covalent and non-covalent chemistry, respectively. A common denominator to any of the highlighted conjugates/hybrids is charge transport across different scales, that is, from individual molecular conjugates/hybrids to morphologically controlled devices.IntroductionDuring the last decade, 1D carbon nanotubes, especially single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), as well as 2D graphene are among the most studied carbon allotropes. The interest in low dimensional nanocarbons stems from the excitement in testing and realizing unique properties based on the size confinement in 1D and 2D as well as on the resulting electronic properties in a wide variety of applications. In this regard, both 1D and 2D nanocarbons share in common that their chemical functionalization offers the invaluable opportunity to combine their properties with those of other molecular building blocks en-route to practical applications.In this Minireview, we will survey the most relevant examples of low dimensional nanocarbons in combination with a series of photo and/or redox active building blocks featuring strong electronic interactions. As a consequence of the latter, charge transfer processes upon light irradiation and, to a lesser extent, energy transfer processes have evolved. We start by describing the covalent and non-covalent chemistry, which has been developed to bind photo and/or redox active building blocks to SWCNTs and, in turn, to fine tune the electronic interactions. This is followed by a survey of the charge and/or energy transfer processes evolving upon photoexcitation. As a complement, corresponding examples based on 2D graphene are discussed. In doing so, the state of the art of low dimensional nanocarbons in terms of mimicking photosynthesis as well as in terms of developing nanocarbon-based organic electronics is gathered.Non-covalent chemistry towards electron donor–acceptor hybrids – carbon nanotubesNon-covalent exohedral functionalization of carbon nanotubes with electroactive molecules or polymers has been achieved via π–π stacking, van der Waals forces, charge-transfer interactions, or any combinations between them.1 This approach is non-destructive and preserves the intrinsic structure and electronic features of carbon nanotubes.In this regard, the combination of SWCNTs with porphyrins results in the particularly useful preparation of electron donor–acceptor nanohybrids bearing light harvesters (Fig. 1). For example, SWCNTs were found to strongly interact with free-base porphyrins (H2P), Zn-porphyrins (ZnP, 1), fused ZnP-trimers (2), and ZnP in conjugated oligomers (3).2 In this context, Anderson and coworkers have investigated the effect of alkylidene-porphyrin oligomer length on the binding affinity to SWCNTs, which proved to be so strong that it induces mechanical strain on the carbon nanotubes, even in solution.3 Fig. 1  Leading examples of ZnP (1), ZnP-trimers (2), and ZnP-oligomers (3) used for the preparation of SWCNT nanohybrids. Results on the self-assembly of porphyrin aggregates onto SWCNTs are still scarce, although recent reports have demonstrated that anionic4 and/or cationic5 porphyrins are able to induce specific geometrical arrangements. These are particularly beneficial in the control/stabilization of SWCNTs with suitable band gaps.6In a complementary approach, SWCNTs, to which positively or negatively charged ionic head groups have been added, complex oppositely charged porphyrins by means of van der Waals and electrostatic interactions. A contemporary challenge in SWCNT chemistry is to differentiate between species that present a similar diameter but different electronic properties and different chiralities. Notably, diporphyrin nanotweezers 4–7 have demonstrated to discriminate between SWCNTs of different chiralities. The addition of chiral centers in the porphyrins allows differentiation between SWCNT enantiomers of single-chirality (Fig. 2).7 With the aid of 10,20-meso-free porphyrin anions, consisting of two dicarboxylate aryl moieties each linked by a flexible group to the porphyrin, water dispersible chiral porphyrin/SWCNT hybrids have been realized.8 Fig. 2  Examples of chiral diporphyrin tweezers (4–7) designed for the separation of SWCNTs of different chiralities. Another interesting member of the porphyrinoid family are phthalocyanines (Pc). They feature absorptions in the near-infrared region of the solar spectrum with high extinction coefficients and high fluorescence quantum yields.9 As a matter of fact, they have successfully been immobilized onto SWCNTs through π–π stacking.10 Combining, for instance, meso-tetraphenyl-H2P and/or ZnP to a zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) allows the construction of a multichromophoric system, which assists in panchromatic light harvesting.11Besides the aforementioned examples of heterocyclic polyaromatics, small aromatic molecules stand at the forefront of investigations to functionalize SWCNTs by virtue of π–π stacking interactions. Among these building blocks, pyrene (Py) stands out as it exhibits a particularly high affinity towards SWCNTs. It has been, by far, the most probed anchoring group. As such, the non-covalent association of SWCNTs with pyrene and porphyrinoid systems (8),12 azobenzene chromophores (9),13 spyropyran derivatives (10),14 metallic complexes (11),15 quantum dots (12),16 tetrathiafulvalenes (TTFs) (13),17 or fullerenes (14)18 has afforded electron donor–acceptor nanohybrids with a variety of properties (Fig. 3). Fig. 3  Examples of pyrene-based electroactive systems (8–14) used to interact with SWCNTs. In contrast to TTFs and most of the polyaromatics, which were combined by π–π stacking with SWCNTs and are p-type semiconductors, perylene bisimides are n-type semiconductors. The latter reveal valence band electrons as the majority charge carriers allowing investigations towards the electron donating ability of SWCNTs.19 Importantly, water soluble perylene bisimides are highly effective in individualizing SWCNTs.20 This stems from the presence of three basic constituents, that is, a water soluble dendrimer as solvophylic moiety, a perylene core to interact with SWCNTs by π–π stacking, and an aliphatic tail to provide an amphiphilic nature. In light of the latter, perylene bisimides represent a novel and superior class of SWCNT surfactants that adhere strongly.Supramolecular π–π interactions between electron-accepting fullerenes and SWCNTs comprise a promising strategy in the quest for artificial photosynthetic systems.21 Nakanishi et al.22 have, for example, constructed fullerene/SWCNT hybrids, where different trialkoxyphenyls, introduced to C60 by a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, assisted in melting-induced morphological changes. By the same token, Imahori et al.23 have also developed a self-assembly method, which consists of a rapid injection of a polar solvent into a mixed solution of the hybrid components in an apolar solvent, to construct H2P–C60 nanograins that are molecularly wired to SWCNTs for efficient charge transport.Furthermore, the selective interactions of SWCNTs, which were produced by different techniques, with electroactive polymers have also been intensively investigated in recent years. Especially, poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) exhibited very high selectivity towards certain semiconducting SWCNTs.24 Overall, the selectivity depends not only on the type of solvent but also on the molecular weight of the polymer. For example, F8BT of low to medium molecular weight in toluene disperses predominantly (10,5) SWCNTs, whereas when using o-xylene as the solvent a selectivity toward (9,4) SWCNTs was noted.25 In another recent example, the sequential treatment of HiPco SWCNTs with nitric acid and π-conjugated copolymer poly(phenyleneethynylene) (PPE)-co-poly(phenylenevinylene) (PPV) resulted in the selection of a narrow range of SWCNTs, which includes (11,6), (12,6), and (11,7).26 Treatment with nitric acid selectively removed the carbon nanotubes with small diameters, while the PPE–PPV polymer adopts a natural helical conformation with enhanced parallel π–π interactions and a proper diameter for the selected chiralities.Nevertheless, sorting specific SWCNT chiralities is a complex process, in which the type of solvent, the molecular weight of the polymer, concentrations, and, last but not least, the viscosity should be carefully taken into account. Additional challenges remain in the area of searching for an effective methodology that guarantees large-scale separation.Covalent chemistry towards electron donor–acceptor conjugates – carbon nanotubesDespite disrupting the CNT's π-system when covalently functionalizing them, this approach has extensively been used in the chemical modification of CNTs. It nicely complements the examples that have been explored in the area of non-covalent chemistry.Among the large number of available covalent functionalization methodologies, oxidation of SWCNTs is probably the most commonly used approach. It involves the treatment of as-produced SWCNTs under strong acidic and oxidative conditions and results in the formation of opened SWCNT–COOHs featuring different oxygenated functionalities, including carboxylic groups etc. In subsequent reactions, the acid functionalities are reacted with electroactive building blocks endowed with alcohol or amino functionalities for esterification or amidation reactions, respectively.27The covalent attachment of porphyrins to SWCNTs and/or SWCNT–COOHs has been investigated by several groups.28 Besides the photoactive role of porphyrins (vide infra), the dramatic rectification effect observed in films containing poly-3-hexyl-thiophene (P3HT)–Py polymers doped with small amounts of fullerenes as well as porphyrin double wall carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs), point to a key role of the porphyrin scaffold.The decoration of SWCNTs with fragments of N-anilinopyrazolino[60]fullerene was one of the first reported syntheses.29 Since then, several reports on C60–SWCNT conjugates that combine C60 with appended photoactive ferrocenyl or porphyrinyl functionalities have appeared.30 In these studies, Raman spectra were of key importance, since they revealed new bands due to electronic interactions between the functional groups and SWCNTs. Similarly, a three electroactive component system, that is ferrocene–porphyrin–SWCNT (Fc–H2P–SWCNT), has been prepared by amidation reaction between carboxylated SWCNTs and an aminoporphyrin endowed with an Fc unit.31In contrast to esterification or amidation reactions with SWCNT–COOHs, the direct functionalization of SWCNTs requires the use of highly reactive species. To this end, a particularly promising methodology is that introduced by Tour et al. in 2001.32 Specifically, aryl radicals are generated from diazonium salts by means of two different methods. Firstly, via a one electron electrochemical reduction and, secondly, via a chemical reaction. This last approach involves a thermally-induced process with the in situ generation of the diazonium salt by reacting aniline derivatives with isoamyl nitrite. When SWCNTs are modified with phenylacetylenes using Tour's method, further functionalization via a subsequent copper-catalyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction with different electroactive units bearing azides33 opens the way to attaching ferrocenes (15),34 porphyrins (16)35 and phthalocyanines (17)36 (Fig. 4). Fig. 4  Examples of covalent functionalization of SWCNTs with ferrocene (15), ZnP (16), and Pc (17) by Tour's reaction and a subsequent CuAAC reaction, that is, a click chemistry approach. To increase the light harvesting efficiency of chromophores, the functionalization of SWCNTs with various dendrons containing two ZnPs, two ZnPcs, or a dendron containing one ZnP and one ZnPc was accomplished by Campidelli et al.36 In a more challenging synthetic approach, the same group described the preparation of photoactive CNT–porphyrin polymer conjugates by using a “grafting from” approach based on the polymerization of ZnP monomers onto SWCNTs.37 The amount of chromophore loading on SWCNTs is increased when hyperbranched instead of linear structures are applied.Different from the aforementioned are cycloaddition reactions, which have widely been used to functionalize SWCNTs by means of carbene or nitrene additions, Bingel–Hirsch reactions or Diels–Alder cycloadditions.1In the seminal work by Prato et al.,38 the preparation of the first SWCNT-based conjugate featuring electroactive ferrocenes was reported. However, due to the peculiar reactivity of the SWCNT batch used, the number of ferrocene units introduced onto the skeleton of SWCNTs was rather large and the electronic properties of the SWCNTs were seriously damaged. Research in this area is currently focused on controlling the degree of functionalization and on the preparation of nanoconjugates enriched in certain chiralities. Along these lines, D'Souza and coworkers have recently reported the preparation of SWCNT–ZnP conjugates employing Prato's method.39Electron transfer reactions in non-covalent electron donor–acceptor hybrids – carbon nanotubesAs aforementioned, a wide array of building blocks has been demonstrated to interact strongly with SWCNTs – see Table 1 – although the most widely employed photosensitizers in constructing SWCNT hybrids by π–π stacking are porphyrins. In particular, H2Ps have shown to interact more strongly with HiPco SWCNTs than with the corresponding ZnPs.40 Nevertheless, the interactions with both H2P and ZnP lead to the individualization of SWCNTs, although ZnP evokes only a partial debundling. By means of transient absorption spectroscopy, photoinduced charge transfer from H2P and ZnP to SWCNTs was confirmed and the corresponding charge separated states were shown to persist on a time scale of hundreds of nanoseconds.
Table 1 Summary of charge and energy transfer rates and device efficiencies of the discussed non-covalent SWCNT hybrid systems

CompoundReferenceτ (CS)τ (CR)Device efficiencya Lifetimes are reported for ZnPc.b Azulenocyanine.c Azulenocyanine–pyrene.d Values reported for CoMoCAT–SWCNT.e Values reported for MWCNT.f Values reported for (7,6) enriched CoMoCAT.g Values reported for (6,5) enriched CoMoCAT.h Report dealing with HiPco–SWCNT.i Report dealing with CoMoCAT–SWCNT.1841 250 ps—1942—∼100 ps—20433a ps>3a ns15%/23%2144—124b ps/137c ps2.5%2245<1 ps2.9 ns—23462.5d ps/5e ps160d ps/380e ps—24475 ps105f ps/260g ps—2649———2750ah/50bi<1 ps/4.5 ps300 ps/170 ps—2851——Up to 5%2952—55f ns/83g ns1%f/0.35%g3053b—400 ns—3154230f ps/110g ps140f ns/120g ns—/—3254290f ps/140g ps220f ns/160g ns—/8%3355570f ps/260g ps111f ns/94g ns—/12%3455580f ps/470g ps100f ns/63g ns—/—3556250 ps100 ns—/—On the other hand, Pcs also stick onto SWCNTs. In an attempt to establish a methodology to obtain water-soluble SWCNT hybrids, Pcs were decorated with four glycolic dendrons of first, second, and third generations (18) (Fig. 5).41 In water, the stability of the resulting SWCNT suspensions was found to increase with increasing dendron generation. The electronic communication between a Pc-functionalized third generation glycolic dendron and SWCNTs was investigated by means of multiple photoexcitation wavelengths. The results unambiguously brought to light the formation of Pc˙+ with absorption maxima at 530 and 840 nm as a result of a charge transfer process, whose lifetime was about 250 ps. In a different approach, Pcs were attached to polyphenylene vinylene (PPV) oligomers (19) through different linkers (Fig. 5).42 As a matter of fact, a detailed assay revealed the key factors that determine an effective interaction between SWCNTs and Pc-based oligomers. Notably, two Pc architectures with either n-type or p-type PPV backbones gave rise to comparable charge separated state lifetimes of around 100 ps. Fig. 5  Examples of phthalocyanines (18–20) and azulenocyanine (21) utilized (40) to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs. In line with what has been accomplished with porphyrins, functionalizing H2Pc and ZnPc with pyrenes (20) (Fig. 5) also reinforces the interactions with SWCNTs by additional π–π interactions.43 A charge separated state with a lifetime longer than in any of the aforementioned Pc/SWCNT hybrids was found to evolve upon photoexcitation. For example, a metastable charge separated state that decays beyond 3.0 ns is formed. Encouraged by such lifetimes, H2Pc/SWCNT thin films were implemented into photoelectrochemical cells and IPCE values as large as 15 and 23% without and with an applied bias of 0.1 V, respectively, were determined. It is important to note that such efficiencies are amongst the highest reported to date.The use of pyrene has not only been proved for porphyrins and phthalocyanines but also for extended, planar architectures such as azulenocyanines (21) (Fig. 5).44 In this particular case, probably due to the existence of stronger attractive forces between azulenocyanines and SWCNTs, the presence of pyrene did not exert any further improvement in terms of overall interactions. Both derivatives lead to similarly stabilized SWCNTs, giving rise to photoinduced charge separated states lifetimes of 124 and 137 ps for azulenocyanines and pyrene-containing azulenocyanines (21), respectively. Finally, the corresponding SWCNT hybrids were implemented in photoelectrochemical cells obtaining, however, lower IPCE values than for the aforementioned Pcs of up to 2.5%.By using the same strategy, but linking extended tetrathiafulvalene (exTTF) to pyrene (22) (Fig. 6), it was possible to establish, for the first time, the spectroscopic signatures for reduced SWCNTs.45 ExTTF, a strong electron donor, possesses a concave shape that additionally contributes to the overall interaction with SWCNTs by π–π stacking. Such an interaction leads, upon photoexcitation, to the formation of the exTTF˙+, whose transient absorption spectrum maximizes at 685 nm, and the formation of new conduction band electrons that shift the SWCNT transitions to lower energies. A global analysis of the process yielded a charge separated state lifetime of about 3 ns. Fig. 6  Examples of extended tetrathiafulvalene (exTTF) derivatives (22–24) utilized to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs. Based on the complementarity between concave exTTF and SWCNTs, a tweezers-shaped building block bearing two exTTFs and a second generation Newkome-type dendron (23) (Fig. 6) with terminal carboxylic groups was designed to realize water dispersable SWCNT hybrids.46 As a result, a photoinduced charge transfer could be reported with charge separated state lifetimes of 160 ps for CoMoCAT SWCNTs and 380 ps for MWCNTs.In a step further, combining the strong interaction of exTTFs and SWCNTs, on one hand, allowed the self-assembly capacity of peptides (24) (Fig. 6), and, on the other hand, enabled the organization of SWCNTs into well-ordered structures of different scales, that is, from the nano to the meso scale.47 In turn, the control over the morphology of SWCNT hybrids was even accomplished in the solid state. Interestingly, the use of enriched SWCNTs led to distinct charge transfer events. While (7,6)-enriched SWCNTs revealed charge separated state lifetimes of 105 ps, (6,5)-enriched SWCNTs with lower charge separated state energies gave rise to lifetimes of 260 ps.Recently, the investigations have been, however, turning from p-type building blocks, which trigger the photoinduced reduction of CNTs, to n-type building blocks, which enable exploiting the donor properties of CNTs.One particular example is 5,15-bis(4-pyridyl)-2,8,12,18-tetraethyl-3,7,13,17-tetramethyl zinc porphyrin (25) (Fig. 7).48 SWCNT hybrids with the aforementioned porphyrin were utilized in field effect transistors. Fig. 7  Examples of n-type building blocks (25–29) utilized to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs. Likewise, the use of sapphyrins (26) (Fig. 7) rendered SWCNT hybrids that were dispersable in water and in ionic liquids.49 Transient absorption spectroscopy revealed that, upon photoexciting the SWCNTs at 775 nm, the signature of the one electron reduced sapphyrin with a characteristic maximum at 840 nm evolved as a consequence of an electron transfer from the conduction band of the SWCNTs to 26.Another n-type building block that has been demonstrated to efficiently interact with SWCNTs is perylene diimide (PDI) (27) (Fig. 7).50 In particular, water-soluble PDIs were tested with HiPco SWCNTs and (6,5)-enriched CoMoCAT SWCNTs. In both cases, PDIs were found to strongly interact with SWCNTs, leading to their successful individualization in aqueous media.Finally, owing to the strong intermolecular interactions between 27 and SWCNTs, lifetimes of the charge separated state were limited to 170 ps for (6,5) CoMoCAT SWCNTs and 300 ps for HiPco SWCNTs.Other n-type materials are fullerenes. As such, C60 derivatives functionalized with alkyl chains (28) have been utilized to suspend SWCNTs (Fig. 7).51 Importantly, the presence of the alkyl chains favors the interactions with SWCNTs. In transient absorption spectroscopy measurements with chloroform solutions of the SWCNT hybrids, the formation of C60˙− was corroborated upon 355 nm excitation. In addition, IPCE measurements with photoelectrochemical cells composed of the latter SWCNT hybrids on FTO showed values of 5% at 405 nm.As shown for electron donors, attaching pyrenes to C60 (29) (Fig. 7) is another successful strategy to immobilize electron acceptors onto SWCNTs.52 A comparative study was performed with (6,5)- and (7,6)-enriched SWCNTs. Photoexcitation of 29 led to the instantaneous formation of a readily identifiable C60˙−. The charge recombination was found to differ as a function of SWCNTs, that is, 55 ns for (7,6) SWCNTs and 83 ns for (6,5) SWCNTs. Finally, photoelectrochemical cells, which were performed with SnO2/OTE, yielded maximum IPCEs of 1% at 460 nm for (7,6) SWCNTs and 0.35% at 480 nm for (6,5) SWCNTs. These values suggest that the electron donating ability depends on the energy of the conduction band of the SWCNTs – vide infra.A different strategy to functionalize SWCNTs involves the use of building blocks that, on one hand, interact via π–π stacking with SWCNTs and, on the other hand, bear suitable functionalities to interact either with electron donors or with electron acceptors. Such bindings typically rely on electrostatic interactions, cation–dipole or coordinative forces. Again, pyrenes have most widely been employed (Fig. 8). Fig. 8  Examples of non-covalently functionalized SWCNTs through electrostatic forces (30–32). When turning to the investigations of photoactive, water-soluble SWCNT hybrids, 1-(trimethylamonium acetyl) pyrene (30) (Fig. 8) was utilized to disperse SWCNTs.53 The positively charged ammonium groups were the inception for the interaction with negatively charged H2P and ZnP by means of electrostatic interactions. As a consequence of the electrostatic binding, the Soret- and the Q-bands of H2P and ZnP shifted and isosbestic points appeared. Transient absorption studies revealed a rapid electron transfer evoking broad absorptions in the range from 600 to 800 nm – corresponding to either H2P˙+ or ZnP˙+. Lifetimes of the newly formed charge separated states were on the order of 0.4 μs.Based on the same approach, pyrene butyric acid (31) as well as an ammonium substituted pyrene (32) (Fig. 8) were immobilized onto (6,5)- and (7,6)-enriched SWCNTs and combined by electrostatic interactions with porphyrins of opposite charges in DMF.54 In particular, tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrins (32) and tetrakis-(4-N-methylpyridyl) porphyrins (31) were utilized. Notably, positively charged pyrenes have not only been used to assemble electron donors by electrostatic interactions, but also via cation-dipole forces. As a matter of fact, ZnPs (33) and ZnPcs (34) bearing one (33) and four 18-crown-6 moieties (34) (Fig. 9), respectively, have been demonstrated to successfully complex with SWCNT in the presence of positively charged pyrenes in DMF.55 Electronic communication was confirmed by transient absorption spectroscopy and, importantly, high IPCE values were realized, reaching 12% at 420 nm. Fig. 9  Examples of non-covalently functionalized SWCNTs by means of crown ether moieties (33–35). Finally, it is worth mentioning that SWCNTs have been functionalized with electron acceptors by means of the aforementioned protocol. To this end, C60 carrying a crown ether (35) (Fig. 9) was applied to complex with SWCNTs in DMF.56 Steady-state and time-resolved absorption spectroscopy revealed a photoinduced electron transfer process from SWCNT to 35. The calculated charge separated state lifetime was found to be beyond 100 ns.Energy transfer in covalent electron donor–acceptor conjugates – carbon nanotubesFluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)57 can be described as the energy transfer from an optically excited state of a (non-fluorescent) donor molecule to a suitable acceptor, which releases its energy by emitting light. It is a widely utilized feature for elucidating biomolecular structures with dynamics in the order of 2–10 nm.58 Moreover, energy transfer is considered as a fundamental process in natural light harvesting systems.59 Herein, a multichromophoric system spreads and transfers the absorbed light in terms of energy to adjacent chromophores, in which at the end of the cascade the energy is converted into electron transfer processes and the biosynthesis of high energetic carbohydrates.As SWCNTs reveal panchromatic absorption throughout the entire solar spectrum, strongly bound excitons are immediately formed after photoexcitation.60 This fact renders the exact determination of an energy transfer process from a photoexcited chromophore to SWCNTs rather difficult. Nevertheless, energy transfer was confirmed in several studies – see Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of charge and energy transfer rates and device efficiencies of the discussed covalent SWCNT hybrid systems

CompoundReferenceτ (CS)τ (CR)Device Efficiency1530———1635,36———1735,36——17.3% (IPCE)3662 Energy Transfer 3763 Energy Transfer 3863 Energy Transfer 3963 Energy Transfer 4064 Energy Transfer 4164 Energy Transfer 4265 Energy Transfer 4367—190 ps—4467—230 ps—4567—275 ps—4667—335 ps—4775 14 μs—4877150 ps2.2 μs9.9% (IPCE)4978—3.8 μs— 38—1.1 μs— 662 ps100 ps— 6950 ps0.66 μs— 71—305 ns— 73215 ps250 ns6.8% (IPCE) 39110–330 ps130–210 ns0.3–2.2% (IPCE) 31—62.9 μs— 35—200–820 ps— 741.5×1010 s-12.9×106 s-1  76——4.2% (IPCE) 80—1.2 ns—For example, pyrenes were linked to SWCNTs either by a modified Prato's protocol61 or by cofunctionalization at the defect sides of SWCNT–COOHs (36) (Fig. 10).62 Fig. 10  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNT–COOH with a pyrene derivative (36). In both cases, steady state quenching of the monomer emission as well as its corresponding excimer emission and shortened fluorescence lifetimes served as independent probes. As a matter of fact, shortening of the fluorescence lifetimes indicates new deactivation pathways, when SWCNTs are present. Since the formation of a charge separated state is unlikely due to the high oxidation potential of pyrenes, the deactivation via energy transfer represents the most rational explanation. In a similar cofunctionalization approach, naphthalenes (37), fluorenes (38), and anthracenes (39) were covalently linked to SWCNT–COOHs in combination with polyethyleneglycol (Fig. 11). In the resulting conjugates, the fluorescence of the polyaromatics is heavily quenched, again suggesting energy transfer to the SWCNTs.63 Fig. 11  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNT–COOH with naphthalene (37), fluorene (38), and anthracene (39). Again, porphyrins are among the most studied chromophores. Consequently, their excited state interactions with SWCNTs have been probed. In 2004, Sun et al. introduced two different H2Ps, which are linked to arc-discharge SWCNTs by a short – a CH2 group (40) – or a long – a C6H12O (41) – aliphatic linker (Fig. 12).64 In this study, only H2P linked by the extended spacer revealed fluorescence quenching. The authors assigned their findings to the flexibility of the system, which allows the direct attachment of H2P to SWCNTs. The quenching of the fluorescence should be assigned to an energy transfer deactivation. Fig. 12  Examples of SWCNT functionalization with porphyrin derivatives through covalent (40,41) and coordinative linkages (42). In a complementary approach, a hybrid composed of ZnP and pyridine-bearing SWCNTs (42) (Fig. 12) has been described and compared with an analogous system, in which SWCNTs have been replaced by C60.65 Several spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques were used to evaluate the successful complexation of ZnP to either SWCNTs or C60. In both cases, the ZnP emission is quenched. However, the nature of the deactivation mechanism is different. With the help of emission spectroscopy and transient absorption measurements on the nano- and microsecond time scale, the formation of a charge separated state is confirmed in case of ZnP–C60, whereas in 42 an energy transfer takes place.Electron transfer in covalent electron donor–acceptor conjugates – carbon nanotubesContrary to energy transfer, the occurrence of electron transfer in SWCNT-based electron donor–acceptor conjugates is even more exciting – see Table 2. One of the best studied electron donors is ferrocene, especially due to its low oxidation potential. In one of the first reports of functional materials synthesized by a covalent protocol, the latter was linked to HiPco SWCNTs by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition. This system revealed not only an extensive degree of functionalization indicated by vanished band gap transitions but also broadened and rather diffuse emission features in the wavelength range from 800 to 1600 nm. Nevertheless, the transients occurring in laser flash photolysis experiments could be assigned to negatively charged SWCNTs, which were confirmed in complementary spectroelectrochemical and pulse radiolytic assays. In conclusion, a charge separated state involving SWCNTs as excited state electron acceptors could be proven for the first time, revealing a lifetime of about 1.1 μs.38 A more recent report demonstrated, however, that the electronic properties of SWCNTs are largely preserved upon covalent decoration with ferrocenes. Here, a similar synthetic protocol was used with two different degrees of functionalization. Supported by advanced spectroelectrochemical techniques, a charge transfer event and redox chemical switching that depended on the chirality was observed. In particular, SWCNTs revealing smaller chiralities, that is, (9,4), (8,6), (8,7), and (9,7), are susceptible towards charge transfer whereas SWCNTs with larger chirality angles are not.66Other well-known classes of electron donors such as TTF (43, 44) and exTTF (45, 46) (Fig. 13) were covalently linked to SWCNTs for the first time in 2006 using spacers of variable chain length. Again, transient absorption measurements confirmed the formation of charge separated states due to the characteristic fingerprints of TTF˙+, exTTF˙+, and SWCNT˙−. Interestingly, the charge separated state lifetimes of the exTTF-based system are longer compared to those of the TTF based systems and revealed a dependence on the length of the linker.67 Fig. 13  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNTs with TTF (43, 44) and exTTF (45, 46) derivatives. The first report concerning Pcs appeared in 2003.68 Here, quenching of the Pc emission has been observed. Finally, ultrafast spectroscopic assays helped to characterize a charge separated state, that is, red-shifted bleaching of the NIR bands as well as a new maximum arising around 840 nm, representing the ZnPc's radical cation.69 Another publication dealing with ZnPc–SWCNT structures followed. Here, click chemistry was applied to decorate SWCNTs produced by laser ablation. Similar features described prior to that proved the formation of a charge separated state. Going one step further, these conjugates were used to construct photoelectrochemical test devices.70 On replacing ZnPc by the free base analogue, H2Pc, similar observations have been made.71Despite the large variety of different binding motifs and chromophores and/or electron donors attached to SWCNTs, most of the covalent approaches published so far have relied on porphyrins. In particular, ZnP as well as H2P were used. In 2005, H2P was attached to SWCNTs as well as MWCNTs. From strong H2P emission quenching at varying excitation wavelengths, deactivation through a charge transfer state was deduced.28a In similar work, diazonium chemistry was used to built up an optically limiting and charge transfer active H2P–SWCNT conjugate.72 Slightly differently, the covalent linkage of ZnP by [2 + 3] cycloaddition reaction to SWCNTs allowed the postulation of a charge separated state based on the reduction of benzyl viologen and promising IPCE spectra.73 Chirality enriched SWCNTs were applied in a similar work based on Prato's protocol. Flanked by theoretical calculations, the rise and decay of the ZnP˙+–SWCNT˙− charge separated state has been traced by transient absorption on the nanosecond time scale.39Furthermore, a triad composed of SWCNT, H2P, and ferrocene has been synthesized, where charge separation is followed by a charge shift reaction.31 To achieve a maximal loading with porphyrins, thereby keeping the disturbance to the SWCNTs π-system as low as possible, dendritic structures were successfully used with H2P and ZnP. Following this protocol, the absorption cross-section in the visible part of the solar spectrum was strongly enhanced and an efficient photoinduced charge separation took place.35,74Besides these purely covalent modifications of SWCNTs, a combination of super- and supramolecular chemistry has also successfully been employed. To the best of our knowledge, the first work in this field was carried out with an octacationic H2P and SWCNTs grafted with polystyrenesulfonate through Coulombic interactions (47) (Fig. 14). This was monitored by titration assays with absorption as well as emission spectroscopy. The charge separated state formed after laser excitation exhibited a rather long lifetime of up to 14 μs.75 One year later, ZnP has been immobilized onto SWCNTs grafted with polystyrenesulfonate and the properties of an electrochemical test cell have been probed.76 The inverted attempt, that is, the utilization of octaanionic H2P or ZnP for Coulombic interactions with positively charged SWCNTs – decorated with polyvinylbenzyltrimethylammonium (48) – was accomplished in 2008. During the course of this work, rather long lived charge separated states and remarkably high photocurrents were detected.77 Fig. 14  Examples of SWCNT systems prepared by mixed covalent/non-covalent functionalizations (47–49). Coordination chemistry has been used in further studies. Once again, the successful complexation of ZnP to the pyridine of poly-(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP) (49), which were covalently attached to HiPco SWCNTs by means of radical polymerization, was noticed in titration assays (Fig. 14). Once photoexcited, the formation of the ZnP˙+–PVP/SWCNT˙− charge separated state, which turned out to be stable on the microsecond time scale, evolved.78In the following, slightly different charge transfer active SWCNT-based systems will be discussed. A surprising work from 2004, for example, presented a conjugate composed of pyrene and SWCNTs linked by an aliphatic chain. Contrary to other studies involving SWCNTs and pyrenes, the deactivation via charge transfer has been proposed, when the investigations were carried out in the solid state.79 Boron-chelated azadipyrromethene (Bodipy) were incorporated into a SWCNT conjugate by means of a two step synthesis. A variety of spectroscopic and microscopic methods were used to characterize and understand the photophysical properties leading to clear evidence for the formation of a short lived charge separated state, in which Bodipy is oxidized and SWCNTs are reduced.80Chemical functionalization of grapheneGraphene is a newly available material with outstanding properties, which is expected to revolutionize the electronics industry. Nowadays, graphene is obtained through several approaches such as mechanical cleavage of graphite,81 epitaxial growth on single-crystal SiC,82 chemical vapor deposition on metal surfaces,83 chemical coupling reactions,84 sonication/intercalation,85 or ball milling.86 In pristine graphene, their sheets feature intact π-lattices. However, this material is fairly insoluble in common solvents, which, in turn, limits its applicability. As a consequence, soluble graphene oxide (GO) sheets are functionalized and further reduced to obtain functionalized graphene.87 It is notable that the obtained material – reduced graphene oxide (rGO) – reveals significantly modified electronic properties.88In the pursuit of practical applications, graphene has been modified by two different functionalization methods. On one hand, there is the non-covalent functionalization via adsorbing polycyclic aromatics or surfactants by π-stacking and/or hydrophobic interactions.89 On the other hand, the covalent functionalization involves the chemical grafting of molecular building blocks onto the sp2 carbons of the π-conjugated graphene honeycomb.Within the context of electronic applications and solar energy conversion, the development of functional structures based on graphene and photo- and/or electroactive units constitutes a tremendous challenge. In this regard, the association of graphene with electron donors or electron acceptors as a means to modify its electronic properties is an essential aspect for the fabrication of innovative optoelectronic devices.Non-covalent functionalization of graphene with electroactive building blocksThe interaction of organic molecules with graphene involves van der Waals forces or π–π stacking. It does not convert sp2-hybridized carbons into sp3-hybridized analogues and, as such, guarantees that the π-system of graphene remains unaltered. The delocalized π-electrons of graphene are, however, heavily affected by adsorbates. As a demonstration, the doping of graphene via non-covalent interactions with electron donors or electron acceptors gives rise to significant changes in the electronic structure of graphene.Graphene monolayers sandwiched by aromatic electron donating 1,5-naphthalenediamine (Na-NH2) and 9,10-dimethylanthracene (An-CH3) or electron withdrawing 9,10-dibromoanthracene (An-Br) and tetrasodium 1,3,6,8-pyrenetetrasulfonic acid (TPA) have been investigated using Raman spectroscopy.90 As documented for SWCNTs, the graphene G-band frequency is downshifted when doped with Na-NH2 and An-CH3, but upshifted upon doping with electron-accepting An-Br and TPA. Similar results were gathered by Rao and co-workers,91 who probed the behavior of aniline and TTF as electron donors and of nitrobenzene and tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) as electron acceptors. An important finding, namely that the 2D-band decreases in intensity, renders the I(2D)/I(G) ratio a sensitive probe for the electronic structure of graphene.92 For example, the electric conductivity decreases in the presence of electron donors, while an increase evolves when electron acceptors are employed.93Pyrene derivatives are known to feature strong affinities towards the graphene basal plane via π–π stacking. As such, graphene electron donor–acceptor hybrids were created using pyrene-1-sulfonic acid sodium salt (PyS).94 The planar aromatic structure of PyS anchors to the hydrophobic graphene skeleton and creates strong static repulsion forces between both the negatively charged PyS and the graphene sheets in solution. When used in bulk heterojunction solar cells, the overall power conversion efficiency was improved to 1.12% for graphene–donor composite films as electrodes from 0.78% for pristine graphene.The strength of the graphene–pyrene interactions was studied using a tripodal motif, which binds multivalently to graphene through three pyrenes.95 The presence of three pyrene “feet” enhances the overall stability and the orientational control compared to a reference system featuring just a single pyrene “foot”. A Co(II) bis-terpyridyl complex ([Co-tpy2]2+) was, for example, incorporated onto the graphene-immobilized tripod (50) (Fig. 15). Its binding constant and its surface coverage was measured through electrochemical detection of the Co2+/3+ redox couple and compared to the monopod. Interestingly, the binding energies of the monopod and the tripod are similar with 38.3 ± 0.5 and 38.8 ± 0.2 kJ mol−1, respectively. Fig. 15  Example of multivalent supramolecular binding of Co(II) bis-terpyridyl complex to graphene through three pyrene moieties (50). Chemically-converted graphene has also been decorated with a 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(1-methyl-4-pyridinio) porphyrin by means of electrostatic and cooperative π–π stacking interactions. Interestingly, the resulting complexes have been used as optical probes for the detection of Cd2+ ions.96Covalent functionalization of graphene with electroactive building blocksGraphene exhibits a considerably lower chemical reactivity than SWCNTs and C60. In contrast to C60 and similarly to open SWCNTs, two reactive sites are found in graphene, namely the edge sites and the basal plane. The basal plane, composed of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms with highly delocalized π-electrons, undergoes covalent addition reactions changing the carbon atoms from sp2 to sp3. However, these carbon atoms are less reactive than those at the edges, which adopt tetrahedral geometries without extra strain.Modulating the intrinsic properties of graphene, such as opening an electronic band gap or changing its doping level, has led to the development of a variety of chemical functionalization reactions that allow chemical coupling between various electronically active building blocks and graphene. Thus, the aryl diazonium salt modification of graphene is a versatile reaction that allows the attachment of many different functional groups only by changing the benzene substituents.97 The reaction takes place through a spontaneous electron transfer from the graphene honeycomb to the diazonium salt and has a strong dependence on the Fermi energy level of graphene and the density of states of the reagents influencing the reaction rate.98 The nitrophenyl is a typical electron-withdrawing group, which has been anchored via aryl diazonium salt reactions onto graphene. The electric conductivity of the nitrophenyl-modified graphene depends on the functionalization degree, with a decrease in conductivity at low levels of functionalization and an opposite effect for highly functionalized graphene.99Among the different classes of electron donors covalently attached to graphene, porphyrins stand out. Porphyrins have been linked to different graphene derivatives. For example, solution processable GO sheets with reactive carboxylic acid groups have been modified via amide bonds (51) (Fig. 16).100 Fig. 16  Examples of porphyrin–graphene materials obtained using amidation reaction on the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction (51), carboxylic acid groups (52) or Suzuki reaction (53). In contrast, pristine and inert graphene makes the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition a suitable approach for the introduction of porphyrins by chemical modification (52, 53) (Fig. 16). This cycloaddition has generated two types of graphene-based hybrid materials, namely graphene–tetraphenylporphyrin and graphene–palladium tetraphenylporphyrin.101 The relatively low degree of functionalization, as shown by TGA analysis and Raman spectroscopy, allows the retention of the inherent properties of graphene compared to GO derivatives. This renders the latter suitable for applications in solar cells or sensors.Photoinduced electron transfer from porphyrin to chemically converted graphene (CCG) has occurred when the organic donor molecule was fixed by means of Suzuki coupling between iodophenyl-functionalized CCG and porphyrin boronic ester in two steps.102 First, a Tour reaction of surfactant-wrapped CCG with a p-iodobenzenediazonium salt afforded iodophenyl groups on the CCG surface.103 Second, a Suzuki coupling of a porphyrin boronic ester with the CCG-functionalized material gave rise to porphyrin-grafted CCG. The short and rigid phenylene spacer avoids the photocurrent response compared to longer spacers.102However, a more suitable reaction to anchor porphyrins is the CuAAC reaction between azide and alkyne moieties forming a 1,4-substituted 1,2,3-triazole ring. This click-type reaction retains the conjugation required for electronic transport and, in turn, allows the study of transport properties. Photoactive ZnP and ruthenium phenanthrolines have also been anchored to hydrazine-reduced graphite oxide using this methodology.104 The reduced graphene was firstly modified by 4-(trimethylsilyl)ethynylaniline via the aryl diazonium salt reaction. An in situ deprotection step with tetrabutylammonium fluoride exposes the alkyl group, which is a platform to attach the photoactive molecules through the click-type reaction.Photoactive anionic porphyrins are introduced as counter anions to an imidazolium-modified hybrid with a positively charged imidazolium fragment.105 1-(3-Aminopropyl) imidazoles were covalently grafted at the peripheral edges of graphene oxide sheets through amidation reactions followed by an N-alkylation of the imidazole ring with butyl bromide, namely the imidazolium moiety with bromine as counter anion. The exchange of the Br counter anion for the anionic porphyrin creates a photoactive material.Phthalocyanines are interesting excited state electron donors. The tunable oxygen-containing groups of GOs have been the starting point for its doping through condensation reactions between amino-phthalocyanines and the carboxylic acid groups.106 XPS as well as Raman provide useful information about graphene oxide covalently functionalized with unsymmetrically substituted ZnPc, confirming the formation of the amide group. A red-shift of the N 1s peak of 0.56 eV was observed compared to free ZnPc due to the electron withdrawing effect of GOs.Torres and co-workers reported on the first covalent graphene–Pc with non-modified graphene.107 The liquid phase exfoliation of graphite in N-methyl pyrrolidone was chosen to obtain pristine graphene for further chemical modification. The covalent modification of few layered graphene uses the Prato protocol to introduce terminal carboxylic acid groups. These carboxylic groups are susceptible to reacting via esterification reactions to afford graphene–Pc conjugates.Among the electron donors employed for the preparation of covalent-modified graphite, exTTF represents an interesting class. π-exTTF undergoes aromatization upon oxidation, affording thermodynamically stable radical cations and dications at relatively low oxidation potentials.108 The nucleophilic [2 + 1] cyclopropanation of the C–C double bonds of graphene in the presence of a base, also called the Bingel–Hirsch reaction, has been used to obtain exTTF-modified graphene.109 In fact, exfoliated graphene obtained by sonication in benzylamine was chemically modified with diethyl malonate containing a π-exTTF derivative using microwave irradiation.The approach based on the low band gap conjugated polymer poly[(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-co-alt-(9,9-bis-(6-azidohexyl)fluorene)] is quite different. The latter has been covalently attached to graphene flakes using the CuAAC reaction between alkyne-modified graphene and an azide-functionalized polymer.110 Hereby, the alkyne functionalities were introduced either through an amidation reaction or a diazonium salt generated in situ. As revealed by XPS analysis of the CC groups, Tour's reaction affords around 33% more alkyne groups than the respective amidation reaction on the graphene surface.Finally, it should be mentioned that the electron acceptor tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) has been found to react as a dienophile in Diels–Alder [4 + 2] cycloaddition reactions with graphene at room temperature (54) (Fig. 17).111 Interestingly, the zero energy gap electronic structure of graphene allows it to react as either a diene or a dienophile, proving the versatility of the Diels–Alder synthetic protocol. Fig. 17  Example of Diels–Alder cycloaddition reactions on a graphene sheet with electron-accepting TCNE (54). Energy transfer reactions in non-covalent electron donor–acceptor hybrids – grapheneRecently, theoretical and experimental studies have shown that graphene can be applied as a highly efficient quencher for various organic chromophores (55, 56)112 and quantum dots (57)113 (QDs) (Fig. 18). Most of the studies are, however, limited to GO, or rGO-related materials rather than graphene.114 In the following we discuss FRET in pristine graphene-based systems – see Table 3. Fig. 18  Examples of FRET between pyrene (55), ZnP (56), CdSe QDs (57) and graphene. 
Table 3 Summary of charge and energy transfer rates and device efficiencies of the discussed graphene hybrid systems

CompoundReferenceτ (CS)τ (CR)Device Efficiency55112 Energy Transfer 56112 Energy Transfer 57113 Energy Transfer 58119b Energy Transfer 59119b Energy Transfer —100 Energy/Electron Transfer —101 Energy/Electron Transfer —102 Energy/Electron Transfer —135—900 ns——136—164 ps——137—150 ps——1387 ps/<1 ps192/135 ps——140—265 ps——141—360 ps—611073.3 ps270 ps—Theoretical results showed that the rate of the nanoscale, long-range resonance energy transfer was suggested to have d−4 dependence on distance (d), in striking contrast to the d−6 dependence predicted from traditional FRET.115 This theoretical assumption allows for long range interaction with chromophores, for example, pyrene, on the order of 30 nm, which is not possible within usual molecular donor–acceptor systems.115aDipole–dipole interactions between chromophores (55, 56) or QDs (57) and the π-electron system of graphene are likely to be responsible. Returning the excited donor to its ground state by electron–hole pair quenching may yield in electronic excitation of graphene.116 This process accounts for electron–hole generation in graphene, which is effectively controlled by the absorption and quantum yield of the attached chromophore.117Next to FRET, which usually occurs as a singlet energy transfer, triplet states are also observed to be quenched in the presence of graphene. This was studied by measuring Stern–Volmer plots with the help of laser flash photolysis, where the graphene concentration was varied and acts as a quencher with pyrene, porphyrins, and ruthenium chromophores.112a Furthermore, FRET from QDs to single and few-layer graphene was observed.113,116a Electronically excited species by means of electron–hole pair generation in semiconductor QDs were quenched by resonant energy transfer when attached to graphene.113An extraordinary increase of 610% in the photosensitivity of graphene was measured when ZnP was grafted onto ribbons of CVD-grown graphene.118 Such an observation calls for the implementation of graphene in light conversion systems by improving the absorption capability.Energy transfer in covalent electron donor–acceptor conjugates – grapheneUnlike the aforementioned non-covalent functionalization, a covalent linkage allows for a better-refined distance-dependent photophysical investigation, which is crucial for studying energy transfer – see Table 3. In this regard, a precise work has been elaborated by varying the distance from 3 (58) to 6.8 nm (59) for light-emitting biotin attached to CVD-grown graphene.119 Upon decreasing the distance the fluorescence quenching is enhanced by a factor of 7.5 (Fig. 19). Fig. 19  Examples of biotin-functionalized graphene sheets (58–59). Furthermore, different graphene derivatives like rGO,102,104 graphene from graphite120 or CVD-grown graphene were applied.119a Insights into energy transfer characteristics are studied by attaching porphyrins. For example, porphyrins were implemented by cycloaddition101 or aryl addition102 using diazonium salt chemistry.The photoinduced energy transfer characteristics from the photoexcited porphyrin to rGO takes place within 38 ps and is followed by a fast decay of rGO excited state after 0.3 ps.102 In contrast, when phenylene-acetylene was introduced to rGO and the porphyrin was attached by a CuAAC reaction, the distance between electron donor and electron acceptor is increased and mirrored by possible competing electron transfer processes.104As such, these few examples allow us to illustrate a less-developed but important area of graphene.Electron transfer reactions in non-covalent electron donor–acceptor hybrids – grapheneThe non-covalent linkage of chemical building blocks onto graphene has been widely used to prevent the strong van der Waals interactions between individual graphene sheets. In particular, the use of electroactive building blocks has allowed the control of its p- and n-type semiconducting electronic properties. In this regard, considering the shifting of charges of an attached chromophore from or to graphene, a distinction between doping or photoexcited electron transfer is feasible – see Table 3. To this end, novel ways for enhancing graphene's photoresponsivity are achieved by p- or n-type doping.90,121Graphene's unique electronic properties are defined by its linear dispersion relation of charge carriers, where π and π*-bands are degenerate at the corners of the K-points, the so-called Dirac points. Normal filling of the π-band results in the coincidence with the Fermi level and a density of states of zero at this place, resulting in semimetallic behavior. Electron and hole transport in field effect devices can be easily controlled by electrical doping by means of applying and changing an external gate voltage.81 In this regard, although interactions of graphene with substrates or atmosphere causes band gap opening,122 more precise control of the type of carrier and the concentration is achieved by molecular or atomic doping. Applying small molecules like CO, NH3 and alkali metals122a,123 enables n-type doping of graphene, while p-type doping is accomplished with H2O or NO2.124 Moreover, NH3 is prone to react with the π-network of graphene by forming covalent bonds at the edges when electrothermally treated.121a Hence, ammonia is also applied for the direct integration of nitrogen into graphene, resulting in intrinsically doped graphene. Also other heteroatoms, such as boron or phosphorus, are conceivable.125Alternatively, charge transfer doping can be achieved by heavy atoms or halogens.126 For example, epitaxially grown graphene on a silicon substrate is n-type doped, where adsorption of bismuth or antimony resulted in a shift downwards of the Fermi level. In contrast, gold resulted in a p-type doping and filling of the π*-bands.127 Consequently, another approach for controlled doping emerged by organic molecule doping. Theoretical calculations emphasized the capability of the π-electrons to interact with graphene's basal plane and to undergo charge transfer processes.90 For this purpose, the most prominently studied molecule is tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ), which is known to form electron donor–acceptor salts with other organic molecules due to its very high electron affinity (Eea = 5.24 eV). From theoretical considerations121b,128 and experiments121c charge transfer from graphene to TCNQ (60) is observed, resulting in a fine tuning of the band gap hole concentration by adjusting the TCNQ concentration (Fig. 20).129 Fig. 20  Examples of non-covalently functionalized graphene with TCNQ (60). Interestingly, upon adsorption of TCNQ onto rippled graphene/Ru(0001), each isolated TCNQ acquires charges from graphene, resulting in localized magnetic moments and a prominent Kondo resonance. Upon completion of the TCNQ monolayer, the delocalization within a spatially extended band preserves a common orientation of the electron spins, as revealed by spin-polarized STM. Thus, a magnetically ordered, 2D organic layer has been created by charge donation from graphene/Ru(0001) to TCNQ.130Since the most powerful characterization techniques for doping effects are Raman spectroscopy and transport measurements together with photo emission spectroscopy (PES), all these approaches are limited to non-wet chemical methods and the characterization of just a few flakes.Nevertheless, wet chemical modification offers an insight into a larger cross-section and makes modified graphene sheets available for new electronic processes like ink printing.131 Therefore, next to TCNQ132 stabilized sheets in aqueous solution, larger aromatic systems like naphthalene, anthracene90 and pyrene are suitable for stabilizing graphene sheets by π–π interactions.94,133 The periphery of π-surfactants can be fine-tuned by chemical modification by means of introducing electron withdrawing and/or electron donating groups.90 For example, the implementation of azo-benzenes as optical switches enables for light-stimulated control of the electrical conductance of graphene.134The interaction of light with such pyrene/graphene systems was studied with time-resolved techniques and proven to be electron transfer next to energy transfer.135 Pyrene-modified CdTe QDs were applied to mediate the exfoliation and direct functionalization of graphite in aqueous solution.136The versatility of such charged pyrene derivatives was further extended to highly charged photoactive porphyrin derivatives, whereupon electrostatic interaction electron transfer was proven by time resolved pump probe spectroscopy.137 Similar results are obtained with pyrene-functionalized porphyrin and phthalocyanine derivatives.138 Direct immobilization of porphyrins and phthalocyanines onto graphene include electrostatic associated porphyrins and GO, followed by reduction.139 The direct exfoliation of natural graphite and concomitant functionalization of tetra-alkyl substituted derivatives, like porphyrins140 or phthalocyanines141 avoids the harsh reduction conditions and allows for in-solution measurements. Altogether, ultrafast charge separation (1011 to 1012 s−1) in the excited state goes hand in hand with a rapid singlet decay and the formation of new maxima, which can be attributed to the one-electron oxidized radical cation of the porphyrin and phthalocyanine, respectively, with charge recombination rates on the order of 109 s−1.Electron transfer reactions in covalent electron donor–acceptor conjugates – grapheneLike in the aforementioned covalent functionalization of CNTs, a main drawback of the covalent chemical modification of graphene is the saturation of double bonds and, therefore, the disruption of the π-network. In contrast, an advantage for the non-covalent functionalization is the non-destructive interaction with photo- and redox-active chromophores. However, the number of functional groups immobilized onto graphene is in equilibrium with free chromophores in dispersion. Therefore, the amount of functional groups on the basal plane of graphene is limited and the photospectroscopic informations are a cross-section of free chromophores and attached ones.Overcoming this problem requires the covalent functionalization of light-harvesting, electron-donating, or electron-accepting chromophores. To this end, porphyrins and phthalocyanines covalently attached to graphene are characterized by strong emission quenching, which next to energy transfer – vide supra – is supposed to originate from underlying electron transfer reactions (Fig. 21 and Table 3).101,102 Confirmation for electron transfer in covalently designed hybrid materials came from a phthalocyanine-graphene (61).107 Here, physicochemical characterizations reveal an ultrafast charge separation of 3.3 ps from the photoexcited phthalocyanine to few-layer graphene followed by a charge recombination of 270 ps. Fig. 21  Example of a covalently functionalized graphene with phthalocyanine derivatives (61). Needless to say that this is an underdeveloped topic in graphene science and much more work is needed in order to gather more precise conclusions about the potentiality of covalently functionalized graphene as a truly and readily available candidate for realistic applications in the so-called organic electronics.ConclusionsIn summary, we have highlighted the most important chemical approaches based on non-covalent and covalent linkages between low dimensional nanocarbons, namely single and multiwall carbon nanotubes as well as graphene, and a variety of electroactive species en-route to novel electron donor–acceptor ensembles. To date, a large number of SWCNT based hybrids are known, while the number of examples related to graphene is significantly smaller due, in part, to its lower chemical reactivity stemming from its planar nature. Furthermore, whereas the covalent chemistry significantly disrupts the electronic properties of the carbon nanostructures, non-covalent interactions allow a better electronic communication without damaging the π-network of the corresponding nanocarbon structures.Emphasis is placed on the electronic communication en-route to novel electron donor–acceptor conjugates and hybrids in relation to their covalent and non-covalent chemistry, respectively. In particular, the most relevant examples regarding energy and electron transfer processes, involving electroactive porphyrins, phthalocyanines, tetrathiafulvalenes, ferrocenes, perylene bisimides or simple polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, among others, have been surveyed. A common denominator to any of the highlighted conjugates/hybrids is charge transport across different scales, that is, from individual molecular conjugates/hybrids to morphologically controlled devices. This is largely motivated by the interest and the potential applicability for the preparation of organic optoelectronic devices.The many examples described in this Minireview clearly document that low dimensional CNTs and graphene are important carbon materials, which, however, are still far from practical applications in the area of molecular electronics. In this regard, based on the advances achieved in their chemical modification within recent years, new possibilities of more easy to handle materials with better tailored properties can be designed and synthesized. This non-comprehensive, but systematic review aims to encourage chemists to pursue the many challenges still open on these low-dimensional carbon species, which represent a new playground scenario for the scientific community.Notes and references
  (a) D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, Carbon nanotubes and related structures, Wiley VCH, Weinheim,  2010 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Martín and J. F. Nierengarten, Supramolecular chemistry of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, Wiley VCH, Weinheim,  2012 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Akasaka, F. Wudl and S. Nagase, Chemistry of nanocarbons, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2010 Search PubMed .
  (a) W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, Y. Lin, M. J. Meziani, L. M. Veca, L. Cao, P. Zhang, M. M. Kimani and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1415–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11884–11885 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) F. Cheng, S. Zhang, A. Adronov, L. Echegoyen and F. Diederich, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 6062–6070 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) F. Cheng and A. Adronov, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5053–5059 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. Satake, Y. Miyajima and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. K. Sprafke, S. D. Stranks, J. H. Warner, R. J. Nicholas and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2313–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. D. Stranks, J. K. Sprafke, H. L. Anderson and R. J. Nicholas, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2307–2315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. M. Andrade, P. Raja, V. K. Saini, A. S. Viana, P. Serp and S. M. B. Costa, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3622–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. S. Zarudnev, A. M. Plokhotnichenko, V. S. Leontiev, I. A. Levitsky and V. A. Karachevtsev, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10795–10804 RSC .F. D'Souza, S. K. Das, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19922–19930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) X. Peng, N. Komatsu, S. Bhattacharya, T. Shimawaki, S. Aonuma, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Peng, N. Komatsu, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15947–15953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Peng, H. Qin, L. Li, Y. Huang, J. Peng, Y. Cao and N. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5764–5769 RSC .D. S. Lawrence and D. G. Whitten, Photochem. Photobiol., 1996, 64, 923–935 CrossRef CAS .G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6768–6816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Bartelmess, A. R. M. Soares, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tome, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3490–3492 RSC .F. D'Souza, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2586–2593 CrossRef CAS .C. Huang, R. K. Wang, B. M. Wong, D. J. McGee, F. Léonard, Y. J. Kim, K. F. Johnson, M. S. Arnold, M. A. Eriksson and P. Gopalan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7767–7774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Setaro, P. Bluemmel, C. Maity, S. Hecht and S. Reich, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2425–2431 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. Le Goff, K. Gorgy, M. Holzinger, R. Haddad, M. Zimmerman and S. Cosnier, Chem. Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10216–10221 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S.-N. Ding, D. Shan, S. Cosnier and A. Le Goff, Chem. Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11564–11568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Schulz-Drost, V. Sgobba, C. Gerhards, S. Leubner, R. M. Krick Calderon, A. Ruland and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6425–6429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) D. Canevet, A. Perez del Pino, D. B. Amabilino and M. Salle, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2898–2902 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Wurl, S. Goossen, D. Canevet, M. Sallé, E. M. Pérez, N. Martín and C. Klinke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20062–20066 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) D. M. Guldi, E. Menna, M. Maggini, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli, M. Prato, G. M. A. Rahman and S. Schergna, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3975–3983 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. W. Smith, M. Monthioux and D. E. Luzzi, Nature, 1998, 396, 323–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Iqbal, M. Chhowalla and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2406–2411 RSC .A. Troeger, M. Ledendecker, J. T. Margraf, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, B. F. Vieweg, E. Spiecker, S.-L. Suraru and F. Würthner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 536–540 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Backes, C. D. Schmidt, K. Rosenlehner, F. Hauke, J. N. Coleman and A. Hirsch, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 788–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Backes, C. D. Schmidt, F. Hauke, C. Böttcher and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2172–2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Backes, F. Hauke, C. D. Schmidt and A. Hirsch, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2643–2645 RSC .
  (a) T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, S. Seki, Y. Matano, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Nakao, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1767–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Umeyama and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3195–3209 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shen, A. G. Skirtach, T. Seki, S. Yagai, H. Li, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8566–8568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, F. Kawashima, S. Seki, Y. Matano, Y. Nakao, T. Shishido, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4615–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) A. Nish, J.-Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Ozawa, X. Yi, T. Fujigaya, Y. Niidome, T. Asano and N. Nakashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14771–14777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Jakubka, S. P. Schießl, S. Martin, J. M. Englert, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch and J. Zaumseil, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 815–819 CrossRef CAS .Y. Chen, A. Malkovskiy, X.-Q. Wang, M. Lebron-Colon, A. P. Sokolov, K. Perry, K. More and Y. Pang, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) P. Singh, S. Campidelli, S. Giordani, D. Bonifazi, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2214–2230 RSC ; 
  (b) N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) D. Baskaran, J. W. Mays, X. P. Zhang and M. S. Bratcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6916–6917 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yu, S. Mathew, B. S. Flavel, M. R. Johnston and J. G. Shapter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8788–8796 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Ehli, S. Campidelli, F. G. Brunetti, M. Prato and D. M. Guldi, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 442–447 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Delgado, P. de la Cruz, F. Langa, A. Urbina, J. Casado and J. T. Lopez Navarrete, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1734–1735 RSC .S. Giordani, J.-F. Colomer, F. Cattaruzza, J. Alfonsi, M. Meneghetti, M. Prato and D. Bonifazi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 578–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhao, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, L. He and J. Zheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4894–4902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. L. Bahr, J. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536–6542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Clave and S. Campidelli, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1887–1896 RSC .G. Tuci, C. Vinattieri, L. Luconi, M. Ceppatelli, S. Cicchi, A. Brandi, J. Filippi, M. Melucci and G. Giambastiani, Chem. Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8454–8463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Palacin, H. L. Khanh, B. Jousselme, P. Jegou, A. Filoramo, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and S. Campidelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15394–15402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. H. Le Ho, L. Rivier, B. Jousselme, P. Jegou, A. Filoramo and S. Campidelli, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8731–8733 RSC .I. Hijazi, B. Jousselme, P. Jegou, A. Filoramo and S. Campidelli, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20936–20942 RSC .D. M. Guldi, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, N. Tagmatarchis, D. Tasis, E. Vázquez and M. Prato, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4206–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Das, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, M. E. Zandler, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, Chem. Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11388–11398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. M. A. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 62–65 RSC .U. Hahn, S. Engmann, C. Oelsner, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6392–6401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) J. Bartelmess, C. Ehli, J.-J. Cid, M. Garcia-Iglesias, P. Vazquez, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8014–8020 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Bartelmess, C. Ehli, J.-J. Cid, M. Garcia-Iglesias, P. Vazquez, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 652–660 RSC .J. Bartelmess, B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, D. Kiessling, S. Campidelli, M. Prato, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16202–16211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Ince, J. Bartelmess, D. Kiessling, K. Dirian, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1472–1480 RSC .M. A. Herranz, C. Ehli, S. Campidelli, M. Gutiérrez, G. L. Hug, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, M. Prato, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 66–73 CrossRef PubMed .C. Romero-Nieto, R. García, M. A. Herranz, C. Ehli, M. Ruppert, A. Hirsch, D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9183–9192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. G. Brunetti, C. Romero-Nieto, J. López-Andarias, C. Atienza, J. L. López, D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. S. Hecht, R. J. A. Ramirez, M. Briman, E. Artukovic, K. S. Chichak, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. J. Boul, D.-G. Cho, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Marquez, Z. Ou, K. M. Kadish, D. M. Guldi and J. L. Sessler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5683–5687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) C. Ehli, C. Oelsner, D. M. Guldi, A. Mateo-Alonso, M. Prato, C. Schmidt, C. Backes, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 243–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Oelsner, C. Schmidt, F. Hauke, M. Prato, A. Hirsch and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4580–4586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Shen, J. S. Reparaz, M. R. Wagner, A. Hoffmann, C. Thomsen, J.-O. Lee, S. Heeg, B. Hatting, S. Reich, A. Saeki, S. Seki, K. Yoshida, S. S. Babu, H. Mohwald and T. Nakanishi, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2243–2250 RSC .A. S. D. Sandanayaka, E. Maligaspe, T. Hasobe, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8749–8751 RSC .
  (a) N. Nakashima, Y. Tomonari and H. Murakami, Chem. Lett., 2002, 31, 638–639 CrossRef ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5526–5530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) A. S. D. Sandanayaka, R. Chitta, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13425–13432 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. K. Das, N. K. Subbaiyan, F. D'Souza, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Hasobe and O. Ito, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 707–716 RSC .
  (a) F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem. Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8277–8284 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, S. K. Das, R. Chitta, E. Maligaspe, T. Hasobe, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2266–2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15865–15871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
  (a) E. A. Lipman, B. Schuler, O. Bakajin and W. A. Eaton, Science, 2003, 301, 1233–1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) E. M. Goldys, Fluorescence Applications in Biotechnology and Life Sciences, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, United States of America,  2009 Search PubMed .
  (a) A. M. van Oijen, M. Ketelaars, J. Köhler, T. J. Aartsma and J. Schmidt, Science, 1999, 285, 400–402 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. A. Bopp, A. Sytnik, T. D. Howard, R. J. Cogdell and R. M. Hochstrasser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 11271–11276 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) L. J. Carlson and T. D. Krauss, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 235–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Wang, G. Dukovic, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Science, 2005, 308, 838–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. Zhao and S. Mazumdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 157402 CrossRef PubMed .V. Georgakilas, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Holzinger and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 760–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) L. Qu, R. B. Martin, W. Huang, K. Fu, D. Zweifel, Y. Lin, Y.-P. Sun, C. E. Bunker, B. A. Harruff, J. R. Gord and L. F. Allard, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 8089–8094 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Li, M. E. Kose, L. Qu, Y. Lin, R. B. Martin, B. Zhou, B. A. Harruff, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 185, 94–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) M. D'Este, M. De Nardi and E. Menna, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 2006, 2517–2522 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Cordella, M. De Nardi, E. Menna, C. Hébert and M. A. Loi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1264–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Li, R. B. Martin, B. A. Harruff, R. A. Carino, L. F. Allard and Y. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 896–900 CrossRef CAS .M. Alvaro, P. Atienzar, P. de la Cruz, J. L. Delgado, V. Troiani, H. Garcia, F. Langa, A. Palkar and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6626–6635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Oelsner, M. A. Herrero, C. Ehli, M. Prato and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18696–18706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Herranz, N. Martín, S. Campidelli, M. Prato, G. Brehm and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4478–4482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Gema de la, B. Werner and T. Tomas, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 765 CrossRef .B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, W. Blau and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5061–5068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Campidelli, B. Ballesteros, A. Filoramo, D. D. Díaz, G. de la Torre, T. Torres, G. M. A. Rahman, C. Ehli, D. Kiessling, F. Werner, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, C. Cioffi, M. Prato and J.-P. Bourgoin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11503–11509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Ballesteros, S. Campidelli, G. de la Torre, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi, M. Prato and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2950–2952 RSC .Z. Guo, F. Du, D. Ren, Y. Chen, J. Zheng, Z. Liu and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3021–3030 RSC .T. Arai, S. Nobukuni, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14493–14499 CAS .S. Campidelli, C. Sooambar, E. Lozano Diz, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12544–12552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. M. Guldi, G. N. A. Rahman, J. Ramey, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Qin, W. T. Ford, D. Balbinot, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2034–2035 RSC .D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Prato, N. Jux, S. Qin and W. Ford, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2015–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. M. A. Rahman, A. Troeger, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, N. Jux, D. Balbino, M. N. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, A. Mateo-Alonso and M. Prato, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8837–8846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, S. Qin, M. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2152–2161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Álvaro, P. Atienzar, J. L. Bourdelande and H. García, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 384, 119–123 CrossRef PubMed .K. Flavin, K. Lawrence, J. Bartelmess, M. Tasior, C. Navio, C. Bittencourt, D. F. O'Shea, D. M. Guldi and S. Giordani, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1198–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, L. Zhi, N. Tsao, Ž. Tomović, J. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2990–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I.-Y. Jeon, Y.-R. Shin, G.-J. Sohn, H.-J. Choi, S.-Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, M.-J. Kim, D. Wook Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .C. Gómez-Navarro, R. T. Weitz, A. M. Bittner, M. Scolari, A. Mews, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3499–3503 CrossRef PubMed .V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Dong, D. Fu, W. Fang, Y. Shi, P. Chen and L.-J. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 1422–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) B. Das, R. Voggu, C. S. Rout and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5155–5157 RSC ; 
  (b) V. Rakesh, D. Barun, R. Chandra Sekhar and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 472204 CrossRef .A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. K. Sood, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. S. Subrahmanyam, R. Voggu, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 472, 96–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Su, S. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3191–3195 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Mann, J. Rodríguez-López, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17614–17617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xu, L. Zhao, H. Bai, W. Hong, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13490–13497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Englert, C. Dotzer, G. Yang, M. Schmid, C. Papp, J. M. Gottfried, H.-P. Steinrück, E. Spiecker, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 279–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, P. Ramesh, C. Berger, M. Sprinkle, W. A. de Heer and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1336–1337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) R. Sharma, J. H. Baik, C. J. Perera and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 398–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Huang, H. Zhu, L. Jing, Y. Zhao and X. Gao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7945–7949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, L. Hou, A. Cnossen, A. C. Coleman, O. Ivashenko, P. Rudolf, B. J. van Wees, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8957–8964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Umeyama, J. Mihara, N. Tezuka, Y. Matano, K. Stranius, V. Chukharev, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, K. Noda, K. Matsushige, T. Shishido, Z. Liu, K. Hirose-Takai, K. Suenaga and H. Imahori, Chem. Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Jian and J. M. Tour, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 3396–3424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-X. Wang, K.-G. Zhou, Y.-L. Xie, J. Zeng, N.-N. Chai, J. Li and H.-L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5747–5749 RSC .N. Karousis, S. P. Economopoulos, E. Sarantopoulou and N. Tagmatarchis, Carbon, 2010, 48, 854–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Chen, J. Wang, B. Zhang, J. Zhang and W. J. Blau, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1900–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M.-E. Ragoussi, J. Malig, G. Katsukis, B. Butz, E. Spiecker, G. de la Torre, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6421–6425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) Y. Yamashita, Y. Kobayashi and T. Miyashi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 1989, 28, 1052–1053 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. R. Bryce, A. J. Moore, M. Hasan, G. J. Ashwell, A. T. Fraser, W. Clegg, M. B. Hursthouse and A. I. Karaulov, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1450–1452 CrossRef ; 
  (c) C. A. Christensen, A. S. Batsanov and M. R. Bryce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10484–10490 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) N. Martín, L. Sánchez, C. Seoane, E. Ortí, P. M. Viruela and R. Viruela, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 1268–1279 CrossRef .S. P. Economopoulos, G. Rotas, Y. Miyata, H. Shinohara and N. Tagmatarchis, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7499–7507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Castelaín, G. Martínez, P. Merino, J. Á. Martín-Gago, J. L. Segura, G. Ellis and H. J. Salavagione, Chem. Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4965–4973 CrossRef PubMed .
  (a) S. Sarkar, E. Bekyarova, S. Niyogi and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3324–3327 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Sarkar, E. Bekyarova and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 673–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) M. de Miguel, M. Álvaro and H. García, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2849–2857 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, S. p. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2964–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) Y. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, J. Li and Y. Lin, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 205–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Dong, W. Gao, F. Yan, H. Ji and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5511–5517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) R. S. Swathi and K. L. Sebastian, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 086101 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. S. Swathi and K. L. Sebastian, J. Chem. Sci., 2009, 121, 777–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. S. Swathi and K. L. Sebastian, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 054703 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) R. S. Swathi and K. L. Sebastian, J. Chem. Sci., 2012, 124, 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. N. J. Persson and N. D. Lang, Phys. Rev. B, 1982, 26, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. A. Velizhanin and A. Efimov, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 84, 085401 CrossRef .
  (a) M. Begliarbekov, O. Sul, J. Santanello, N. Ai, X. Zhang, E.-H. Yang and S. Strauf, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1254–1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. J. Echtermeyer, L. Britnell, P. K. Jasnos, A. Lombardo, R. V. Gorbachev, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Thongrattanasiri, F. H. L. Koppens and F. J. García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 047401 CrossRef .M. S. Choi, D. J. Lee, S. J. Lee, D. H. Hwang, J. H. Lee, N. Aoki, Y. Ochiai, H.-J. Kim, D. Whang, S. Kim and S. W. Hwang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 163116 CrossRef .
  (a) A. Kasry, A. A. Afzali, S. Oida, S.-J. Han, B. Menges and G. S. Tulevski, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4879–4881 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Kasry, A. A. Ardakani, G. S. Tulevski, B. Menges, M. Copel and L. Vyklicky, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2858–2862 CrossRef CAS .N. Karousis, J. Ortiz, K. Ohkubo, T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi, Á. Sastre-Santos and N. Tagmatarchis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20564–20573 CAS .
  (a) X. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. Wang, J. Guo and H. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Pinto, R. Jones, J. P. Goss and P. R. Briddon, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 402001 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) G. Gómez-Santos and T. Stauber, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 84, 165438 CrossRef .
  (a) T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Science, 2006, 313, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Y. Zhou, G. H. Gweon, A. V. Fedorov, P. N. First, W. A. de Heer, D. H. Lee, F. Guinea, A. H. Castro Neto and A. Lanzara, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 770–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, J. L. McChesney, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206802 CrossRef .
  (a) T. O. Wehling, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, E. E. Vdovin, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and A. I. Lichtenstein, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 173–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Y. Zhou, D. A. Siegel, A. V. Fedorov and A. Lanzara, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 086402 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 125416 CrossRef .
  (a) V. V. Strelko, V. S. Kuts and P. A. Thrower, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1499–1503 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, V. M. Karpan, J. van den Brink and P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 026803 CrossRef CAS .I. Gierz, C. Riedl, U. Starke, C. R. Ast and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Tian, J. Xu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 11377–11381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) C. Coletti, C. Riedl, D. S. Lee, B. Krauss, L. Patthey, K. von Klitzing, J. H. Smet and U. Starke, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 235401 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Barja, M. Garnica, J. J. Hinarejos, A. L. Vazquez de Parga, N. Martin and R. Miranda, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8198–8200 RSC .M. Garnica, D. Stradi, S. Barja, F. Calleja, C. Diaz, M. Alcami, N. Martin, A. L. Vazquez de Parga, F. Martin and R. Miranda, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 368–374 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Malig, J. M. Englert, A. Hirsch and D. M. Guldi, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2011, 20, 53–56 CAS ; 
  (b) J. Malig, N. Jux and D. M. Guldi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 53–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Hao, W. Qian, L. Zhang and Y. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6576–6578 RSC .
  (a) X. An, T. Simmons, R. Shah, C. Wolfe, K. M. Lewis, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak, S. Talapatra and S. Kar, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4295–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Kim, N. S. Safron, C. Huang, M. S. Arnold and P. Gopalan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 182–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, K. S. Subrahmanyam, K. Venkata Rao, S. J. George and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 506, 260–264 CrossRef PubMed .G. Katsukis, J. Malig, C. Schulz-Drost, S. Leubner, N. Jux and D. M. Guldi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1915–1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Malig, C. Romero-Nieto, N. Jux and D. M. Guldi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 800–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. B. Kc, S. K. Das, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi and F. D'Souza, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11859–11861 RSC .A. Wojcik and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6697–6706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Malig, A. W. I. Stephenson, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, D. L. Officer and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8745–8747 RSC .J. Malig, N. Jux, D. Kiessling, J.-J. Cid, P. Vázquez, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3561–3565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Leading examples of ZnP (1), ZnP-trimers (2), and ZnP-oligomers (3) used for the preparation of SWCNT nanohybrids.	 

 	Fig. 2  Examples of chiral diporphyrin tweezers (4–7) designed for the separation of SWCNTs of different chiralities.	 

 	Fig. 3  Examples of pyrene-based electroactive systems (8–14) used to interact with SWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Examples of covalent functionalization of SWCNTs with ferrocene (15), ZnP (16), and Pc (17) by Tour's reaction and a subsequent CuAAC reaction, that is, a click chemistry approach.	 


18	41	 	250 ps	—
19	42	—	∼100 ps	—
20	43	3a ps	>3a ns	15%/23%
21	44	—	124b ps/137c ps	2.5%
22	45	<1 ps	2.9 ns	—
23	46	2.5d ps/5e ps	160d ps/380e ps	—
24	47	5 ps	105f ps/260g ps	—
26	49	—	—	—
27	50ah/50bi	<1 ps/4.5 ps	300 ps/170 ps	—
28	51	—	—	Up to 5%
29	52	—	55f ns/83g ns	1%f/0.35%g
30	53b	—	400 ns	—
31	54	230f ps/110g ps	140f ns/120g ns	—/—
32	54	290f ps/140g ps	220f ns/160g ns	—/8%
33	55	570f ps/260g ps	111f ns/94g ns	—/12%
34	55	580f ps/470g ps	100f ns/63g ns	—/—
35	56	250 ps	100 ns	—/—

 	Fig. 5  Examples of phthalocyanines (18–20) and azulenocyanine (21) utilized (40) to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Examples of extended tetrathiafulvalene (exTTF) derivatives (22–24) utilized to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples of n-type building blocks (25–29) utilized to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Examples of non-covalently functionalized SWCNTs through electrostatic forces (30–32).	 

 	Fig. 9  Examples of non-covalently functionalized SWCNTs by means of crown ether moieties (33–35).	 

15	30	—	—	—
16	35,36	—	—	—
17	35,36	—	—	17.3% (IPCE)
36	62	 	Energy Transfer	 
37	63	 	Energy Transfer	 
38	63	 	Energy Transfer	 
39	63	 	Energy Transfer	 
40	64	 	Energy Transfer	 
41	64	 	Energy Transfer	 
42	65	 	Energy Transfer	 
43	67	—	190 ps	—
44	67	—	230 ps	—
45	67	—	275 ps	—
46	67	—	335 ps	—
47	75	 	14 μs	—
48	77	150 ps	2.2 μs	9.9% (IPCE)
49	78	—	3.8 μs	—
 	38	—	1.1 μs	—
 	66	2 ps	100 ps	—
 	69	50 ps	0.66 μs	—
 	71	—	305 ns	—
 	73	215 ps	250 ns	6.8% (IPCE)
 	39	110–330 ps	130–210 ns	0.3–2.2% (IPCE)
 	31	—	62.9 μs	—
 	35	—	200–820 ps	—
 	74	1.5×1010 s-1	2.9×106 s-1	 
 	76	—	—	4.2% (IPCE)
 	80	—	1.2 ns	—

 	Fig. 10  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNT–COOH with a pyrene derivative (36).	 

 	Fig. 11  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNT–COOH with naphthalene (37), fluorene (38), and anthracene (39).	 

 	Fig. 12  Examples of SWCNT functionalization with porphyrin derivatives through covalent (40,41) and coordinative linkages (42).	 

 	Fig. 13  Examples of covalently functionalized SWCNTs with TTF (43, 44) and exTTF (45, 46) derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of SWCNT systems prepared by mixed covalent/non-covalent functionalizations (47–49).	 

 	Fig. 15  Example of multivalent supramolecular binding of Co(II) bis-terpyridyl complex to graphene through three pyrene moieties (50).	 

 	Fig. 16  Examples of porphyrin–graphene materials obtained using amidation reaction on the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction (51), carboxylic acid groups (52) or Suzuki reaction (53).	 

 	Fig. 17  Example of Diels–Alder cycloaddition reactions on a graphene sheet with electron-accepting TCNE (54).	 

 	Fig. 18  Examples of FRET between pyrene (55), ZnP (56), CdSe QDs (57) and graphene.	 

55	112	 	Energy Transfer	 
56	112	 	Energy Transfer	 
57	113	 	Energy Transfer	 
58	119b	 	Energy Transfer	 
59	119b	 	Energy Transfer	 
—	100	 	Energy/Electron Transfer	 
—	101	 	Energy/Electron Transfer	 
—	102	 	Energy/Electron Transfer	 
—	135	—	900 ns	—
—	136	—	164 ps	—
—	137	—	150 ps	—
—	138	7 ps/<1 ps	192/135 ps	—
—	140	—	265 ps	—
—	141	—	360 ps	—
61	107	3.3 ps	270 ps	—

 	Fig. 19  Examples of biotin-functionalized graphene sheets (58–59).	 

 	Fig. 20  Examples of non-covalently functionalized graphene with TCNQ (60).	 

 	Fig. 21  Example of a covalently functionalized graphene with phthalocyanine derivatives (61).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
