Luminescent S-doped carbon dots: an emergent architecture for multimodal applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TB00583F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TB00583F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2375-2382Luminescent S-doped carbon dots: an emergent architecture for multimodal applications†Sourov Chandraabc, Prasun Patrac, Shaheen H. Pathand, Shuvrodeb Royc, Shouvik Mitrac, Animesh Layeke, Radhaballabh Bharb, Panchanan Pramanik*a and Arunava Goswami*caNanomaterials laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 721302, India. E-mail: pramanik1946@gmail.com; sourov.chem@gmail.combDepartment of Instrumentation Science, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, IndiacAERU, Biological Sciences Division, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, 700108, IndiadDepartment of Applied physics, Faculty of Technology and Engineering, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, IndiaeDepartment of physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, IndiaReceived 29th December 2012, Accepted 11th March 2013First published on 12th March 2013AbstractA facile route has been developed to synthesise and isolate sulphur doped fluorescent carbon dots for the first time. Such carbogenic quantum dots exhibit a wide band gap of 4.43 eV with a high open circuit voltage (VOC) of 617 mV along with a fill factor (FF) as high as 37%, using phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron transporting layer. Besides the wide band gap, which is useful in the fabrication of solar cells, sulphur modified carbon dots also exhibit a high fluorescence quantum yield of 11.8% without any additional surface passivation, producing a unique fluorescent probe for further applications. In addition, the particles have a strong tendency to interact with the surface of gold nanoparticles and produce a thin fluorescent layer over their surfaces. Moreover, as they are completely biocompatible in nature, the highly fluorescent S-doped carbon dots have a strong potential for use in bioimaging applications. Interestingly, owing to the presence of oxygen and sulphur functionality, the highly negatively charged particles can easily bind with positively charged DNA–PEI complexes, simply by mixing them, and after interaction with DNA, bright blue fluorescence has been observed under an excitation wavelength of 405 nm .IntroductionIn the past decades, nanoscale quantum dots have exhibited diverse applications from electronics to biotechnology. During the last few years several works have addressed CdSe, CdS and ZnS based quantum dots; however enormous toxicity induces serious limitations on their biomedical applications. Of late, carbon quantum dots (CQDs), an ‘emergent nanolight’, have flourished as the most suitable alternatives due to their non-toxicity, good availability and facile synthesis. Initially CQDs have been prepared from carbon soots,1 which is practically inconvenient owing to the multistep fabrication, poor quantum yield, complex separation techniques and low yield. More recently, several methodologies including laser ablation,2,3 microwave irradiation,4,5 solvothermal6 or pyrolytic degradation7,8 have been developed for the synthesis and functionalization of carbogenic quantum dots. However, in most of the approaches, a negligible amount of product was isolated by the use of tedious post-separation techniques,1,2,9 which cannot be utilized for further fabrications. Again, the requirement of proper surface passivation2 to enhance the quantum yield of carbon dots, restricts their use for large scale applications. Without surface passivation, the quantum yield of carbon dots is quite low, after passivation however, the processes become highly expensive,10,11 as they form a stable dispersion in the solution phase and hence they cannot be separated out easily. While the mesoporous template-based approach has been routed for the synthesis of carbon dots12 with uniform size distribution by confinement of particles in their pores, it is very difficult to control their pore size. Meanwhile the process has some drawbacks as mentioned earlier including multi-step fabrication, expensive starting materials, pre-synthesis and post-removal of templates,13,14 and relatively low yields. Although it is well established that only electrochemical methods have the potential to control the synthesis of carbon dots by resolving their parameters, a mixture of different sized particles have been produced in this way, therefore filtration15 and chromatographic techniques16 are required for further separation. Thus, the development of a simple, isolable, cost-effective, non-passivated, high quantum yield, easily functionalized and environmentally benign method for large scale synthesis of highly fluorescent carbon dots still remains a great challenge. Herein we present a facile and scalable synthesis of sulphur doped fluorescent carbon dots focusing on (a) applying highly dense carbonyl and sulphur moieties onto their framework, (b) simple solvent extraction for separation, (c) isolation of pure C-dots into its powder form, (d) high quantum yield without passivation and (e) ability to adjoin with the surfaces of soft metal nanoparticles and DNA to make them fluorescent for further potential applications.Materials and methodsMaterialsThiomalic acid, HAuCl4, ethidium bromide, polyethyleneimine and agarose were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Trisodium citrate, ammonium hydroxide, sulfuric acid, succinic acid, malic acid, hydrochloric acid, Tris base, EDTA, dichloromethane (DCM) and acetic acid were received from Merck (India); PUC-19 was obtained from SRL.Synthesis of carbon quantum dotsFirstly, 150 mg of thiomalic acid was placed into a 50 mL round bottom flask and subjected to reflux at 90 °C in the presence of 5 mL of conc. sulfuric acid for 4 hours. The reaction mixture was then cooled to room temperature and gradually poured into 20 mL of water, which was kept in an ice bath. The product (PreCQD) was then separated out from H2SO4 by solvent extraction using DCM and isolated by evaporation of DCM at low temperature. Excess ammonium hydroxide was introduced into the dry PreCQD and kept for 24 h. By this time PreCQD was converted to CQD by polymerization. The final product was collected by evaporation of water and ammonia at 60 °C in a vacuum oven to yield 38.4 mg of product. This experiment was repeated for malic acid and succinic acid to evaluate the probable mechanism and utility of that particular reaction.Fabrication of solar cell deviceFor the preparation of a solar cell device, ITO coated glass substrate was at first cleaned with acetone, alcohol and DI water repeatedly by an ultrasonic technique. Then 0.02 mg of Phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) powder was mixed with 10 mL of chloroform and the mixture was sonicated for 2 h to get the desired PCBM solution. The solution was then mixed with an alcoholic dispersion of CQD at weight ratio 1:3 and was further sonicated for 2 h before preparing the device. After that the mixture was deposited on the pre-cleaned ITO coated glass substrate by spin coating at 1400 rpm for 3 minutes inside a glove box under a nitrogen atmosphere. As the film was deposited, it was preserved inside a vacuum desiccator for the next two days whilst drying. Finally aluminium, as a top electrode, was deposited by an evaporation technique on to the film with shadow musk.Synthesis of carbon dot coated gold nanoparticlesIn our experiment, we followed the similar pathway discussed by Basu et al.17 for the synthesis of gold nanoparticles. Briefly, a 50 mL 0.25 mM aqueous solution of HAuCl4 was heated in a round bottom flask fitted with a condenser. When the solution was just boiling, 1 mL of a 1% aqueous solution of trisodium citrate was introduced one drop at a time with vigorous stirring. Stirring and heating were continued for another 10 minutes and during this time period the color of the solution first turned to blue and finally to red. The red color indicated the formation of gold nanoparticles (GNPs). To conjugate the carbon quantum dots onto the gold surfaces, they were simply mixed together without further modification. 5 mL of the synthesized GNPs were mixed with 1 mL (1 mg mL−1) of CQDs and kept for 6 h. After that the CQD conjugated GNPs were isolated by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 10 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. It was dispersed in water by sonication, again precipitated out by centrifugation followed by redispersion.MTT assayMTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assays were performed on human normal feline fibroblast cell lines and the cell viability was recorded after exposure to CQDs at different concentrations up to 24 h. Cells were seeded into 96-well microtiter plates at a density of 5 × 105 per well and allowed to adhere for 24 h. Then CQDs were introduced at three different concentrations of 100 μg mL−1, 200 μg mL−1 and 300 μg mL−1. After incubation, cells were washed with PBS twice and incubated with MTT solution (450 μg mL−1) for 3–4 h at 37 °C. The resulting formazan crystals were dissolved in an MTT solubilization buffer and the absorbance was measured at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Biorad) and the values were compared to the control cells.LDH assayLactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is a soluble cytosolic enzyme present in most eukaryotic cells, which is released into the culture medium upon cell death due to damage of the plasma membrane. Similarly to the MTT assay, the LDH assay was performed on human normal feline fibroblast cell lines and the cytotoxicity was evaluated after introduction of CQDs at different concentrations for 24 h. The extent of cytotoxicity was estimated in triplicate in a 96-well plate by measurement of LDH released from damaged cells into the medium (LDH assay kit: Cayman chemical – 1008882). 100 μL of supernatant from each well of treated and control cells were transferred to corresponding wells in a new 96-well plate. 100 μL of reconstituted reaction mixture was added to each well. The plate was incubated at room temperature with gentle shaking on an orbital shaker for 30 min. The absorbance was taken at 490 nm in a microtiter plate reader. In this assay data were expressed as percentage of cytotoxicity in control and treated wells respectively.Toxicological study on human red blood corpuscles (RBC)The human erythrocyte enriched fraction was centrifuged twice (at 3000 rpm, for 15 minutes) at 4 °C to removed the residual plasma and buffy coat. RBCs were washed 3 times with sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and resuspended in same buffer to make a packed cell volume of ∼10% (w/v) as stock. Then haemolysis and cell labelling was carried out by mixing 690 μL of the above RBC stock suspension with different concentrations (0.25 to 2 mg mL−1) of 20 μL of the aqueous dispersion of CQDs and a final volume of 1.5 mL was achieved by the addition of phosphate buffer saline to maintain 5.5% cell volume for each and every set of experiments. Afterwards, the erythrocyte cells were centrifuged (at 3000 rpm, for 15 minutes) at 4 °C and washed three times with sodium phosphate buffer. Haemolysis was monitored by UV-Vis spectrophotometry at 540 nm.BioimagingThe microbial strain E. coli was cultured in nutrient broth. For bioimaging the culture was simply incubated with CQDs at 37 °C for 24 hours. The excess particles were removed by precipitating the bacterial cells using centrifugation followed by washing with PBS buffer. Finally the above bacterial suspension was placed on a glass slide and observed under confocal microscopy.Interaction of carbon dots with DNA50 μL (100 μg mL−1) of PUC 19 was incubated with 50 μL (1 mg mL−1) of an aqueous solution of branched polyethyleneimine (PEI) (Mw 25000) for 10 minutes at 25 °C. 100 μL (1 mg mL−1) of CQDs were then added to the above mixture and the whole solution was incubated at 4 °C for overnight. To isolate the DNA–PEI–CQD complex from excess of PEI and CQD, the above solution was incubated with 400 μL of isopropanol at 4 °C for 30 minutes. During this time period, the complex was precipitated out and collected after centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 15 minutes. The sample was washed twice with 70% ethanol followed by reprecipitation. After each centrifugation, the supernatants were completely decanted to remove the starting materials along with the impurity. Finally the pellet was redispersed in tris-acetate EDTA (TAE) buffer solution and stored at 4 °C.Gel electrophoresisThe formation of the DNA–PEI–CQD complex was confirmed by using gel electrophoresis. PUC-19, CQD and CQD conjugated PUC-19 were loaded on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel, prepared by 50 mL of tris-acetate EDTA buffer (1×), 0.5 g of agarose and 200 μL (1 mg mL−1) of ethidium bromide. The amount of sample loaded into each well was 30 μL. Finally, the electrophoresis was performed at 100 V for 30 min and the bands were visualized under UV lamp in a UVP GelDoc-It 310 imaging system.Absorption titrationThe binding efficacy of DNA with CQD was studied by absorption titration, which was carried out by the addition of different concentrations of DNA with specified concentrations of CQDs and PEI in TAE buffer. In each titration, a mixture of 100 μL (0. 05 mg mL−1) of PEI and 2 mL of plasmid DNA (PUC-19) was introduced to 2 mL (0.05 mg mL−1) of the aqueous dispersion of CQDs and the resultant absorption of CQDs was monitored by a UV-visible spectrophotometer. Five different PUC-19s with concentrations of 4.33 × 106, 8.65 × 106, 1.73 × 107, 3.46 × 107 and 6.92 × 107 (M) were used for this purpose. This titration was repeated in triplicate and the mean values are presented accordingly.InstrumentationFourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was conducted on a Perkin-Elmer spectrum 2 FTIR spectrophotometer. For absorption and fluorescence measurements we have used a Shimadzu absorption spectrophotometer (model no: UV-1700) and a Hitachi spectrofluorimeter (model no: F-7000), respectively. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) data were collected using an Al K excitation source in an ESCA-2000 Multilab apparatus (VG microtech). Phase characterization was carried out by X-ray diffractometer (XRD; model no. PW1710). Samples for XRD were prepared by the deposition of well dispersed carbon dots onto glass slides and after drying the analysis was performed using copper as the target material. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were carried out using a JEOL JEM 2010, operating at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. For TEM analysis a very dilute aqueous suspension was prepared, which was then deposited on a copper grid followed by drying in air. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was performed by a JEOL JSM-5800 scanning electron microscope in which the sample was prepared by deposition followed by spin coating on a glass slide. Confocal images were acquired at 405 nm laser excitation on a Nikon A1 confocal microscope. Surface topology was obtained using an atomic force microscope (AFM; Vecco Metrology Inc.) in tapping mode. Zeta potentials were measured using a Malvern zetasizer and Time Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) lifetime measurements were carried out using a picosecond diode laser at 370 nm (IBH, Nanoled) as a light source and the signal was taken at magic angle (54.7°) polarization using a Hamamatsu MCP PMT (3809U). The data analysis was evaluated using a IBH DAS, version 6, and decay analysis software. Gel electrophoresis was performed on a BIO-RAD Mini-PROTEAN Tetra cell with a Power Pac Basic at an operating voltage of 100 volt. Gel documentation was carried out by a UVP GelDoc-It 310 imaging system.Results and discussionsIn this article, sulphur modified carbon dots were prepared from a thiol precursor and thus there was no need for additional functionalization prior to anchoring with soft metal surfaces and DNA–PEI complexes. Herein we report a method for the synthesis of S-doped carbon dots from thiomalic acid (TMA) through pyrolysis in the presence of conc. H2SO4 (98%) followed by isolation (referred as preCQD) and polymerization with excess NH4OH. Fig. 1a represents the UV-Vis absorption of TMA and CQD, signifying a distinct broad peak at 302 nm for CQDs18 while no characteristic peak was observed for TMA only. Formation of S-doped CQDs from preCQDs in presence of NH4OH was evaluated by UV-Vis and fluorescence spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 1b, PreCQD conveyed a distinct peak at 343.6 nm in the UV-Vis spectrum, which was gradually blue shifted with time, centred at 337, 308 and 303 nm at subsequent times of 0, 5 and 7 h respectively and became constant at 302 nm beyond 10 h of the reaction. Similarly, a gradational enhancement in the PL-spectrum against time was observed during the conversion of preCQDs to CQDs (Fig. 1c), although the peak position remained unaltered. The preCQD itself wasn't fluorescent in nature, but after addition of NH4OH the solution became fluorescent as a function of time. The PL-intensity reached saturation within 24 h indicating the complete conversion of the preCQDs to the fluorescent CQDs within this time period. Unlike organic dyes, the PL property of CQDs is closely related to the band gap between its valence and conduction bands, where transition of electrons from the former to the later one is caused by absorption of incident photons having energies greater than the band gap energy. The required band gap was measured using the following equation derived by Tauc and Devis Mott independently:αhυ = K(hυ − Eg)nwhere α is the absorption coefficient, hυ is the energy of the incident light, Eg is the optical energy gap or the band gap and n is a number which characterizes the optical absorption processes. For direct transition n = 1/2 and for indirect transition n = 2. For the high absorbing region, where α obeys the above equation, by plotting (αhυ)2 as a function of photon energy (hυ) (Fig. 1d) and extrapolating the linear regions of this curve to (αhυ)2 = 0, the value of Eg was obtained as 4.43 eV which is the direct band gap of the material. Such a wide band gap for S-doped carbon dots could be useful for solar cell applications. Fig. 1  (a) UV-Vis spectra of TMA and CQD. (b) UV-Vis spectra and (c) corresponding PL spectra for the conversion of CQD from preCQD against time. (d) Determination of band gap energy for CQD. The J–V characteristics of a typical hybrid photovoltaic cell made by the deposition of a thin film of CQD-PCBM with an ITO anode and aluminium metal cathode are presented in Fig. 2a. The current density against voltage of the hybrid cell made by CQD (donor) and PCBM (acceptor) is shown in Fig. 2a, in which blue and pink lines corresponds to the current density measured in the dark and in the presence of light respectively. Such a photo-voltaic cell showed a short circuit current density of 3.19 mA cm−2 with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 617 mV under white light illumination along with an incident intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Again the cell exhibited a maximum power density (Pmax) of 0.73 mW cm−2 (Fig. 2b) to yield a fill factor (FF) of 37%. For an incident power density of 100 mW cm−2, the overall power conversion efficiency (η) was calculated to be 0.73%. Therefore it could be concluded that the cell fabricated by the deposition of CQD-PCBM showed significantly high VOC and FF, which might be due to S-atoms present on the surface of the CQDs.19 Fig. 2  (a) J–V Characteristics under dark and photo conditions and (b) the corresponding plot of power density against voltage. The surface functionalities were characterized by FTIR and XPS analysis. Fig. 3a represents the FTIR spectra of TMA, preCQD and CQD, whereas Fig. 3b and c demonstrate the C 1s and S 2p XPS spectrum of the resultant CQDs. FTIR spectra showed the presence of C–H (2998 cm−1), S–H (2568 cm−1), –COOH (1695 cm−1), C–O (1317 cm−1) and α-CH2 (1422 cm−1) groups in TMA. In preCQD, the peak patterns were quite similar to that of TMA, except the peaks appeared at 3454 (–OH) and 1585 (CO) cm−1 with diminishing –COOH functionality. The presence of C–O–C and CC bonds in the preCQD was again confirmed by the peaks centered at 1285 or 1227 cm−1 and 1585 cm−1 respectively. Therefore HOOC–CH2–CH(SH)–O–CO–CH2–CHS or its tautomeric form might be generated from TMA during the treatment with H2SO4, pursuing a similar mechanism as described by Whitford for the decomposition of malic acid (MA).20 It is noteworthy to mention that malic acid produced a similar reaction with H2SO4, exhibiting the characteristic colour of preCQD but could not be isolated by the use of DCM. However no such reaction was noted when TMA or MA was replaced by succinic acid. Therefore it is speculated that α-SH or α-OH groups must be responsible for these reactions. In excess NH4OH, probably a slow thiol-ene like cross condensation21 might be originated between C–S− and –CS or –CC– groups. As a result the peak around 2568 cm−1 (S–H) completely disappeared giving rise to a new prominent peak at 3121 cm−1 (C–H) in the CQD. Other distinctive peaks at 1603, 1403 and 1317 cm−1 disclosed the existence of –CO, –CH2 and C–O groups respectively. Moreover the bands at 856 and 803 cm−1 for the CQD and 862 cm−1 for the preCQD were attributed to C–S bonds.22,23 The successful conversion of thiol (C–S–H) to the C–S–C polymeric unit was further evaluated by XPS analysis. The high resolution C 1s XPS spectrum of CQD (Fig. 3b) revealed three distinct peaks at 285, 286.3 and 288.2 eV confirmed the presence of C–C, C–O and CO bonds respectively.23 The binding energy for the C–S bond was merged with the C–C bond at 285 eV.23,24 The S 2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 3c) demonstrates a peak at 164.1 eV corresponding to the binding energy for the C–S bond.24 No peak at the region of ∼165 eV suggests the absence of free S–H groups in CQDs.25 The total number of sulfur atoms in the CQD was quantified by EDX analysis shown in Fig. 3d; the atomic weight ratio of carbon:sulfur was equal to 5.57:1. Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of TMA, PreCQD and CQD. (b) C 1s and (c) S 2p X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the CQD. (d) EDX analysis of the CQD thin layer on a glass slide, prepared by drop casting, illustrates the presence of carbon, oxygen and sulfur atoms in the sample. Unlike other carbogenic quantum dots, the peak position in the PL spectrum of the S-doped CQDs is independent of the excitation wavelength (λex), but its quantum yield was solely related to both the excitation wavelength and pH of the medium. A bright blue emission was observed for each and every excitation wavelength, though the intensity reached a maximum at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm. Fig. 4a clarifies that in all excitation wavelengths, the emission maxima were centred at about 446 nm. The PL intensity was gradually increased from an excitation wavelength of 320 to 340 nm, showing the highest quantum yield at 340 nm and then again gradually decreasing with increasing λex. In all of the excitations, the peak position was unaltered, signifying a single blue emission throughout the entire region. The mechanism of such abnormal PL behaviour for carbon dots is still unknown. Several mechanisms were proposed to elucidate these unique optical characteristics which included the size distribution of the carbon dots within the sample, the distribution of different emissive trap sites, the presence of oxygen containing groups, the pyrolytic formation of several different polyaromatic fluorophores within the carbogenic core, free zig-zag sites and edge defects.26–28 The PL intensity against pH of the medium is displayed in Fig. 4b, which shows that in acidic conditions (pH 1 to5), PL was negligibly small, then increased beyond pH 6 and reached a maximum at pH 12. The PL intensity progressively increased from pH 7 to pH 12. The size and morphology of the resultant S-doped CQDs were characterized by TEM and AFM analysis. Fig. 4c shows the TEM image of the product, demonstrating the homogeneous distribution of tiny spheres with average size of 1–2 nm. This result clearly signifies the successful formation of carbon dots from TMA. The AFM image (Fig. 4d) further complements the TEM result, where the particles were found to be spherical having sizes of between 1 and 2 nm. The inset image in Fig. 4c represents the corresponding SAED pattern, manifesting the polycrystalline nature of the S-doped CQDs. Such crystallinity was further confirmed by X-ray diffraction studies (Fig. S1†), where the CQDs expressed completely different crystalline planes and patterns in contrast to its parent substrate (TMA). Fig. 4  Photoluminescence spectra of CQDs (a) at different excitation wavelengths and (b) at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm with varying pH. (c) TEM and (d) corresponding AFM image of the synthesized CQDs. The inset image in Fig. 4c represents the corresponding SAED pattern. The fluorescence quantum yield was measured against an aqueous solution of quinine sulphate. A plot of the integrated PL intensity against the corresponding absorbance for both S-doped CQDs and quinine sulphate is displayed in Fig. S2.† A high quantum yield of 11.8% was observed at 340 nm excitation in pH 8, which in fact was satisfactory for carbon dots to be used as an excellent bioimaging agent. Quantum yields at different excitation wavelengths are summarized in Table 1 (ESI†). The PL lifetime decay profile is shown in Fig. S3;† the curve was fitted to a tri-exponential function summarized in Table 2 (ESI†), demonstrating a typical short average lifetime of 1.15 ns,5 consisting of two fast (0.29 ns and 1.78 ns) and one slow component (6.8 ns). Such multiple relaxation phenomena of the S-doped CQDs were quite similar to the other carbon and silicon quantum dots reported earlier,29,30 which might be due to the localized conduction band electrons in shallow trap states.31 Oxygen related emission might also be responsible for that decay profile.29 In addition to the multi-exponential fluorescent decay, the sulphur coordinated CQDs showed brilliant photostability with respect to the photo irradiation. No photo bleaching was observed even with up to 8 h under photo irradiation (Fig. S4†). This exceptional photostability might be due to the radiative recombination of excitons.2 The feasibility for the formation of a stable particle dispersion by electrostatic repulsion was analyzed by zeta potential measurement (Fig. S5†). It was shown that the potential was completely pH dependent; at pH < 7, the potential was very low, resulting in aggregation and hence shows negligible PL intensity as mentioned earlier. Whereas at pH > 7 the zeta potential was enhanced appreciably and attained its maximum value (−42.7 mV) at pH 12. This exceptionally high zeta potential imparted higher stability and dispersibility which correlated with its high quantum yield as well.The sulphur coordinated carbon dots could be useful for interacting with soft metal nanoparticles without further modification, they could then be fabricated into a fluorescent counterpart. Fig. 5a shows the UV-visible absorption spectra of the gold nanoparticles (GNPs) and subsequent changes in the absorption peak with gradual addition of CQDs into the above suspension. A continuous red shift phenomenon was observed for the GNPs with an accumulation of CQDs, suggesting a strong interaction between both of them.32 After separation of GNPs from CQDs by centrifugation followed by washing, the carbon dot conjugated GNPs exhibited a bright photoluminescence under 340 nm excitation wavelength (Fig. 5b). The integration of carbon dots onto the GNP surfaces was further clarified by its PL quenching. Fig. 5c demonstrates that a mixture containing 140 μL of CQDs with 2.5 mL of GNPs, showed PL quenching in contrast to the 140 μL of CQDs in equal volume of water; while only the GNPs did not exhibit any fluorescence. The ability of the sulphur atoms, which are situated in between the carbon network, to interact with the GNPs can be explained by certain conformational changes or some sort of disruption during adsorption onto the gold surface.33 Finally, such conjugation was confirmed by HR-TEM analysis (Fig. 5d), which shows a thin layer of carbon dots around the surface of the GNPs. This thin layer might be due to the large steric effect on the sulphur atoms or the slow dissociation of the C–S bond33 towards the gold surfaces during adsorption. As a result there was a low surface coverage caused by weak chemisorptions of thiolates towards the gold surfaces, which was completely different from free thiols, where a more densely packed polymer layer had been investigated.33 Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis spectra of GNPs with simultaneous addition of CQDs; (b) PL spectra of GNPs and CQD conjugated GNPs; (c) PL spectra of GNPs, CQDs and quenching of CQDs by GNPs. (d) TEM image of the CQD conjugated GNPs, inset high resolution TEM image. To determine the cytotoxicity of CQDs, the MTT assay (Fig. 6a), the LDH assay (Fig. S6†) and haemolysis study (Fig. 6b) were performed on normal feline fibroblast cell lines and erythrocyte enriched human red corpuscle (RBC) cells respectively. The results shown in Fig. 6a demonstrate that the particles were non-toxic in nature with nearly 80% viable cells present at a concentration of 100 μg mL−1. When the concentration of CQDs reached 200 μg mL−1 and 300 μg mL−1, the corresponding cell viability dropped to 76 and 72% respectively, indicating that most cells were still alive under those conditions too. The LDH assay (Fig. S6†) further supports the above results, where 20.74, 25.06 and 31.31% cell cytotoxicity was observed at 100, 200 and 300 μg mL−1 of CQDs respectively. Again from Fig. 6b, it is noteworthy to mention that no significant cell lysis was observed with gradual addition of CQDs. Only 3.4% lysis was noted after the addition of CQDs with a concentration of 2 mg mL−1. From all of the above results it was concluded that S-doped CQDs were completely non-toxic in nature, ensuring their potential for bioimaging as well as drug delivery in the near future. Fig. 6  (a) MTT assay showing the percentage of viable human feline fibroblast cells and (b) percentage of haemolysis with the introduction of 20 μL of CQDs having different concentrations. For bioimaging, E. coli was simply incubated with the newly developed S-doped CQDs at 37 °C for 24 hours. The excess particles were removed by centrifugation of the bacterial cells followed by washing with PBS buffer. After this treatment, the E. coli emitted a bright blue fluorescence at 405 nm excitation under a confocal microscope (Fig. 7b). Such bright blue emission from bacterial cells indicated internalization of CQDs into the cells through endocytosis. This significant fluorescent feature, non-toxicity and highly negative surface charge enables them be used as a novel probe for bioimaging, for gene delivery and for drug delivery. Fig. 7  (a) Bright field and (b) confocal fluorescence microscopic image of CQD treated E. coli cells. Since DNA and CQDs both are highly negative in charge, the direct interaction between them isn't feasible. Branched polyethyleneimine (PEI) has a strong tendency to interact with DNA, causing the later one to be positive in charge.34 Hence CQDs could be easily combined with a plasmid DNA–PEI complex by simple mixing. Gel electrophoresis (Fig. 8a) was performed to evaluate the binding between DNA and CQDs. The mobility of the CQDs (Lane C) was faster than that of PUC-19 (Lane A), as the former was smaller in size and highly negatively charged in comparison to the later one, while the DNA–PEI–CQD complex was unable to move through the gel (Lane B). Such strong inhibition might be due to the formation of a complex too large to permeate into the gel.35 Conjugation of the CQDs over the surface of PUC-19 was confirmed by the confocal image (Fig. 8b), showing that the CQD coupled PUC-19 emitted bright blue fluorescent light at 405 nm excitation. Binding of CQDs with PUC-19 was further monitored by UV-visible spectroscopy (DNA titration, detailed in the ESI†), indicating that with the increasing concentration of PUC-19 with equal concentration of CQDs and PEI, the absorbance of the CQDs gradually decreased36 (Fig. 8c). A plot of A0/A1 against [DNA] increased steeply and then became saturated (Fig. 8d). Where, A0 and A1 were the absorption intensities of the CQDs in the absence and presence of various concentrations of DNA, respectively. Fig. 8  (a) Gel electrophoresis results of PUC-19 (Lane A), CQD conjugated PUC-19 (Lane B) and free CQDs (Lane C) (b) confocal image of CQD conjugated PUC-19 at 405 nm excitation. The inset represents the corresponding confocal image of CQDs. (c) Changes in UV-visible absorption spectra of CQDs with increasing concentration of DNA and (d) the corresponding plot of A0/A1vs. [DNA], where A0 and A1 are the absorption intensities in absence and presence of DNA respectively. ConclusionsIn a nut shell, S-doped carbon dots have been fabricated from TMA for the first time exhibiting high quantum yield without surface passivation. The particles possess a wide band gap, useful for the fabrication of solar cell devices, where CQDs and PCBM act as the electron donor and acceptor respectively. Probably due to the presence of sulphur atoms at the interior of carbon dots, the resulting device exhibits reasonably higher open circuit voltage as well as a high fill factor. Such synthetic carbon dots show excellent water dispersibility, high photostability and negligible toxicity. The presence of S atoms triggers the binding of CQDs with soft metal nanoparticles to its fluorescent counterpart. CQDs exhibit bright blue fluorescence, even after entering into the bacterial cell membrane and have the potential to act as an excellent bioimaging agent. Meanwhile suitable positively charged spacers can allow the CQDs to bind with plasmid DNA and afterwards the DNA emits bright blue light under an excitation wavelength of 405 nm . Non-toxicity with high quantum yield can assure its lucrative application in future gene and drug delivery.AcknowledgementsWe acknowledge DBT, ICAR-NAIP, ICAR-National Fund, ISI plan project, CSIR (New Delhi) for financial support.Notes and referencesH. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, H. Wang, Y. Shimizu, A. Pyatenko, K. Kawaguchi and N. Koshizaki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 932 RSC .S. Chandra, P. Das, S. Bag, D. Laha and P. Pramanik, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1533 RSC .S. Chandra, S. H. Pathan, S. Mitra, B. H. Modha, A. Goswami and P. Pramanik, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3602 RSC .P. C. Hsu and H. T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3984 RSC .Y. Dong, N. Zhou, X. Lin, J. Lin, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5895 CrossRef CAS .S. Chandra, S. Mitra, D. Laha, S. Bag, P. Das, A. Goswami and P. Pramanik, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8587 RSC .L. Tian, D. Ghosh, W. Chen, S. Pradhan, X. Chang and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2803 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4594 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Yu, M. W. Kang, H. C. Chang, K. M. Chen and Y. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17604 CrossRef CAS .J. Zong, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 764 RSC .C. J. Gommes and A. P. Roberts, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 77, 041409 CrossRef .S. Chandra, S. Bag, R. Bhar and P. Pramanik, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 138, 149 CrossRef CAS .Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5116 RSC .Z. H. Kang, H. T. Li, X. D. He, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, S. Y. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. B. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef .S. Basu, S. Pande, S. Jana, S. Bolisetty and T. Pal, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5562 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lin, W. Xue, H. Chen and J. M. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1051 RSC .N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L. Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Whitford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1925, 47, 953 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Bhagat, J. Chatterjee, B. Chen and A. E. Stiegman, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1174 CrossRef CAS .P. B. Zmolek, H. Sohn, P. K. Gantzel and W. C. Trogler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1199 CrossRef CAS .R. Tomovska, Z. Bastl, V. Vorlicek, K. Vacek, J. Subrt, Z. Plzak and J. Pola, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9793 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Oleksiaka, A. P. Nowaka, M. Wilamowskaa, M. Sikorab, W. Szczerbab and C. Kapusta, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1234 CrossRef .D. G. Castner, K. Hinds and D. W. Grainger, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5083 CrossRef CAS .Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, P. J. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. L. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230 RSC .S. Mitra, S. Chandra, T. Kundu, R. Banerjee, P. Pramanik and A. Goswami, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12129 RSC .L. Bao, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801 CrossRef CAS .S. Sato and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4083 CrossRef CAS .I. S. Liu, H. H. Lo, C. T. Chien, Y. Y. Lin, C. W. Chen, Y. F. Chen, W. F. Su and S. C. Liou, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 675 RSC .H. Zhang, K. H. Fung, J. Hartmann, C. T. Chan and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16830 CAS .S. Slavin, A. H. Soeriyadi, L. Voorhaar, M. R. Whittaker, C. R. Becer, C. Boyer, T. P. Davis and D. M. Haddleton, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 118 RSC .Z. Dai, T. Gjetting, M. A. Mattebjerg, C. Wu and T. L. Andresen, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8626 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, G. Li, W. Guo, P. Li, E. Wang and J. Wang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2776 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Deshpande, A. A. Kumbhar, A. S. Kumbhar, M. Kumbhakar, H. Pal, U. B. Sonawane and R. R. Joshi, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 447 CrossRef CAS .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c3tb00583fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
αhυ = K(hυ − Eg)n

 	Fig. 1  (a) UV-Vis spectra of TMA and CQD. (b) UV-Vis spectra and (c) corresponding PL spectra for the conversion of CQD from preCQD against time. (d) Determination of band gap energy for CQD.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V Characteristics under dark and photo conditions and (b) the corresponding plot of power density against voltage.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of TMA, PreCQD and CQD. (b) C 1s and (c) S 2p X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the CQD. (d) EDX analysis of the CQD thin layer on a glass slide, prepared by drop casting, illustrates the presence of carbon, oxygen and sulfur atoms in the sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoluminescence spectra of CQDs (a) at different excitation wavelengths and (b) at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm with varying pH. (c) TEM and (d) corresponding AFM image of the synthesized CQDs. The inset image in Fig. 4c represents the corresponding SAED pattern.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis spectra of GNPs with simultaneous addition of CQDs; (b) PL spectra of GNPs and CQD conjugated GNPs; (c) PL spectra of GNPs, CQDs and quenching of CQDs by GNPs. (d) TEM image of the CQD conjugated GNPs, inset high resolution TEM image.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) MTT assay showing the percentage of viable human feline fibroblast cells and (b) percentage of haemolysis with the introduction of 20 μL of CQDs having different concentrations.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Bright field and (b) confocal fluorescence microscopic image of CQD treated E. coli cells.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Gel electrophoresis results of PUC-19 (Lane A), CQD conjugated PUC-19 (Lane B) and free CQDs (Lane C) (b) confocal image of CQD conjugated PUC-19 at 405 nm excitation. The inset represents the corresponding confocal image of CQDs. (c) Changes in UV-visible absorption spectra of CQDs with increasing concentration of DNA and (d) the corresponding plot of A0/A1vs. [DNA], where A0 and A1 are the absorption intensities in absence and presence of DNA respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c3tb00583f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
