Digital manufacturing of functional materials for wearable electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC01112F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC01112F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10587-10603Digital manufacturing of functional materials for wearable electronics

        
          
            Jing 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoran 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chi Fai 
            Cheung
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Yan
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Guijun 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Ultra-Precision Machining Technology, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
bDepartment of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: mitch.li@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      4th March 2020
    , Accepted 2nd April 2020First published on 2nd April 2020AbstractEmerging development of functional materials provides promising solutions for wearable electronics, given their outstanding electronic, optical and mechanical properties. Digital manufacturing has the ability of rapidly building computer designed electronic devices from scratch, and provides tremendous opportunities for wearable electronic devices. This review summarizes the recent advances of digitally manufactured wearable electronic devices, from the perspectives of functional materials, manufacturing methods and wearable electronics applications. The opportunities and challenges for digitally manufactured wearable electronics are also discussed for this exciting field.
Jing Lin
Jing Lin is an undergraduate student in the State Key Laboratory of Ultraprecision Machining Technology and the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering in The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Her current research interest is digital manufacturing of functional materials for healthcare and energy applications.
Zhaoran Zhu
Zhaoran Zhu is currently in her third-year undergraduate study in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HKSAR, China. She joined the State Key Laboratory of Ultraprecision Machining Technology in 2019. Her current research interest is various applications of laser induced transfer graphene.
Chi Fai Cheung
Prof. Benny C. F. Cheung is a Professor and the Head of the State Key Laboratory of Ultra-precision Machining Technology at the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include ultra-precision machining, precision metrology, advanced optics manufacturing, etc. He has authored and co-authored more than 260 refereed journal papers. Currently, he is a Board Member of the Asian Society for Precision Engineering and Nanotechnology (ASPEN), an Associate Member of the International Academy for Production Engineering (CIRP), and a Fellow and Council Member of the International Academy of Engineering and Technology (AET).
Feng Yan
Prof. Feng Yan has research interests in thin film transistors, solar cells, 2D materials, organic electronics, biosensors and smart materials. He received his PhD degree in physics from Nanjing University and then joined Cambridge University as a Research Associate and National Physical Laboratory as a Higher Research Scientist. In September 2006, he became an Assistant/Associate/Full Professor at the Department of Applied Physics of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He is a Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals and given more than 70 invited talks at international conferences.
Guijun Li
Dr Guijun Li received his BSc in Physics from Nanjing University and PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from The University of Hong Kong. Currently, he is a Research Assistant Professor in the State Key Laboratory of Ultra-Precision Machining Technology, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering in The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He is a Senior Member of IEEE, and an Associate Editor of IEEE Access. He has research interests in optics and magnetics. Currently he is focusing on developing digital manufacturing methods to process functional materials for healthcare and energy applications.
1. Introduction
Functional materials with outstanding properties are being rapidly developed for interdisciplinary applications. Organic semiconducting materials with higher mobility, lightweight, flexible and stretchable features are booming, providing better performances for semiconducting devices.1 Metallic and alloy nanoparticles are also important materials with selective electrochemical sensitivities towards several key molecules in human respiration.2 The combination of functional materials and other supporting materials can be used for novel applications, such as the triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG).3 These large families of functional materials provide novel solutions for practical wearable electronics applications.4
The wearable electronics area is rapidly developing due to the high demand for personalized health care systems, which is the result of the emerging challenges from an aging society. Wearable sensors for physiological status monitoring, wearable power systems and human–computer interfaces are currently being explored.5 Lightweight, flexible, stretchable, and comfortably wearable electronic devices are needed for this exciting field, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration scheme of emerging wearable electronic devices. 
Due to the large dissimilarities between different people, there are extremely high requirements for customized designs of devices for the wearers. Although traditional manufacturing methods, such as photolithography based semiconductor production lines, can produce high performance electronic devices, the lack of customized designs hinders the wearable comfortability and limits wider applications. Personalized wearable devices with task-specific applications in distinct sizes are required for implementing wearable electronics applications.
Digital manufacturing methods can provide customized designs for each of the fabricated modules. The computer blueprints can be directly fabricated into designed shapes and sizes through 3D printing, inkjet printing, laser writing and other digital manufacturing methods.6 The use of digital manufacturing methods of functional materials has been rapidly developed in the past five years, especially for wearable electronics applications. Although there have been several reviews on functional materials of wearable electronics, the digital manufacturing aspects of emerging materials have not been thoroughly reviewed for wearable electronics applications. In this review, the key aspects of the digital manufacturing of functional materials for wearable electronics are systematically discussed. The principles, restrictions and applications of various digital manufacturing methods are comprehensively discussed, considering the requirements of functional materials for high performance wearable electronic devices. Meanwhile, the limitations and challenges are also discussed to spotlight the future developments in this new field.
2. Digital manufacturing of functional materials
Digital manufacturing provides an important means for transforming digital blueprints into real world samples. The process of digital manufacturing includes the design, fabrication and assembly processes. At the beginning, the blueprints of the materials are designed as patterns using 2D or 3D software.
The pixel sizes, widths and lengths of the product can be customized to meet the requirements of end-users, which is more advanced than the traditional fixed-mask based mass produced products of the same sizes. Digital manufacturing methods such as using inkjet printing, laser writing or 3D printing are adopted to create wearable electronic components with functional materials, as shown in Fig. 2. Finally, the fabricated devices can be assembled as integrated devices. The major methods of digital manufacturing are introduced below:
 Fig. 2  Illustration of digital manufacturing of flexible electronics, from left to right: inkjet printing, laser scribing and 3D printing. 
2.1 Inkjet printing
Inkjet printing is a digital manufacturing method for depositing functional materials onto desired locations, as designed by a computer. It is a powerful method for patterning functional materials into wearable devices on almost all types of substrates. Other than using carbon ink for printing text and figures, more types of functional materials can be printed for particular applications.
There are several components within an inkjet printer, including the inkjet printing head (also called the nozzle), the cartridge, the substrate and the ink, as shown in Fig. 3. The integrated system can transform designs from the computer to different patterns of materials on various types of substrates.
 Fig. 3  Components within a single-nozzle inkjet printing system for deposition of functional materials for electronic devices. 
The cartridge is the container for the functional materials before the deposition through the nozzles. The inner surfaces of the cartridges are usually coated with a polymer, so the type of solvent needs to be considered with the potential reactions of the coating, so as to prevent contamination or failure of the cartridge. For a strong polar solvent such as dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) it is recommended to use glass-based cartridges instead of polymer ones. The ink should be filtered with high density filters (usually with a 0.4 or 0.225 micrometer pore size) before pouring into the cartridge, to prevent potential clogging issues. The potential chemical reaction of the solvent and the filter materials should be considered to prevent unwanted doping.
Inkjet printing nozzles are commonly classified into two categories: one is piezoelectric and the other one is thermal jetting nozzles. The thermal jetting head is the most widely used for office printers, due to its ease of fabrication and low cost. By locally heating the ink, the thermal expansion can create the momentum for jetting the ink onto the desired locations. However, as the temperature increases, it might be challenging for the deposition of some functional materials. In one aspect, the functional materials might break down or significantly change their properties, so it is not suitable for some temperature sensitive materials. In another aspect, the solvent might dry faster at the increased temperature, and the surface tension and viscosity vary significantly due to the higher temperature, so the jetting properties might change drastically. In contrast, a piezoelectric nozzle won’t heat the ink significantly, so it would be more appropriate for the testing and depositing of custom inks for functional materials. State-of-the-art printing heads are made of an array of nozzles instead of a single nozzle, as shown in Fig. 4, so rapid deposition of functional materials onto different substrate areas simultaneously is possible with properly designed paths.
 Fig. 4  Inkjet printing with an array of nozzles for simultaneous depositing of functional inks. 
The relative movement of the nozzle and the substrate is controlled automatically using a microcontroller, which can be programmed through computer designed paths. Both movement of the nozzle and of the platform which holds the substrate can realize the deposition of functional inks onto different locations of the substrate.
The substrates for printing wearable electronics are usually flexible. Polymer substrates such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyimide, polycarbonate (PC), polypropylene (PP), paper and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) are commonly used. The potential dissolving of the substrate materials with the functional ink needs to be considered. For a highly polar solvent, inert substrates should be used, such as polyimide or PDMS, considering the potential interaction between the solvent and the substrate.7
The wetting properties of the substrates should also be considered. Poor wetting properties can result in printing failures of the functional materials onto unwanted locations. For printing functional materials on flexible substrates, the wettability of the substrates and that of the solvent need to be considered together. For printing with aqueous ink, hydrophobic or superhydrophobic substrates should be avoided or modified. 3-Mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) can be added onto the PDMS surface to wet nanoparticle based aqueous inks.8 UV ozone treatment is an efficient method for wetting the substrate by creating oxygen binding on the surfaces of the substrates.9 For printing with oil-type organic solvents, oleophobic or superoleophobic substrates need pre-treatment before printing. For example, some amphiphilic coatings can be deposited on oleophobic surfaces to create an intermediate layer for ease of wetting organic inks.10
For digital manufacturing of functional materials using inkjet printing, both solutions and dispersions with satisfactory distributions are feasible. Solution-based inks, considering the potential interaction of the inner surface of the cartridge and the substrates, can be used for inkjet printing. For example, metallopolymers can be used for inkjet printing on glass and polyimide substrates with DMF. Dispersion inks with well controlled distributions can also work with inkjet printing systems. The first demonstrated inkjet printing of functional materials was performed with gold ink for fabricating a micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) using a self-developed inkjet printing system.11 The inks can be either filtered or centrifugally separated to avoid the potential clogging of the nozzles during printing.
The temperature of the substrate also plays a key role for determining the final resolution of printed functional materials, and the solvent of the ink should be dried before actual usage. The drying process of the ink can prevent further movement of the ink on the substrate. Since most of the substrates for wearable electronics are flexible, one might lose control of the ink if it is still flowable on the substrates. By increasing the substrate temperature, the drying rates of the solvent can be increased, in order to decrease the free flow of ink on the flexible substrates. However, the breakdown temperature of the polymer substrate should be considered. For example, the PET substrate melts at 110 °C, so the substrate temperature for PET cannot be higher than this.
2.2 Laser manufacturing
Advanced laser manufacturing provides an alternative approach for fabricating wearable electronics with functional materials. Laser beams are usually scanned with either mechanical moving heads or by Galvo scanning systems, which can scan the laser beam at very fast speeds. State of the art lasers have wide power distributions, from nanowatts to megawatts, making the process highly scalable for mass production. Lasers also have widespread wavelengths (as shown in Fig. 5(a)), from deep (ultraviolet) UV to far infrared (IR), suitable for manufacturing materials with different wavelength dependent absorption. The main applications of laser manufacturing are in three categories: laser cutting, laser reduction and laser printing.
 Fig. 5  Laser manufacturing for wearable electronics applications. (a) Lasers with different wavelengths. (b) Laser cutting. (c) Laser induced graphene on polyimide. (d) Laser induced forward transfer of graphene. 
Laser cutting utilizes the high-power density of a focused coherent laser beam, and physically vaporizes the unwanted materials with high temperature heating. The remaining patterns can therefore be used as functional components for wearable electronics applications, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Any pre-coated materials can be removed by using the appropriate laser parameters, such as laser frequency and intensity. The main challenge with laser cutting is its interaction of the substrate materials. The laser energy can be absorbed by the substrate, depending on its optical transmission rate. If the absorption of laser energy is significantly low for the substrate and high for the functional materials, the laser will selectively pattern the structures and not noticeably have an influence on the substrate.
Laser reduction is an emerging technique for fabricating functional materials for wearable electronics. Laser induced graphene and laser reduced graphene are the main applications of laser reduction, as shown in Fig. 5(c).12 Due to the relatively high absorption of graphene oxide for infra-red energy, the oxygen–carbon bonding can be selectively reduced by the absorbed laser energy.13 As a result, the laser beam can photochemically reduce the graphene oxide and form the desired structures along the laser writing path. In 2014, it was also experimentally found that commercial polymers, such as polyimide, can be directly converted to laser-induced graphene by using laser writing.14,15 This work has been successfully repeated in numerous research studies with applications for supercapacitors, biosensors, mechanical actuators, etc. The rapid heating of the aromatic carbon rings can form graphene structures, an effect that was also realized by electrical heating of different carbon sources. So the photothermal effect of the laser can be utilized to create graphene patterns on selective locations.
Laser printing is an alternative approach for creating functional materials with desired shapes, mainly based on the laser-induced forward transfer mechanism.16 By focusing on a donor layer with precursor materials, functional materials can be selectively transferred onto the acceptor substrate. The transfer energy can either be the momentum from an ultra-short laser pulse or sacrificial materials which can be photothermally ignited.17,18 Femtosecond, picosecond and nanosecond lasers have all been demonstrated for the laser transfer of functional materials with various applications.19–21 The authors first demonstrated that ABS can be used as a sacrificial material for the deposition of copper precursor materials using a continuous wave laser at a 405 nm wavelength.22 Later, they successfully demonstrated that a 1064 nm continuous wave (CW) laser can simultaneously be used for photochemical synthesis and printing graphene onto other substrates, as shown in Fig. 5(d).23 In theory, almost any condensed matter materials with proper melting temperature can be printed using laser induced forward transfer (LIFT).
2.3 3D printing
3D printing is an additive manufacturing process for the deposition of materials at designed locations. The design model can be built either by modelling software or a 3D scanner, which includes the corresponding coordinates of the model. The three-dimensional coordinates are then converted into two-dimensional data for each layer by a process named slicing, and a machine path for the printer nozzle is designed accordingly. Then the data is transferred to the microcontrollers of the 3D printer, and melted functional materials are extruded through the nozzle to fabricate the designed model. The mighty ability of 3D printing to selectively place the functional materials onto the desired locations enables the construction of real-world geometries, as shown in Fig. 6. Commercial 3D printers are widely available across educational institutes. The challenges of 3D printing for electronic devices are limited by the choice of printable materials.
 Fig. 6  Components of a 3D printing nozzle. 
3. Functional materials for wearable electronics
There are two aspects of the material requirements for wearable electronics applications fabricated by digital manufacturing methods. One is to be compatible for wearable electronics applications, and the other is to match with existing digital manufacturing methods.
For wearable electronics applications, there are a few constraints. First, the material should be non-toxic to humans through airborne or physical contact. So highly toxic materials must be avoided for direct use in wearable electronic devices, even though they might possess high performance in applications. For example, nickel oxide nanoparticles are high-performance semiconducting materials. However, due to their high toxicity, they should not be used directly in wearable electronic devices.24
Secondly, the comfortability of the functional materials should also be considered. For long-term wearable devices, it is crucial that the users feel comfortable during usage. Anti-inflammation should be considered for the materials that can directly contact the skin. So the materials of the substrates, which usually directly contact the skin, should have good comfortability and be chemically safe. One of the most important factors is the stretchability of the material. It is significant to have the extensibility of the finalized product remaining in the range of the elastic tensile strain for the skin as 15% epidermal strain.25 Two prevalent methods were commonly reported; one was to provide an elongation property by chemical reactions and the structure construction of various materials,26 and the other one was to assemble an intrinsically stretchable material with other elastomeric materials.27–29 In addition, kirigami structures were frequently adopted for wearable applications.30,31 At the same time, the user habits toward long-term usage should also be considered. Paper based wearable electronics are booming due to their low cost and ease of manufacturing.32 However, current devices made of paper are not durable enough for long-term usage.
Thirdly, the mechanical and electronic properties of the materials should not degrade drastically when they are applied as wearable devices. The flexibility, stretchability and light-weight features should be considered with the performance. All after, the usability of the devices is essential, for example in replacing large-scale equipment in hospital.
For digital manufacturing, the materials should also be compatible with at least one of the existing methods, such as inkjet printing, laser manufacturing, and 3D printing.
3.1 Functional materials for inkjet printing
For inkjet printing or other wet printing methods, the surface tension and viscosity of the ink are key parameters to determine whether the selected type of materials can be printed. The viscosity of the ink is determined simultaneously by the solvent and the solute for a solution, and by the solvent and the dispersed materials for a dispersion. By adding in sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS), the viscosity of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) in water can be maintained at 20 cp at 1 s−1 for printing electrodes for supercapacitor applications.32 By adding 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in water, the viscosity of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) ink can be maintained at 100 cp at 1 s−1, which can be used for printing circuits on wearable textiles.33
Some solution-based inks can be printed directly through the nozzles, such as zinc acetate dihydrate in ethanol for printing the precursor for ZnO thin films.34 However, most of the emerging novel materials cannot be dissolved in solvents, so their sizes and distributions within the inks need to be finely controlled. Some extra procedures such as ball milling, sonication and surfactant addition are common for pre-treating the inks before printing, for producing well-dispersed inks, as shown in Fig. 7. Graphene at a 3.5 mg mL−1 density can be printed in a composite solution of 85% cyclohexanone and 15% terpineol with added ethyl cellulose 5% in toluene/ethanol 80:20, for printing H2O2 sensors.35 Few-layer graphene with a density of 0.8 g cm−3 and viscosity of 2.3 mPa s mixed with PVP and IPA was inkjet-printed for thermoelectric applications.36 For supercapacitor applications, rGO/MoO3 composites,37 and carbon quantum dot/graphene oxide inks38 can also be dispersed in water for inkjet printing.
 Fig. 7  Different states of distribution of functional materials within the solvent, from left to right: precipitation (poor), uniform suspension (good), and non-wetting (poor). 
With properly designed physical properties of the inks, integrated systems can also be inkjet printed.39 By sequentially printing polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene (C8-BTBT/PS) in anisole, organic transistors at a high gain and low voltage can be fully inkjet printed.40 By sequentially inkjet printing MnO2/rGO/PEDOT:PSS as supercapacitor electrodes and SnO2 as the gas sensor, a self-powered gas detection system can be built.41 Various components within organic transistors can also be fully inkjet printed, with 10 mg mL−1 poly(vinylidene fluoride)-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as the gate dielectric, 0.03 mg mL−1 SC-SWCNTs dispersed in toluene as the channel layer, PEDOT:PSS in water with added DSMO and SDBS as the source and drain, and silver for the conducting pads.38 Compared to 3D printing, the inkjet printing method has significantly higher resolution, which can be selected for manufacturing compact devices. Due to the lower use of additive composite materials for extruding through 3D printing nozzles, inkjet printed structures usually possess higher conductivity.42,43
3.2 Functional materials for laser manufacturing
Compared to inkjet printing, laser manufacturing has a higher tolerance in the choice of materials, because it is free from the clogging issues of inkjet printing nozzles. Carbon rich precursors, such as polyimide, graphene oxide, etc., as shown in Fig. 8, have been studied for generating laser induced graphene.44 Metal-containing organic materials can also work as the precursors for producing metallic nanoparticles.45 Laser induced forward transfer is capable of printing many different kinds of materials, even with live cells, due to its low temperature process.46 However, the phase change temperatures are crucial for determining the laser printing quality. If the melting temperature is too low, it is challenging to print using a laser. For example, it is impossible to print ice with a laser. Although printing with liquid inks has been demonstrated using LIFT, most materials are laser printed in a solid or half-melted phase.47
 Fig. 8  Precursor materials for laser synthesis of graphene. (a) Polyimide molecule and (b) graphene oxide. 
3.3 Functional materials for 3D printing
It is challenging to 3D print existing materials directly, except for some high viscosity polymers, such as silicone elastomers.48 Usually, a polymer will be mixed with functional materials to form the composite precursor materials. Ecoflex elastomers are frequently reported to aid the 3D printing of other functional materials, as illustrated in Fig. 9. By mixing Ecoflex sets with MWCNTs, a commercial 3D printer with a 0.4 mm diameter nozzle can be used for printing highly sensitive tactile and electrochemical sensors.49 When Ecoflex was mixed with carbon nanoparticles, the composites could be printed with a 0.8 mm nozzle as flexible and stretchable electronic skins.50 When Ag flakes were mixed with Ecoflex, PDMS and MIBK solvent, the composites could be 3D printed as self-wiring ink with a 0.51 mm nozzle at a 1 mm s−1 speed.51 At the same time, PDMS was frequently wet mixed with MWCNTs as 3D printing ink, for stretchable electrodes52 and wearable microheater applications.53 Silver particles were frequently 3D printed for wearable electronics applications, mixed with silicone,54 poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO),55 polylactic acid (PLA),56etc., as composite precursor materials. Although similar functional materials, such as MWCNTs, can be fabricated using inkjet printing, the viscosity of the composite inks for 3D printing is significantly higher than that for inkjet printing. In addition, inkjet printing has limited capability for fabricating high aspect ratio microstructures compared to 3D printing. For building wearable electronic components beyond two dimensions, 3D printing is recommended.
 Fig. 9  Mixing of graphene and carbon nanotubes in silicone for 3D printing. 
Dry mixing is also capable of producing filaments containing functional materials as precursors for commercially available 3D printers. Through twin-screw extrusion, MWCNTs can be dry mixed with TPU, which can be printed by a commercial 3D printer at 220 °C at a 20 mm s−1 speed with a 0.8 mm nozzle, for highly elastic strain sensing applications.57 TPU can also be planetarily mixed with silver as the precursor for fabricating soft electronic devices.58 Carbon black and homo polypropylene can be mixed using a single screw extruder, which can be printed at 230 °C using a 0.4 mm nozzle as a 3D printable electrically conductive filament.59 Clobetasol propionate can also be mixed with PLA using a single-screw extruder, which can be used as filaments for 3D printing at 195 °C at a 50 mm s−1 speed using a 0.35 mm nozzle, as a wearable personalized oral delivery device.60
Functional materials can also be all-3D-printed as integrated systems. For example, silver nanoparticles, P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS with modified surface tensions and viscosities can all be printed using 3D printing with a 0.1 mm nozzle for integrated photodetector applications.61
4. Wearable electronic devices from digitally manufactured materials
4.1 Energy applications
Electrical energy provides the source for active devices for wearable electronics applications. Energy storage and conversion devices can both provide energy for these devices fabricated by digital manufacturing methods.

4.1.1 Triboelectric nanogenerators. 
Energy generating/conversion devices can provide instant power, including triboelectric generators, solar cells and fuel cells. A wearable triboelectric nanogenerator can convert kinetic energy to electricity in a lightweight and flexible fashion. Several digital manufacturing methods have been demonstrated for fabricating TENGs for wearable electronics, as shown in Fig. 10. An inkjet printed TENG showed an output voltage as high as 124 V at a power density up to 608.5 mW m−2, which could power a wearable electrowetting display and 51 LEDs.48 A 3D printed snow-based TENG demonstrated an open circuit voltage up to 8 V with an instant output power density up to 0.2 mW m−2 and a current density of 40 μA m−2, which can work in snowy weather conditions.62 Laser induced graphene can also work as electrodes for TENGs with a high open-circuit voltage up to 3500 V and a peak power over 8 mW as flexible wearable electronic energy sources.63 These digitally manufactured TENG devices can work as instant power supplies with high peak powers and voltages for various electronic devices. To provide a constant electrical power, the TENG can be integrated with a power storage unit, such as a flexible micro-supercapacitor.64 The strong customization ability of digitally manufactured TENGs can support a wide range of applications for wearable electronics.65 The key challenge of TENGs is their resistance towards stretching and twisting. Kirigami and other structures can be artificially designed, benefiting from the flexibility of digital manufacturing.66
 Fig. 10  Illustration of a nanostructured multilayer for a TENG device. 


4.1.2 Solar cells. 
Solar cells are efficient power conversion devices that can be used for directly providing electricity from sunshine illumination. Digital manufacturing provides great support for emerging solar cells, which benefit significantly from solution processing methods. Highly efficient P3HT/fullerene solar cells fabricated by inkjet printing were first demonstrated in 2008, with an efficiency up to 3.5%.67 Since then indium tin oxide (ITO) free solar cells were frequently reported with inkjet-printed current collectors.68–70 Organic solar cells, inorganic solar cells and perovskite halide solar cells have all been successfully inkjet printed with high efficiencies.71–73 Thick perovskite solar cells at 1.5 μm thickness with large grain sizes having a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 21% were successfully inkjet printed in a digital manufacturing manner.74 At the same time, laser writing techniques also demonstrated useful applications for solar cell manufacturing, such as deposition, patterning, sintering and sealing.75 In addition, laser treatment is very efficient for promoting the crystallinity and efficiency for halide perovskite solar cells.76 Large grains of perovskite with a high efficiency up to 21.2% were successfully demonstrated using ultra-fast laser writing.77 These digitally manufactured solar cells can provide an instant power supply under sunlight. When energy storage devices are integrated with these solar cells, a sustainable power system is formed for long-term usage, which can provide a green energy source for wearable electronics.78 The challenges of scalability can be properly solved by digital manufacturing methods, which provide promising opportunities for the emerging development of solar cell materials.


4.1.3 Fuel cells. 
The fuel cell is another method for generating electricity from multiple chemical resources. Inkjet printing of electrode materials has been widely studied for fuel cell applications. Microbial fuel cells with inkjet-printed polyaniline (PANI) gel as the anode can provide a 6.1 fold increase in current density, compared to unmodified carbon paper.79 Cerium oxide decorated polymer nanofibers fabricated by inkjet printing can provide ultralong durability with a voltage decay rate as low as 0.39 mV h−1. Digital laser manufacturing is also a useful method for creating fuel cell electrodes. Additive laser manufactured electrodes with a high current density up to 1.515 A cm−2 and a power density of 363 mW cm−2 were demonstrated as stainless steel micro fuel cells.80 The laser writing method can also create active porous carbon surfaces with enhanced catalytic performance of the embedded platinum nanoparticles for proton exchange membrane fuel cells.81 Printed microbial fuel cells with a power density of 6.4 μW cm−2 and a current density of 52 μA cm−2 proved to have excellent foldability toward stretching and twisting.82


4.1.4 Batteries. 
Compared to energy conversion devices, digitally manufactured energy storage devices are usually effective for providing energy, without the need for considering the critical conditions for power generation. Wearable energy storage devices are usually classified into two categories: i.e. batteries with high energy densities and supercapacitors with high power densities.
Wearable batteries are emerging energy devices due to their high electrical capacities. Digital manufacturing methods are efficient for creating customized designed electrodes for batteries, as shown in Fig. 11. A fiber-based lithium battery with a specific capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 was 3D printed using a gel polymer.83 Fused filament fabrication of lithium ion batteries with controlled LiClO4 doping ratios was demonstrated for 3D printed wearable batteries.84 Due to the excellent interpenetrating transmission paths and channels for electrons and ions from the 3D skeleton, high-loading lithium-sulfur batteries were also 3D printed, with 505.4 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles.85 Laser machined PANI/carbon fiber with laser micromachined zinc anodes can be integrated into 3D printed rings for rechargeable batteries.86 Laser lift-off can fabricate thin film flexible batteries used in smart lenses with electrochemically active LiFePO4 with a 70 μW h cm−2 energy density for powering a glucose sensor for 11.7 h.87 Laser induced graphene can also work as the anode for a lithium ion battery with a 280 μA h cm−2 initial real capacity.88 It was also reported to possess a peak power density of 98.9 mW cm−2 and energy density of 842 W h kg−1 as electrodes for Zn–air batteries.89 These wearable batteries are promising power resources with customized designed features.
 Fig. 11  3D printing of electrodes for energy storage. 


4.1.5 Supercapacitors. 
The supercapacitor is an energy storage device based on the principles of electrical double layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance. Due to the non-intercalation nature of the electrochemical storage, supercapacitors are usually capable of fast charging and discharging, which are very useful for short-duration and large power density applications. Due to the ease of fabricating artificial shapes, digital manufacturing methods have been widely studied for patterning interdigital patterns for supercapacitors. Direct laser writing of polyimide can synthesize laser induced graphene, which is a low-cost and fast method for creating the interdigital electrodes of supercapacitors.14 Sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (SPEEK) can work as an alternative precursor material for creating flexible supercapacitors by direct laser-induced graphenization.90 In-plane micro-supercapacitors have been fabricated using different laser sources, ranging from the CO2 laser to the femtosecond laser.91,92 Reduced graphene oxide and gold nanoparticles can also be laser written into micro-supercapacitors for wearable electricity sources.93 Ultrathin laser processed micro-supercapacitors with a 5.7 mW h cm−3 volumetric energy density were achieved for powering wearable LEDs.94 Graphene oxide and black phosphorus quantum dots can also work as precursor materials for directly writing flexible planar supercapacitors using a laser.95 Different patterns and scales can be realized, demonstrating the scalability of laser writing for creating supercapacitor electrodes.96 The highly porous inner structures and conductivities are the advantages of laser manufactured functional materials.
At the same time, inkjet printing of different functional materials has also been widely studied for wearable supercapacitors. With CNT inter-welded Ag nanowires as electrodes, flexible supercapacitors can be fully-inkjet-printed as flexible power sources.32 With solely printed 2D materials, the integration of circuits and capacitors has been demonstrated using inkjet printing for energy storage, resistor–capacitor low pass filters and transistors.97,98 Beyond electrode materials, latex PVDF with PVA can be inkjet-printed as the dielectric media, realizing a high discharge energy density of 12 J cm−3 at 550 MV m−1 with outstanding mechanical robustness and stability over time.99 Inkjet printed RGO and MoO3 nanosheets can work as all-solid-state electrodes for flexible supercapacitor applications, with a maximum energy density of 2 mW h cm−3 and a power density of 0.018 W cm−3.37 Among the reported inkjet printing inks, MnO2 nanoink possesses the highest specific areal capacitance.100,101 The combination of laser writing and inkjet printing can also create flexible supercapacitors. By introducing pseudocapacitive cobalt molecules via inkjet printing, the areal specific capacitance of the interdigital laser scribed electrode can be improved by 45 times.102 As a result, the introduction of pseudocapacitive functional materials by inkjet printing can further enhance the capacitance of supercapacitors.
Meanwhile, 3D printing might not provide additional inner surface areas as electrical double-layer capacitance. However, it can create artificial shape supercapacitor devices and increase the specific areal capacitances, which can enhance the areal power density for wearable applications.103–105

4.2 Sensors

4.2.1 Tactile sensors. 
Tactile sensors are sensing elements that can simulate the physical sensing of human skin. There are several types of tactile sensors, such as pressure sensors, strain sensors, and vibration sensors. The digital manufacturing of tactile sensors for wearable electronics has been evolving, as shown in Fig. 12, for Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), soft robotics and prosthesis applications.106 3D printed tactile sensors have been developed for working on freeform surfaces under ambient conditions, for advanced bionic skin applications.54 Capacitive sensors were 3D printed using multiwall CNTs for highly sensitive tactile sensing.49 Spider-web shape tactile sensors can also be 3D printed with the aid of collaborate robotic arms using porous graphene.107
 Fig. 12  Digital manufacturing of a strain sensor on a flexible substrate. From left to right: laser direct scribing, and inkjet printing. 
For strain sensor applications, many wearable devices have been fabricated using digital manufacturing methods. For 3D printing, elastic strain sensors were fabricated using CNT and thermoplastic polyurethane composites with gauge factors as high as 176.57 CNT and graphene composites were used as vertically stackable strain sensors after 3D printing, with a gauge factor over 70.108 With the addition of PDMS to MWCNTs, the 3D printed strain sensor had excellent stretchability and flexibility, with long term stability over 300 cycles.109 When silver nanoparticles were added to 3D printed CNTs, the fabricated strain sensors had gauge factors up to 43260 at 250% strain, a fast response time of 57 ms and outstanding stability after 1000 cycles of stretching.110
Inkjet printing has also been explored for wearable tactile sensing applications. Graphene flakes and ZnO composites printed with commercialized inkjet printers had stretchability up to 30%.111 Strain and pressure sensors were inkjet printed together as bimodal sensors with a gauge factor of 4000 and were stable over 4500 cycles.112 Inkjet printed silver nanoparticles on PDMS also worked as a resistive type pressure sensor, with sensitivity up to 0.48 kPa−1.113 Aerosol jet printing was examined for building bandage-based strain sensors with good sensitivity over 700 repeated cycles, thanks to the post laser sintering of printed nanoparticles.114 Laser writing has also been utilized for fabricating various strain sensors. Sputtered metal on polymer membranes can be selectively written by a laser as a strain sensor, with linear output up to 85%.115 After laser engraving on CNT paper, the fabricated strain sensor showed a gauge factor over 42000 at 150% strain and was highly linear at large strains.116 With a laser induced graphene strain sensor, a gauge factor of 0.47 could be achieved by direct laser writing on polyimide.117
From the above comparison, it was found that 3D printed strain sensors usually show higher stretchability compared to other methods, due to the consideration of using a fiber type composite. However, it is challenging to directly inkjet print fibers through the nozzle due to clogging issues. So for inkjet printing strain sensors, it is important to consider introducing alternative fibers to enhance the stretchability.


4.2.2 Temperature sensors. 
High accuracy wearable temperature sensors are in high demand with the recent COVID-19 outbreak. The digital manufacturing of temperature sensors has been frequently reported in recent years. Through 3D printing an ear-fit sensor, the real time monitoring of the core body temperature can be realized with wireless connectivity.118 A hybrid supercapacitor with a temperature sensor system using all-fiber materials was fabricated by 3D printing.105 By introducing up-conversion nanoparticles in stretchable polymer based optical fibers, wearable health monitoring systems can sustain strain up to 80%.119 Inkjet printing was used for fabricating a highly sensitive temperature detector with a high linearity of 0.15% from −20 to 100 °C.120 Monolithic laser induced reductive sintering was developed for fabricating a temperature field measurement device.121 3D printing also showed the capability of building integrated electronic devices with supercapacitor powered temperature sensors, with a 1.2% per degree sensitivity.122 From the above literature, it is interesting to note that there is a trend for the development of collaborative systems for temperature sensors with integrated energy storage devices, rather than a single component.


4.2.3 Glucose sensors. 
Digital manufacturing provides advantageous features with customized designs for glucose sensing, as shown in Fig. 13. A flexible glucose sensor with inkjet printed gold nanoparticles was developed with a linear range of 0 to 40 mg dL−1 and a detection limit of 0.3 mg dL−1.123 By inkjet printing CuO nanoparticles on platinum electrodes, a non-enzymatic electrochemical sensor showed a high sensitivity of 1.6 mA cm−2 per mM with a wide linear range.124 A saliva wearable glucose monitoring device was 3D printed with a glucose detection limit of 27 μmol L−1.125 Laser scribed carbon paper can provide active sites of electronic/ionic pathways, with a glucose detection limit of 3.6 mA mM−1 cm−2.126 Superhydrophilic pattern arrays can be fabricated via two-stage laser scribing on superhydrophilic graphene for sweat droplet manipulation and electrochemical measurements.127 An inkjet printed organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) glucose detector with up to 30% stretchability can operate at a 1 μM sensitivity.
 Fig. 13  Digitally manufactured wearable glucose sensor on the human wrist. 


4.2.4 Pulse rate sensor. 
The continuous monitoring of human heart rates provides essential feedback for evaluating the physiological condition of elderly people. Self-powered pulse rate monitoring can be realized by laser printing of piezoelectric sensors, as shown in Fig. 14.128 Heart rate monitoring can be realized by a self-powered TENG fabricated by 3D printing. A heart rate of 6 s duration can be realized by running for 10 min.129 Stereo laser lithography could be used to build microsprings with CNTs as an arterial pulse sensor within a wearable plaster.130
 Fig. 14  Pulse rate monitoring with a laser patterned piezoelectric sensor. 


4.2.5 Electroencephalography. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) is an important method for recording brain waves through skin-contact monitoring, and is a mature technique for experimental neuroscience. Digital manufacturing of electroencephalography electrodes can provide novel solutions with higher customization and sensitivity. 3D printed dry EEC electrodes with low cost and quick response make it highly customizable for brain–computer interface applications.131 Direct laser writing of microneedle arrays can be realized on flexible substrates for EEG electrode applications.132


4.2.6 Humidity sensors. 
Differing from inkjet printing or 3D printing, the laser writing method is characterized by an all dry procedure, which makes it a more effective method for creating humidity sensors. Laser writing on polyimide and paper bilayers can create a dual sensor for sensing humidity and force.133 Laser induced graphene can also be transferred to other substrates, such as by peeling off the PDMS capping the scribed polyimide, to fabricate a flexible humidity sensor with fast response for adsorption at 0.9 s and desorption at 4.5 s.134 A high resolution humidity sensor with spatial resolution down to 12 μm can also be created with a shorter wavelength of 405 nm.135


4.2.7 Gas, pH and photon sensors. 
Laser induced graphene can also work for gas sensing. An electronic nose can be made by transferring laser induced graphene onto a PET substrate with Pd nanoparticle loading, for sensing non-polar H2 molecules.136 Laser irradiation of a screen printed TiO2 film can also work as a wearable gas sensor for ethanol detection.137
The laser writing of PANI and carbon electrodes can create a pH sensor with a linearity of 53 mV per pH in the physiological pH range of 4 to 10.138 Inkjet printing can be used to fabricate biosensors for the selective detection of lysozyme due to the strong adhesion of a single DNA to CNTs.139
Wearable photodetectors can provide continuous measurement for UV and other optical radiation. Inkjet printing was developed for fabricating a photodetector using ZnO, with a short response time of 0.3 s and a high on/off rate up to 3525.34 Laser writing was another effective way to create a photodetector using porous rGO and ZnO, with high photocarrier generation, due to the highly porous structures.140 3D printing of polymer semiconductors also demonstrated successful fabrication of flexible photodetectors with a quantum efficiency up to 25.3%.61


4.2.8 Transistors. 
Wearable transistors are very popular types of electronic devices due to the high-performance nature of their advanced semiconductors. High quality and fine feature size control of the channel components provide the key for high performance transistors. Digital manufacturing has been widely studied for creating various types of flexible transistors, as illustrated in Fig. 15. Inkjet printing was used for printing organic thin film transistor (TFT) arrays at a 2 μm channel length using semiconducting ink.141 Single wall CNTs have been successfully inkjet printed for pressure sensing, with an ultralow operation voltage down to 1 V.142 IZO and silver composite channels were fabricated using inkjet printing with a strong thermionic transport regime at a subthreshold slope as low as 16 mV dec−1.143 A fully inkjet-printed OTFT with a Schottky barrier was realized with ultralow power consumption, less than 1 nW, for amplifier applications.40 The integration of dual-mode transistors was demonstrated using the combination of inkjet and extrusion printing for long-durability wearable electronics, using various emerging materials such as CNTs, 2D materials, oxide semiconductors, etc.144 High performance transistors have also been fabricated with inkjet-printed CNTs and polymers, operating at 1 V, with mobilities up to 30 cm2 V−1 s−1.38 At the same time, laser writing was also used for building transistor based sensing systems. Microcapillary arrays have been built using direct laser writing for accurate sweat droplet acquisition and precise sample delivery to an OECT.145 Laser patterned capillary arrays could also help prompt the detection of NH4+ and Ca2+ in human sweat using an OECT.146 More advanced transistors with the combination of multiple digital manufacturing methods will be developed in the near future with high performance sensing and fine control of respiration droplets.
 Fig. 15  Illustration of a multilayer transistor. 


4.2.9 Smart gloves. 
Digitally manufactured conducting materials can be used as conducting pads for electrical conduction of the power source to the electronic components. Due to their easy availability, gloves have been widely examined as wearable flexible substrates. 3D printing of MWCNTs was used to fabricate conducting pads and strain sensors on gloves for monitoring the movement of human hands.147 Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) can also be added to the 3D printing of MWCNTs to enhance the stretchability up to 50%.148 3D printed perovskite nanocomposites can be used as a piezoelectrical pressure sensor on the surface of boxing gloves for pressure mapping.149 3D printing can also be used for fabricating elastomers to hold liquid metal for wearable glove based electronics.150 At the same time, inkjet printing was also utilized to fabricate the connecting pads on polymer gloves using Ag nanodendrites.151 Laser writing technologies could also create artificial patterns with laser reduced copper on 3D printed surfaces for prosthetic applications.152


4.2.10 E throat. 
Direct laser writing on polyimide has been studied for creating an actuator for converting electricity into sound energy, which could help patients with speaking difficulties.153 The addition of PVA can enhance the sound-emitting ability at a 2 mm distance at 0.38 W.154


4.2.11 Wearable heaters and personal cooling. 
3D printing of BN/PVA composites can result in electrical cooling in textiles for thermal management.155 Flexible Bi2Te2.7Se0.3 nanoplate inks can be printed using 3D conformal aerosol jet printing, with outstanding power factors of 730 μW m−1 K−2.156
Other applications for wearable electronics are also available by digital manufacturing, such as resistive switching, photobiomodulation,157 smart bandaging for wound management,158,159etc.

4.3 Wearable displays
As there are several reviews discussing the comprehensive developments of wearable display applications,160,161 herein only the recent achievements are reviewed. A self-healing feature of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) was first investigated by non-digital manufacturing methods, with excellent performance of recovering their luminance after being broken or deformation.162 Later, Tan et al. reported 3D printing methods for self-healable and optoelectronic stretchable devices which boost the application of customized patterned design, with working conditions under an alternating voltage of 23 V and a frequency below 1 kHz, achieving a brightness of 1460 cd m−2 at 2.5 V μm−1.163 The self-healing properties and the rapid development of customized digital manufacturing provide a promising solution for applying in smart phones. Additionally, digital manufacturing shows satisfactory ability for dealing with organic or inorganic perovskite materials. Chao's group has figured out three protective encapsulation materials for perovskite nanocrystals which enable 3D printing production and maintain the excellent optical properties of the perovskite materials.164 The perovskite nanocrystal–PCL composite films were incorporated to build a white light-emitting diode with CIE coordinates (0.33, 0.33). The possibility of laser writing 3D patterns of perovskite quantum dots was also proved by Dong's research group.165
5. Future perspectives
Although existing digitally manufactured functional materials have been developed for many aspects of wearable electronics, there is plenty of room for future development. With the emerging development of novel functional materials, higher performance materials have been frequently reported.166,167 Semiconducting materials with higher mobility and flexibility have been developed, which can further improve the performance of wearable electronics.168 Metallic and alloy nanoparticles with active sites are emerging, which can lead to better selectivity and higher sensitivity toward molecule sensing.169 The study of these novel materials for digital manufacturing is vital for constructing future wearable electronic components.170
At the same time, some novel digital manufacturing methods are being developed for building higher accuracy devices in a shorter time. Previous 3D printing and inkjet printing were relatively slow in fabricating large numbers of products.171 The development of novel 3D printing methods, such as the digital projection method, can significantly reduce the production time for printing various devices.172 However, incorporation of functional materials into these novel methods is lacking, and needs many future experimental studies and optimization. The inkjet printing production rates can also be boosted by introducing more nozzles in the printing head, which needs better pixelization optimization for printing more droplets simultaneously.173
Furthermore, the integration degree of wearable electronics can be improved, as shown in Fig. 16. Power generating devices, including solar cells and TENGs, can be better integrated with energy storage devices, including batteries and supercapacitors, as self-powered frameworks for long term power systems. Wireless transmission antennas can be integrated with various wearable sensors for synchronizing the signals to smart phones.174 The sensor networks can generate a large amount of data, such as body temperatures, sweating rates and corresponding components, which can be transferred wirelessly to smart phones and further analyzed with artificial intelligence for systematic monitoring of human physiological states.175,176 At the same time, the anti-bacterial properties of functional materials can provide additional advantages for wearable electronics. The superhydrophobic and photothermal effects of semiconducting and plasmonic nanoparticles can offer anti-bacterial properties for long-term wearable devices.177 Lastly, the privacy of the collected data should be handled properly at a safe level, without the leakage of personal data to third parties.178,179
 Fig. 16  Illustration diagram of digitally manufactured future integrated wearable systems, with a solar cell, battery, transistor, and strain sensor, connected to a microcontroller. 
6. Conclusions
In this paper, the state of the art of digital manufacturing of functional materials for wearable electronics is reviewed. Inkjet printing, 3D printing and laser writing are the essential methods for creating artificially designed devices for health monitoring and usage. The emerging development of functional materials provides more choices for building high performance, flexible and stretchable devices. The integration of the power system, wireless transmission and various sensors can provide long-term and systematic daily monitoring. These emerging and interdisciplinary aspects are worthy of further study for future developments in the fields of functional materials and novel manufacturing methods, for building more comprehensive devices for the characterization of physiological information.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
J. Lin and Z. Zhu contributed equally. G. Li acknowledges the funding support by the State Key Laboratory of Ultra-precision Machining Technology from the Innovation and Technology Commission (ITC) of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR), China. The authors would also like to express their sincerely thanks to the financial support from the Research Office of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project code: 1-BBX9).
References
P. Lin and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 34–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, I. Jeerapan and J. Wang, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 464–482 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tricoli, N. Nasiri and S. Y. De, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605271 CrossRef .
G.-H. Lee, H. Moon, H. Kim, G. H. Lee, W. Kwon, S. Yoo, D. Myung, S. H. Yun, Z. Bao and S. K. Hahn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 149–165 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Li and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2971–2993 RSC .
J. Jiang, B. Bao, M. Li, J. Sun, C. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Li, X. Yao and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1420–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, R. Wang, H. Yu, G. Li, K. Xu, N. C. Tien, R. C. Roberts and D. Li, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 690–695 RSC .
C. Tsao, L. Hromada, J. Liu, P. Kumar and D. DeVoe, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 499–505 RSC .
K. Ellinas, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3960–3969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Fuller, E. J. Wilhelm and J. M. Jacobson, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2002, 11, 54–60 CrossRef .
R. Ye, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51(7), 1609–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. C. Yung, G. Li, H. M. Liem, H. S. Choy and Z. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11294–11299 RSC .
J. Lin, Z. W. Peng, Y. Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Q. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3689–3695 RSC .
M. L. Tseng, B. H. Chen, C. H. Chu, C. M. Chang, W. C. Lin, N.-N. Chu, M. Mansuripur, A. Q. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 16975–16984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Tseng, P. C. Wu, S. Sun, C. M. Chang, W. T. Chen, C. H. Chu, P.-L. Chen, L. Zhou, D.-W. Huang and T.-J. Yen, Laser Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 702–707 CrossRef .
G. Li, X. Mo, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4055–4062 RSC .
D. P. Banks, C. Grivas, J. D. Mills, R. W. Eason and I. Zergioti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 193107 CrossRef .
D. A. Willis and V. Grosu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 244103 CrossRef .
D. Papazoglou, A. Karaiskou, I. Zergioti and C. Fotakis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1594–1596 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. C. Yung, B. Sun, Z. Meng, J. Huang, Y. Jin, H. S. Choy, Z. Cai, G. Li, C. L. Ho, J. Yang and W. Y. Wong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, X. Mo, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Chan and K. C. Chan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900874 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. W. Leung, C. Shueh, H.-F. Hsu, H.-R. Huang, K.-W. Lin, P. T. Lai and P. W. T. Pong, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 228, S437–S441 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H.-J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y.-W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Fernandes, C. Majidi and M. Tavakoli, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14035–14068 RSC .
W. Gong, C. Hou, J. Zhou, Y. Guo, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 868 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-J. Kim, K. Sim, A. Thukral and C. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701114 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sim, Z. Rao, H.-J. Kim, A. Thukral, H. Shim and C. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav5749 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Xu, Y. Y. Lu, S. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9609–9617 RSC .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K. J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
Y. Guo, M. T. Otley, M. F. Li, X. Z. Zhang, S. K. Sinha, G. M. Treich and G. A. Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26998–27005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Tran, Y. F. Wei, H. Y. Yang, Z. Y. Zhan and H. J. Du, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 095204 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Das, Q. Nian, A. A. Cargill, J. A. Hondred, S. W. Ding, M. Saei, G. J. Cheng and J. C. Claussen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15870–15879 RSC .
T. Juntunen, H. Jussila, M. Ruoho, S. H. Liu, G. H. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, L. W. T. Ng, R. C. T. Howe, T. Hasan, Z. P. Sun and I. Tittonen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800480 CrossRef .
B. Li, N. T. Hu, Y. J. Su, Z. Yang, F. Shao, G. Li, C. R. Zhang and Y. F. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46044–46053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Molina-Lopez, T. Z. Gao, U. Kraft, C. Zhu, T. Ohlund, R. Pfattner, V. R. Feig, Y. Kim, S. Wang, Y. Yun and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Carey, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, J. S. Ren, A. Mansouri, J. M. Kim, C. X. Wang, C. Ducati, R. Sordan and F. Torrisi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1202 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jiang, H. W. Choi, X. Cheng, H. B. Ma, D. Hasko and A. Nathan, Science, 2019, 363, 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Lin, J. Q. Chen, M. M. Tavakoli, Y. Gao, Y. D. Zhu, D. Q. Zhang, M. Kam, Z. B. He and Z. Y. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804285 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mora, P. Verma and S. Kumar, Composites, Part B, 2020, 183, 107600 CrossRef .
C. Yun, F. Chu, B. Cui, X. Wang, G. Liu and J. Sun, Mater. Lett., 2020, 266, 127461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 010901 CrossRef .
K. Brousse, S. Nguyen, A. Gillet, S. Pinaud, R. Tan, A. Meffre, K. Soulantica, B. Chaudret, P. L. Taberna, M. Respaud and P. Simon, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 816–821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, P. Renaud, Z. Guo, Z. Huang and Y. Chen, J. Biol. Eng., 2017, 11, 2 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sopeña, J. Arrese, S. González-Torres, J. M. Fernández-Pradas, A. Cirera and P. Serra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29412–29417 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, R. H. Li, X. T. Fang, H. W. Jiang, X. R. Ding, B. Tang, G. F. Zhou, R. Zhou and Y. Tang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Zhao, J. Cai, Y. Guo, C. B. Li, J. L. Wang and H. W. Zheng, Smart Mater. Struct., 2018, 27, 085008 CrossRef .
P. Q. Wei, X. Yang, Z. M. Cao, X. L. Guo, H. L. Jiang, Y. Chen, M. Morikado, X. B. Qiu and D. L. Yu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900315 CrossRef .
I. S. Yoon, Y. Oh, S. H. Kim, J. Choi, Y. Hwang, C. H. Park and B. K. Ju, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, K. Li, W. G. Liu, H. Meng, P. X. Zhang and C. Y. Yan, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1700341 CrossRef .
M. T. Yin, L. Xiao, Q. C. Liu, S. Y. Kwon, Y. Zhang, P. R. Sharma, L. Jin, X. D. Li and B. X. Xu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 1901170,  DOI:10.1002/adhm.201901170 .
S. Z. Guo, K. Y. Qiu, F. B. Meng, S. H. Park and M. C. McAlpine, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701218 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. J. Zhu, S. Z. Guo, T. Hirdler, C. Eide, X. X. Fan, J. Tolar and M. C. McAlpine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707495 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Q. Wei, X. Cauchy, I. O. Navas, Y. Abderrafai, K. Chizari, U. Sundararaj, Y. J. Liu, J. Leng and D. Therriault, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24523–24532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Christ, N. Aliheidari, A. Ameli and P. Potschke, Mater. Des., 2017, 131, 394–401 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Valentine, T. A. Busbee, J. W. Boley, J. R. Raney, A. Chortos, A. Kotikian, J. D. Berrigan, M. F. Durstock and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703817 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kwok, K. H. H. Goh, Z. D. Tan, S. T. M. Tan, W. W. Tjiu, J. Y. Soh, Z. J. G. Ng, Y. Z. Chan, H. K. Hui and K. E. J. Goh, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 167–175 CrossRef .
K. Liang, S. Carmone, D. Brambilla and J. C. Leroux, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat2544 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Park, R. T. Su, J. Jeong, S. Z. Guo, K. Y. Qiu, D. Joung, F. B. Meng and M. C. McAlpine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803980 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ahmed, I. Hassan, I. M. Mosa, E. Elsanadidy, G. S. Phadke, M. F. El-Kady, J. F. Rusling, P. R. Selvaganapathy and R. B. Kaner, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Stanford, J. T. Li, Y. Chyan, Z. Wang, W. Wang and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7166–7174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Luo, F. R. Fan, T. Jiang, Z. W. Wang, W. Tang, C. P. Zhang, M. M. Liu, G. Z. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3934–3943 CrossRef .
S. Chen, T. Huang, H. Zuo, S. H. Qian, Y. F. Guo, L. J. Sun, D. Lei, Q. L. Wu, B. Zhu, C. L. He, X. M. Mo, E. Jeffries, H. Yu and Z. W. You, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805108 CrossRef .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K.-J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Hoth, P. Schilinsky, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2806–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, E. W. C. Coenen, M. Jorgensen, D. M. Tanenbaum, F. C. Krebs, H. Gorter, S. Sabik, L. H. Slooff, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon and R. Andriessen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, M. Jorgensen, R. R. Sondergaard and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angmo, J. Sweelssen, R. Andriessen, Y. Galagan and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1230–1237 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hashmi, M. Ozkan, J. Halme, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari, M. Gratzel and P. D. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2453–2462 RSC .
X. Z. Lin, R. Klenk, L. Wang, T. Kohler, J. Albert, S. Fiechter, A. Ennaoui and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2037–2043 RSC .
X. J. Peng, J. Yuan, S. Shen, M. Gao, A. S. R. Chesman, H. Yin, J. S. Cheng, Q. Zhang and D. Angmo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703704 CrossRef .
H. Eggers, F. Schackmar, T. Abzieher, Q. Sun, U. Lemmer, Y. Vaynzof, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1903184,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201903184 .
G. Mincuzzi, A. L. Palma, A. Di Carlo and T. M. Brown, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 9–30 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jeon, H. M. Jin, S. H. Lee, J. M. Lee, H. I. Park, M. K. Kim, K. J. Lee, B. Shin and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7907–7914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. You, G. Li, G. Tang, J. Cao and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1187–1196,  10.1039/C9EE02324K .
J. Gao, C. X. Shao, S. X. Shao, F. Wan, C. Gao, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801809 CrossRef PubMed .
R.-B. Song, K. Yan, Z.-Q. Lin, J. S. Chye Loo, L.-J. Pan, Q. Zhang, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14555–14559 RSC .
G. Scotti, P. Kanninen, V.-P. Matilainen, A. Salminen and T. Kallio, Energy, 2016, 106, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kohsakowski, R. Streubel, I. Radev, V. Peinecke, S. Barcikowski, G. Marzun and S. Reichenberger, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467-468, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pang, Y. Gao and S. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702261 CrossRef .
Y. B. Wang, C. J. Chen, H. Xie, T. T. Gao, Y. G. Yao, G. Pastel, X. G. Han, Y. J. Li, J. P. Zhao, K. Fu and L. B. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703140 CrossRef .
C. Reyes, R. Somogyi, S. Niu, M. A. Cruz, F. C. Yang, M. J. Catenacci, C. P. Rhodes and B. J. Wiley, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5268–5279 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Chen, J. M. Jiang, W. J. He, W. Lei, Q. L. Hao and X. G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1909469,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201909469 .
C. Kim, B. Y. Ahn, T. S. Wei, Y. Jo, S. Jeong, Y. Choi, I. D. Kim and J. A. Lewis, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11838–11846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, S. Kim, K. B. Kim and J. W. Choi, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aslam, R. U. R. Sagar, Y. X. Liu, T. Anwar, L. W. Zhang, M. Zhang, N. Mahmood and Y. J. Qiu, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 17, 123–129 CrossRef .
M. Q. Ren, J. B. Zhang and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1460–1468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lamberti, M. Serrapede, G. Ferraro, M. Fontana, F. Perrucci, S. Bianco, A. Chiolerio and S. Bocchini, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 035012 CrossRef .
S. T. Wang, Y. C. Yu, R. Z. Li, G. Y. Feng, Z. L. Wu, G. Compagnini, A. Gulino, Z. L. Feng and A. M. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, H. Lee, Y. J. Kim and P. S. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 959–969 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Li, R. Peng, K. D. Kihm, S. Bai, D. Bridges, U. Tumuluri, Z. Wu, T. Zhang, G. Compagnini, Z. Feng and A. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1458–1467 RSC .
B. H. Xie, Y. Wang, W. H. Lai, W. Lin, Z. Y. Lin, Z. X. Zhang, P. C. Zou, Y. Xu, S. Zhou, C. Yang, F. Y. Kang and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 276–285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Fu, Z. D. Chen, Y. L. Zhang, D. D. Han, J. N. Ma, W. Wang, Z. R. Zhang, H. Xia and H. B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9133–9140 RSC .
J. Gao, C. X. Shao, S. X. Shao, C. C. Bai, U. R. Khalil, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Worsley, L. Pimpolari, D. McManus, N. Ge, R. Ionescu, J. A. Wittkopf, A. Alieva, G. Basso, M. Macucci, G. Iannaccone, K. S. Novoselov, H. Holder, G. Fiori and C. Casiraghi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 54–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Li, H. Li, M. Su, M. Gao, Y. Li, D. Su, X. Zhang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12369–12376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Torres-Canas, J. K. Yuan, I. Ly, W. Neri, A. Colin and P. Poulin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901884 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, D. Dubbink and J. E. ten Elshof, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, H. Jin, B. Chen, M. Lin, W. Lu, W. M. Tang, W. Xiong, L. W. H. Chan, S. P. Lau and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6800–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Meng, J. Qian, C.-L. Ho, S. P. Lau, W.-Y. Wong and F. Yan, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 155–160 CrossRef .
M. Areir, Y. M. Xu, D. Harrison and J. Fyson, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18254–18261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. X. Ji, S. H. Hou, L. F. Zhang, Y. H. Shi, J. X. Zhao and X. H. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 403, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. A. Huang, J. X. Xie, X. X. Zhao, C. W. Li, J. Y. Qu, Q. C. Zhang, J. Sun, B. He, Q. L. Li, C. H. Lu, X. H. Xu, W. B. Lu, L. Q. Li and Y. G. Yao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801114 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Cho, D. Byun, T. S. Nam, S. Y. Choi, B. G. Lee, M. K. Kim and S. Kim, J. Healthcare Eng., 2017, 9053764,  DOI:10.1155/2017/9053764 .
L. Liu, Y. Huang, F. Y. Li, Y. Ma, W. B. Li, M. Su, X. Qian, W. J. Ren, K. L. Tang and Y. L. Song, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4810–4813 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, S. Ji, S. Jung, B. H. Ryu, H. S. Kim, S. S. Lee, Y. Choi and S. Jeong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11035–11046 RSC .
M. Abshirini, M. Charara, Y. T. Liu, M. Saha and M. C. Altan, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1800425 CrossRef .
D. Xiang, X. Z. Zhang, E. Harkin-Jones, W. Q. Zhu, Z. X. Zhou, Y. C. Shen, Y. T. Li, C. X. Zhao and P. Wang, Composites, Part A, 2020, 129, 105730 CrossRef .
G. Hassan, J. Bae, A. Hassan, S. Ali, C. H. Lee and Y. Choi, Composites, Part A, 2018, 107, 519–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu, J. Tao, W. Q. Wu, J. L. Sun, F. T. Li, J. Li, Z. H. Huo, Z. G. Xia, R. R. Bao and C. F. Pan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800703 CrossRef .
L. W. Lo, H. Y. Shi, H. C. Wan, Z. H. Xu, X. B. Tan and C. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 1900717 CrossRef CAS .
S. Agarwala, G. L. Goh, T. S. D. Le, J. N. An, Z. K. Peh, W. Y. Yeong and Y. J. Kim, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 218–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Atalay, A. Atalay, J. Gafford, H. Q. Wang, R. Wood and C. Walsh, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700081 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Xin, J. Zhou, X. Z. Xu and G. Lubineau, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10897–10905 RSC .
T. Han, A. Nag, R. B. V. B. Simorangkir, N. Afsarimanesh, H. R. Liu, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Z. Xu, M. Zhadobov and R. Sauleau, Sensors, 2019, 19, 3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ota, M. H. Chao, Y. J. Gao, E. Wu, L. C. Tai, K. Chen, Y. Matsuoka, K. Iwai, H. M. Fahad, W. Gao, H. Y. Y. Nyein, L. W. Lin and A. Javey, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 990–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Guo, B. Q. Zhou, C. X. Yang, Q. H. Dai and L. J. Kong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902898 CrossRef .
L. Kang, Y. L. Shi, J. Zhang, C. Huang, N. Zhang, Y. Q. He, W. Li, C. L. Wang, X. Wu and X. F. Zhou, Microelectron. Eng., 2019, 216, 111052 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shin, B. Jeong, J. Kim, V. B. Nam, Y. Yoon, J. Jung, S. Hong, H. Lee, H. Eom, J. Yeo, J. Choi, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1905527,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201905527 .
J. X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. A. Huang, X. X. Zhao, Y. H. Shi, J. Y. Qu, C. F. Yang, J. X. Xie, J. J. Wang, L. Li, Q. H. Yan, S. H. Hou, C. H. Lu, X. H. Xu and Y. G. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 972–978 RSC .
Z. H. Pu, R. D. Wang, J. W. Wu, H. X. Yu, K. X. Xu and D. C. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 230, 801–809 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bernasconi, A. Mangogna and L. Magagnin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, B3176–B3183 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. de Castro, S. V. de Freitas, L. C. Duarte, J. A. C. de Souza, T. R. L. C. Paixao and W. K. T. Coltro, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 4919–4928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hou, H. Zhao, S. Y. Bi, L. Zhu, Y. M. Xu and Y. X. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 320–331 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, X. Mo, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 238–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Maharjan, R. M. Toyabur and J. Y. Park, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 383–395 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, B. Gil, M. Power, A. Z. Gao, S. Treratanakulchai, S. Anastasova and G. Z. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35577–35586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Krachunov and A. J. Casson, Sensors, 2016, 16, 1635 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ren, S. J. Xu, J. Gao, Z. Lin, Z. P. Chen, B. Liu, L. Liang and L. L. Jiang, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1191 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Pan, N. J. Tong, N. F. He, Y. X. Liu, E. Y. Shim, B. Pourdeyhimi and W. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7927–7934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Wu, Q. Y. Huang, J. Nie, J. M. Liang, N. Joshi, T. Hayasaka, S. L. Zhao, M. Zhang, X. H. Wang and L. W. Lin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 5310–5316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Stanford, C. Zhang, J. D. Fowlkes, A. Hoffman, I. N. Ivanov, P. D. Rack and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(9), 10902–10907 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Cho, Y. T. Li, I. Cho, J. H. Suh, D. Del Orbe, Y. Jeong, T. L. Ren and I. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24386–24394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dubourg and M. Radovic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6257–6266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rahimi, M. Ochoa, A. Tarnayol, S. Khalili, A. Khademhosseini and B. Ziaie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9015–9023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Khan, A. G. Maddaus and E. Song, Biosensors, 2018, 8, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. An, T. S. D. Le, C. H. J. Lim, V. T. Tran, Z. Y. Zhan, Y. Gao, L. X. Zheng, G. Z. Sun and Y. J. Kim, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800496 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, Z. H. Hu, H. M. Liu, L. F. Lan, J. B. Peng, J. Wang and Y. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Joo, J. Yoon, J. Ha, T. Kim, S. Lee, B. Lee, C. Pang and Y. Hong, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600455 CrossRef .
S. K. Behera, N. Devabharathi, J. R. Pradhan, S. K. Mondal and S. Dasgupta, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwon, Y. Takeda, R. Shiwaku, S. Tokito, K. Cho and S. Jung, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Parlak, S. T. Keene, A. Marais, V. F. Curto and A. Salleo, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Keene, D. Fogarty, R. Cooke, C. D. Casadevall, A. Salleo and O. Parlak, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 1901321,  DOI:10.1002/adhm.201901321 .
M. Abshirini, M. Charara, P. Marashizadeh, M. C. Saha, M. C. Altan and Y. T. Liu, Appl. Nanosci., 2019, 9, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Christ, N. Aliheidari, P. Potschke and A. Ameli, Polymers, 2019, 11, 11 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Yao, H. C. Cui, R. Hensleigh, P. Smith, S. Alford, D. Bernero, S. Bush, K. Mann, H. F. Wu, M. Chin-Nieh, G. Youmans and X. Y. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903866 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhou, J. Z. Fu, Q. Gao, P. Zhao and Y. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1906683s,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201906683 .
B. Tian, W. J. Yao, P. Zeng, X. Li, H. J. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Feng, C. S. Luo and W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 809–818 RSC .
W. K. C. Yung, B. Sun, J. Huang, Y. Jin, Z. Meng, H. S. Choy, Z. Cai, G. Li, C. L. Ho, J. Yang and W. Y. Wong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31188 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Q. Tao, H. Tian, Y. Liu, Z. Y. Ju, Y. Pang, Y. Q. Chen, D. Y. Wang, X. G. Tian, J. C. Yan, N. Q. Deng, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Wei, Y. C. Qiao, G. Y. Jiang, Y. F. Wang, F. W. Wang, M. R. Li, Y. F. Zhao, Y. Tian, G. Y. Gou, S. Y. Tan, H. Tian, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8639–8647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. J. Chen, Y. J. Li, K. Fu, J. Q. Dai, E. M. Hitz, H. Xie, B. Y. Liu, J. W. Song, B. Yang and L. B. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11513–11520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saeidi-Javash, W. Kuang, C. C. Dun and Y. L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901930 CrossRef .
Y. Jeon, H. R. Choi, M. Lim, S. Choi, H. Kim, J. H. Kwon, K. C. Park and K. C. Choi, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700391 CrossRef .
M. F. Farooqui and A. Shamim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Koh, J. Yeo, Y. Y. Lee, Q. Ong, M. Y. Han and B. C. K. Tee, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 86, 151–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kwon, Y. H. Hwang, M. Nam, H. Chae, H. S. Lee, Y. Jeon, S. Lee, C. Y. Kim, S. Choi, E. G. Jeong and K. C. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Liu, J. Feng, Y.-G. Bi, D. Yin and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800371 CrossRef .
X. Shi, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Xu, Z. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Zuo and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12774–12780 RSC .
Y. J. Tan, H. Godaba, G. Chen, S. T. M. Tan, G. Wan, G. Li, P. M. Lee, Y. Cai, S. Li, R. F. Shepherd, J. S. Ho and B. C. K. Tee, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Tai, W.-L. Hong, Y.-T. Kuo, C.-Y. Chang, M.-C. Niu, M. Karupathevar Ponnusamythevar Ochathevar, C.-L. Hsu, S.-F. Horng and Y.-C. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30176–30184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Q. Guo, D. Yang, X. Xiao, X. Liu, Z. Xia, F. Fan, J. Qiu and G. Dong, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. C. Wu, C. X. Zhu, A. Ehrlich, L. Shaw, M. Nikolka, S. H. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, X. D. Gu, S. C. Luo, D. S. Zhou, Y. H. Kim, G. J. N. Wang, K. Gu, V. R. Feig, S. C. Chen, Y. Kim, T. Katsumata, Y. Q. Zheng, H. Yan, J. W. Chung, J. Lopez, B. Murmann and Z. A. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Li, M. J. Li, J. Xu, J. You, Z. Q. Yang and C. X. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3514 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Choi, Y. J. Park, B. K. Sharma, S. R. Bae, S. Y. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas8721 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Choi, S. I. Han, D. Jung, H. J. Hwang, C. Lim, S. Bae, O. K. Park, C. M. Tschabrunn, M. Lee, S. Y. Bae, J. W. Yu, J. H. Ryu, S. W. Lee, K. Park, P. M. Kang, W. B. Lee, R. Nezafat, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1048–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Yang, Y. Song, X. J. Bo, J. H. Min, O. S. Pak, L. L. Zhu, M. Q. Wang, J. B. Tu, A. Kogan, H. X. Zhang, T. K. Hsiai, Z. P. Li and W. Gao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boto, N. Holmes, J. Leggett, G. Roberts, V. Shah, S. S. Meyer, L. D. Munoz, K. J. Mullinger, T. M. Tierney, S. Bestmann, G. R. Barnes, R. Bowtell and M. J. Brookes, Nature, 2018, 555, 657–661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. de Beer, H. L. van der Laan, M. A. Cole, R. J. Whelan, M. A. Burns and T. F. Scott, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau8723 CrossRef PubMed .

          G. Li, R. C. Roberts and N. C. Tien, 2014.
S. Gupta, G. J. Li, R. C. Roberts and L. J. Jiang, Electron. Lett., 2014, 50, 339–340 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Y. Fu, G. Li, L. Li, H. K.-W. Law, X. Chen and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701733 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sarycheva, A. Polemi, Y. L. Liu, K. Dandekar, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau0920 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Jiang, Y. Wang, K. C. Chan, C.-Y. Chan, H. Sun and G. Li, Global Challenges, 2020, 4, 1900054 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Choi, R. Ghaffari, L. B. Baker and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar3921 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, Y. Gao and Y. Shi, Int. J. Med. Inf., 2016, 88, 8–17 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Jing Lin
	Jing Lin is an undergraduate student in the State Key Laboratory of Ultraprecision Machining Technology and the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering in The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Her current research interest is digital manufacturing of functional materials for healthcare and energy applications.

Zhaoran Zhu
	Zhaoran Zhu is currently in her third-year undergraduate study in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HKSAR, China. She joined the State Key Laboratory of Ultraprecision Machining Technology in 2019. Her current research interest is various applications of laser induced transfer graphene.

Chi Fai Cheung
	Prof. Benny C. F. Cheung is a Professor and the Head of the State Key Laboratory of Ultra-precision Machining Technology at the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include ultra-precision machining, precision metrology, advanced optics manufacturing, etc. He has authored and co-authored more than 260 refereed journal papers. Currently, he is a Board Member of the Asian Society for Precision Engineering and Nanotechnology (ASPEN), an Associate Member of the International Academy for Production Engineering (CIRP), and a Fellow and Council Member of the International Academy of Engineering and Technology (AET).

Feng Yan
	Prof. Feng Yan has research interests in thin film transistors, solar cells, 2D materials, organic electronics, biosensors and smart materials. He received his PhD degree in physics from Nanjing University and then joined Cambridge University as a Research Associate and National Physical Laboratory as a Higher Research Scientist. In September 2006, he became an Assistant/Associate/Full Professor at the Department of Applied Physics of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He is a Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals and given more than 70 invited talks at international conferences.

Guijun Li
	Dr Guijun Li received his BSc in Physics from Nanjing University and PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from The University of Hong Kong. Currently, he is a Research Assistant Professor in the State Key Laboratory of Ultra-Precision Machining Technology, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering in The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He is a Senior Member of IEEE, and an Associate Editor of IEEE Access. He has research interests in optics and magnetics. Currently he is focusing on developing digital manufacturing methods to process functional materials for healthcare and energy applications.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration scheme of emerging wearable electronic devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of digital manufacturing of flexible electronics, from left to right: inkjet printing, laser scribing and 3D printing.	 

 	Fig. 3  Components within a single-nozzle inkjet printing system for deposition of functional materials for electronic devices.	 

 	Fig. 4  Inkjet printing with an array of nozzles for simultaneous depositing of functional inks.	 

 	Fig. 5  Laser manufacturing for wearable electronics applications. (a) Lasers with different wavelengths. (b) Laser cutting. (c) Laser induced graphene on polyimide. (d) Laser induced forward transfer of graphene.	 

 	Fig. 6  Components of a 3D printing nozzle.	 

 	Fig. 7  Different states of distribution of functional materials within the solvent, from left to right: precipitation (poor), uniform suspension (good), and non-wetting (poor).	 

 	Fig. 8  Precursor materials for laser synthesis of graphene. (a) Polyimide molecule and (b) graphene oxide.	 

 	Fig. 9  Mixing of graphene and carbon nanotubes in silicone for 3D printing.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of a nanostructured multilayer for a TENG device.	 

 	Fig. 11  3D printing of electrodes for energy storage.	 

 	Fig. 12  Digital manufacturing of a strain sensor on a flexible substrate. From left to right: laser direct scribing, and inkjet printing.	 

 	Fig. 13  Digitally manufactured wearable glucose sensor on the human wrist.	 

 	Fig. 14  Pulse rate monitoring with a laser patterned piezoelectric sensor.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of a multilayer transistor.	 

 	Fig. 16  Illustration diagram of digitally manufactured future integrated wearable systems, with a solar cell, battery, transistor, and strain sensor, connected to a microcontroller.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
