Two-dimensional matrices confining metal single atoms with enhanced electrochemical reaction kinetics for energy storage applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02651D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02651D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1794-1834Two-dimensional matrices confining metal single atoms with enhanced electrochemical reaction kinetics for energy storage applications

        
          
            Peng 
            Wang†
, 
      
        
          
            Danyang 
            Zhao†
 and 

        
          
            Longwei 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Liquid–Solid Structural Evolution and Processing of Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, P. R. China. E-mail: yinlw@sdu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 531 88396970;   Tel: +86 531 88396970
Received 
      18th August 2020
    , Accepted 27th November 2020First published on 10th December 2020AbstractDiversified electrochemical energy storage systems highly depend on electrode material construction. In this area, single-atom catalysts intentionally incorporated within two-dimensional (2D) matrices (SAs@2D) can offer desirable advantages derived from host–guest interactions with abundant extrinsic defects. Nevertheless, the intrinsic manipulation mechanisms and guiding insights regarding the use of SAs@2D in various energy storage devices have not been comprehensively appraised. Firstly, newly updated synthesis methodologies and structure–activity mechanisms are summarized in this review. Then, cutting-edge applications regarding the use of SAs@2D hybrids in various rechargeable batteries, such as Li–O2, Li–CO2, Li–S, Li–metal, and Zn–air batteries, and the central kinetics amelioration schemes underlying these applications are highlighted in detail for the first time. We argue that the maximally exposed active centers and optimized electronic environments are responsible for enhancing mass transfer throughout the conductive grid, which is indispensable for accelerating the redox kinetics and enhancing energy efficiencies in advanced battery systems. In particular, in-depth mechanisms describing how high-density unsaturated coordination sites can tune the adsorption-nucleation-growth behaviors of intermediates in the framework and how the impressive electronic and structural characteristics of SAs@2D can lower potential energy barriers during redox reactions are fundamentally concentrated on. Finally, challenges and advisory guidelines for further investigations relating to the use of SAs@2D in rechargeable batteries are presented.
Peng Wang
Peng Wang received his MS degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China, in 2013. Currently, he is working in Prof. Longwei Yin's group at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Shandong University as a PhD candidate. His research mainly focuses on material and structure design in the fields of metal–air batteries and electrocatalysis.
Danyang Zhao
Danyang Zhao received her BS degree from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China, in 2016. She is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at SDU under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Her current research mainly focuses on the structural and component design of high-performance electrodes based on two-dimensional materials.
Longwei Yin
Longwei Yin is a distinguished professor and director of the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 from SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li- or Na-based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electrocatalysis, solar cells, etc.

Broader context
The development of electrochemical energy storage technology is severely limited by universal challenges, including sluggish reaction kinetics and unsatisfactory cycling stability. Hence, the elaborate design of electrode materials with specific structural and componential functionality plays a key role in enhancing the intrinsic activity. In particular, single-atom catalysts confined in ultrathin two-dimensional skeletons (SAs@2D) have been rapidly developed in recent years. Synergistic effects between ultrathin supports and isolated atomic sites can induce intense electron interactions, forming abundant unsaturated coordination centers. Due to their optimized electronic structures and exposed active sites, SAs@2D hybrids can operate well as efficient multifunctional electrode materials in various novel batteries. Consequently, in this review, freshly updated synthetic methods for SAs@2D hybrids, such as defect engineering strategies, coordination engineering strategies, and atom substitution strategies, are systematically summarized. The current understanding of the structure–activity mechanisms explaining catalytic capabilities and long-term durabilities, based on coordination geometry and metal–support interactions, is presented. Then electrochemical energy storage applications based on SAs@2D hybrids are discussed in detail. Challenges and future prospects relating to the use of SAs@2D in the rechargeable battery field are forecast. This review is expected to present some inspiration for further expanding the feasibility of using functionalized SAs in electrode design.

1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage technologies have been developed as a “holy grail” in the cleaner energy community, and they bear significance in the attempt to simultaneously relieve the ever-growing threats of fossil energy scarcity and environmental contamination.1–3 However, many intrinsic bottlenecks strongly hinder the practical application of various emerging battery systems. For example, in gas-involving rechargeable batteries, such as Li–O2, Li–CO2, Zn–air, Zn–CO2, and Al–air batteries, the sluggish redox kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), and CO2 evolution reaction (CO2ER) inevitably induce inferior energy conversion efficiencies and unsatisfactory cycling stabilities. More specifically, for non-aqueous Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries, the complex multi-electron and multi-step electrochemical reactions involved in the formation and decomposition of discharge products (Li2O2 and Li2CO3) inevitably deteriorate round-trip efficiencies. Commonly, the formation of solid discharge species with wide band gaps and insoluble characteristics result in subsequent decomposition processes becoming rate-determining steps, inducing larger charge overpotentials. The high operating voltage triggers undesirable electrolyte degradation and side reactions, causing fast activity decay and inferior cyclability.4,5 For aqueous Zn–air, Zn–CO2, and Al–air batteries, the power density and long-term durability are also critically limited by the charge/mass transfer kinetics during ORR/OER redox reactions.6,7 Accordingly, highly efficient electrode materials (catalysts) are indispensable for accelerating the multi-electron conversion kinetics around triple-phase reaction areas in these secondary battery systems. For Li–S batteries, the complex polysulfide shuttling effect leads to the undesirable corrosion of the Li anode and inferior sulfur utilization efficiencies. The sluggish decomposition kinetics of insulating Li2S also create a redox reversibility bottleneck during cycling.8,9 Hence, well-designed catalysts with ameliorated catalytic activity and tunable surface chemistry are also necessary for Li–S batteries in order to enhance the overall electrochemical performance. Additionally, Li–metal batteries suffer from severe volume expansion during Li-stripping and -plating processes, making the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film fragile. This finally leads to unordered dendritic growth and the irreversible consumption of active ions, inducing inefficient Li utilization and structural instability; this finally leads to Coulombic efficiency and cycle life deterioration.10 Undoubtedly, efficient operation in these desired fields highly relies on the active species and/or catalysts. To this end, productive endeavors, ranging from the trialing of new materials to structural optimization, have continuously been undertaken to break through the inherent energy and efficiency constraints to achieve benchmark rechargeable batteries.11–14
In particular, severely decreasing the metal particle size to the atomic scale in the form of single atoms could offer unprecedented opportunities to modulate the surface characteristics and electronic configurations of electrocatalysts, with the first report made by T. Zhang and coworkers in 2011.15 Since this point, single-atom catalysts with both performance and cost superiority have gradually appeared, forming a burgeoning research domain.16,17 As defined, single-atom catalysts refer to hybrids in which individual single metal/nonmetal atoms are homogeneously dispersed in a second matrix phase via steady host–guest interactions, thus synergizing the advantages of both heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts.18–20 Intuitively, the physicochemical properties, including the composition, size, distribution, geometry, and valence state of the object single atoms and subject substrate, play decisive roles in determining the intrinsic electrocatalytic characteristics.
2D materials, including typical graphene, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), MXenes, 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), etc., possess a large number of exposed active sites, a large surface/volume ratio, and nanoscale thickness.21 With such characteristics, in principle, embedding single atoms within 2D matrices could thoroughly unlock the potential of these materials, tuning the catalytic activity and utilization efficiency of active species. Apart from the conventional merits in terms of atomic-sized metal catalysts, SAs@2D hybrids have other characteristics that are incomparable to those of their one-dimensional (1D) and three-dimensional (3D) counterparts. (i) The intimate reciprocal interactions between adequately exposed metal sites and the matrix greatly benefit competitive catalytic kinetics. In this regard, the atomic-sized bi-component metal-nonmetal active sites in 2D substrates possessing unsaturated coordination structures can be readily available as catalytic centers and can concurrently boost the activity efficiency for various rechargeable battery applications. (ii) The ordered 2D flat structure with periodic geometry and a homogeneous dispersion of SAs across both the edge regions and bulk area make morphology characterization and theoretical simulations based on local atomic arrangements and surface orientation more persuasive and reliable. (iii) Elaborately designed 2D structures with easily distinguishable thin-flake characteristics offer a perfect platform for intuitively monitoring the evolution of intermediate products during battery cycling via various ex situ or in situ electron microscopy methods.
To date, several reviews focused on the coupling of 2D materials with SAs, from different perspectives, have aimed to categorize the connotations, advantages, synthetic strategies, structure–function relationships, and applications in various fields, such as chemistry, energy, medicine, and environmental science.22–27 For example, Fei et al. fundamentally discussed recent advances relating to SA electrocatalysts confined within graphene matrices for electrocatalytic applications.26 Wang et al. reported thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis applications based on 2D materials anchoring SA catalysts.27 Despite this, three critical factors have aroused our interest when it comes to updating the reviews of SAs@2D electrochemistry. (i) Despite a boom in developments in the above-mentioned catalytic field, contemporary reviews on SAs@2D materials for electrochemical energy storage applications remain in their infancy. More explorations into rechargeable batteries are highly desired to broaden the knowledge of SAs@2D materials. (ii) Studies associated with 2D materials and SA catalysts are still proliferating in a large way, providing continuous new insights into the interplay between the electronic structure manipulation of SAs@2D composites and their electrochemical performance at the atomic level. (iii) Furthermore, the binding of increasingly prevalent 2D nano-scaffolds, embracing MXenes,28–30 MOF-derived carbon nannosheets,31,32 and covalent organic frameworks (COFs),33,34 with SAs has been proven to be feasible, leading to enhanced catalytic activities, selectivities, and stabilities, which are beyond those obtained using pure matrix basal planes. Rarely reported alkaline-earth metal (Mg, Al, Ca)35 and non-metal (such as iodine)36 atomic sites have also undergone considerable study in relation to SA technology, further covering the periodic table of elements in terms of different supports.
Based on the above considerations, in this complementary perspective, as shown in Fig. 1, we first systematically summarize various recent advances associated with SAs@2D in the state-of-the-art electrochemical energy storage field, categorized into gas–liquid–solid tri-phase involved systems (Li–O2, Li–CO2, Zn–air, Zn–CO2, and Al–air batteries) and liquid-solid two-phase involved systems (Li–S, Li metal, Na metal, and metal-ion batteries). Crucially, we have paid special attention to how the excellent electronic and structural characteristics of SAs@2D can be used to tune charge diffusion/adsorption and ion insertion/extraction behaviors during repeated redox cycles, and to electrochemical performance boosting mechanisms at different levels. Meanwhile, recently updated synthetic schemes and characterization methods for 2D substrates, in particular representative carbon-containing materials (MXenes, carbon nanosheets, g-C3N4, 2D MOFs/COFs) and sulfur-containing TMDs being used to confine SAs, are also reviewed in detail. Finally, challenges, opportunities, and advisory guidelines for further investigations into the use of SAs@2D in the rechargeable battery field are presented. This summary is anticipated to offer guiding insights for furthering the energy storage application boundaries of 2D matrices coupled with SAs.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the scope of SAs@2D hybrids used for various rechargeable batteries applications. 
2. Synthetic strategies for 2D materials confining SAs
Developing effective synthetic strategies for stabilizing SAs on 2D substrates has been a prerequisite for large-scale applications. Elaborate synthetic techniques play a crucial role in ensuring the isolated dispersion of SAs due to potentially high surface energies, which can lead to the formation of clusters and nanoparticles.27,37 Atomic metal species, possessing highly well-defined active centers and tuned electronic structures, provide a unique opportunity for the rational design of novel catalysts with high activity, selectivity, and stability.38 Effective anchoring strategies are constantly being proposed to achieve the atomic dispersion of SAs; these can be categorized into four broad strategies according to the immobilization mode: defect engineering, coordination engineering, atom substitution, and other strategies.
2.1. Defect engineering strategies
Immobilizing SAs on 2D matrices is challenging due to the low migration barrier and high mobility of atomic metal species, which may result in agglomeration, even at room temperature. Atoms located around edges and vacancies possess tuned electronic structures and form unsaturated coordination centers, which serve as “traps” that can effectively restrict the migration of metal atoms.39–41

2.1.1. Edge immobilization. 
For 2D substrates possessing high integrity along the basal plane, atoms situated at the edges of nanosheets are more likely to capture SAs in order to stabilize the hybrid due to unsaturated coordination. Cheng et al.42 developed a simple and convenient approach to obtain porous microwave exfoliated graphene oxide (MEGO) confining unsaturated edge-anchored Ni SAs. As shown in Fig. 2a, a porous MEGO substrate with a high content of edge carbon atoms was immersed in nickel nitrate ethanol solution to allow Ni2+ ions to fully adsorb at edge sites. The collected powder was vigorously ground with urea, followed by thermal treatment under NH3 conditions. After washing with dilute nitric acid, the final edge-anchored Ni SA product was obtained. AC-STEM images (Fig. 2b) clearly identified that Ni SAs were predominately anchored on the insides of nanopore edges, with few Ni SAs being adsorbed on the surface.
 Fig. 2  (a) A schematic diagram showing the synthesis of Ni–N–MEGO. (b) AC-STEM images showing that single-atom Ni sites are predominately located on the edges of nanopores inside Ni–N–MEGO.42 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (c) A schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of Cu@MoS2.43 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) A HAADF-STEM image and (e) the DFT-calculated stable Rh1–S4 configuration of the Rh1 active site of the Rh1/MoS2 SAC.44 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) The preparation, (g) a HAADF-STEM image, and (h) a magnified HAADF image of the area in the yellow box of Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty. (i) Corresponding intensity maps obtained along line 1 in (h). (j) HAADF-STEM images and corresponding element maps of Ti3−xC2Ty confining different metal species.30 Copyright 2019; American Chemical Society. (k) A schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure, and (l) SEM, (m) HAADF-STEM, and (n) atomic-resolution STEM images of the NiSA–MoS2/CC catalyst.52 Copyright: 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
For molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), which has great crystallinity, achieving atom substitution is difficult due to the strong covalent Mo–S bonds. S atoms located at edge sites are the optimal coordination sites for SAs due to the existence of lone pair electrons. Ji et al.43 developed the one-pot synthesis of porous 1T-phase MoS2 integrated with Cu SAs. MoO3, thioacetamide, urea, and copper nitrate were dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and maintained at 200 °C for 20 h. During the solvothermal reaction, the MoO3 precursor can first be sulfurized to MoS3. The formation of the Cu@MoS2 catalyst can then be described via two reactions as follows: MoS3 can be subsequently reduced to metallic 1T-phase MoS2 by urea (MoS3 + NH2CONH2 + O2 → MoS2 + N2 + CO2 + H2O); and Cu+ ions adsorbed by edge S2− atoms can be transformed into Cu SAs (Cu+ + MoS3 → Cu@MoS2 + Cu2+ + S), as clearly exhibited in Fig. 2c.
Post-treatment is also a widely used method to realize the edge functionalization of TMD nanosheets. As-prepared MoS2 substrates are immersed into a solution containing metal ions, which are adsorbed by unsaturated edge S atoms. Lou et al.44 reported the fabrication of Rh1/MoS2 catalysts with a mass loading of 0.27 wt% via wet-impregnation and thermal reduction. HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 2d) clearly showed that Rh SAs were anchored at the edges of the pocket-like MoS2 nanosheets. Furthermore, density functional theory (DFT) calculations proved that Rh SAs were immobilized with Rh1–S4 configuration at the edges (Fig. 2e), which matched the HAADF-STEM observations.
Utilizing unsaturated edge atoms to anchor atomic metal species can be easily realized, but this is limited by the numbers of atoms at edges. It is difficult to obtain SAs@2D products with high mass loading.45 Fabricating surface vacancies to improve the utilization of the basal plane is supposed to be an effective strategy.


2.1.2. Vacancy immobilization. 
Vacancies are ideal sites for anchoring SAs due to low adsorption energy, and they can preferentially interact with SAs and restrict the migration of atomic metal species along the surface. The fabrication and utilization of vacancies can improve the concentration of SAs in 2D matrices. SAs anchored by edge atoms and vacancies are concurrent under these circumstances.
MXenes with metallic characteristics and nearly free electron states have been identified as ideal substrates for SAs due to the three following main points.46 (i) MXenes etched using HF, even under mild conditions, possess abundant single M-vacancies or vacancy clusters that are unstable and are inclined to capture metal ions.47 (ii) Ultrathin MXene nanosheets are highly reductive; hence, metal ions can be reduced by MXene substrates without any additional reducing agents.48 (iii) Terminal groups, such as O2−, OH−, and F−, on the surface are favorable for electrostatically adsorbing metal precursors, which benefits the subsequent reduction and anchoring of SAs.49 Zhao et al.30 developed a mild and feasible self-reduction strategy to stabilize Pt SAs on defective Ti3−xC2Ty MXene nanosheets with a mass loading of ∼0.2 wt%. In the typical synthesis process (Fig. 2f), few-layered Ti3−xC2Ty with abundant vacancies was first obtained via an in situ etching process and ultrasonic exfoliation. Then, H2PtCl6 solution served as the oxidizing agent and a Pt source was added dropwise into the Ti3−xC2Ty suspension under agitation; then, Ti vacancies, which were unstable and exhibited highly reductive characteristics, could capture the surrounding Pt atoms. Ptδ+ species could be reduced by the highly reactive MXene surface without any reducing agent and fill Ti sites (Fig. 2g and h), and corresponding intensity maps (Fig. 2i) showed a high intensity of Pt species. The precipitate was collected using acetone after 8 h of reaction, and the final Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty catalyst was obtained after drying overnight. This strategy is a universal and robust fabrication route for SAs and it can also be applied to other metal atoms, including Ru, Rh, Ir, and Pd species (Fig. 2j). A similar synthesis approach was reported by Cui et al.50 A hierarchical Pt/MXene/single-walled-carbon-nanotube hybrid was constructed via utilizing the self-reducing character of MXene substrates.
Furthermore, defect engineering strategies have been more widely applied to transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) due to the rich S vacancies on their surfaces, which possess enormous electrocatalytic activity potential.51 A typical impregnation approach was proposed by Gu's group52 for activating these inert sites and thereby dramatically enhancing the activity. As shown in Fig. 2k, MoS2 nanosheets were first vertically grown on carbon cloth (CC), and then immersed in NiCl2 ethanol solution, followed by drying and annealing treatment under a H2/Ar mixed atmosphere. SEM (Fig. 2l) and low-magnification HAADF-STEM (Fig. 2m) images revealed the ultrathin morphology of the NiSA–MoS2 nanosheets, and atomic-resolution STEM images (Fig. 2n) clearly showed that Ni atom dopants tended to concurrently occupy the S-edge sites and H-basal sites of MoS2 in a single dispersion, resulting in a favorable improvement in the electrocatalytic properties. A similar impregnation treatment for synthesizing a Ru-SA electrocatalyst anchored by S vacancies was reported by Zhang et al.53
Defective sites, including edges and vacancies, existing on 2D matrices can be ideal positions for stabilizing isolated metal species and restricting the migration and aggregation of SAs. Moreover, the electronic structures of the surrounding atoms can be regulated due to synergistic effects between defect sites and SAs, which can tune the electrochemical characteristics of SAs@2D hybrids.

2.2. Coordination engineering strategies
To increase the concentration of SAs and further improve the electrochemical activity of the inactive basal plane, moieties possessing lone-pair electrons acting as “claws” can be fabricated as coordination sites on the basal planes of 2D matrices. In this case, an elaborately controlled synthesis process is crucial for the successful synthesis of SA catalysts. The coordination sites can be divided into the following three categories: divacancies, heterogeneous atoms, and polymeric ligands.

2.2.1. Carbon divacancies. 
A carbon matrix divacancy is a typical defect of carbon materials, and it can be considered as a cavity for coordinating SAs.54 Defective graphene (DG), possessing a high density of divacancies, has become a suitable substrate for supporting SAs. As early as 2012, Wang et al.55 first fabricated defect-rich graphene via high-energy ion bombardment, and they significantly filled SA dopants (Pt, Co, and In) into the manufactured vacancies. Carbon atoms located around divacancies can strongly interact with SAs and directly form M–Cx moieties, accompanied by a reduction in the energy barriers of C–C bonds around the SAs, as calculated via DFT.56 The expectations for Pt-group species, including Pt, Pd, and Ni, are high due to their unique electrochemical catalytic properties.41,57–59 Li's group60 delivered a thermal emission strategy to distribute Pt SAs on graphene, which significantly simplified the synthesis route and minimized synthesis costs (Fig. 3a). A piece of Pt was placed in a porcelain boat, to act as the Pt source, along with dicyandiamide (DCD) and GO. The porcelain boat was placed in a tube furnace and heated to 1100 °C under the protection of Ar, and DG was simultaneously created through the removal of CO2 and CO during thermal treatment. Pt(NH3)x produced via coordination with NH3, and evaporating Pt atoms were captured by divacancies on graphene and reduced by the carbon matrix to Pt SAs, which are clearly shown as individual bright dots in Fig. 3b. The zoomed-in image (Fig. 3c) shows that defective areas could be occupied by Pt SAs and form Pt–Cx moieties, which were identified via corresponding EXAFS measurements (Fig. 3d). Au and Pd atoms can be successfully stabilized on DG in the same way. Huang et al.61 developed an expanded atomic layer deposition (ALD) strategy to realize the decoration of Pd SAs on graphene, forming individual Pd–C moieties as active centers.
 Fig. 3  (a) The proposed reaction mechanism for the preparation of Pt SAs/graphene. (b) A magnified HAADF STEM image of Pt SAs/DG. (c) A zoomed-in image of a defect area. (d) The corresponding EXAFS fitting curve for Pt SAs/DG.60 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) The preparation and (f) HADDF-STEM imaging of A-Ni@DG.62 Copyright: 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (g) The preparation and characterization of the SACo@N–C catalyst.93 Copyright: 2020, Springer Nature Publishing. (h) A schematic illustration and atomic-scale HAADF-STEM image of Ni–O–G.71 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (i) A schematic illustration and magnified HAADF-STEM image of the RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx catalyst; scale bar: 2 nm.29 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of an MPSA catalyst.95 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (k) The preparation and characterization of a PtSA–MNS catalyst.97 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (l) The synthesis and HAADF-STEM imaging of a pfSAC-Fe catalyst.99 Copyright: 2019, Science. (m) A schematic diagram of the bottom-up fabrication of ultrathin CMP nanosheets containing Co SAs.101 Copyright: 2020, Advancement of Science. 
However, the potential of Pt- and Pd-based catalysts is restricted due to their limited reserves. First-row transition metals are alternative candidates, such as the use of Ni species for constructing Ni–Cx moieties on DG substrates. For instance, Yao's group62 initially delivered an acid-leaching approach to obtain DG confining Ni SAs with a mass loading of 1.24%. A facile two-step method was designed, as shown in Fig. 3e. DG was impregnated with Ni nitrate solution, where it uniformly adsorbed Ni2+ ions, followed by thermal treatment at 750 °C under Ar conditions to form Ni oxide; this was then reduced to Ni nanoparticles via the DG matrix. The as-prepared material was then washed in 1 M HCl solution for 2 days to thoroughly remove nanoparticles, and Ni SAs anchored by Ni–Cx moieties were finally obtained. The Ni SAs accurately filled divacancies on DG, as shown in Fig. 3f.
Divacancies in carbon matrices are a prerequisite for anchoring SAs, but the SA concentration is restricted due to the limited number of divacancies. Too many defects will destroy the stability. To further increase the number of electrochemically active sites, introducing heterogeneous atoms can be a viable strategy.


2.2.2. Heteroatom moieties. 
Heterogeneous atom anchoring is the most widely used strategy for anchoring SAs, and it plays a vital role in the capture of SAs and the fabrication of stable SAs@2D hybrids with a high density of active sites. Heteroatoms with lone pairs of electrons, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur heterogeneous centers, can be ideal sites for coordinating SAs. Nitrogen heteroatom moieties are the most common ligands due to their widespread existence in carbon-based matrices, including N-doped graphene, g-C3N4, and other derived carbon nanosheets; hence, the use of M–Nx moieties is the most common heteroatom coordination strategy.63 Yao's group64 demonstrated that M–Nx moieties require lower formation energy and possess higher catalytic activity than M–Cx. Pyrolysis has been extensively used in the preparation of SAs@2D due to its feasibility and controllability.65–67 However, the degree of graphitization can seriously affect the efficiency when it comes to supporting SAs and it heavily depends on the carbon source. To realize controllable preparation and the regulation of constituents, high-quality 2D carbon-based substrates with uniformly dispersed N species need to be first obtained. The synthesis of N-doped carbon matrices for confining SAs can be basically divided into two routes: direct synthesis and template-assisted techniques.27,68–71
Pyrolysis is a simple and uncomplicated direct approach for integrating substrate carbonization and SA decoration in one step, but it is critical to select suitable carbon sources. The use of well-designed precursors can significantly optimize the distribution of SAs and release potential in terms of tuning catalytic activity and catalyst utilization efficiency. Monomers, including melamine,72 urea,73 dicyandiamide,74 and cyanamide,75 and metal organic frameworks (MOFs)76,77 can be ideal precursors for the construction of SAs@N-doped carbon hybrids via pyrolysis approaches. g-C3N4, consisting of C and N atoms with sp2 hybridization, can be regarded as a special type of 2D monomer-derived N-doped carbon, and it possesses more heteroatomic centers and larger coordination cavities for SAs.78,79 Hence, it is expected that SA catalysts with high loading content can be prepared in this way. For example, Chen et al.75 successfully fabricated Ag SAs embedded in g-C3N4via pyrolysis with a high mass loading of up to 6.44 wt%, but the material suffered from slight agglomeration due to the migration of metal ions at high temperature. To solve this dilemma, a spatial limitation effect was utilized as an effective solution to prevent the aggregation of SAs. Guo's group72 synthesized a SAFe@g-C3N4 catalyst, selecting an Fe-imidazole coordination compound (MIL-53) as the Fe source, and an ultrahigh mass loading of Fe SAs of 18.2 wt% could be achieved. Wu et al.80 delivered a scalable and feasible molecule-confined pyrolysis strategy to achieve N-doped porous carbon nanosheets confining highly stable Fe–Nx moieties. The 1,10-phenanthroline (Phen) ligand was added as a spatial isolation agent to ensure the atomic distribution of Fe dopants, and no aggregated nanoparticles were observed, even without any extra acid-leaching treatment.
MOFs can also be desirable precursors due to their isolated metal centers and highly ordered organic linkers.77,81,82 Atomically dispersed metal centers can be reduced to SAs during the pyrolysis process, and organic linkers can be transformed into 2D N-doped graphene-like carbon nanosheets.76 Han and co-workers32 successfully synthesized Cu–N–C nanodisks with an interconnected hierarchical porous microstructure via the carbonization of 2D Cu-tetrapyridylporphyrin (TPyP) precursors. In a typical synthesis process, the synthesized 2D MOF precursor was carbonized under Ar conditions to achieve the reduction of the Cu centers. The obtained Cu@Cu–N–C nanohybrid was acid-leached in a mixed solution of FeCl3 and H2SO4 to remove Cu nanoparticles, and the final desired Cu–N–C catalyst was obtained. Furthermore, Cu(BTC)(H2O)3 MOFs were also prepared as precursors to fabricate highly stable catalysts with abundant Cu–Nx active sites by Baek's group83 and Zheng's group.84 To overcome the inevitable aggregation of metal centers during the pyrolysis process, MOFs containing two kinds of metal species with different boiling points were constructed, with one serving as a spatial separator, and no additional acid-leaching treatment was required. Zn species that can evaporate during the pyrolysis process are widely applied as spatial separators to prevent the aggregation of SAs due to their low boiling points. For instance, Xie et al.85 delivered a simple and feasible method to obtain Co SAs with self-supported architecture. Briefly, a 2D ZnCo-ZIF precursor was first synthesized on CC with a uniform distribution of Zn and Co centers, followed by a pyrolysis process under N2 conditions to obtain Co SAs supported on ZIF-derived graphene nanosheets. To further increase the SA content, the presence of N-containing additives can be advantageous during the pyrolysis process to reduce the evaporation of metal atoms via the formation of M–Nx moieties. Zheng et al.86 added a certain ratio of g-C3N4, which served as an additional N source, and successfully prepared 2D bimetallic Zn/Fe-MOF derived porous carbon nanosheets confining Fe SAs with a mass loading of 3.89%. Pan et al.87 delivered a polymerization-pyrolysis-evaporation (PPE) strategy to fabricate Fe SAs supported on N-doped graphene-like carbon, forming atomically dispersed Fe–N4 catalytic sites. The synthesis process can be described as involving the polymerization and pyrolysis of the ZnFe-polyphthalocyanine (ZnFe-BPPc) precursor. Atomic Fe species were reduced to SAs, and Zn species evaporated thoroughly.
The advantage of MOF precursors lies in the design and construction of pore structures, but the weak coordination bonds possess poor stability. The agglomeration of SAs is an insurmountable problem when the loading content is increased.88 Hence, highly ordered 2D nanoporous coordination polymers (termed covalent organic frameworks or COFs), which are composed of organic molecules connected via strong covalent bonds and exhibit tailormade crystallinity, stand out.89,90 Covalent bonds are strong enough for stabilizing SAs and restrict agglomeration. The advantages of COF precursors are their stability and endurability under harsh conditions. Furthermore, COFs are relatively lightweight, exhibiting a wide variety of functionalities and possessing high thermal stability, and they are more likely to form ultrathin 2D morphologies.91,92 Sun and co-workers33 fabricated nanostructured COFs with preferentially exposed edges and converted them into porous carbon nanosheets. The COF-300 precursor was mixed with a cobaltous acetate solution and stirred overnight. The filter-collected precipitate was dried and then pyrolysed at 900 °C for 2 h under N2 protection. After natural cooling, a well-designed SACo@COF900 catalyst was obtained. Furthermore, to make the synthesis process more controllable and accurate, our group93 developed an environmentally friendly gas-migration-trapping strategy to embed Co SAs in an ultrathin Zn-MOF-derived N-doped carbon matrix (Fig. 3g), which fundamentally solved the issue of aggregation. N-doped carbon matrices are first prepared, and then they are decorated with SAs. All the Zn atoms thoroughly evaporated during the first pyrolysis process, forming N–C skeletons. Heterogeneous N-atom centers captured Co species liberated from CoCl2 during a second thermal treatment process under an Ar atmosphere, and the desired SACo@N–C moieties were obtained. The HAADF-STEM image in Fig. 3g clearly exhibits the atomic dispersion of Co species, and the Co K-edge EXAFS fitting of the first shell in R-space matches well the Co–N4 scattering paths. Wang's group68 demonstrated a scalable synthesis process to obtain Fe SAs densely dispersed on cellulose-derived N-doped graphene, forming Fe–Nx active centers. Briefly, a graphene dispersion, cellulose solution, urea solution, and FeCl3 solution were mixed and chemically activated at high temperature for 2 h to intercalate biocellulose into the carbon nanosheets with much improved surface area and porosity. Furthermore, the use of a spatial separator is still advantageous to ensure the dispersion of SAs.
However, carbon layers can easily restack due to interlayer van der Waals forces, and a salt-template-assisted technique is a general strategy for synthesizing carbon substrates with highly stable hierarchical porous structures; this is beneficial for the atomic dispersion and stability of SAs. Chlorides, such as NaCl and KCl, usually serve as templates due to their high solubility: they can be easily removed. For instance, Li et al.71 demonstrated the formation of Ni SAs coordinated to oxygen sites on graphene-like carbon via a template-assisted strategy (Fig. 3h). NiCl2 and sucrose were dissolved in NaCl solution, followed by freeze-drying treatment to form ultrathin layers of sucrose wrapped around NaCl grains, and Ni2+ ions were spontaneously absorbed as atomic ions on the sucrose layers. Then, an annealing process was carried out to carbonize sucrose, forming a graphene-like porous carbon framework. Finally, a Ni–O–G SA catalyst was prepared after washing with sufficient deionized water to thoroughly remove the NaCl template. HADDF-STEM imaging clearly revealed an atomic dispersion of Ni SAs embedded in ultrathin carbon nanosheets. Similarly, Zhang et al.94 reported a general NaCl template-assisted strategy to realize the uniform dispersion of a series of SAs, including Fe, Co, and Ni, anchored on a N-doped porous carbon matrix (NPC). A two-step thermal treatment process was designed. The first carbonization treatment at 500 °C under NH3 conditions was used to realize the stabilization of the interconnected framework and the doping of N species. The final thermal reduction after the thorough removal of the NaCl template was used to obtain the final honeycomb-like SAM@NPC catalyst.
Furthermore, apart from N dopants, S and P species can also be introduced as “claws” to capture and immobilize SAs due to their abundant lone-pair electrons. For example, Ti3C2Tx MXenes equipped with heterogeneous N and S species can coordinate with metal centers as ligands. Alshareef's group29 developed a coordination interaction strategy involving SARu and 2D Ti3C2Tx to fabricate the RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx product (Fig. 3i). Ru SAs were anchored by N and S heteroatomic species on Ti3C2Tx. Ru3+ ions were first absorbed on the surface of the MXene substrate by oxygen-containing terminal groups, including O and –OH, and were then thermally reduced at 500 °C under an inert atmosphere homogeneously to Ru SAs. The Ru SA moieties are stabilized on the MXene support via the formation of covalent Ru–N and Ru–S bonds with N and S heteroatoms, which were simultaneously doped due to the in situ pyrolysis of thiourea.
However, SAs coordinated with matrices may suffer from electron deficiencies, which can lead to poor stability. Guo's group95 demonstrated a novel PH3-assisted strategy for the effective transformation of metal nanoparticles, including Ru, Rh, and Pd, into SAs coordinated with P species on g-C3N4 substrates (Fig. 3j). The synthesis process can be described as involving three stages. The first stage was photoreduction treatment to preliminarily load crystalline metal nanoparticles (MNPs) on g-C3N4 substrates. Then, the MNP sample was annealed at 400 °C in a tube furnace together with NaH2PO2, which was located upwind. MNPs were transformed into amorphous P-doped Pd nanoparticles (MPNPs) upon reduction by in situ generated PH3. After cooling, the collected powder was again subjected to low-temperature thermal treatment and the final P and SA co-doped g-C3N4 (MPSA) product was obtained. The HADDF-STEM images in Fig. 3j show that Pd, Ru, and Rh SAs anchored by Pd-P2 moieties led to novel electron-rich features, and this is conceptionally different from previous works.


2.2.3. Polymeric ligands. 
A high-temperature carbonization process is not needed for preparing coordination polymers confining SAs; hence, metal species rarely evaporate or accumulate as a result of high-temperature thermal migration. Obtaining catalysts anchoring a high content of SAs is facile. 2D MOFs and COFs with periodic structural arrangements are ideal candidates for supporting SAs.96 A novel surfactant-stabilized coordination strategy was reported by Zhou's group97 for fabricating 2D ultrathin MOFs confining Pt SAs with a mass loading of 12%. As shown in Fig. 3k, PtII-tetrakis (4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (PtTCPP), serving as linkers, was directly coordinated with ultrathin Cu2-(COO)4 paddle-wheel clusters, which served as metal nodes, forming a 2D ultrathin product with a thickness of 2.4 ± 0.9 nm. Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) was added as a surfactant stabilizer during the formation process, and it played a vital role in the formation of a 2D ultrathin morphology instead of bulk MOF crystals. Solvothermal treatment was applied to form polymer precursors, and low-temperature reduction treatment under H2 conditions was applied to obtain atomic Pt species. Elemental mapping images clearly revealed the uniform distribution of Pt SAs supported on the MOF. Furthermore, Guo's group98 developed a bifunctional MOF-Co separator with ultrathin 2D morphology, which was prepared via the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly of bacterial cellulose and 2D ultrathin MOF-Co. Briefly, Co–Ox moieties were mutually interlinked via 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid ligands, and they connected with each other to form 2D morphology. One nanosheet consisted of two coordination layers connected via hydrogen bonds between coordinated water molecules. It is worth noting that the MOFs (or COFs) used here act as substrates rather than precursors; polymeric molecules will coordinate with the central SAs and directly form large-sized organic polymer nanosheets without any other treatment. The final obtained products are MOF (or COF) stabilized SAs, rather than MOF (or COF) derived matrices.
A 2D covalent triazine-based framework (CTF) was attractive as a new matrix for SAs due to the abundant, adjustable, and well-defined anchoring sites. Zhong's group34 successfully synthesized ultrathin CTF nanosheets confining Pt SAs anchored by Pt–N3 moieties, which possessed ultrahigh nitrogen fixation activity. In the two-step synthesis process, the CTF–PDDA–TPDH substrate was first synthesized via a solvothermal method, and this was then mixed with K2PtCl4 at 85 °C for 12 h. The thoroughly dried SAPt@CTF product was reduced at 180 °C for 2 h under a mixed atmosphere of H2 and Ar. Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) can be ideal matrices for supporting SAs owing to a couple of unique merits, such as inherent 2D morphology and well-defined anchoring sites. However, the amorphous nature of CMPs limits their development due to their unmanageable size, shape, and structure. To overcome these disadvantages, Xiang's group99 exploited a novel graphene-assisted pyrolysis-free strategy to obtain SA catalysts with high electrocatalytic activity. As shown in Fig. 3l, a fully closed π-conjugated iron phthalocyanine (FePc)-rich COF (named COFBTC) was first prepared. Then, different mass ratios of the prepared COFBTC precursor were dispersed in glycol solution, followed by grinding with corresponding amounts of graphene to construct a pfSAC-Fe catalyst with gradient Fe concentration. Fe SAs were anchored between COFBTC and the graphene matrix through intermolecular interactions, forming Fe–N–C moieties, instead of being randomly distributed on a derived carbon matrix obtained via pyrolysis. HAADF-STEM imaging revealed that coordinated Fe atoms, represented by bright dots, were exclusively in single-atom format and uniformly anchored throughout the graphene matrix.
Metal phthalocyanine-based catalysts have been identified as one of the most promising candidates to substitute noble materials due to their intrinsic M–Nx moieties. Yang et al.100 designed and synthesized a novel 2D conjugated organic framework confining SAs. The well-defined hybrid possessed a conjugated aromatic network involving transition metal phthalocyanines (CAN-Pc(M), M = Fe, Co, and Fe/Co), which was obtained via exfoliating metal polyphthalocyanine, and the M–N4 active sites were condensed in one conjugated plane via four aromatic rings. Exfoliated CAN-Pc(M) catalysts were obtained via ball-milling polyphthalocyanine in aqueous solution, following a redispersion process in N2-saturated ethanol with a dialysis membrane.
Recently, Zhang et al.101 demonstrated that the morphology and delocalized electron-withdrawing effect on inner SAs in the conjugated skeleton of a CMP could be simultaneously regulated by bridging molecules. As shown in Fig. 3m, cobalt tetraaminophthalocyanine (CoPc(NH2)4), a kind of CMP, was selected as the basic building block, and 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DTBBQ) was applied as the bridging molecule. Dicarbonyl groups in DTBBQ could react with amino species in CMP, and tert-butyl groups in DTBBQ could impair the interlayer interactions of CMP to facilitate the formation of a 2D structure. Co SAs exposed on the surfaces uniformly possessed electronic structures that were tuned by the conjugated skeleton.
In summary, SAs@2D hybrids synthesized via coordination engineering strategies possess strong interactions between coordinated substrates and SAs due to the formation of homogeneous active centers. The electronic structures of the atomic metal active centers and surrounding coordination atoms can be tuned via synergistic effects, leading to enhanced electrocatalytic performance. Under the guidance of all the above coordination engineering strategies, more 2D matrices confining SAs have been designed and prepared with the desired structures and compositions. Divacancies can effectively prevent the migration and agglomeration of SAs due to strong covalent interactions between SAs and the supports, but the concentration of SAs is restricted due to the limited amount of divacancies; it is also costly to manufacture carbon divacancies at high concentrations and this approach is not suitable for large-scale industrial production. SAs coordinated with polymeric ligand are equipped with the advantages of the MOF (or COF) substrates, including having high surface area, selective gas absorption, and superior structural controllability, possessing huge potential for use in electrochemical energy storage devices. However, most SAs coordinated with polymeric ligands suffer from decomposition when they are involved in systems that are placed under harsh condition, like during electrocatalysis. Also, poor substrate conductivity also restricts their application. In contrast, heterogeneous atom coordination strategies are the most convenient and widely used method for the preparation of 2D substrates confining SAs. SAs can be tightly immobilized by heteroatoms and form strong covalent bonds, possessing excellent adaptability and long-term stability. Developing 2D materials confining SAs with high activity, selectivity, and stability is always a key task and an ultimate goal for industrial production, and the application of SAs is still in the basic research stage. Heterogeneous atom coordination strategies show obvious superiority. Both direct synthesis and post-treatment can be used to obtain ideal 2D matrix structures confining SAs, and the yields are also larger than those of the other two coordination strategies. It is believed that a large amount of outstanding research will be published in the future, promoting the development of 2D materials confining SAs for industrial applications.

2.3. Atom substitution strategies
Atomic metal species can occupy positions in the lattices of substrates. For MXenes and TMDs, atom substitution is a general strategy to achieve SA decoration. This replacement process can tune the electronic structures of the surrounding atoms and form unsaturated coordination structures, hence improving the electrochemical properties. According to the positions occupied by the SAs, atom substitution can occur on the surface or in the interior.

2.3.1. Surface atom substitution. 
Surface atoms are highly reactive and more likely to undergo displacement reactions with surrounding species under certain conditions. In the structure of a block MAX precursor, adjacent MXene layers are connected by Al atoms, and MXene surface metal atoms can be highly reactive during the removal of Al-atom layers. Therefore, cation displacement reactions between MXene and the etching agent can easily occur during the etching process. Huang and co-workers102 first proposed a molten ZnCl2 salt etching method to obtain accordion-like Ti3C2Clx with the decoration of Zn species on the surface. Other Lewis acidic salts, such as CuCl2, can be applied to achieve the non-aqueous etching of MXene.103 Inspired by this novel etching strategy, Yang's group28 expansively demonstrated an in situ immobilization strategy for preparing Ti3C2Clx MXene confining Zn SAs. The general strategy was appropriate for synthesizing a series of Cl-terminated MXenes, benefiting from a replacement reaction between the MAX precursor and late transition-metal halides. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Ti3AlC2 precursor and ZnCl2 powder were adequately mixed via ball-milling under the protection of dried Ar: avoiding ZnCl2 hydrolysis was crucial. The mixture was heated at 550 °C for 10 h and naturally cooled. After thoroughly washing with 2 M HCl, the final Zn–MXene product was collected using argon-saturated water to prevent the oxidation of Zn species. A magnified HAADF-STEM image identified the accurate substitution of surface Ti sites by Zn atoms. The method can be expanded to Ti2AlC, Ti2AlN, and V2AlC precursors to afford MXene nanosheets immobilizing Zn SAs.
 Fig. 4  (a) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of a Zn–MXene product.28 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) An illustration of the synthesis mechanism and the characteristics of an Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA catalyst.104 Copyright: 2018, Springer Nature Publishing. (c) The preparation and characteristics of Mo SAs/ML-MoS2; scale bar: 1 nm.105 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) The synthetic process and ADF-STEM images of Co-doped MoS2 with different dopant concentrations.106 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) The preparation and characteristics of Sn-doped WS2 monolayers, including intensity line profiles across the yellow and blue rows of the HAADF-STEM image showing the differences in intensity between W and Sn.108 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Electrochemical approaches are viable for confining SAs due to the high electroconductivity of MXene substrates. Gogotsi and co-workers104 creatively reported the synthesis of a double transition metal Mo2TiC2Tx substrate confining Pt SAs that were substituted at Mo sites on the surface through an electrochemical exfoliation approach (Fig. 4b). In brief, electrochemical exfoliation and in situ deposition were conducted via applying reduplicative linear sweep voltammetry scans in a three-electrode system, with HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx serving as the working electrode and Pt foil as the counter electrode. The reaction mechanism is clearly shown in Fig. 4b. The implementation of the substitution of Mo vacancies for Pt SAs can be attributed to the surface chemical composition of Mo2TiC2Tx being varied by H+ generated during the electrochemical process. The H+ ions initially bond with O-containing functional groups on the MXene surface and form Mo–OH2 species; this may lead to surface Mo vacancies or the evolution of H2. Pt SAs can simultaneously occupy Mo sites and are strongly fixed by covalent Pt–C bonds. STEM and HAADF-STEM images revealed the substitution by Pt atoms, matching well the corresponding simulated results.
Although surface atoms can be substituted by external atoms via conventional approaches, novel strategies have been proposed to achieve the migration of internal atoms in the lattice, and surface atoms can be partially substituted. Cheng's group105 proposed a universal cold hydrogen plasma reduction method for synthesizing different SAs supported on 2D TMD substrates, including MoS2 and WS2. Unsaturated Mo SAs were generated from coexisting MoS2 nanosheets and formed Mo–Sx active sites on the surface (Fig. 4c). Hydrogen plasma possesses highly reducing characteristics and it can break the strong covalent Mo–S bond; then, unsaturated Mo SAs partially migrate to the surface due to the transfer of less charge to S atoms and occupy S sites. HAADF-STEM images show the precise substitution of atomic metal species. This method is feasible for obtaining both MoS2 and WS2 with different SA concentrations.
Coupling surface SAs with 2D matrices can significantly enhance the catalytic activities of inactive surface planes. However, inert atoms sandwiched in the lattice dramatically restrict the catalytic efficiency. Approaches for the substitution of atoms inside lattices have been proposed to further increase the number of active sites and improve the atomic utilization.


2.3.2. Interior atom substitution. 
M atoms in TMDs sandwiched between S-atom layers are difficult to substitute through post-treatment methods because of the strong covalent M–S bond. In situ substitution approaches, also known as bottom-up strategies, can ensure the introduction of SAs into the basal Mo-atom plane, in addition to at defect and edge sites, to achieve Mo-site substitution. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), a solid-phase reaction, has been regarded as a secure and reliable bottom-up method to achieve atomic substitution in MoS2 lattices with the formation of M–S bonds.
Recently, Zhou et al.106 demonstrated the successful incorporation of Co SAs, which substituted Mo atoms, at various concentrations via CVD. As shown in Fig. 4d, sulfur powder, MoO3, and CoCl2 were applied as the S, Mo, and dopant sources, respectively. The precursors were placed into a quartz tube with a growth temperature from 700 to 800 °C. A concentration-gradient distribution of Co SAs embedded in the MoS2 substrate could be easily obtained via controlling the molar ratio of the precursors, demonstrating the tunability of Co loading into the MoS2 lattice. ADF-STEM images revealed three SACo@MoS2 catalysts with different Co concentrations, and tridopant clusters (green circles) became dominant as the dopant concentration increased. The same synthesis approach was also reported by Li et al. for preparing p-type substituted and large-scale monolayer MoS2 confining Nb SAs with the assistance of NaCl.107 NaCl can reduce the melting point of Nb2O5 and help form NbClxδ+ species, which facilitate the fabrication of MoS2 substrates.
Furthermore, Warner et al.108 creatively developed a metal exchange strategy to realize substitution by Sn dopants at W sites via energetically favorable replacement, as shown in Fig. 4e. High-quality WS2 single crystals were first prepared via CVD techniques, and then they were subsequently reacted with a SnS precursor. S vacancies on WS2 were the initial binding sites for metal exchange. The Sn–WS2 product obtained via this approach exhibited better dopant-distribution control than that obtained via directly adding SnS2 during the growth process, and isolated Sn SAs successfully filled W sites. ADF-STEM imaging clearly showed an area of monolayer atomic Sn-doped WS2, and the intensity line profiles across the yellow and blue rows demonstrated the differences in intensity between W and Sn species.
To sum up, it is difficult to anchor SAs in the interiors of substrates possessing high integrity, and covalent bonds in matrices are nearly impossible to break via post-treatment methods. In situ substitution approaches, including molten-salt assistance, electrochemical deposition, and CVD, can be applied to achieve atom substitution. Confining SAs can modulate the electronic structures of 2D supports, integrate host and guest advantages, and dramatically enhance electrocatalytic activities. However, synthesis processes for atom substitution are limited in the laboratory, and the high costs and low yields significantly restrict the large-scale production of SAs@2D hybrids. There is an urgent need to make improvements and expand the available techniques in order to reduce costs and increase production.

2.4. Other strategies
Novel approaches for anchoring SAs, other than the synthetic strategies mentioned above, are constantly being proposed. SAs can also be decorated on substrates without entering the lattice. In this situation, the surface activities of substrates can be significantly enhanced without any structural damage. SAs have two main anchoring modes: functionalization via oxygen-containing groups; and intercalation between adjacent layers via van der Waals forces.

2.4.1. Functional SAs. 
Abundant and uniformly dispersed oxygen-containing terminal groups on the surface of a 2D substrate can serve as specific anchoring sites to tightly capture SAs. Zboril's group109 developed a novel approach, synthesizing mixed-valence Cu SAs with low metal loading but exceptional conversion and selectivity via a series of complex reactions. Functionalized graphene, e.g., graphene–CN, was synthesized first as a matrix for loading Cu SAs. CuCl2 solution serving as the Cu source was added into a graphene–CN aqueous suspension to stabilize the Cu SAs. As shown in Fig. 5a, Cu atoms possessing mixed valence were anchored on the graphene substrate via oxygen bridging bonds. HR-TEM images of the G(CN)–Cu catalyst before and after catalytic reactions identified that the Cu SAs still existed in isolation without any aggregation, which proved the excellent stability of the G(CN)–Cu catalyst. G(COOH)–Fe catalysts can be synthesized via the same approach. Furthermore, Gao et al.110 demonstrated a simple thermal treatment approach for stabilizing Co SAs, which were bridged by oxygen-containing terminal groups. Briefly, a graphene suspension and Co-containing solution were intensively mixed under ultrasonication to prepare a precursor solution. Co2+ cations can be adsorbed onto the surface via negatively charged oxygen-containing terminal groups due to electrostatic interactions. A freeze-drying approach was applied to reduce the restacking of graphene nanosheets and a final well-controlled Co1–G catalyst was obtained after annealing under Ar protection.
 Fig. 5  (a) A model and HR-TEM image of the G(CN)–Cu catalyst. Higher magnification HR-TEM images of the catalyst show high-contrast spots originating from embedded Cu atoms (b) before and (c) after catalytic reactions.109 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) A schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of the Co1–G catalyst.110 Copyright: 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) A schematic diagram and the characteristics of V2C MXenes synthesized via an interlayer engineering strategy.112 Copyright: 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of Co1-in-MoS2.113 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. 


2.4.2. Intercalated SAs. 
For 2D substrates possessing layered architecture, metal ions can be spontaneously intercalated between adjacent nanosheets and reduced to atomic species.111 MXenes with an M2X structure (such as Ti2C, Nb2C, and V2C) can present better electrochemical properties than their M3X2 and M4X3 counterparts, as predicted via theoretical studies. Wang et al.112 engineered interlayer coordination in V2C MXenes through a substitution and intercalation strategy. As shown in Fig. 5e, an SACo@V2C catalyst was synthesized through a typical impregnation approach with additional KOH activation treatment for 1 day. The activated V2C substrate was immersed into Co-containing solution, and Co2+ ions spontaneously moved into the interlayer space due to ion exchange and electrostatic interactions. HRTEM imaging revealed distributed Co SAs with uneven atomic spacing, which are clearly demonstrated in the atomistic model of V2C@Co MXene. SACo@V2C catalysts with different Co content can be obtained via controlling the intercalation time. Co SAs were immobilized between V2C layers instead of occupying surface vacancies.
SAs can also be intercalated between adjacent MoS2 nanosheets. A vertically structured Co-SA-intercalated MoS2 catalyst was designed by Loh and co-workers113 and synthesized via electrochemical intercalation treatment (Fig. 5f). MoS2 nanosheets were first grown on carbon paper and an encapsulated cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPC) precursor was intercalated into the MoS2 nanosheets via an electrochemical co-intercalation method in a standard two-electrode cell. The modified electrode was transferred to a tube furnace and heated under Ar conditions to reduce the intercalated Co atoms, and the final Co1-in-MoS2 product was obtained after natural cooling. Atomic-resolution STEM-HAADF images of Co1-in-MoS2 presented the atomically dispersed Co SAs as brighter dots.
In conclusion, manipulating the synthesis of atomic metal species in a controllable way to obtain SAs@2D products possessing desired structures and properties is vital for the continuous development of the SA family. Each strategy exhibits advantages and disadvantages, and it is necessary to select an appropriate strategy according to the applications. Defects, including unsaturated edges and vacancies, provide possibilities for anchoring SAs, but low loading concentrations and the exorbitant cost of manufacturing defects can limit the development of defect-engineering strategies. Atomic substitution strategies face the same dilemma of difficult synthesis conditions in the laboratory, and the stringent synthesis conditions can immensely limit the industrial applications. Coordinated engineering strategies exhibit potential for expanded applications due to the wide range of raw materials, simple synthesis processes, and stable coordinated structures of the final products, suitably meeting industrial needs. It is believed that plenty of outstanding research will be conducted, promoting the development of SAs@2D hybrids in the field of energy storage systems.

3. Understanding the structure–activity mechanisms of 2D materials anchoring SAs
During the synthesis stage, the ultrathin basal plane characteristics and large open surface areas of 2D materials are beneficial for the near-absolute exposure of abundant intrinsic defects, such as vacancies, and/or non-intrinsic defects, such as doped nonmetallic atoms, on the surfaces. These defect sites can function as anchoring centers to readily enable metal-ion-precursor infiltration and the efficient trapping of individual metal species.114 As a result, in comparison to SAs on 1D and 3D host counterparts, SAs@2D composites can exhibit inherent structural advantages in terms of having high densities of active anchoring centers that can effectively immobilize isolated atoms within 2D supports. Furthermore, because the two sides of the basal plane are vacant, the coordination unsaturability and local charge inhomogeneity of the isolated atoms embedded in the SAs@2D hybrids are more distinct. Therefore, atomic SAs with unique electronic structures can be achieved. This further contributes to the apparently enhanced redox activity and versatile electrochemical performance. Due to efficient charge transfer stemming from electronegativity differences between the metal SAs and nonmetal coordinating atoms, strong electronic interactions occur at the site-support regions, triggering the evolution of metal electronic states between zero valence and saturated cation valence.113,115,116 Intrinsically, the outer orbitals of these bonds are not fully filled with electrons, inducing unsaturated coordination environments and, thus, new metal electronic status. For instance, intrinsically inert Mg, Al, and Ca metals can even be activated by intense metal–N bonding interactions, triggering the upshifting of p-band energy levels. The thus-tuned electronic structures greatly support the superior catalytic activities of main-group-metals@graphene composites.35 In their work, Ye et al. demonstrated that the d-electron density around the Fermi level of Pt SAs could be positively modulated by coordinative aniline molecules anchored on graphene, which enhanced the electrocatalytic capabilities.117 Hence, anchoring or doping foreign SAs is essentially critical for activating an inert broad platform via tuning local charge density, transforming the electronic properties, and establishing an optimized catalytic interface on a 2D substrate, skillfully expanding the redox site performance with trace amounts of SAs.27 Furthermore, metal-nonmetal coordination geometries with fully adjustable parameters are central for tailoring the spin characteristics, charge transfer kinetics, and physicochemical properties of SAs@2D hybrids. In particular, the constituent metal centers (noble metals/transition metals), coordination non-metal atoms (B/C/N/O/P/S), coordination environment (coordination number/bond length), doping sites (edge/basal plane), and mass loading offer sufficient room for optimizing and tuning the electron state density, electron donating/withdrawing effects, intermediate adsorption/dissociation behavior, rate-determining step, and redox energy barrier. These factors as universal descriptors ultimately govern two critical electrochemical parameters, the inherent catalytic capabilities and long-term durability, under various practical electrochemical conditions.
3.1. Modulating the catalytic activity through coordination geometry

(i) Metal centers. 
Importantly, individual atomic sites that invade from an external location are conducive to breaking the structural symmetry of 2D supports and triggering an increase in the electronic density of states surrounding the Fermi energy level. Hence, highly charged metal centers play a key role in determining the catalytic activity. As a result, SAs@2D hybrids based on different metal centers demonstrate apparent electrocatalytic selectivity for various electrochemical applications. However, in cases with similar coordination structures, the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity exhibits apparent correlation with the binding strength of reaction intermediates on different active materials. In addition, the valence electrons in the occupied d orbitals of different metals play a critical role in governing the binding energies of intermediates, with negative correlation between them. Based on these considerations, from a theoretical perspective, Xu et al.16 predicted the optimal M–Nx coordination combinations for different catalytic applications. For instance, they concluded that Fe–pyridine/pyrrole–N4, Co–pyrrole–N4, and Mn–pyrrole–N4 are better choices for the ORR, OER, and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), respectively. Gao et al.116 fabricated a series of transition metal (M) SAs (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) within N-rich graphene (M–NC) with similar morphologies and loadings. Among them, Co SAs result in an optimal d-band center, which can also optimize oxygenated intermediate (*OOH, *O, and *OH) adsorption, and they occupy the peak positions of activity volcano curves (Fig. 6a and b). Experimental and simulation results demonstrate that the Co–NC catalyst achieves preferable ORR activity and high selectivity for H2O2 production in acidic media.
 Fig. 6  (a) The binding energies of *OOH, *O, and *OH to M-SA and the d-band centers (open circles) of M atoms. (b) Activity volcano curves of the ORR via a 2e− or 4e− pathway.116 Copyright: 2020, Cell Press. (c) A schematic illustration of the formation of Fe/Co/Ni-SAs with different coordination environments.120 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) The linear relationship between the amounts of charge transfer from the functional groups and the d-band center. (e) The linear relationship between the adsorption energies of various intermediates and the d-band center.122 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In another work, Meng et al.118 demonstrated that among M SAs (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) anchored on hollow N-rich graphene (M–N–Gr), the electrocatalytic performance during the ORR follows the order: Fe > Co > Cu > Ni. The different ORR performances stem from the diverse electronic structures of the dopant atoms and discrepancies in the metal–nonmetal coordination structures. They declare that in the case of Fe–N–Gr, the larger M–O overlap during *-OO species adsorption and the shorter M–O intermediate bond lengths play key roles in accelerating the ORR kinetics. The Fe–N–Gr hybrid then demonstrated the lowest energy barrier during the rate-determining step. The optimized Fe–N–Gr catalyst displays excellent ORR activity and stability in alkaline media, even outperforming a commercial Pt/C catalyst. Fei et al.119 reported that the OER activities of different SA-doped graphene samples follow the sequence: Ni > Co > Fe. They disclosed that the OER performance strongly relies on the valence electrons in the d orbital. Furthermore, different metal centers can demonstrate different binding characteristics with the same coordinating atoms during the synthesis process, which can also affect the final catalytic activity. For example, Zhang et al.120 reported that Co and Ni SAs could simultaneously bind with N and S elements, establishing Co–S1–N3 and Ni–S1–N3 coordination structures. However, Fe SAs demonstrated negligible bonding with S heteroatoms and could only combine with N atoms, forming Fe–N4–S2 active sites (Fig. 6c). Due to the special coordination characteristics, the catalyst based on Fe–N4–S2 shows higher charge density and lower energy barriers during the ORR process.


(ii) Coordination atoms. 
Apart from readily accessible central metal SAs, the intrinsic properties of coordinative nonmetal atoms in the matrix are another fundamental aspect determining catalytic performance. In particular, for M–Nx coordination structures, different N ligands, especially pyridine-N (p-type doping) and pyrrole-N (n-type doping), are essentially important for manipulating the electronic structures of the central SAs, further governing the electrocatalytic activity. For instance, Zhang et al.66 disclosed that pyrrole-N tetradentate Fe SAs showed boosted ORR activity compared to a pyridine-N dominated Fe–N4 structure. The reason lies in the more intense electron depletion around the iron centers in the former type, which definitely influences the electronic construction and valence state of the Fe SAs. In addition, various non-metal heteroatoms, such as B, N, P, and S, with different electronegativity values and atomic radii contribute to the activation of surrounding metal atoms via tuning the shifting of the d-band center. When metal SAs are bridged via different non-metal atoms within the support, electronegativity discrepancies cause different levels of electron transfer from the central atom to the coordination atom. Then, the valence electrons in the metal d orbital are inevitably altered, which further determines the electronic interactions between intermediate adsorbates and active sites. For example, Hou et al.121 introduced partial S atoms, with weaker electronegativity and a larger radius, into carbon nanosheets, forming a Ni–S–N3 coordination configuration. The electron donor characteristics of the S heteroatoms and the shortened Ni–N bonds after S doping caused slight lattice distortion and optimized the charge state of the Ni–N coordination. This facilitates the OER activity in alkaline media via modulating the local electronic structure, enhancing the charge transfer capabilities of the Ni–S–N3 catalyst.
Furthermore, Mun et al.122 showed that different types of S (thiophene-like S and oxidized S) doping have opposite effects on charge transfer and, thus, on the ORR activities of the Fe–N4 centers. Thiophene-like S (–S) with electron-donating characteristics enhances the adsorption energy of ORR intermediates at Fe–N4 sites, which is detrimental to the catalytic activity. However, oxidized S (–SO2) with electron-withdrawing effects suppresses the interactions between the intermediates and Fe–N4 sites, distinctly improving the kinetic activity in acidic media (Fig. 6d and e). P heteroatom doping within SAs@2D can also introduce new catalytic sites. For example, Yuan et al.123 developed N/P dual-coordinated Fe SAs within carbon nanosheets with the structure Ni–P–N3. According to experimental data and theoretical analysis, the optimized Ni–P–N3 coordination environment plays a key role in governing the intermediate adsorption/desorption behavior and electrocatalytic kinetics during the ORR process. Upon B doping, Guo et al.124 demonstrated that the introduction of electron-deficient B atoms within Co–N4 coordination units is beneficial for triggering electron delocalization around the defective centers. This contributes to the adsorption of oxygen species during the ORR. Then, low-impedance charge transfer can be realized, thus accelerating the 4e− reaction kinetics.


(iii) Coordination numbers. 
Importantly, the electrocatalytic activity during multi-electron conversion processes also relies heavily on the coordination numbers of adjacent nonmetal atoms toward specific metal SAs. The coordination ratio is essentially critical for determining the charge state and, thus, the electronic structure of a metal center. Coordinatively unsaturated sites with the capability for the energy-efficient gain or loss of electrons tend to preferentially work as electrocatalytic redox centers. For instance, Rong et al.125 reported that, relative to the conventional Ni–N4 coordination structure, the lower coordinated Ni–N3 catalyst with vacancy defects achieved superior electrocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction. The intentionally produced vacancy defects can simultaneously lower the energy barriers of the rate-limiting step (CO2 → COOH*) and the final CO desorption step. Similarly, Wang et al.19 achieved Co–N2, Co–N3, and Co–N4 active centers within carbon substrates at different pyrolysis temperatures. For Co–N2 sites, the upward-shifted d-band center is beneficial for the initial CO2 activation and final CO desorption steps. Hence, the lower-coordinated Co–N2 catalyst shows optimal CO2 reduction activity. Slightly differently, Liu et al.126 also fabricated Fe–Nx (x = 4–6) with different coordination numbers via controlling the pyrolysis temperature. They confirmed that the medium-spin FeN5 configuration demonstrates much higher catalytic activity for the oxidation of the C–H bond than FeN6 and FeN4. Chen et al.127 reported that, compared with W–N3 and W–N4, W–N5 catalytic centers within carbon nanosheets with a higher coordination number demonstrated accelerated ORR reaction dynamics both in acidic and alkaline electrolytes. Therefore, it can be seen that the optimized combination of metal and nonmetal active sites for specific electrochemistry reactions, especially in the rechargeable battery field, remains ambiguous, and further mechanisms by which the coordination geometry affects the activity need to be identified in the future.

3.2. Maintaining immunity against activity degradation
In reality, the isolated dispersed atoms are not in a real sense “loners”; they are, however, tightly interlinked with surrounding nonmetal atoms, such as electronegative N, S, and P, within the 2D substrate, establishing solid metal–nonmetal chemical bonding. During long-term cycling, this can maximally resist the notorious agglomeration tendencies elicited by the huge free energies of individual atoms. In addition, the tendency for easy oxidation in harsh electrolyte environments and under high applied potentials can also be suppressed. In these cases, the cycling stabilities of metal SAs under working conditions are also determined by the coordination environment and site-substrate electronic interactions. For example, Zhang et al.66 showed that high-purity Fe SAs coordinated by pyrrole-N with stronger electron depletion could achieve better ORR stability than their pyridine-N counterparts. Yuan et al.123 confirmed that robust N/P dual-coordinated Fe SAs demonstrated superior methanol tolerance in an acidic medium. In another work, Li et al.128 reported that Pt SAs anchored on different matrices (graphene, ZrO2, CeO2, and Co3O4) exhibited huge differences in durability and anti-toxicity properties. Due to the optimized 5d state and intense binding energy of Pt SAs on the Co3O4 support (−8.43 eV, higher than the graphene (−2.31 eV), ZrO2 (−7.23 eV), and CeO2 (−8.34 eV) substrates), the desirable promotion of electronic site–substrate interactions occurs. Then, the hybrid demonstrates superior immunity against the aggregation and deactivation of Pt SAs, further verifying that matching between the metal SAs and support is a key factor for maintaining activity during cycling. Apart from spatial stability and electrochemical stability, thermal stability is another critical requirement for a high-performance catalyst that works in a high-temperature environment. For example, Yan et al.129 proposed an interesting structural reconstruction strategy to fabricate thermally stable Pt SAs. Different from conventional chemisorption, apparent charge transfer is triggered between Pt SAs and the MnOx support. Then, the original Mn3O4 support is reconstructed into Mn2O3, generating high-valent Pt metal centers and stronger interactions. The achieved Pt SAs can be maintained for 5 days at 800 °C in humid air. In another work, Yao et al.130 initiated a general high-temperature shockwave method (1227–1727 °C) to dramatically enhance metal-defect bond interactions and boost the thermal stability of Pt SAs. Totally different from the conventional Pt–Nx coordination structure, more thermodynamically stable Pt–C covalent bonds can be formed at such high temperatures. These studies all highlight again the irreplaceable role of metal–support coupling effects in stabilizing active SAs in various harsh environments.
It is worth mentioning that the valuable use of in operando XAS characterization over the course of cycling has been dedicated to the dynamic monitoring of the electronic state stability, offering a convenient way to gain deeper understanding of the activity mechanisms relating to metal SAs.65,131 For example, as shown in Fig. 7a and b, by means of comparing the degree of down-shifting of the Fe K-edge during electrocatalysis, Gu et al.132 drew a conclusion that, relative to Fe SAs coordinated with pyridine-N, pyrrolic-N anchored Fe SAs demonstrate better immunity against degradation, with a well-maintained +3 valence state during CO2 reduction. Similarly, upon monitoring via in situ K-edge XANES during the ORR process, with the operating voltage reduced below 1.0 V, the corresponding profiles also demonstrate a tendency to down-shift, implying the distinctly decreased oxidation state of the Fe SAs (Fig. 7c).133 In a work carried out by Cao et al.,134 the evolution of the Co K-edge monitored via in operando XANES and EXAFS shows the elevation of the Co valence state and local coordination reconstruction during the HER, which contribute to the enhanced catalytic activity (Fig. 7d–f). Yang et al.135 also reported a similar increase in the valence state of Ni SAs upon CO2 adsorption via in operando XAS characterization. However, they can recover a low oxidation state after one CO2 reduction cycle. Hence, self-regulated electronic structures and slight valence state fluctuations during cycling are responsible for the much enhanced electrocatalytic stability.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) The first derivatives of the Fe K-edge XANES spectra of Fe3+–N–C and Fe2+–N–C as dry powder (black) and when loaded onto glassy carbon electrodes at open circuit and various working potentials. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright: 2019, Science. (c) Fe K-edge XANES spectra of Fe-SAs/NPS-HC during ORR catalysis. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright: 2018, Springer Nature. (d) In operando XANES spectra recorded at the Co K-edge of Co1/PCN, from open-circuit conditions to −0.1 V during the HER; inset: a magnified view of the pre-edge XANES region. (e) Corresponding k3-weighted Fourier transform spectra. (f) First-shell fitting of the EXAFS spectra via different fitting paths under ex situ and open-circuit conditions and at −0.04 V. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright: 2019, Springer Nature. 
Even so, deactivation mechanisms that apply to metal SAs after prolonged redox cycles have scarcely been reported. Many works, as mentioned above, have focused on electronic state and coordination environment variations before and after cycling and have stated that an oxidized valence state and coordination number can be well-maintained by metal SAs. However, there are questions as to what is the final failure state of the metal SAs, and whether it is undesirable agglomeration, excessive oxidation, reduction into a zero-valent metal, or 2D matrix destruction that gives rise to the degradation of SAs@2D composites. These questions are still critical for resolving existing controversies with regard to cycling termination and for further optimizing stability enhancement strategies in turn. Hence, more process monitoring during cycling via in operando characterization techniques (in situ TEM, HAADF-STEM, and XAS) is considerably important for precisely clarifying the failure mechanisms of SAs@2D catalysts.
4. Electrochemical energy storage applications of two-dimensional materials confining SAs
For various rechargeable battery systems, the elaborate design and construction of electrode materials with specific structural and component functionalities are the most important subjects. Thus, during past decades, a series of promising 2D species has been extensively developed and has demonstrated extraordinary superiority for realizing the building of desirable hierarchically porous electrode materials. The critical advantages lie in their special structural features, namely, huge surface areas and ample interlayer spacing, appropriate electrolyte wettability, shortened solid-state diffusion pathways, and adjustable surface functional groups. Furthermore, rich edge dangling bonds and highly exposed in-plane surface sites can not only be used to self-enhance the electrical conductivity and catalytic activity via heteroatom doping strategies, but they can also work together in matching the second phase via heterogeneous junction engineering to collectively adjust the overall electronic properties through well-designed interfaces.
Due to so many advantages being inherent in 2D materials and SAs@2D hybrids, efficient electrode materials based on metal single atoms for use in rechargeable batteries possess bright development prospects. As time passes, researchers have begun to understand that the occupation of individual atomic sites by foreign atoms may break the structural symmetry of 2D supports, triggering an increase in the electronic density of states surrounding the Fermi energy level. The resultant electronic structural distortions of SAs@2D hybrids fundamentally ameliorate the electrical conductivity and can satisfy similar requirements in the secondary battery field. Since then, as shown in Fig. 8, an increasing number of studies associated with SAs@2D composites distinctly enhancing the reversible capacities, long-term cycling performances, and rate characteristics of various energy storage systems have emerged. In this section, the concrete utilization of 2D-support-trapped SAs in the field of rechargeable batteries, such as metal-gas batteries (Li–O2, Li–CO2, Zn–air, Zn–CO2, and Al–air batteries) and non-gas systems (Li–S, Li metal, Na metal, and metal ion batteries), will be summarized in detail. What is more, particular performance-enhancement mechanisms derived from intense site–support electronic interactions in SAs@2D materials via defect engineering at the atomic scale will be discussed.
 Fig. 8  A brief history and recent progress relating to the use of SAs@2D hybrids in electrochemical energy storage systems. In the 1960s, the initial concept of single catalysis sites was established.136 In 2005, Thomas et al.137 reported the synthesis of SAs; these processes can be roughly divided into physical and chemical strategies. In 2011, Zhang's group15 first directly observed SAs via the HAADF-STEM technique. From 2018–2020, SAs@2D hybrids were gradually applied in Zn–air,138 Li–S,139 Li–CO2,140 Li–metal,141 Li–O2,93 Al–air,69 and Zn–CO2142 batteries. 
4.1. Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries
Often involving trial and error, the search for competitive power sources that far exceed their Li-ion counterparts and that can cater to ever-expanding energy storage demands has been continuous. The ultra-high theoretical energy densities (3506 and 1876 W h kg−1, respectively) and favorable environmental friendliness of rechargeable Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries render them a pivotal guide to suitable research directions.143–145 Specifically, Li–CO2 chemistry involves the re-utilization of waste CO2, which is critical for relieving the notorious “greenhouse effect”.146 Generally, aprotic Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries follow similar working principles. For the former, the reaction equation is: 2Li+ + O2 + 2e− ⇔ Li2O2 (2.96 V), involving ORR and OER processes.147 For the latter, the corresponding mechanism is: 4Li+ + 3CO2 + 4e− ⇔ C + 2Li2CO3 (2.80 V), involving CO2RR and CO2ER processes.148
Similar to other catalytic systems, Li–O2 and Li–CO2 technologies proceed through multistep electron transfer and gas adsorption/desorption processes in tri-phase reaction zones, inevitably requiring a large voltage gap to overcome the energy barriers. Detrimentally, the insoluble characteristics of the solid Li2O2 and Li2CO3 discharge species mean that they do not decompose easily, further triggering inferior energy efficiencies, incomplete reversibility, and limited cycling performance. Furthermore, an excessive charging overpotential can also lead to a risk of organic electrolyte decomposition, bringing about undesirable parasitic reactions. Hence, elaborately designed catalysts endowed with outstanding reactivity, stability, and durability are indispensable for efficiently electrocatalyzing the reaction kinetics. As a newly emerging class of catalyst, SAs@2D hybrids with many exposed O2/CO2-favorable active sites can induce electron delocalization and spin character discrepancy around the active centers. To this end, rationalized single-atom-doping and open sites exert determining effects on the intrinsic catalytic capabilities of air cathodes due to the facilitation of charge transfer and optimized intermediate adsorption, going beyond conventional nanoparticle catalysts. As certified by Song et al.,149 Co SAs anchored on carbon spheres could induce Li2O2 oxidation following a single electron process, instead of via a 2e− pathway, thoroughly altering the redox mechanisms and reducing kinetics constraints in Li–O2 batteries. Excitingly, their superior ORR electrochemical performance even surpassed that of the benchmark commercial Pt/C catalyst. To date, only a limited number of reports associated with SAs@2D catalysts has been dedicated to investigating structure–function relationships and electrochemical performance improvement mechanisms in detail. Despite this field being in its infancy, in this section we will emphasize the key role played by SAs@2D in speeding up O2/CO2 oxidation–reduction conversion kinetics and mitigating side-reaction concerns, referencing substantial achievements that have already been achieved.
To dramatically ameliorate the overpotential and enhance the cycling stability in Li–O2 batteries, our group first fabricated Co SAs trapped in an ultrathin 2D nitrogen-rich carbon skeleton derived from Zn–hexamine frameworks (Co-SAs/N–C), and we innovatively demonstrated that it can operate well as an efficient bifunctional catalyst for the ORR and OER under Li–O2 conditions (Fig. 9a).93 According to DFT calculations, abundant Co–N4 structures, as driving-force centers, are pivotal for drastically improving the inherent LiO2 affinity and, thus, essentially inducing the formation of well-crystallized Li2O2 with much reduced size (<10 nm) that is intimately and homogeneously deposited on the N–C scaffold. This facilitates its efficient formation and easy oxidation (Fig. 9b). Additionally, the calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams reveal that Co–N4 centers can conspicuously ameliorate the discharge/charge overpotential (Fig. 9c). Notably, Li–O2 cells employing Co-SAs/N–C exhibit an ultra-low overpotential (0.4 V) and long cycle-life (260 cycles, 400 mA g−1) (Fig. 9d). This work, involving the pioneering testing of single atoms in an oxygen cathode for use in Li–O2 batteries, paves a new way for rational catalyst construction at the atomic scale for use in various metal–gas batteries. Even so, more efforts should be devoted to studying in detail Li2O2 decomposition routes under assistance from SAs@2D catalysts, which is somewhat overlooked in this work. At the same time, Zhao et al.150 designed g-C3N4 that could capture Pt SAs with homogeneous dispersibility. Unique electronic interactions between foreign Pt SAs and g-C3N4 nanosheets give rise to charge distribution modification near the active centers and contribute to the distinct enhancement of ion diffusion and electron transport. The assembled Li–O2 batteries realize superior round-trip efficiency (69%) and outstanding rate performance (5964.7 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1). Ex situ characterization also shows that Pt doping can efficiently induce Li2O2 to generate film-like morphology during the ORR and then feasibly catalyze its decomposition during the OER (Fig. 9e). As previously reported, in comparison to transition-metal nanoparticles, noble-metal catalysts (Ru, Pt, Pd, Au, etc.) demonstrate competitive catalytic capabilities for ameliorating the ORR/OER overpotential.151 Hence, inspired by the excellent bifunctional activities of the reported Co-SA-based catalysts, noble-metal-based SAs@2D species deserve more attention, as they can further optimize the electrochemical performance (energy conversion efficiency, rate capability, and cycling stability) of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries.
 Fig. 9  (a) A diagram showing the configuration of a Li–O2 battery based on Co-SAs/N–C. (b) Schematic illustrations of the working mechanisms of the Co-SAs/N–C (top) and N–C (bottom) electrodes. (c) Calculated free-energy diagrams for the discharge–charge reactions involving Co-SAs/N–C. (d) The cycling stability and terminal voltages of a Co-SAs/N–C electrode at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright: 2020, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration of the reaction process of a Pt/g-C3N4 catalyst during cycling. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. 
Relative to Li–O2 batteries, the core bottlenecks for Li–CO2 batteries in terms of the overpotential and reversibility are more entrenched. This is due to difficulties relating to handling bulk discharge products (Li2CO3) with wide bandgaps. The drastically lagging CO2ER kinetics strongly require ground-breaking catalysts to accelerate electrochemical phase transitions. Burgeoning SA catalysts with rich defect sites and inherent maximum atom efficiencies can show great adaptability to overcome dilemmas relating to discharge/charge kinetics deficiencies. Following this thread, Zhang et al.140 reported graphene oxide loaded with a high concentration of Co dimers (5.3%). Compared with pure Co SAs and Co clusters, this work illustrates that the special Co-dimer-based catalyst manifests preferable catalysis-activation capabilities, implying that it can efficiently accelerate both CO2RR and CO2ER kinetics. Electrochemical evaluations illustrate that Co-dimer-based Li–CO2 batteries show a higher round-trip efficiency of 82.5%. Furthermore, the Co-dimer-based Li–CO2 batteries can run stably for over 100 cycles with a charge voltage always below 4.2 V. As shown in Fig. 10a–c, DFT adsorption models and charge density difference calculations show that the much-ameliorated overpotential, energy conversion efficiency, and cycling stability can be attributed to the well-designed Co dimers, which display a larger Li2CO3 adsorption energy. This means that the firmly adsorbed discharge species are likely to be inclined to assemble around the Co-dimer centers with metal-like characteristics, and this can lead to the best electrocatalytic decomposition performance during recharging (Fig. 10d and e).
 Fig. 10  (a) Side views, (b) top views, and (c) charge density differences of Li2CO3 adsorbed on graphene oxide, a single cobalt atom, and a cobalt dimer, respectively. (d) The first cycle charge voltage profiles of adjacent Co/GO–Li2CO3, SA Co/GO–Li2CO3, and GO–Li2CO3 electrodes up to 400 mA h g−1. (e) A schematic diagram of a Li–CO2 battery and the corresponding CO2 reduction and evolution reactions on an adjacent Co/GO electrode. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Models of N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene, N,S-doped graphene, and Fe/N-doped graphene structures with “FeN4” moieties at the center. (g) Fe/N-doped graphene with “FeN4” moieties at the edge. (h) The spin density distribution of edge “FeN4” moieties in the carbon skeleton. (i) A schematic diagram of the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 on the catalyst surface. (j and k) Schematic Gibbs free energy diagrams from the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 during discharging and charging. (l) The adsorption energy of *CO (ΔG*CO) as a function of the overpotential on the above-mentioned catalysts. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Taking a further leap, in parallel with endeavors to optimize metal SAs themselves, the collaborative management of atomic metal doping and inherent defects residing in the 2D matrix, including hole defects, topological defects, and non-metal heteroatom doping, can further synergistically boost the active site density. For example, Hu et al.152 developed robust Fe SAs held within an N,S-doped graphene catalyst (Fe-ISA/N,S-HG). Benefiting from both the atomically dispersed Fe–N4 moieties and homogeneous N and S dopants as active centers, the charge location, spin characteristics, and surface electronic environment of the neighboring carbon plane can be synergistically optimized. This finally results in the enhancement of the kinetics of the CO2RR and CO2ER reactions (Fig. 10f–i). DFT calculations confirm the unique role of Fe-ISA/N,S-HG in reducing both the discharge and recharge voltage gaps (Fig. 10j–l). As expected, the as-assembled Li–CO2 batteries demonstrate low polarization of 1.17 V and a larger round-trip efficiency of 92.9%. Post-mortem SEM characterization studies illustrate that the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG catalyst is beneficial for inducing the formation of small Li2CO3 nanoparticles (<10 nm) that uniformly cover the graphene skeleton after discharging; this is quite different from the conventional large-sized Li2CO3 aggregates dispersed on pure N,S-HG. The easily decomposed small-sized Li2CO3 is found to significantly improve the catalytic efficiency during recharging. This dimensional inhibition effect on the discharge products due to metal-SA coordination centers is highly consistent with our observations from Li–O2 battery studies.93 In conclusion, SAs@2D catalysts have paved a new avenue for effective electrocatalyst design for use in Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries. However, the experimental results so far only indicate the unique role of specific SAs@2D species in enhancing round-trip efficiency; the energy and power densities have not been suitably optimized yet, and the critical OER performance is still inferior to those in the presence of noble metal catalysts. Meanwhile, due to overly strong interactions between intermediates and SA active sites, as certified by the above-mentioned reports, potential active center poisoning and passivation may have detrimental effects on catalytic capabilities, especially during long-term cycling.93,140,152 Hence, obtaining a comprehensive understanding of structure–activity relationships is highly desirable for confirming that SAs@2D materials can act as general and durable catalysts in Li–O2 and Li–CO2 batteries. More types of SAs@2D catalysts should be explored to further reveal their roles in accelerating Li2O2 and Li2CO3 formation/decomposition kinetics and in suppressing active-site degradation. Furthermore, due to the highly oxidizing environment, Li–O2 and Li–CO2 cell failure is commonly caused by inevitable Li–metal anode corrosion and passivation rather than catalytic cathode deactivation during long-term cycling. Gaining an atomic-level understanding of the specific mechanisms of action of SAs@2D catalysts in relation to modulating Li/electrolyte interfaces and defending Li anodes would be an interesting research direction.
4.2. Zn–air batteries
Zn–air batteries have been recommended for breaking the monopoly status of the benchmark Li-ion system due to the use of a naturally abundant zinc anode and the extremely high theoretical density of 1086 W h kg−1. In particular, the development of flexible all-solid-state Zn–air batteries, an emerging research hotspot, could tremendously satisfy the high demand for bendable portable electronics and wearable devices. Generally, on the cathode side, Zn–air batteries follow ORR and OER working principles, suffering from sluggish redox kinetics. This unavoidably induces poor overpotentials, inferior energy efficiencies, and long-term operation instability.153,154 Hence, the development of cheap but efficient bifunctional catalysts has been intensively pursued but is still challenging. Carbon-based materials, metal oxides, sulfides, and corresponding hybrids have been investigated in the most depth.155 As an important modification strategy during the last decade, the defect engineering (vacancy engineering and doping) of these systems has greatly promoted the development of Zn–air batteries due to much-enhanced redox kinetics.156
Principally, heteroatom doping within a superior conductive grid can establish numerous newly activated catalytic sites, which induce apparent electron delocalization around the substrate atoms. The defect-triggered charge density distribution can not only accelerate the charge diffusion dynamics but can also optimize the oxygen adsorption and desorption routes, facilitating OO bond-breaking during the ORR process. These diversified factors synergistically play a pivotal role in improving the electrochemical performance of Zn–air batteries. In fact, out of a series of rechargeable batteries, Zn–air batteries are the earliest and the most investigated example associated with the SA electrochemical catalysis.133,157–159 Hence, in this section, the practical implementation of SAs@2D hybrids in Zn–air batteries, especially of all-solid-state type, will be comprehensively introduced.

4.2.1. Co-SA-based catalysts. 
(i) Pyrolysis-derived carbon catalysts. 
Carbon nanosheets derived from the pyrolysis of MOFs and other organic coordination polymers are usually employed as SA doping matrices. For example, as shown in Fig. 11a, Ji et al.82 fabricated Co SAs on N-rich carbon-flake arrays (Co SA@NCF/CNF). Experimental and theoretical results certify that Co–N4 sites play a critical role in reducing both the ORR and OER barriers (Fig. 11b and c). A flexible Zn–air battery involving Co SA@NCF/CNF can generate a capacity of 530.17 mA h g−1 at 6.25 mA cm−3 (Fig. 11d). Furthermore, three Zn–air cells in series can concurrently light up three light-emitting diodes (Fig. 11e). Similarly, Zang et al.138 fabricated carbon nanoflake arrays with abundant atomically distributed Co–Nx sites (NC–Co SA) (Fig. 11f). This work shows that the highly exposed Co–Nx single-atom centers with abundant defects change the charge distributions surrounding the matrix C atoms, which is beneficial for oxygen-molecule adhesion and subsequent OO bond breakage during the ORR. In particular, NC–Co-SA-based solid-state batteries can obtain a maximum power density of 20.9 mW cm−3, far exceeding that obtained with Co nanoparticles (16.9 mW cm−3) (Fig. 11g). In another work, Li et al.160 synthesized Co SAs fixed on a 2D carbon skeleton through the pyrolysis of a porphyrin organic framework (Co-POF). The achieved catalyst can effectively boost the ORR/OER kinetics of Zn–air batteries (Fig. 11i). The calculated maximum discharge power density of the Co-POF is 78.0 mW cm−2 (Fig. 11h). When cycled at 2.0 mA cm−2, the Co-POF cathode obtains a favourable ORR/OER overpotential of 1.04 V (Fig. 11j). A Zn–air battery equipped with Co-POF can run stably for 164 cycles, outlasting a Pt/C + Ir/C cathode (105 cycles).
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of M SA@NCF/CNF film in a wearable Zn–air battery. (b) Free energy diagrams of two models at U = 0 V and U = 1.23 V. (c) The ORR at Co–N4/C. (d) Voltage–capacity curves of the prepared Zn–air batteries. (e) A digital photo showing three wearable batteries in series as a scarf, with different light-emitting diodes lit up simultaneously. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) A schematic illustration of the fabrication process of NC–Co SAs. (g) Power–current density curves for batteries based on NC–Co SAs. (h) The LSV profiles of Co-POC-based cathodes in rechargeable Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) A model of a Co-POC-based battery. (j) The cycling stabilities of Co-POC and the Pt/C + Ir/C cathodes. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Biomass-species-derived cost-effective carbon nanosheets are another alternative material for coordination with SAs. For instance, Tang et al.161 creatively used a gelatinized-amylopectin-assisted carbonization process, harvesting a hierarchically porous sp2-conjugated graphene-like matrix confining Co–Nx–C centers (NGM–Co). The optimized charge distribution arising from the Co SAs fundamentally tunes intermediate chemisorption and boosts electron transport. Hence, an NGM–Co-based flexible solid Zn–air battery can generate a satisfactory open-circuit voltage of 1.44 V (Fig. 12a and b). In another work, Zhong et al.162 developed a considerably scalable pyrolysis procedure during which Co SAs were reduced and concurrently anchored on carbon nanosheets and Co3O4 nanoparticles (Co–Co3O4@NAC). This work elucidates that the fully exposed flat characteristics and ultra-high surface area are vital for enhancing the numbers of anchored Co atoms and Co3O4 nanoparticles, which synergistically function as catalytically active sites and greatly improve both the ORR and OER reversibility and stability (Fig. 12c). Critical interactions around the defect centers are also essential for reducing energy barriers and realizing a charge transfer number close to four during the ORR. Hence, Co–Co3O4@NAC-derived Zn–air batteries demonstrate a high open-circuit potential of 1.449 V (Fig. 12d). When operated at 5 and 10 mA cm−2, much lower polarization (0.73 and 0.77 V, respectively) can be observed, surpassing the Pt/C and IrO2–Pt/C counterparts (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a) A photograph of a toy car powered by one Zn–air battery. (b) A photograph of the solid Zn–air battery, showing an open-circuit voltage of 1.439 V. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright: 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) An illustration of the structure of the Co–Co3O4@NAC catalyst. (d) A photograph of a Zn–air battery with a high open-circuit voltage of 1.449 V. (e) The galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling performance of rechargeable Zn–air batteries based on Pt/C, Co–Co3O4@NAC, and Pt/C–IrO2. (f) Cycle-testing of Co–Co3O4@NAC in a rechargeable Zn–air battery. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. (g) A schematic illustration of the preparation of M3HITP2. (h) Different reaction cascades on Co3HITP2, showing the configurations and bond lengths during intermediate binding. (i) Free energy diagrams of intermediates along the reaction coordinates at a potential of 1.23 V. (j) Structural diagram of the flexible all-solid-state battery. (k) Rate capability testing of the flexible all-solid-state battery in various bending states. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
(ii) Pyrolysis-free catalysts. 

Via an innovative approach, Lian et al.163 first developed a conductive coordination polymer involving Co2+ and hexaiminotriphenylene as a metal source with organic ligands (Co3HITP2) to directly work as a catalytic cathode in Zn–air batteries. Via an approach not involving high-temperature pyrolysis, atomically dispersed Co–N4 centers can be homogeneously established in the 2D polymer matrix, possessing a twisty quadrilateral structure (Fig. 12g). The theoretical and experimental results disclose that, owing to the abundant unpaired 3d electrons, this material beneficially promotes the 4e− pathway, thus enhancing the ORR and OER activities (Fig. 12h and i). Hence, Zn–air batteries equipped with Co3HITP2 achieve a maximum power density of 164 mW cm−2 at 269 mA cm−2. Furthermore, well-optimized flexible all-solid-state Zn–air batteries using a polyvinyl-alcohol-based gel electrolyte also demonstrate outstanding rate stabilities at various bending angles (Fig. 12j and k).


4.2.2. Fe-SA-based catalysts. 
(i) Pyrolysis-derived carbon catalysts. 
Organic coordination polymers with abundant pyridinic N species residing at ligand and homogeneous sites are considered to be perfect for capturing Fe SAs without agglomeration.164 For instance, Yang et al.80 developed Fe SAs within N-rich carbon nanosheets (Fe SAs/N–C) via the pyrolysis of phenanthroline. The Fe SAs/N–C catalyst demonstrates substantially enhanced ORR activity, owing to intense Fe–N4 interactions and enough catalytic centers being exposed by the 2D carbon framework. Bimetallic Zn/Fe organic coordination compounds possess advantages for immobilizing metal SAs due to special spatial confinement effects from Zn elements.87 For example, Chen et al.67 successfully fabricated Fe SAs anchored on a carbon matrix via the pyrolysis of a coordination polymer (SA-Fe–NHPC). The mass/charge transfer and intrinsic ORR catalytic capabilities can be greatly enhanced due to the ultra-high surface area and thorough accessibility of Fe–Nx target sites. Corresponding batteries achieve an outstanding open-circuit voltage of 1.52 V and a considerably high maximum power density of 266.4 mW cm−2. Cost-effective biomass-derived carbon nanosheets are also prevalent in the generation of individually dispersed Fe SAs. For example, Ma et al.165 employed a flour precursor to construct Fe SAs embedded at the edge sites of graphitic carbon (E-FeNC). DFT calculations disclose that marginally distributed Fe–N4, as catalytic centers, can extend the OO bonds, and hence charge transfer and the oxygen binding energy are fundamentally tuned during the ORR (Fig. 13a–c). As a result, optimized HOOH dissociation and a favorably proceeding 4-electron ORR route govern the enhanced electrocatalytic capabilities (Fig. 13d). As expected, excellent electrochemical behavior, including an outstanding lifetime of 200 h, a superior specific capacity of 710 mA h g−1, and a power density of 151.6 mW cm−2, can ultimately be obtained in E-FeNC-driven Zn–air batteries (Fig. 13e and f).
 Fig. 13  (a) The Fe–N4 site near graphitic edges (upper panel: top view; lower panel: side view). (b) A perfect Fe–N4 site (side view). (c) The differential charge density distribution of an Fe–N4 site near graphitic edges. (d) The free energy diagram for a 4e− transfer ORR on E-FeNC and FeNC at U = 1.23 V. (e) Typical galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries with E-FeNC and Pt/C as cathode catalysts at 50 mA cm−2. (f) Polarization curves and corresponding power density plots of a battery using E-FeNC compared with a Pt/C catalyst. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. (g) A schematic diagram of an Fe–N/P–C catalyst with Fe–N3–P coordination configuration. (h) Long-term galvanostatic discharge curves from Zn–air batteries; inset: a photograph of two Zn–air batteries lighting an LED. (i) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the ORR on Fe–N4 and Fe–N3P active sites. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. (j) Top- and front-view models of the adsorption of HO*/O* on the P/Fe atoms of P/FeN4–CNS. (k) The calculated free energy diagram of the ORR/OER at the equilibrium potential. (l) The free energies of the ORR/OER limiting step using the models. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
As an alternative to mono-coordinated Fe–Nx construction, bi-component nonmetal-coordinated Fe SAs can result in stronger catalytic capabilities due to the more drastic lattice distortion throughout the conductive matrix. For example, Yuan et al.123 developed well-defined N/P dual-coordinated and atomically dispersed Fe SAs embedded within laminar carbon nanosheets, featuring an Fe–N3–P coordinative configuration (Fe–N/P–C) (Fig. 13g). As expected, Fe–N/P–C-based Zn–air batteries are capable of generating an outstanding specific capacity of 723.6 mA h g−1 and a steady potential (0.93 V) at 100 mA cm−2, even exceeding the performance of a Pt/C reference (Fig. 13h). According to theoretical simulations, during the last rate-determining step (namely, the detachment of *OH into OH−), the Fe–N/P–C catalyst still demonstrates a much lower energy barrier (0.85 vs. 1.02 eV), implying much-tailored catalytic activity by virtue of Fe–N3–P (Fig. 13i). In another report, Sun et al.166 introduced innovative P–O bonds to stabilize the Fe–N4 sites on 2D carbon nanosheets (P–O/FeN4–CNS) (Fig. 13j). Based on theoretical calculations, P–O doping distinctly reduces the free energy barrier, predominantly contributing to an enhancement in catalytic kinetics (Fig. 13k and l). Hence, a P–O/FeN4–CNS-based Zn–air battery can run for 450 cycles at 25 mA cm−2.
(ii) Pyrolysis-free catalysts. 
Due to the feasible attachment of organic ligands and metal ions within conducting polymers, realizing homogeneously distributed Fe SAs on such ideal scaffolds to achieve optimized structures and multitudinous functionalities is eagerly desired. Following this pathway, Cheng et al.167 successfully grafted iron phthalocyanine (FePc) that was full of Fe SAs onto N/P co-doped carbon nanosheets (FePc@GN). Interestingly, the Fe SAs can simultaneously coordinate with N species from both FePc and the defective carbon matrix, inducing moderate absorption capabilities between the O2 intermediates and the catalyst surface. This contributes to enhanced ORR catalytic activity and durability. As another example, Peng et al.99 demonstrated that Fe–N4 within an FePc-dominated COF can efficiently bridge with carbon atoms from graphene, building up fast electron transfer pathways surrounding the active centers; these can preferentially absorb O2 molecules during the ORR. Hence, as-assembled Zn–air batteries paired with Fe–N–C demonstrate excellent power density (123.43 mW cm−2) and long-term durability (over 300 h). It is worth mentioning that, apart from organic–ligand coordination and pyridinic/pyrrolic N bonding with SAs, exploiting diversified linking opportunities is of importance to expand the application prospects of SA-based catalysts. As a pioneer, Qu et al.168 developed Fe SAs anchored on graphene oxide by virtue of interesting dangling-bond coordination with M–Nx. In Fe SAs/N–G based Zn–air batteries, as expected, a satisfactory power density of as high as 275 mW cm−2 can be realized, which is even higher than that of its commercial Pt/C catalyst (200 mW cm−2) counterpart.


4.2.3. Other SA-based catalysts. 
Ni-SA-dominated catalysts are another hotspot in the field of catalytic research. For instance, Cai et al.169 reported that Ni–N4 sites confined in carbon flakes demonstrated strong ORR activity, close to a Pt/C reference, when used in primary Zn–air batteries. Due to the highly exposed active centers and modulated intermediate adsorption, the achieved catalyst demonstrates high 4e− ORR selectivity in an alkaline medium. This OER activity is highly desirable for further investigations. As a typical case, Qiu et al.170 fabricated Ni atoms/clusters confined within N-rich graphene hybrids (Ni–N/G). During the ORR process, the Ni–Nx sites play a critical role in affecting OOH* adsorption, with larger adsorption energy and increased O–O bond lengths. During the OER, the co-existence of Ni–O and C–O bonds contributes to the stability of O* intermediates and, thus, boosts the OER capabilities. Ni–N/G-based Zn–air batteries ultimately show a smaller ORR/OER overpotential of 0.77 V and long-term cycling stability for 258 cycles. In the case of Cu SAs, Han et al.171 fabricated atomically dispersed Cu on graphene (Cu–G), with effects on the activity during the ORR. The dense population of Cu SAs allows the Cu–G catalyst performance to surpass commercial Pt/C. As a result, further research involving Cu-SA-based SAs@2D catalysts for the OER is eagerly awaited. For Mo SAs, Du et al.172 designed Mo and N co-doped holey graphene (N–Mo-holey G). They propose that the Mo SAs play a decisive role in enhancing the OER performance, while pyridine N doping exerts a crucial effect on the ORR. Therefore, assembled solid-state zinc–air batteries achieve a high power-density of 83 mW cm−2 and superior cycling life for 88 h.
As we can see, in the field of SAs@2D-based Zn–air batteries, Fe and Co doping are the most studied areas due to their availability, bifunctional catalytic activity, and long-lasting durability. This is consistent with work reported by Peng et al. They conclude that in the field of metal-doped carbon catalysts, the ORR activities of Fe and Co are much higher than those of Cu, Mn, and Ni, both in alkaline and acidic electrolytes.173 Furthermore, several Cu-SA-based catalysts have also been applied in Zn–air batteries. The authors all demonstrate that the Cu–Nx moieties play a key role in enhancing the ORR activity via adjusting the intermediate adsorption/desorption behavior.174–176 However, equally critical OER performance and in-depth mechanism studies have not been conducted. Hence, the corresponding electrochemical performance can only be evaluated in primary Zn–air battery devices rather than in rechargeable counterparts. Hence, it can be inferred that the discharge/recharge conversion efficiencies of Zn–air batteries manifest conspicuous catalyst selectivity. Fe SAs and Co SAs are better choices for obtaining excellent ORR/OER electrocatalytic activity and stability, which can surpass even those of benchmark Pt/C and IrO2 or Ir counterparts. Furthermore, we highlight that instead of mono-dispersed SA catalysts, double metal active centers based on highly active Fe and/or Co SAs, such as dimeric Fe–Co100,177 and Co–Zn,178 would be more competitive in Zn–air batteries. This can be attributed to the mixed valence and multiscale coordination environment, leading to bimetallic acceleration. Additionally, considering the inevitable carbon corrosion at higher potentials (>1.5 V) during the OER,155,179 the development of more corrosion-resistant 2D substrates, such as MXene, MoS2, and MOFs, coupled with various bimetal sites would be an important direction for further promoting the intrinsic catalytic kinetics in Zn–air batteries. Furthermore, although many achievements have been made in terms of catalytic cathodes via SAs@2D engineering, Zn anode dendrite growth issues still pose a strong threat to the overall stability. To date, the structure–function relationships between atomic active sites and suppressed ZnO deposition are still to be investigated. More studies are encouraged that will focus on such critical topics for further boosting Zn–air technology during future investigations.

4.3. Other metal–gas batteries
Furthermore, SAs@2D materials have also appeared in the fields of aqueous Zn–CO2 and Al–air batteries, featuring similar working mechanisms as Zn–air batteries. The kinetics boosting and intermediate regulation characteristics shown by defect-containing SA materials can also be applied in these areas. For instance, Zheng et al.133 provided an eye-catching example of Cu SAs on graphene to activate Zn–CO2 chemistry. The introduced Cu–N2 coordination structures with more unoccupied 3d orbitals and disturbed charge polarization accelerate the CO2 electroreduction activity. According to DFT calculations, the Gibbs free energy for CO2 trapping is essentially reduced by Cu–N2. Then, during CO2 reduction, the shortened Cu–N bond distances and modified electron density in the presence of intermediates considerably benefit rapid charge migration from active centers to targeted *CO2 molecules. This is critical for subsequent transformation into *COOH and then *CO, fundamentally reducing the energy barrier and thus the voltage hysteresis. Hence, a Cu–N2-aided catalyst with more accessible active sites can yield a much larger faradaic efficiency of 81% and a narrowed voltage gap of −0.5 V. Yang et al.180 fabricated a Ni/N/P co-doped graphene (NiPG) catalyst. Due to the considerable CO2 electroreduction activity derived from the Ni-Nx units, a NiPG-based Zn–CO2 battery can run stably for 12 h at 0.5 mA. Zheng et al.181 developed a series of M–N4 sites (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) confined in carbon nanosheets for CO2 electroreduction. The electrochemical performance data demonstrate that the intrinsic activities follow the order: Ni > Fe > Cu > Co. Finally, optimized Zn–CO2 batteries based on Ni–N4 sites show high faradaic efficiency of 93.3%. In another work, Wang et al.182 reported that Fe SAs on a carbon support (Fe1NC) could accelerate the CO2 electroreduction kinetics in rechargeable Zn–CO2 batteries. Fe–N3 unsaturated coordination is beneficial for optimizing the adsorption energies of *COOH/*CO intermediates and boosting the final conversion to CO. Herein, the Fe1NC catalyst achieves an ultrahigh faradaic efficiency of 96%. Such Zn–CO2 batteries show superior power density of 526 mW cm−2 and can run for 72 cycles at 0.5 mA cm−2. The excellent electrochemical performance is close to those of reported benchmark noble-metal-based catalysts.183,184 Inspired by these studies, it is reasonable to expect that more SAs@2D species with well-defined catalytic sites can be developed to yield high-performance Zn–CO2 batteries.
Meanwhile, as an example of catalyzing Al–air chemistry, Wang et al.69 adopted biomass-chitosan-derived ultrathin porous carbon (NPC) to lock Co SAs in situ via carbonization. The super-high specific surface area of 1977.9 m2 g−1 and abundant anchoring sites of NPC contribute to a high density of Co–N4 coordination centers, which are conducive to reducing energy barriers and altering the rate-limiting steps during ORR and OER processes. When integrated into an Al–air battery, the hybrid catalyst displays a much lower voltage gap and enhanced cycling efficiency. Finally, outstanding energy density (2387 W h kg−1) and power density (494 mW cm−2) at 200 mA cm−2 can be realized. Similarly, He et al.185 also developed a cost-effective biomass pyrolysis strategy to acquire carbon aerogels full of Fe SAs. The highly exposed Fe–N4 catalytic centers play a key role in diminishing the overpotential and ameliorating both activity and durability. As expected, Al–air batteries with the Fe–N–C catalyst demonstrate an Fe-SA-dependent structure–activity relationship. Concretely, a satisfactory open-circuit voltage (1.81 V), expanded power density (181.1 mW cm−2), and boosted durability can be obtained, even surpassing those of a Pt/C reference.
4.4. Li–S batteries
Due to a super-high theoretical energy density of up to 2567 W h kg−1 and the cost-effectiveness of sulfur substances, Li–S batteries, a research hotspot, have emerged as one of the candidates closest to acting as a possible substitute for benchmark Li-ion batteries. Unfortunately, compared with the facile O2 gas cathode in Li–O2 batteries, solid S cathodes encounter more troublesome obstacles derived from complex polysulfide (Li2Sx) transition reactions.186 More specifically, the sluggish kinetics caused by the low electroconductivity of insulating S materials, polysulfide intermediates, and the final Li2S make the reversible discharge/charge procedure unfeasible. Even worse, the “shuttling effect”, arising from the crossover of soluble polysulfides in the electrolyte, has a decisive effect on reducing the reversible utilization of active species.98,187 Generally, the escape of polysulfides from the cathode into the Li–metal anode induces severe Li–metal corrosion and passivation, reducing the Coulombic efficiency and cycling life to low levels.
In response, seeking qualified cathode materials for simultaneously catalyzing polysulfide decomposition and restraining the shuttle effect lies at the core of Li–S technology. Generally, varieties of carbon-based materials have been selected as sulphur-supporting matrices, aimed at ameliorating the inherent electrical conductivity. However, nonpolar carbon species still cannot impose sufficient restrictions preventing the escape of polar polysulfides. Meanwhile, carbonaceous materials demonstrate limited catalytic activity towards polysulfide oxidation. Integrating carbon species with more polarized phases to constrain hydrophilic polysulfide diffusion via strong chemical binding and intrinsically modulating the nature of polarization via heteroatom doping have been proven to be preferable choices.188–190 It is conceivable that the emergence of SAs@2D hybrids can appropriately overcome this bottleneck; these materials can demonstrate practical applicability via offering sufficient defective active sites that are exposed to the target polysulfides. The altered charge state and tuned intermediate affinity due to the SAs@2D hybrid as a result of intense covalent interactions can further optimize the electrical conductivity and electrocatalytic reduction capabilities during sulfur redox chemistry.
In this area, we principally concentrate on discussing the influences of various well-tailored metal SAs on the surface polarity and mass transfer characteristics of S-related cathodes from multiple perspectives. In particular, in-depth analysis of the correlation between the SA physicochemical characteristics and the enhancement of key performance indices, including the gravimetric capacity, rate capability, cycling life, and S utilization rate, of Li–S batteries is systematically provided. Furthermore, materials are categorized as SAs@2D modified cathodes and SAs@2D decorated separators in order to intrinsically elucidate the central issue, namely, how atomically dispersed metal impurities cooperate with the 2D basal body to regulate the sophisticated S-related electrochemistry around the electrodes through controllable pathways.

4.4.1. SAs@2D modified cathodes. 
(i) S-based cathodes. 
Du et al.63 proposed a N-rich graphene catalyst confining Co SAs with Co–N4 coordination (Co–N/G). Then, sulfur-containing cathodes were fabricated via a melt-diffusion procedure with a high loading of 90 wt%. The thus-ameliorated catalytic kinetics are beneficial for reversible transitions following the path: solid S ↔ polysulfides ↔ Li2S. The DFT calculations in this work also provide solid evidence that during discharge the final change from Li2S2 to Li2S is the rate-limiting step. Prior to N–G control, the calculated free energy value for Co–N/G is much lower. Similarly, during subsequent recharging, the Li2S oxidation energy barrier for Co–N/G is also apparently reduced (Fig. 14a–c). Hence, the optimized Li–S batteries can operate for 500 and 100 cycles with negligible capacity attenuation at S loading masses of 2.0 and 6.0 mg cm−2, respectively (Fig. 14d). These results innovatively indicate that the Co–N4 redox centers, which serve as dual catalysts, are of paramount importance for alleviating the energy barriers of both Li2S formation and decomposition via allowing more kinetically favored pathways. In addition, it is vital to explore more kinetics enhancement mechanisms and fresh functionalities as a result of SAs@2D, such as suppressing polysulfide shuttling and governing the nucleation-deposition behavior of Li2S. As expected, atomically dispersed SA-decorated carbon species can not only catalyze Li2S transitions, as shown above, but they can also be used to tailor the polysulfide adsorption behavior. For instance, Xie et al.191 fabricated Co SAs stabilized within a mesoporous carbon host (SC-Co). The desirable open structure facilitates the exposure of polar atomic Co to polysulfide intermediates, triggering intense interactions between them at catalytic interfaces (Fig. 14e). As verified via cyclic voltammetry (CV) and potentiostatic nucleation experiments, these strong interactions can offer favorable conditions for electrocatalyzing transformations from easy-to-escape polysulfides into the final Li2S and can modulate the deposition behavior. The activated sulfur activity and optimized polysulfide immobilization synergistically help to reduce polarization. As a result, when integrated into Li–S batteries, an outstanding discharge capacity (1130 mA h g−1, 0.5C) and superior cycling stability (300 cycles) with only 0.086% decay per cycle can be obtained (Fig. 14f–h).
 Fig. 14  (a) Energy profiles for the reduction of LiPS on N/G and Co-N/G substrates. (b and c) Energy profiles of the decomposition of Li2S clusters on N/G and Co–N/G. (d) The cycling performances of S@Co–N/G, S@N/G, S@Co/G, and S@rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) A schematic diagram of SC–Co. (f) Charging and discharging profiles of Li–S cells at different rates. (g) The cycling performance of interlayer SC–Co under a high loading of 3.6 mgS cm−2. (h) The cycling performances of Li–S cells with SC or interlayer SC–Co. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. Schematic diagrams showing (i) the approach for seeding a single atom on graphene, and the conversion processes on (j) graphene and (k) single-atom-seeded graphene in Li–S batteries. (l) The long-term cycling stabilities of S–G, S–NG, S-SACo@NG, and S-SAV@NG electrodes at 0.5C for 400 cycles. (m) Energy profiles for the reduction of polysulfides on graphene, NG, SACo@NG, and SAV@NG. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, by virtue of DFT simulations, Zhou et al.192 first screened 10 types of metal SAs trapped within N-doped graphene. The results demonstrate that the V-single-atom-based SAV@NG catalyst achieves an optimized Li2S decomposition energy barrier (1.10 eV) via intensively stretching the Li–S bonds, implying better reversible catalytic oxidation kinetics during recharging. More than that, SAV@NG also displays better chemical binding capabilities for polysulfides (3.38 eV), enormously slowing their casting-off and enhancing the active species retention rate (Fig. 14i–k). Supported by theoretical data, this work verifies the multifunctional catalytic effect through building Li–S batteries equipped with SAV@NG. A much-ameliorated cycling life (400 cycles, 0.5C) can be realized (Fig. 14l). Detailed Gibbs free energy simulations during Li2S generation show that the V-SA species play a key role in reducing the energy barriers during the last rate-determining step (Li2S2* → Li2S*), distinctly boosting the polysulfide transformation efficiency and, thus, the long-term oxidation–reduction kinetics (Fig. 14m). Moreover, as another example, Liu et al.193 reported Fe SAs anchored within N-rich carbon (Fe–PNC) for use in rechargeable Li–S batteries. The authors conclude that, due to intimate interactions between nucleophilic S42− and oxidized iron, the homogeneously distributed Fe–Nx sites demonstrate intense chemical affinity for soluble polysulfides. Together with the reduced charge transfer resistance and enhanced catalytic capabilities, fast conversion into nanosized Li2S and efficient Li2S oxidation can be realized.
In particular, high densities of single-atom active sites are indispensable for maximizing catalytic activity during redox processes and for enhancing the energy densities of practical Li-S batteries. With this in mind, Lu et al.194 developed Fe SAs on g-C3N4 (SAFe@g-C3N4) nanosheets with a high loading of 8.5 wt%. The well-defined Fe single-atom sites are responsible for decreasing the delithiation energy barrier during electrochemical reactions and accelerating the polysulfide conversion kinetics. The rate performance (704 mA h g−1 at 5C) and long-term cycling stability (200 cycles at 0.2C) of SAFe@g-C3N4-based Li–S batteries with a high S loading of 2.3 mg cm−2 are distinctly boosted, essentially demonstrating great advantages compared with pure g-C3N4 and bulk Fe/g-C3N4 references. Crucially, as reported in this work, the electrolyte dosage to energy density ratio is only 5.5 g A h−1. Such low electrolyte loss during cycling further makes SAs@2D a promising Li–S battery cathode candidate for real applications. Li et al.195 developed a higher proportion (15.3 wt%) of Co SAs on N–C nanosheets (CoSA–N–C) as a sulfur host material. Thanks to the dense population of active sites, highly efficient polysulfides ↔ Li2S conversion kinetics can be guaranteed. Meanwhile, the CoSA–N–C hybrid contributes to the tight constraint of dissolved polysulfides and the modulation of Li2S deposition during cycling. As expected, the rate capabilities and cycling stability are dramatically improved. In the case of high S loading of 4.9 mg cm−2, CoSA–N–C-based Li–S batteries show a reversible capacity of 4.24 mA h cm−2 after 120 cycles at 0.2C. As shown in the above-mentioned works, the 2D supports are restricted to graphene-like nanosheets or g-C3N4. Hence, more 2D choices for coupling with SAs are highly desirable for Li–S batteries. As an attempt to achieve this, Zhang et al.196 prepared Zn SAs on Ti3C2 MXene (SA-Zn–MXene) as a sulfur host. Benefiting from the strong electronegativity of Zn SAs, the intense constraint of polysulfides can be achieved. Meanwhile, the rate-limiting step, namely Li2S2 to Li2S, during discharge can be energetically feasible due to the reduction of the energy barrier (0.71 eV) by SA-Zn–MXene, leading to enhanced electrochemical performance. For example, the assembled Li-S batteries show a high rate-capacity of 640 mA h g−1 at 6C and superior areal capacity of 5.3 mA h cm−2.
(ii) Li2S-Based cathodes. 
To fix the uneven distribution of active S species via a conventional post-infiltration strategy and further optimize the intimate contact between metal SAs and sulfur-containing substances, Wang et al.197 introduced a precursor calcination method to mix Li2S active materials with an Fe-SA-doped carbon network (Li2S@NC:SAFe) in situ. Importantly, based on in situ XAS studies and theoretical analysis, the authors conclude that in the initial charging process oxidized Fe SAs tend to bind with negatively charged sulfur ions from Li2S, stretching the Li–S coordination (Fig. 15a–e). More interestingly, a single Fe–Nx site can simultaneously catalyze several Li2S molecules in a continuous manner, guaranteeing outstanding high rate-performance. Overall, the atomically dispersed Fe–Nx moieties convincingly contribute to reducing the energy barrier of Li–S splitting during Li2S decomposition and to boosting the multiphase transformation kinetics. The rapid delithiation of Li2S and mass transfer are beneficial for reducing the redox voltage gap and enhancing the rate capabilities during long-term operation with multistep conversion (Fig. 15f).
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Calculated Li2S delithiation models with and without a SAFe catalyst. (c) A comparison of the delithiation energy barriers of pristine Li2S and Li2S@NC with/without the SAFe catalyst. (d) A comparison of the CV curves of the three composite cathodes. (e) In situ XANES spectra of the Li2S@NC:SAFe cathode in different charging states. (f) A proposed mechanism for the SAFe-catalyzed Li2S delithiation reaction. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (g) A model of Li2S@C:SACo. (h) A comparison of the rate performances of Li2S@C:SACo and Li2S@C electrodes. (i) The long-term cycling performance of the Li2S@C:SACo electrode. (j) A comparison of simulated delithiation energy barriers of Li2S on different carbon matrices. (k) A comparison of lithium-ion diffusion energy barriers on various nanocarbon surfaces. (l and m) Simulated Li2S4 adsorption on nitrogen-doped nanocarbon with and without SACo. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. 
To advance this idea, the group carried out another work, in which the effects of the SAs on the Li diffusion behavior at a higher current density and Li2S mass loading were deeply investigated. Specifically, they implanted Co SAs and sheet-like Li2S onto a 2D carbon substrate derived from graphene and polyacrylonitrile (Li2S@C:SACo) in situ, fundamentally improving the conductivity and Li-ion transfer within an insulating Li2S electrode.198 When assembled into large areal mass loading Li2S/Li batteries, a satisfactory capacity of 340 mA h g−1 at 23.4 mA cm−2 and an apparently enhanced cycling life (200 cycles, 6.77 mA cm−2) can be achieved (Fig. 15g–i). This work manifests that the enhancement of the Li2S redox properties can be ascribed to three factors arising from the economical use of Li2S@C:SACo. First, the coordinatively unsaturated Co SAs are responsible for enhancing the confinement of Li2S4 species and curbing the migration of polysulfides. Second, the energy barrier for obtaining Li ions from insulating Li2S is dramatically ameliorated, affording a low-energy-consumption delithiation pathway. Last, the migration dynamics of Li ions through the conductive grid are obviously activated by Co SA doping, even at high rates (Fig. 15j–m).


4.4.2. SAs@2D decorated separators. 
SAs@2D compounds can also work well in the field of separator modification for use in Li–S batteries. Conventional separators can only function as insulating layers to avoid short-circuiting between electrodes, and they do not have additional polysulfide-restriction features. Atomically distributed catalysts attached to 2D substrates with unique functionality allowing the modulation of intermediate adsorption behavior are believed to provide new possibilities in the decorated-separator field. For example, Zhang et al.139 presented a pioneering attempt to systematically uncover the intrinsic mechanisms of the effects of metal SAs on Li–S batteries from multiple perspectives. They fabricated Ni SAs confined within a graphene matrix (Ni–NG). The CV results suggest that the Ni–NG catalyst displays more prominent redox kinetics during polysulfide transformation, implying stronger Li–S cleavage capabilities and, thus, faster Li2S oxidation kinetics. Furthermore, the Ni–NG catalyst also shows superior Li2S6 adsorption compared to an NG reference (Fig. 16a–c). According to ex situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and XANES results, critical Sx2−⋯Ni–N bonding and Li–N adsorption, or “dual sites”, can be established between positively charged Ni SAs and polysulfides, maximizing the capabilities for fixing intermediates and suppressing the shuttling effect. Meanwhile, a reduced-barrier charge-transfer path can be obtained via electron-withdrawing effects between catalytic sites and polysulfides. Based on these advantages, Li–S batteries exhibit considerably stable rate performance and a satisfactory discharge capacity (1598 mA h g−1, 0.1C), far exceeding those of Ni particle and pure NG counterparts (Fig. 16d). One remarkable result is that the batteries can even maintain superb capacity retention of 78% and 70% after 500 cycles at 1C and 10C, respectively (Fig. 16e). As another example, Cao et al.199 designed Fe SAs confined on N-doped graphene (Fe@NG) to modify a polypropylene (pp) separator for Li–S batteries. According to electrochemical tests and Li2S6 permeation measurements, the authors conclude that due to the evenly distributed Fe–Nx sites, enhanced polysulfide affinity and ameliorated polysulfide conversion efficiency can be simultaneously realized.
 Fig. 16  (a) Free-energy diagrams of LiPS on Ni@NG and NG. (b) The binding energies between LiPS and Ni@NG or NG. (c) The catalytic mechanism of LiPS on the surface of Ni@NG. (d) Charge/discharge profiles of a Li–S battery based on the Ni@NG modified separator. (e) The cycling stabilities of Li–S batteries based on the Ni@NG modified separator. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) A schematic illustration of the operation of an Li–S battery with the multifunctional C–C–N–Co interlayer. (g) Gibbs free energy plots for the reduction of lithium polysulfides on NC@SA-Co (red line) and NC (black line). (h) The stability of the Li–S battery with a C–C–N–Co interlayer. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, Li et al.200 prepared an interesting multicomponent carbon hybrid, embracing carbon nanosheets, nanotubes, and nanofibers, and which worked as a freestanding interlayer for Li–S batteries, featuring multifunctional activity towards S redox chemistry. The critical point lies in the atomically dispersed Co SAs confined within carbon nanosheets (NC@SA-Co) being conducive to polysulfide phase transitions, thus yielding rapid Li2S precipitation through a thermodynamically favorable pathway (Fig. 16f). This can be confirmed based on the reduced Gibbs free energy according to DFT calculations. The reversible Li2S decomposition kinetics can also be strengthened by well-tailored Co SAs@carbon nanosheets (Fig. 16g). Therefore, NC@SA-Co-assisted Li–S batteries feature outstanding electrochemical properties, e.g., a large capacity of 1160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and a cycle-life of 700 cycles at 2C. The accompanying capacity attenuation per cycle is limited to as low as 0.058% (Fig. 16h). In another case, Zhang et al.201 reported a modified separator consisting of graphene foam anchoring metal (Fe, Co, or Ni) SAs. In terms of optimization, according to experimental and theoretical results, they confirmed that Fe-SA species demonstrated stronger affinity for Li2S6via electrostatic interactions and they can effectively hamper the migration of polysulfides. The authors also infer that the “dual site” effect contributes to the firm constraint of polysulfides. Furthermore, in situ Raman results disclose that, with the aid of atomic Fe–Nx active sites, thorough S reduction during discharging and more reversible Li2S oxidation during recharging can be synchronously accomplished. Meanwhile, the well-designed batteries can exhibit excellent long-term cycling performance (750 cycles, 0.5C) with a large capacity retention rate (83.7%).
Compared with traditional Li–S battery cathode materials, such as carbonaceous materials, metal nanoparticles and transition metal oxides/sulfides/carbides, SAs@2D catalysts with variable electronic environments demonstrate comprehensive advantages as S host materials. First, although the above-mentioned traditional metal compounds deliver considerable chemical affinities for soluble polysulfide intermediates to suppress the shuttling effect, their inferior electronic conductivities and limited catalytic activities play unsatisfactory roles in accelerating the Li2S transformation kinetics, especially at high S content levels and during high rate discharge/charge processes. In addition, metal-compound nanoparticles with larger sizes inevitably decrease the pore volumes and conductive surfaces of the conductive substrates to inefficient levels, causing undesirable drops in active-site utilization. Furthermore, the higher molecular weights and insufficiently exposed catalytic centers are not beneficial for high specific energy densities. Also, metal-compound nanoparticles tend to agglomerate during repeated discharge/recharge processes, inducing catalyst inactivation and finally resulting in limited cycling lifetimes. In relation to the above-mentioned bottlenecks, SAs@2D catalysts with more unsaturated and fully exposed active sites, excellent electrical conductivity, superior polarization for trapping polysulfides, and strong metal–support interactions against aggregation could be an ideal solution for Li–S batteries. Even so, there are still wide development prospects for further expanding their superiority for use in high-performance Li–S batteries. Simultaneously, taking into account all the parameters, optimizing the S areal loading, S weight ratio, electrolyte to S ratio (E/S), and self-discharge behavior is still a challenge in the current studies relating to SAs@2D hosts. It is generally accepted that in order to meet market requirements, high S loading (>5.0 mg S cm−2), a low E/S ratio (<3.0 μL mg−1) and high S utilization (>70%) are indispensable.202 Hence, the influence of SAs@2D on the E/S ratio and self-discharge phenomena deserves more attention in future designs.

4.5. Li–Metal and Na-metal batteries
Undeniably, engineering Li metal batteries via a versatile method has been one of the most challenging but strategically meaningful areas of focus in recent years. The key attractions lie in the superior gravimetric capacity of 3860 mA h g−1 and the extremely low equilibrium potential of −3.04 V.203 Significant breakthroughs in Li–metal anode technology have dramatically improved the electrochemical performances of Li-ion, Li–S, and Li–O2 full batteries.204 However, troublesome bottlenecks, namely, unchecked dendrite growth and severe volume variations during Li plating and stripping, hinder the Coulombic efficiency, capacity stability, and operational safety, induced by irregular dendrite punctures and fragile SEI passivation.205,206
Obviously, rational efforts should be devoted to modulating the Li deposition behavior and inducing high-quality SEI species in a controllable manner. 3D frame construction, especially the use of various carbon supports, has been profoundly investigated to suppress volume expansion and to accelerate the metallic Li plating kinetics and induce nucleation behavior, thus ameliorating the overall Li redox chemistry.207,208 However, the lithiophobic characteristics of carbon species commonly prevent homogeneous Li from landing on substrates.209,210 Hence, powerful technology is still required to efficiently cope with these technical obstacles with atomic precision. Xu et al.211 reported that Zn SAs anchored on carbon polyhedrons play a critical role in governing the deposition and stripping behaviors of Li, facilitating the tendency for high-dimensional lithium precipitation and avoiding dendrite formation. Furthermore, among various candidates, preferred SAs@2D composites provide new opportunities for Li–metal-anode optimization. They are imperative for further tuning the Li distribution, morphology, and dimensional characteristics. Meanwhile, Na-metal anodes have similar working principles and face similar intrinsic challenges with regard to detrimental dendrites and volume fluctuations, so we will describe the progress related to that made in the field of Li–metal batteries.212 Herein, in this part, the critical effects of SAs@2D hybrids on electrochemical indicators, including the Coulombic efficiency, voltage gap, and cycling lifespan, will be deeply discussed below. We will also unveil accompanying mechanisms underlying the successive Li-ion adsorption, lithiation, stripping, and delithiation processes, which are boosted by heteroatom doping.

4.5.1. Carbon matrices coupled with SAs. 
Liu et al.213 exploited graphene doped with Co SAs as a lithium deposition host platform (CoNC). Critical electrochemical performance data, such as Coulombic efficiency, polarization, and cycling time, synchronously display Co-SA-dependent tendencies. For example, Li metal batteries equipped with CoNC species show superior Coulombic efficiencies of 99.2% and 98.2% at 2.0 and 10 mA cm−2, respectively. The corresponding cycle lives are 400 and 200 cycles. For practical applications, the LiFePO4 cathode was coupled and constructed into a full cell. It can stably run for 340 cycles at a rate of 1C, far surpassing control samples without Co SAs (Fig. 17d–f). According to DFT simulations, after the incorporation of atomic Co–Nx sites into the carbon scaffold, a much-enhanced Li binding energy and, thus, a reduced overpotential can be realized (Fig. 17a–c). The authors also state that existing Li bonds with Co–Nx sites also make a contribution. The thus-ameliorated Li wettability benefits the initial nucleation sites surrounding the Co–Nx moieties, contributing to even Li deposition onto the 2D matrices during the charging process. This work confirms the synergistic effect of Co–N co-doping, with stronger affinity, on tailoring the Li plating pathway based on experimental and theoretical perspectives.
 Fig. 17  (a) Li adsorption sites on CoNC. (b) A summary of the binding energies between a Li atom and different adsorption sites on CoNC. (c) Li nucleation overpotentials on Cu, CoNC, and NGM electrodes at different current densities. (d) Long-term cycling at 1.0C and (e) the rate capability performance of CoNC–Li|LiFePO4 and Li|LiFePO4 full cells. (f) The Coulombic efficiencies of CoNC, NGM, and Cu electrodes at a fixed capacity of 2.0 mA h cm−2. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) A comparison of the CEs of SANi–NG, PG, and NG electrodes. (h) The voltage profiles of the 20th Li plating/stripping cycles on SANi–NG, PG, and NG electrodes. (i) Top views of PG, NG, and SANi–NG; H, M, and K represent the most stable adsorption sites of lithium on their structures. C1 and C2 represent the C atoms that directly bond with N atoms. (j) Side views of the charge density differences of PG, NG, and SANi–NG with one Li atom adsorbed; yellow and blue represent the charge accumulation and loss regions; the inset images show top views. (k) Li adsorption energy distribution maps and corresponding schematic illustrations of Li nucleation and plating processes on a SA-metal–NG electrode; G, M, N, and Li represent graphene, a metal atom, a nitrogen atom, and a lithium atom, respectively. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In a slightly different manner in another work, Zhai et al.141 successfully implanted three kinds of metal SAs (Ni, Pt, and Cu) within N-rich graphene to act as steady Li deposition hosts (SANi–NG, SAPt–NG, and SACu–NG). Specifically, they innovatively state the key role played by M–Nx coordination structures in allowing the moderate adsorption of Li ions during nucleation/growth. Of the three samples, the formation energy of SANi–NG is the lowest, implying more stable coordination structures. First-principles calculation results confirm that the SANi–NG hybrid demonstrates beneficial Li adsorption capabilities, not only guaranteeing sufficient control of metallic Li plating but also avoiding damage to carbon stability due to Li–N bond stretching (Fig. 17i and j). Unsurprisingly, the SANi–NG-decorated Li metal batteries achieve a considerably low overpotential of 0.019 V. Furthermore, a satisfactory Coulombic efficiency of 98.45% can be maintained after 250 cycles (Fig. 17g and h). Undoubtedly, the distinct performance enhancements can be ascribed to the robust Ni–N coordination sites, which can act as preferred nucleation centers to manipulate Li deposition and shield the holistic SEI structures from damage during long-lasting cycling at a high rate (Fig. 17k). Even so, more comparative analysis regarding the action mechanisms, such as manipulating the Li deposition/stripping, SEI layer evolution, and Li adsorption energies using different atom centers, is needed in this work.
It should be emphasized that the effects of metal SAs on the Li nucleation behavior and deposition kinetics have been studied in greater depth. In sharp contrast, concrete Li stripping and delithiation mechanisms based on atomically dispersed metal dopants have been ignored to some extent. Recently, Kim et al.214 profoundly illuminated the elaborate plating/stripping procedures related to Zn SAs anchored on porous carbon. This work innovatively showed that during the charging process, metallic Li is stored via lithiation and metallization in two steps. Upon charging, Li insertion and lithiophilic transformation contribute to subsequent feasible metallization deposition within the carbon support due to the strengthened Li affinity of the Zn–N co-dopants. Hence, small-sized Li clusters are homogeneously generated within the nanopores. Regarding discharge in turn, only these Li clusters participate in delithiation. The lithiated Li species can still be retained to guarantee long-lasting lithiophilicity, which is beneficial for homogenizing the current density and optimizing the local electric field for Li-ion migration (Fig. 18a). The DFT simulations shown in Fig. 18b also disclose that by virtue of Zn-SA doping, the electronic environment around Li is optimized, triggering energetically feasible Li growth. Overall, owing to the deliberately designed Zn SAs on the conductive substrate, Li dendrite growth and volume expansion can be simultaneously hampered. Coincidentally, the use of Zn SAs stabilized within carbon supports has also been attempted to yield high-performance Na anodes. Yang et al.215 reported that N-rich carbon dominated by Zn SAs has a positive effect on obstructing Na dendrite growth during the earliest nucleation period, efficiently driving Na plating with controllable distribution and geometry (Fig. 18c). Together with DFT calculations and in situ optical microscopy, this work discloses that, due to intimate affinity between Zn SAs and Na via an alloying reaction and a lowered nucleation overpotential, many sodiophilic sites have been constructed that can induce oriented deposition on the skeleton with superior tolerance for dendrites (Fig. 18d–f). As a consequence, Zn-SA-upgraded Na metal batteries exhibit ultra-high Na usage efficiency of close to 100% for 120 cycles. Specifically, a Na3V2(PO4)3-matched full cell can operate for over 1000 cycles, maintaining nearly 100% Na utilization. This work opens a new chapter for the promotion of metal doping in the Na-metal field (Fig. 18g and h).
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction mechanisms related to dual-phase Li storage materials and their electrochemical behavior. (b) The 3D isosurface of the negative electronic charge redistribution of Zn. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) A schematic illustration of Na plating behavior on ZnSA–N–C electrodes. (d) The voltage profiles of galvanostatic Na deposition on different substrates. (e) The nucleation overpotentials of different substrates. (f) DFT calculations relating to the affinity between carbon and a single Zn atom site to evaluate the strong interactions with Na ions. (g) Long-term cycling stability with a high Coulombic efficiency of almost 100%. (h) The cycling performances of Na–ZnSA–N–C and Na-CC anodes. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 


4.5.2. MXene matrices coupled with SAs. 
Apart from carbon-based matrices, MXene nanosheets, such as Ti3C2, have also been employed as optimized structures to ameliorate lithiophilic characteristics. Gu et al.28 successfully confined Zn SAs within MXene (Ti3C2Clx) layers via Ti-vacancy capture with a loading of 0.87 at%. Morphology evolution analysis during Li plating showed that for Zn–MXene, upon plating, Li seeds tend to evenly nucleate around the abundant Zn SAs. Then, due to a lightning rod effect from the MXene edges, bowl-like lithium species are gradually deposited on the MXene surface along the perpendicular direction. Particularly, after numerous charge/discharge cycles (with the capacity controlled at 40 mA h cm−2), interconnected blocky Li species appear, without dendrites. This highlights the special nucleating-agent function of high-density Zn SAs, which can distinctly lower the Li plating barrier and achieve faster deposition kinetics than in the case of a pure MXene reference. As expected, a narrowed hysteresis voltage of 11.3 mV and an extended cycle lifespan of 1200 h can be realized in Zn–MXene-based Li metal batteries.
It should be mentioned that relative to conventional carbon substrates and non-metal heteroatom-doped carbon substrates, SAs@2D hybrids have become more suitable for inducing Li/Na metal plating. First, the enhanced lithiophilic characteristics and evenly distributed nucleation seeds guarantee a balanced current density and induce Li plating with spatial homogeneity, which is critical for suppressing dendrite formation. Second, reliable metal coordination interactions play a key role in preventing undesirable chemical reactions between doping sites and Li ions, which commonly occur in the case of non-metal heteroatom doping.141 Furthermore, to date, Zn/Co/Ni SAs@2D species have drawn extensive attention in the field of Li/Na metal batteries. In addition, Sun et al.216 demonstrated that atomically dispersed Fe–Nx sites within carbon spheres can drive nucleation procedures around the active sites, inducing homogenous Li–metal deposition. Yang et al.217 reported that Au single-clusters on carbon cloth induced Li plating with zero overpotential and achieved dendrite-free morphology. Importantly, many works also confirmed that the zero nucleation overpotential of noble metals makes them preferential nucleation seeds during Li plating, governing the dynamic behaviour of Li–metal anodes.218–220 Hence, inspired by these achievements and compared with their transition metal counterparts, more studies on noble SAs@2D materials with preferred lithiophilicity and reduced nucleation barriers are in serious demand. Despite SAs@2D species demonstrating promising prospects for controlling alkali metal nucleation and deposition kinetics, to realize the large-scale application of Li (Na)-metal batteries, it is essential to consider the balance between electrochemical performance and manufacturing cost. The synthesis of SAs@2D hybrids on the gram scale still relies on accurate conditions and relatively complex approaches. There is an urgent need to develop efficient, facile, and scalable synthetic strategies to allow practical implementation in the real world.

4.6. Alkali-ion storage
Alkali-ion batteries are such classical devices because of the endlessly developed strategies to enrich them, bringing about a wealth of unintended progress in the energy storage field. Specific metal-SA-based species with unpaired electrons can trigger the lattice distortion of adjacent matrix atoms and favor fast charge transfer kinetics, which are also indispensable for alkali metal ion batteries. Although only a few works have been reported to now, many instructive ideas for combining this typical alkali-ion technology with SA engineering can be obtained. For example, Li et al.221 reported Cu SAs stabilized on a carbon support via Cu–P bonding. The active material can modulate the sodium-ion storage process and ensure that Na maintains its ionic state under full discharge conditions. This generates considerable benefits for enhancing redox reversibility and restraining Na dendrite formation. Yi et al. confined Ni SAs within carbon nanochannels via Ni–O5 unsaturated coordination. When used for lithium-ion and potassium-ion storage, the convention kinetics can both be distinctly accelerated.222 In another work, Li et al.223 synthesized a biomass-derived porous carbon substrate to trap Pt SAs via Pt–N confinement. Interestingly, DFT and electrochemical performance data clarify that Pt SAs can function as ion-storage sites via Pt–Li alloying reactions. Furthermore, both electron and Li-ion transfer resistance are reduced upon defective Pt doping. Hence, synergetic coupling between Pt SAs and the carbon framework assists Li-ion batteries to yield considerably enhanced cycling stability (800 cycles, 2 A g−1). The capacity can still be maintained at 846 mA h g−1 with nearly 100% Coulombic efficiency. Even so, the contributions of SAs to the overall electrochemical capacities of SAs@2D active materials are still decreased due to the trace amounts of mass loading and, thus, the limited lithium storage sites. The specific capacities of SAs@2D hybrids are still contributed to by the 2D substrates. In general, the incorporation of metal atoms into 2D carbon matrices is beneficial for electron- and ion-diffusion kinetics within the basal plane. However, such in-plane doping demonstrates limited advantages for enhancing interlayer charge migration. This is also critically important for improving the storage capacities and rate performances of alkali metal ion batteries, which highly depend upon the insertion and extraction of active ions within the layer structures of 2D substrates. Apart from carbon-like systems, the existence of rich surface functional groups and unique lamination structures makes MXenes a promising electrode choice for use in alkali metal ion batteries. However, the actual capacities and rate performances are far below the expected values due to the self-stacking tendency, dissatisfactory electrical conductivity, and limited layer space of MXenes. Based on these points, Wang et al.112 successfully inserted polyvalent Co ions into the interlayers of V2C MXene. Specifically, atomic Co is stabilized by robust Co–O covalent coordination, which is advantageous for expanding the interlayer space. This can apparently boost the Li-ion storage capabilities and charge-transfer kinetics. As a result, record-breaking capacity (1117.3 mA h g−1, 0.1 A g−1) and outstanding cycle life (15000 cycles) can be achieved with atomic Co-inserted V2C electrodes. Furthermore, the unique roles of SAs@2D active materials in the field of alkali-ion batteries mainly relate to enhancing electronic conductivity and ameliorating ion-storage sites. It is still difficult to solve all the common problems faced by alkali-ion batteries only via SA engineering, such as improving Coulombic efficiency, breaking capacity limits, and restraining structural expansion during intercalation/de-intercalation processes. To synthetically ameliorate the electrochemical performances of alkali-ion batteries, coupling SA engineering with other approaches, such as heterostructure engineering and surface/interface engineering, could be considered a prospective strategy for the further application of SAs@2D hybrids.
5. Summary and perspectives
The deep integration of two emerging research frontiers, namely, 2D nanomaterials and single atom engineering, deserves more attention. SAs@2D compounds have injected new momentum into conventional catalyst/electrode construction and they can deepen and extend the energy storage research field from the nanotechnology era to the “atomic age”. This review pays systematic attention to recently updated design principles, application expansions in the area of diversified rechargeable batteries (as summarized in Tables 1 and 2), and intrinsic performance enhancement mechanisms from multiple directions with regard to the flourishing field of SAs@2D hybrids. We highlight, considering the host functionality of the integrated structure, that ultrathin 2D scaffolds can provide the maximum exposure of atomic-scale metal sites to create multiphase redox locations. This can guarantee absolute access for various intermediates. Furthermore, periodic 2D matrices effectively minimize the risk of atomically dispersed sites agglomerating, especially during long-term oxidation–reduction processes. The well-shielded active centers possess outstanding immunity against activity degradation, which is indispensable for battery operation durability. Furthermore, SA impurity doping can induce a quick response in terms of lattice distortion around neighboring host atoms, which favors the breaking of electro-neutrality, thus activating mass dynamics during the operation of various batteries and outdistancing nanoparticle counterparts. In addition, intentionally arranged heteroatoms function as preferable adsorption centers and further act as “soil” to provide many “seeds” for accompanying nucleation in Li–O2/CO2/S/metal batteries. Hence, nucleation-growth procedures involving oxidation and reduction process can be fundamentally modulated. All in all, these spontaneously realized multiple promotion effects enable much-ameliorated activity, stability, efficiency, and kinetics performances in a wide range of secondary battery devices.
Table 1 A summary of SAs@2D materials for use in Li–O2, Li–CO2, Zn–air, Zn–CO2, and Al–air batteries




Catalyst
Loading content
Overpotential
Capacity/power density
Cycles
Ref.




SAs@2D for Li–O2 batteries


Co-SAs/N–C
2.01 wt%
0.40 V
20105 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1
260

93



Pt–CNHS
0.77 wt%
—
17059 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
100

150







SAs@2D for Li–CO2 batteries


Co/GO
5.3 wt%
1.64 V
17358 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
100

140



Fe-ISA/N,S-HG
0.7 at%
1.17 V
23174 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
100

103







Catalyst
Loading content
Open-circuit voltage
Voltage gap
Peak power density
Cycling stability
Reference




SAs@2D for Zn–air batteries


CoN4/NG
—
1.51 V
0.84 V
115 mW cm−2
100 cycles

224



NC–Co SA
1.84 wt%
1.411 V
0.45 V
20.9 mW cm−3 at 31.0 mA cm−2
125 cycles

138



Co–G@POF
2.48 wt%
—
1.04 V
78.0 mW cm−2 at 2.0 mA cm−2
164 cycles

160



Co SA@NCF/CNF
2.05 wt%
1.41 V
0.6 V
—
90 cycles

82



NGM–Co
1.23 wt%
1.44 V
0.7 V
152 mW cm−2
60 h

161



Co SANC-850
1.27 wt%
1.48 V
0.79 V
—
44 h

69



Fe–N4 SAs/NPC
1.96 wt%
—
1.45 V
232 mW cm−2
108 cycles

87



P–O/FeN4–CNS
3.1 wt%
1.50 V
0.77 V
232 mW cm−2
450 cycles

166



Fe SAs/GO
4.3 wt%
—
—
275 mW cm−2
120 h

168



Fe-NSDC
—
1.64 V
0.71@50
225.1 mW cm−2
400 cycles

225



1.0@100


NiN4–C
4.2 ± 0.4 wt%
1.45 V
—
95 mW cm−2
—

169







SAs@2D for Zn–CO2 batteries


Cu–N2/GN
1.45 wt%
—
1.7 V
0.6 mW cm−2 at 1.06 mA cm−2
40 h

142



NiPG
1.09 wt%
—
2.11 V
—
12 h

180



SAs-Ni–N–C
5.05 wt%
—
—
1.4 mW cm−2
50 h

181



Fe1NC/S1-1000
0.38 wt%
0.727 V
0.5 V
526 mW cm−2
25 h

182







SAs@2D for Al–air batteries


Co SANC-850
1.27 wt%
1.80 V
—
494 mW cm−2
10 h

69



NCALR/Fe
1.3 wt%
1.81 V
—
181.1 mW cm−2
14 h

185





Table 2 Summary of SAs@2D materials for use in Li–S, Li/Na-metal, and alkali metal ion batteries




Application
Active material
Loading content
Capacitance
Cycle performance
Ref.




Li–S batteries
Co–N/G
—
1210 mA h g−1 at 0.2C
500 cycles at 1C

63



SC–Co
0.70 wt%
1130 mA h gS−1 at 0.5C
300 cycles at 0.5C

191



SAV@NG
4.3 wt%
645 mA h g−1 at 3C
400 cycle at 0.5C

131



Fe–PCN/S
1.0 wt%
1138.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
300 cycles at 0.5C

193



SAFe@g-C3N4
8.5 wt%
1379 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
200 cycles at 0.2C

194



CoSA–N–C
15.3 wt%
1574 mA h g−1 at 0.05C
120 cycles at 0.2C

142



SA-Zn–MXene
1.5 wt%
1136 mA h g−1 at 0.2C
200 cycles at 4C

93



Li2S@C:SACo
5.357 wt%
708 mA h g−1 at 1C
1500 cycles at 2C

198



Ni@NG
—
1598 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
500 cycles at 1.0C

139



Fe@NG
0.67 at%
1616 mA hg−1 at 0.1C
200 cycles at 2C

199



NC@SA-Co
4.1 wt%
1160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
700 cycles at 2C

200



Fe SACs
0.57 at%
1028 mA h g−1 at 0.2C
750 cycles at 0.5C

201



Li–Metal batteries
Zn–MXene
0.87 at%
158 mA h g−1 at 0.2C
1200 h at 1.0 mA cm−2

167



SANi–NG
0.63 at%
—
250 cycles at 4 mA cm-2

141



CoNC
0.40 wt%
115 mA h g−1 at 2C
340 cycles at 1.0C

213



FeSA–N–C
—
1 mA h cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2
200 cycles at 1C

216



PCF-E (Zn)
—
0.2 mA h cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2
350 cycles at 0.2 mA cm−2

214



Na-Metal batteries
ZnSA–N–C
—
1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.2C
1000 cycles at 0.5C

215



Li-Ion batteries
Pt1/MC
0.66 at%
846 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1
6000 cycles at 5 A g−1.

223



V2C@Co
—
1117.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1
15000 cycles at 8 A g−1

112



Na-Ion batteries
Cu/PTA-MOPF
26.3 wt%
107.7 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1
1000 cycles at 1 A g−1

221



K-Ion batteries
NiSA/S/C
8 wt%
608 mA hg−1 at 100 mA g−1
500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1

222





In spite of these discernible achievements in the SAs@2D field, several challenges remain, still leaving sufficient growth space for the further optimization and ultimate commercialization of various batteries. There are still limitations regarding the application of SAs@2D, including cost, loading content, yield, and energy density. First, the precise synthetic conditions in the laboratory are costly and result in low yields, and the production of SAs@2D hybrids is still far from the gram level. Second, the relatively low loading content of SAs also limits industrial applications. The agglomeration of SAs is an intractable problem when the loading content is increased. Finally, volumetric energy densities are restricted due to the limited densities of most widely used carbon-based substrates. Above all, SAs@2D technologies require improvements aimed at low cost, high yield, high utilization, and high energy density. Generally, although the research products show atomic precision, the depth and optimization of research remain suboptimal. Concretely, the outlooks with regard to this prospective field are presented from four aspects: controllable preparation, constituent regulation, application expansion, and in-depth mechanism studies for energy-storage systems.
(i) Controllable preparation
(a) Despite many remarkable trials, the accurate engineering of doping sites and dispersion homogeneity with controllable coordination geometry has still not been well realized. Solutions to this dilemma are limited due to the randomness of trapping sites within 2D supports and the rigorous energy barriers regarding covalent bond reconstruction. For instance, metal SAs are commonly stabilized within Ti3C2 MXene via titanium-vacancy confinement. These vacancies are produced via ball milling, acid etching, or exfoliation and, thus, demonstrate considerable nonuniformity. As a result, guaranteeing the precise grafting of foreign atoms is difficult. Meanwhile, achieving controllable geometrical features, including the make-up, locations, coordination numbers, and distances between individual atoms, has not been well obtained with the prevailing carbonaceous matrices. (b) The actual mass loading is another indispensable indicator during SA engineering, and it governs the catalytic site density and, thus, the electrochemical activity. The doping content is generally believed to be positively correlated with the catalytic capabilities. However, excessive doping unavoidably brings about inactive metal aggregates or clusters, hindering the obtaining of true activity enhancement. Hence, achieving optimized doping concentrations in different reaction environments deserves more attention. (c) Maintaining a balance between van der Waals interactions and uniform dispersion without agglomeration is also of enormous importance for ensuring the full exposure of metal–nonmetal active centers, especially during long-term cycling when subjected to severe volume changes. As a result, further endeavors should be devoted to obtaining highly organized networks via functional group engineering and directed self-assembly methods that go beyond disordered aggregates. (d) Developing efficient but facile synthetic strategies to meet scalable industrial production demands is also eagerly anticipated. There is no doubt that on the subject of exclusive SAs@2D, the ultimate goal is to make real-world trials possible.
(ii) Constituent regulation
(a) When discussing guest atoms, relative to the extensively investigated metal SAs, the enthusiasm for non-metal (except for B, N, F, P, and S light elements) SAs is less to some extent. Heavy non-metal doping can induce discrepancies in the spin state, thus improving the catalytic activity. For example, Zhao et al.36 introduced single non-metal iodine atoms into a Ni lattice, obtaining superior HER performance. Wang et al.226 reported that selenium SAs can be stabilized within a 3D carbon matrix. Intuitively, the feasible doping of the non-metals selenium, bromine, and iodine into various periodic 2D matrices has aroused considerable interest. (b) The 2D scaffolds currently employed for confining SAs already cover most of the available options. In particular, the most-investigated carbon-based SAs@2D catalysts, in spite of their excellent kinetic performances, may inevitably encounter electrochemical corrosion, especially when being cycled at higher voltages and being subjected to strongly oxidized electrolytes. Hence, other support choices, such as MXenes (V2C and Nb2C), black phosphorene, boron nitride, silene, and metallene, deserve further attention. For example, Li's group experimentally demonstrated that Ni, Fe, and Mo SAs can be successfully fixed within graphdiyne via electronic coupling and chemical interactions.227,228 Yin et al.229 also reported that coordination interplay exists between Pt SAs and alkynyl carbon in graphdiyne. These pioneering attempts shed light on other 2D matrices for confining metal SAs, which can offer more possibilities for battery applications. (c) Other meaningful tactics prevalent in material functionalization construction can also offer endless inspiration in the SAs@2D field. For example, multifarious 2D quantum dots (QDs), including carbon QDs, MoS2 QDs, TiO2 QDs, etc., with myriad quantum effects and edge effects may exhibit preferable capabilities for trapping metal SAs, presenting more catalytic centers. Additionally, our group reported that a heteroatomic gradient doping strategy involving different non-metal elements can induce a built-in electric-field within a carbon substrate.77 Hence, establishing metal-SA-based gradient doping within a supporting framework may be feasible for accelerating redox chemistry.
(iii) Application expansion
Compared with the intensive study of SAs@2D hybrids in the catalysis field via diverse methods, their application in the electrochemical energy storage community still has broad scope for future study. In particular, as discussed in this review, the vast majority of electrode materials applied in rechargeable batteries involve carbonaceous species. By inference, the exploration of more 2D matrices with intentionally captured SAs, including MXenes, LDHs, TMDs, transition metal oxides, and phosphides, with desirable volume energy densities may create a subsequent wave of enthusiasm in the rechargeable battery field. Alone, the large families of critical aprotic alkali (alkaline earth) metal–O2 (S, CO2, and N2) batteries, Na/K metal batteries, multivalent metal ion batteries, flow batteries, and a series of aqueous batteries and all-solid-state batteries all suffer from sluggish kinetics. They could highly benefit from activity boosting via SAs@2D hybrids. To attempt this, our group and other groups have certified that the unique functionality of these materials can improve the energy efficiency and cycling life in specific battery fields. More importantly, the above-mentioned energy storage systems are also expected to be able to fully take advantage of creative developments related to SAs@2D hybrids.
(iv) In-depth mechanism studies
The obtaining of a deep understanding of the correlation between impurity doping, electrochemical phase transitions, and performance enhancement also remains in a nascent state for various battery systems. For example, for Li–O2/CO2 batteries, much controversy regarding the exact nature of the evolution pathways of Li2O2 and Li2CO3 remains. Further revealing how defect-induced single sites continuously govern the intermediate behaviors during both discharge and recharge processes is critical. Determining whether single-atom sites can trigger a new nucleation-growth mechanism beyond “surface-adsorption” and “solvation-mediated” procedures in Li–O2/CO2 batteries is interesting. For Li–S batteries, central schemes regarding the chemical affinity for polysulfides and the Li2S formation/decomposition behaviors of SAs@2D hybrids have not thoroughly been expounded to date, especially the electron-donating and withdrawing processes between coordinatively unsaturated metal SAs and S-based species during redox chemistry. For Li–metal batteries, more fresh ideas are needed to fundamentally unravel the homogenizing effects on the Li-ion flux and local electric field from neighboring atomic metal sites during plating and stripping. From both experimental and theoretical perspectives, these issues all highlight the importance of establishing structure–function mechanisms at atomic dimensions to allow further optimization of the redox kinetics and operational stability of rechargeable batteries in the presence of doped/defective SAs@2D hybrids. Furthermore, in operando characterization, such as in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), HAADF-STEM, XAS, XPS, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis, are still urgently needed for the whole-process monitoring of the evolution of the metal SAs, 2D supports, intermediates, and even dynamic charge transfer, with the aim of offering more straightforward and convincing clarifications.
In summary, the development of SAs@2D materials is advancing at a pace that is so rapid that we can only focus on a limited number of synthetic strategies and practical implementations. The continuous optimization of catalytic capabilities and energy storage performances by virtue of various fresh ideas is still underway. Meeting the rigorous requirements of industry and satisfying the four guidelines of safety, performance, cost, and environmental friendliness are the ultimate pursuits with regard to this emerging technology. Hence, we expect that this contribution can document the latest progress with respect to SAs@2D engineering and essentially provide meaningful enlightenment for future catalyst and battery development.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51532005, 51802175 and 51872171) and The Project of “20 items of University” of Jinan (2019GXRC010) for financial support.
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dresselhaus and I. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
X. Hu, G. Luo, Q. Zhao, D. Wu, T. Yang, J. Wen, R. Wang, C. Xu and N. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16776–16786 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, W.-L. Bai, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4717–4737 RSC .
S. Ren, X. Duan, S. Liang, M. Zhang and H. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6144–6182 RSC .
J. Xie and Y. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1721–1729 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Lim, S. Kim, C. Jo and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18746–18757 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, W. Chen, L. Xue, Y. Jiao, T. Lei, J. Chu, J. Huang, C. Gong, C. Yan and Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903008 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Wang, X. Liu and J. Luo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3223–3232 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Deng, Y. Jiang, R. Liang, S.-J. Zhang, D. Luo, Y. Hu, X. Wang, J.-T. Li, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. D. McCloskey, L. F. Nazar and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Kovarik, X. Zhang, A. S. Hoffman, A. Gallo, S. R. Bare, D. Sokaras and T. Kroll, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Han, H. Liu, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13694–13698 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gawande, P. Fornasiero and R. Zbořil, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2231–2259 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, H. Cheng, J. Liu, M. Shao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, H. Zhang and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1900486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800438 CrossRef .
A. Alarawi, V. Ramalingam and J.-H. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 1–23 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, T. Fan, N. Xie, G. Nie and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901787 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Kwon, J. M. Suh, R. S. Varma, M. Shokouhimehr and H. W. Jang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800492 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, Q. Zhu, Y. Shi, H. Chen, D. Zhang, Z. Du and S. Yang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 891–898 CrossRef .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H. C. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, W.-C. Cheong, L. Zheng, F. Ren and G. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, H. Zhou, Q. Li, M. Chen, J. Wan, N. Zhang, L. Xiong, S. Li, B. Y. Xia and G. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900149 CrossRef .
T. Wang, R. Yang, N. Shi, J. Yang, H. Yan, J. Wang, Z. Ding, W. Huang, Q. Luo and Y. Lin, Small, 2019, 15, 1902410 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Guo, J. Qian, S. Yang, D. Luo, P. Gao, D. Wu, X. Li and Z. Jiang, Small, 2019, 15, 1905363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Huang, H. Cui, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Tao, M. Huang, M. Zuo, Y. Yang, K. Yang, L. Zhang and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 938 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, T. Ling, S. Chen, B. Jin, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, L. Song, J. Luo and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12252–12257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 21, 11900–11955 CrossRef .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, H. Li, S. He, J.-P. Veder, B. Johannessen, J. Xiao, S. Lu, J. Pan and M. F. Chisholm, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, P. Yan, C. Zhu, C. Ma, W. Wu, C. Wei, Y. Shen, S. Chu, J. Wang and Y. Du, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lou, Y. Zheng, X. Li, N. Ta, J. Xu, Y. Nie, K. Cho and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19289–19295 CrossRef CAS .
E. Meza, R. E. Diaz and C. W. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2238–2247 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, N. Li, W.-J. Ong and N. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27620–27631 RSC .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, R. Cheng, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Shi, B. Fan, H. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000693 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Lau, X. Lu, J. Kulhavý, S. Wu, L. Lu, T.-S. Wu, R. Kato, J. S. Foord, Y.-L. Soo and K. Suenaga, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4769–4776 RSC .
Q. Wang, Z. L. Zhao, S. Dong, D. He, M. J. Lawrence, S. Han, C. Cai, S. Xiang, P. Rodriguez and B. Xiang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 458–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yang, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Chen, K. Wu, Z. Chen, S. Liu, X. Cao, W.-C. Cheong, T. Meng, J. Luo and L. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4290 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, K. Li, Y. Yao, Q. Zhang, C. Dong, P. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl and W. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kano, A. Hashimoto, T. Kaneko, N. Tajima, T. Ohno and M. Takeguchi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 529–535 RSC .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng and M. N. Banis, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and L.-M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, H. Yan, L. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Ma, Z. Sun and S. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 123, 7922–7930 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang and A. Du, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
Z. Du, X. Chen, W. Hu, C. Chuang, S. Xie, A. Hu, W. Yan, X. Kong, X. Wu and H. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3977–3985 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Y. Jia, F. Wei, L. Zhuang, D. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Lin, P. Yuan and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6122–6127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, C.-S. Hsu, D. T. Alexander, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14190–14199 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, M. Chen, H. Feng, R. Yuan, W. Yan, Y. Tian, X. Wu, W. Chu and C. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 111–118 RSC .
G. Chen, P. Liu, Z. Liao, F. Sun, Y. He, H. Zhong, T. Zhang, E. Zschech, M. Chen and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907399 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23110–23115 RSC .
Y. Wang, B. Yu, K. Liu, X. Yang, M. Liu, T.-S. Chan, X. Qiu, J. Li and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2131–2139 RSC .
S. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. Waterhouse, Y. C. Huang, L. Zheng and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900509 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. S. Wu, P. Lu, X. Wang, W. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Ma, W. Ren, Z. Jiang and X. Bao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903089 CrossRef CAS .
S. An, G. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Zhang, K. Li, C. Song, J. T. Miller, S. Miao, J. Wang and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9441–9450 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Su, F. Tang, X. Zhao and Q. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lei, W. Zhao, L. Shen, S. Liang, C. Au and L. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118663 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Pronkin, T.-P. Fellinger, K. Kailasam, G. Vilé, D. Albani, F. Krumeich, R. Leary, J. Barnard and J. M. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3166–3175 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong and J. Mao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef .
C. Li, S. Dong, R. Tang, X. Ge, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Lu and L. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3201–3211 RSC .
P. Zhou, F. Lv, N. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, Y. Tang, J. Lai, Y. Chao, M. Luo and F. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Long, Y. Zhang, D. Duan, Y. Xiong, Y. Zhang and Y. Bi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6224–6229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Zhu, Z. Li, W. Chen, W. Wei, T. Yuan, Y. Qu, Q. Xu and C. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2158–2163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q.-L. Zhu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem, 2017, 2, 52–80 CAS .
D. Ji, L. Fan, L. Li, S. Peng, D. Yu, J. Song, S. Ramakrishna and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808267 CrossRef .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
A. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. Quan, C. Peng, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, C. Yang, Y. Ji, L. Qian and X. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, Y. Song, S. Li, J. Li, Y. Yang, W. Liu, M. Shao and M. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906477 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, S. Yu, X. Lu, W. Fan, B. Chi, Y. Ye, X. Shi, J. Zeng, X. Li and S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13878–13887 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen and A. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, K. Shen, F. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6579–6586 CrossRef CAS .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16068 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3565–3604 RSC .
S. Chandra, T. Kundu, S. Kandambeth, R. BabaRao, Y. Marathe, S. M. Kunjir and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6570–6573 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Kuehl, J. Yin, P. H. Duong, B. Mastorovich, B. Newell, K. D. Li-Oakey, B. A. Parkinson and J. O. Hoberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18200–18207 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Ren, R. Wang, P. Zhang, M. Ding, C. Li, D. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Zhang and L. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1576 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Mu, H. Zhu, X. Zhu, H. Xing, H. Xia and B. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906905 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Yang, P. Gao and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14184–14188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang and X. Meng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14310–14314 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zuo, T. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Ji, X. Gong, Y. Mai and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10198–10203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Lin, D. Wang, T. Gao, J. Song, P. Zhou, Z. Xu, Z. Yang, N. Xiao and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906722 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, C. Mi, X. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. Xiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Yu, M. Dou, Z. Zhang, L. Dai and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14724–14730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, P. An, Y. Shi, J. Han, Z. Yang, C. Long, J. Guo, S. Zhao and K. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz4824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Lu, K. Luo, Y. Li, K. Chang, K. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Rosen, L. Hultman and P. Eklund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4730–4737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Shao, Z. Lin, J. Lu, L. Liu, B. Duployer, P. O. Persson, P. Eklund, L. Hultman and M. Li, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, S. Zhang, H. Pan, S. Xiao, Z. Guo, L. Tang, U. Khan, B.-F. Ding, M. Li and Z. Cai, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 767–776 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, J. Lin, H. Sims, C. Jiang, C. Cong, J. A. Brehm, Z. Zhang, L. Niu, Y. Chen and Y. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906536 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Yao, X. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Xing, X. Niu, X. Yan, Y. Yu, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6276–6282 CrossRef CAS .
R.-J. Chang, Y. Sheng, G. H. Ryu, N. Mkhize, T. Chen, Y. Lu, J. Chen, J. K. Lee, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24279–24288 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bakandritsos, R. G. Kadam, P. Kumar, G. Zoppellaro, M. Medved’, J. Tuček, T. Montini, O. Tomanec, P. Andrýsková and B. Drahoš, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900323 CrossRef .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704624 CrossRef .
X. W. Wang, H. P. Guo, J. Liang, J. F. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Z. Wang, W. B. Luo, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801016 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Xie, S. Chen, B. Ge, D. Liu, C. Wu, W. Xu, W. Chu, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802525 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, C. Liu, J. Liu, J. Li, S. Xi, X. Chi, H. Xu, I. H. Park, X. Peng and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, F. M. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef .
P. Huang, M. Cheng, H. Zhang, M. Zuo, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. bin Yang, X. Huang, S.-F. Hung, W. Cai, C. Jia, S. Miao, H. M. Chen, X. Yang and Y. Huang, Chem, 2020, 6, 658–674 CAS .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and C. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
J. Meng, J. Li, J. Liu, X. Zhang, G. Jiang, L. Ma, Z.-Y. Hu, S. Xi, Y. Zhao and M. Yan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1431–1440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and H. Sun, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, C.-J. Chen, R.-S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, M. G. Kim, P. Liu, G. Nam, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, B. Yang, J. Cho and M. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1392 CrossRef .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6254–6262 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, M. K. Leung and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, I. S. Amiinu, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Xia, Z. Song and Q. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1894–1901 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rong, H. J. Wang, X. L. Lu, R. Si and T. B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1961–1965 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Gong, Z. Liu, S. Cong, Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Ma, H. Yu and G. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 394–403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Q. Guan, H. Wu, W. Liu, Y. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Ye, X. Zheng, H. Pan and J. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14515–14519 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, J. Chen and H. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13562–13567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, Z. Huang, P. Xie, L. Wu, L. Ma, T. Li, Z. Pang, M. Jiao, Z. Liang and J. Gao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 851–857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Shang, W. Chen, T. Sun, H. Li, J. Dong, J. Zhou, Z. Li and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3508–3514 RSC .
J. Gu, C.-S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng and A. I. Rykov, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai and R. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rooney and G. Webb, J. Catal., 1964, 3, 488–501 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Thomas, R. Raja and D. W. Lewis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6456–6482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Liu, Z. Muhammad, F. Wan, W. Xie, Y. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903955 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhang, Y. Jiao, D. L. Chao, C. Ye, Y. X. Wang, K. Davey, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904206 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, T. Wang, W. Yang, S. Cui, P. Zhang, A. Nie, Q. Zhang and Y. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1804019 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, J. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Hou, Q. Wang, M. Gu, F. He, Y. Xia, Z. Xia and Z. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907658 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hyun, B. Son, H. Kim, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, J. Wang, J. Liu, C. Hou, Z. Xiu, Y. Fan, L. Zhao, Y. Zhai, H. Li and J. Zeng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901751 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmadiparidari, R. E. Warburton, L. Majidi, M. Asadi, A. Chamaani, J. R. Jokisaari, S. Rastegar, Z. Hemmat, B. Sayahpour and R. S. Assary, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, J. Yi, S. Wu, Y. Liu, S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Joule, 2017, 1, 359–370 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, C. Li, S. Dong, X. Ge, P. Zhang, X. Miao, R. Wang, Z. Zhang and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900788 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Bi, T. Liu, T. He, J. Cheng, F. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903852 CrossRef .
L.-N. Song, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ge, L.-C. Zou, H.-F. Wang, X.-X. Wang, Q.-C. Liu, F. Li and J.-J. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2191 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Yin, B. Li, X. Huang, L. Zhao and L. Qian, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, T. Yu, E. Tzoganakis, K. Amine, T. Wu, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800348 CrossRef .
C. Hu, L. Gong, Y. Xiao, Y. Yuan, N. M. Bedford, Z. Xia, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Lin and J. W. Connell, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907436 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, N. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1132–1153 RSC .
Y.-P. Deng, R. Liang, G. Jiang, Y. Jiang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1665–1675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Y. Xu, H. Yang, Z. Dong, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700691 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Tao, C. Xie, D. Wang, Y. Zou, R. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Jia and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905923 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Yang, C.-Z. Yuan and A.-W. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2383–2389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, X. Meng, L. Lu, J. Bian, Z. Li and C. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808872 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Li, C. X. Zhao, S. Chen, J. N. Liu, X. Chen, L. Song and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900592 CrossRef .
C. Tang, B. Wang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703185 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, W. Yi, Y. Qu, L. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Zhu, J. Wan, S. Chen, M. Yang and L. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lian, W. Yang, C. Zhang, H. Sun, Z. Deng, W. Xu, L. Song, Z. Ouyang, Z. Wang and J. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 286–294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Yang, C.-Z. Yuan and A.-W. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16145–16152 RSC .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Q. Ju, W. Tang, G. Chen, Z. Chen, Q. Liu, M. Yang, Y. Lu and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118593 CrossRef .
H. Sun, S. Liu, M. Wang, T. Qian, J. Xiong and C. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33054–33061 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, P. Yuan, Z. Lv, Y. Guo, Y. Qiao, X. Xue, X. Liu, W. Bai, K. Wang and Q. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, L. Wang, Z. Li, P. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, F. Zhou, H. Wang, Z. Yang and Y. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904496 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, P. Du, W. Liang, H. Zhang, P. Wu, C. Cai and Z. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15012–15022 RSC .
H. J. Qiu, P. Du, K. Hu, J. Gao, H. Li, P. Liu, T. Ina, K. Ohara, Y. Ito and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900843 CrossRef .
G. Han, Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Gong, C. Du, M. N. Banis, Y.-M. Yiu, T.-K. Sham and L. Gu, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104088 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, K. Hu, J. Lyu, H. Li, X. Lin, G. Xie, X. Liu, Y. Ito and H.-J. Qiu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119172 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, F. Liu, X. Liu, S. Liao, C. You, X. Tian, H. Nan, F. Luo, H. Song and Z. Fu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3797–3805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, X. Zhou, J. Dong, A. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Pei, Z. Li and Z. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3049 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, B. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Qu, F. Zhou, C. Zhao, Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, X. Duan and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3734 CrossRef .
S. Ma, Z. Han, K. Leng, X. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Qu and J. Bai, Small, 2020, 16, 2001384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Hu, F. Nichols, F. Bridges, S. Kan, T. He, Y. Zhang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11649–11655 RSC .
D. Liu, B. Wang, H. Li, S. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, J. Xie, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, J. Lv, M. A. Ghausi, X. Wang, Z. Peng, M. Wu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2575–2580 RSC .
W. Zheng, F. Chen, Q. Zeng, Z. Li, B. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Zhang, F. He, X. Wu and Y. Hou, Nanomicro Lett., 2020, 12, 108 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yao, C. Lei, Z. Li, Q. He, J. Lu and L. Lei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. Wang, J. Lv, Y. Huang, M. Wu, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16996–17001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Xie, M. A. Ghausi, J. Lv, Y. Huang, M. Wu, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807807 CrossRef .
T. He, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Hu, M. Liu, C.-W. Pao, J.-L. Chen and L. Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20840–20846 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Shen, J. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Liu, R. Hu, L. Yang, Y. Feng, J. Liu and Z. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902228 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, G. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Luo, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Liu, P. Ji, X. Du and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904876 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jana, R. Xu, X.-B. Cheng, J. S. Yeon, J. M. Park, J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and H. S. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1049–1075 RSC .
R. Fang, J. Xu and D.-W. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 432–471 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Cheng, A. Natan, A. M. Hafez, D. Cao, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804609 CrossRef .
J. Xie, B. Q. Li, H. J. Peng, Y. W. Song, M. Zhao, X. Chen, Q. Zhang and J. Q. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903813 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, S. Zhao, T. Wang, S.-Z. Yang, B. Johannessen, H. Chen, C. Liu, Y. Ye, Y. Wu and Y. Peng, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1252–1261 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Zhou, Q. Ge, R. Chen, M. Ni, W. Utetiwabo, X. Zhang and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19311–19317 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, Y. Chen, Y. Yang and X. Chen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5522–5530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wu, B. Zhang, W. Wang, G. Zhang, Z. W. Seh, N. Zhang, J. Sun, L. Huang and J. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 250–259 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, S. Wang, R. Hu, J. Gu, Y. Cui, B. Li, W. Chen, C. Liu, J. Shang and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Jia, J. Zhong, Q. Xiao, C. Wang, K. Zang, H. Liu, H. Zheng, J. Luo and J. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 246–252 CrossRef .
J. Wang, L. Jia, S. Duan, H. Liu, Q. Xiao, T. Li, H. Fan, K. Feng, J. Yang and Q. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 375–382 CrossRef .
G. Cao, Z. Wang, D. Bi, J. Zheng, Q. Lai and Y. Liang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10314–10320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, P. Zhou, H. Li, T. Gao, L. Zhou, Y. Zhang, N. Xiao, Z. Xia, L. Wang and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900701 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Z. Chen, R. Ning, S. Xi, W. Tang, Y. Du, C. Liu, Z. Ren, X. Chi and M. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25147–25154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, B. Q. Li, H. J. Peng, H. Yuan, J. Y. Wei and J. Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12636–12652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. Qian, Y. Li, X. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3319–3327 RSC .
J.-l. Ma, F.-l. Meng, Y. Yu, D.-p. Liu, J.-m. Yan, Y. Zhang, X.-b. Zhang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fu, V. Venturi, J. Kim, Z. Ahmad, A. W. Ells, V. Viswanathan and B. A. Helms, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 758–766 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X.-R. Chen, T.-Z. Hou, B.-Q. Li, X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau7728 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, C. Yang, N. Eidson, J. Chen, F. Han, L. Chen, C. Luo, P. F. Wang, X. Fan and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906427 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, L. Nie and W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908494 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, S. Yao, M. Ihsan-Ul-Haq, J. Wu and J. K. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802777 CrossRef .
S.-H. Wang, J. Yue, W. Dong, T.-T. Zuo, J.-Y. Li, X. Liu, X.-D. Zhang, L. Liu, J.-L. Shi and Y.-X. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4930 CrossRef .
K. Xu, M. Zhu, X. Wu, J. Liang, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 587–593 CrossRef .
J. Xiang, L. Yang, L. Yuan, K. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Lin, F. Pan and Y. Huang, Joule, 2019, 3, 2334–2363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Chen, X. B. Cheng, B. Q. Li, R. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Chen and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800354 CrossRef .
J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Yun, S. H. Choi, S. A. Han, J. Moon, J. H. Kim, J. W. Lee and M. S. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910538 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, T. Qian, Y. Sun, J. Zhong, F. Rosei and C. Yan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7827–7835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Zhou, H. Ji, J. Liu, T. Qian and C. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32008–32014 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, T. Qian, X. Shen, M. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhong, C. Yan and F. Rosei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14496–14503 RSC .
C. Yang, Y. Yao, S. He, H. Xie, E. Hitz and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702714 CrossRef .
K. Yan, Z. Lu, H.-W. Lee, F. Xiong, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Zhao, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pu, J. Li, Z. Shen, C. Zhong, J. Liu, H. Ma, J. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804133 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. Kong, J. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000400 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yi, S. Jiang, J. Tian, Y. Qian, S. Chen, S. Wei, N. Lin and Y. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6521–6527 CrossRef .
T. Li, D. Yu, J. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37559–37566 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Qiu, H. Zhou, C. Sun, Y. Yu, C. Zhu and Z. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900307 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Da, W. Zhou, Y. Shao, D. Li, S. Zhan, J. Yuan and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13466–13471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Yin, H. J. Wang, S. F. Tang, X. L. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T. B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Peng Wang and Danyang Zhao contribute equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Peng Wang
	Peng Wang received his MS degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China, in 2013. Currently, he is working in Prof. Longwei Yin's group at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Shandong University as a PhD candidate. His research mainly focuses on material and structure design in the fields of metal–air batteries and electrocatalysis.

Danyang Zhao
	Danyang Zhao received her BS degree from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China, in 2016. She is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at SDU under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Her current research mainly focuses on the structural and component design of high-performance electrodes based on two-dimensional materials.

Longwei Yin
	Longwei Yin is a distinguished professor and director of the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 from SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li- or Na-based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electrocatalysis, solar cells, etc.

Broader context
The development of electrochemical energy storage technology is severely limited by universal challenges, including sluggish reaction kinetics and unsatisfactory cycling stability. Hence, the elaborate design of electrode materials with specific structural and componential functionality plays a key role in enhancing the intrinsic activity. In particular, single-atom catalysts confined in ultrathin two-dimensional skeletons (SAs@2D) have been rapidly developed in recent years. Synergistic effects between ultrathin supports and isolated atomic sites can induce intense electron interactions, forming abundant unsaturated coordination centers. Due to their optimized electronic structures and exposed active sites, SAs@2D hybrids can operate well as efficient multifunctional electrode materials in various novel batteries. Consequently, in this review, freshly updated synthetic methods for SAs@2D hybrids, such as defect engineering strategies, coordination engineering strategies, and atom substitution strategies, are systematically summarized. The current understanding of the structure–activity mechanisms explaining catalytic capabilities and long-term durabilities, based on coordination geometry and metal–support interactions, is presented. Then electrochemical energy storage applications based on SAs@2D hybrids are discussed in detail. Challenges and future prospects relating to the use of SAs@2D in the rechargeable battery field are forecast. This review is expected to present some inspiration for further expanding the feasibility of using functionalized SAs in electrode design.


 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the scope of SAs@2D hybrids used for various rechargeable batteries applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A schematic diagram showing the synthesis of Ni–N–MEGO. (b) AC-STEM images showing that single-atom Ni sites are predominately located on the edges of nanopores inside Ni–N–MEGO.42 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (c) A schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of Cu@MoS2.43 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) A HAADF-STEM image and (e) the DFT-calculated stable Rh1–S4 configuration of the Rh1 active site of the Rh1/MoS2 SAC.44 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) The preparation, (g) a HAADF-STEM image, and (h) a magnified HAADF image of the area in the yellow box of Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty. (i) Corresponding intensity maps obtained along line 1 in (h). (j) HAADF-STEM images and corresponding element maps of Ti3−xC2Ty confining different metal species.30 Copyright 2019; American Chemical Society. (k) A schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure, and (l) SEM, (m) HAADF-STEM, and (n) atomic-resolution STEM images of the NiSA–MoS2/CC catalyst.52 Copyright: 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The proposed reaction mechanism for the preparation of Pt SAs/graphene. (b) A magnified HAADF STEM image of Pt SAs/DG. (c) A zoomed-in image of a defect area. (d) The corresponding EXAFS fitting curve for Pt SAs/DG.60 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) The preparation and (f) HADDF-STEM imaging of A-Ni@DG.62 Copyright: 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (g) The preparation and characterization of the SACo@N–C catalyst.93 Copyright: 2020, Springer Nature Publishing. (h) A schematic illustration and atomic-scale HAADF-STEM image of Ni–O–G.71 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (i) A schematic illustration and magnified HAADF-STEM image of the RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx catalyst; scale bar: 2 nm.29 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of an MPSA catalyst.95 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (k) The preparation and characterization of a PtSA–MNS catalyst.97 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (l) The synthesis and HAADF-STEM imaging of a pfSAC-Fe catalyst.99 Copyright: 2019, Science. (m) A schematic diagram of the bottom-up fabrication of ultrathin CMP nanosheets containing Co SAs.101 Copyright: 2020, Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of a Zn–MXene product.28 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) An illustration of the synthesis mechanism and the characteristics of an Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA catalyst.104 Copyright: 2018, Springer Nature Publishing. (c) The preparation and characteristics of Mo SAs/ML-MoS2; scale bar: 1 nm.105 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) The synthetic process and ADF-STEM images of Co-doped MoS2 with different dopant concentrations.106 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) The preparation and characteristics of Sn-doped WS2 monolayers, including intensity line profiles across the yellow and blue rows of the HAADF-STEM image showing the differences in intensity between W and Sn.108 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A model and HR-TEM image of the G(CN)–Cu catalyst. Higher magnification HR-TEM images of the catalyst show high-contrast spots originating from embedded Cu atoms (b) before and (c) after catalytic reactions.109 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) A schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of the Co1–G catalyst.110 Copyright: 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) A schematic diagram and the characteristics of V2C MXenes synthesized via an interlayer engineering strategy.112 Copyright: 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) The preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging of Co1-in-MoS2.113 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The binding energies of *OOH, *O, and *OH to M-SA and the d-band centers (open circles) of M atoms. (b) Activity volcano curves of the ORR via a 2e− or 4e− pathway.116 Copyright: 2020, Cell Press. (c) A schematic illustration of the formation of Fe/Co/Ni-SAs with different coordination environments.120 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) The linear relationship between the amounts of charge transfer from the functional groups and the d-band center. (e) The linear relationship between the adsorption energies of various intermediates and the d-band center.122 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) The first derivatives of the Fe K-edge XANES spectra of Fe3+–N–C and Fe2+–N–C as dry powder (black) and when loaded onto glassy carbon electrodes at open circuit and various working potentials. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright: 2019, Science. (c) Fe K-edge XANES spectra of Fe-SAs/NPS-HC during ORR catalysis. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright: 2018, Springer Nature. (d) In operando XANES spectra recorded at the Co K-edge of Co1/PCN, from open-circuit conditions to −0.1 V during the HER; inset: a magnified view of the pre-edge XANES region. (e) Corresponding k3-weighted Fourier transform spectra. (f) First-shell fitting of the EXAFS spectra via different fitting paths under ex situ and open-circuit conditions and at −0.04 V. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright: 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  A brief history and recent progress relating to the use of SAs@2D hybrids in electrochemical energy storage systems. In the 1960s, the initial concept of single catalysis sites was established.136 In 2005, Thomas et al.137 reported the synthesis of SAs; these processes can be roughly divided into physical and chemical strategies. In 2011, Zhang's group15 first directly observed SAs via the HAADF-STEM technique. From 2018–2020, SAs@2D hybrids were gradually applied in Zn–air,138 Li–S,139 Li–CO2,140 Li–metal,141 Li–O2,93 Al–air,69 and Zn–CO2142 batteries.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A diagram showing the configuration of a Li–O2 battery based on Co-SAs/N–C. (b) Schematic illustrations of the working mechanisms of the Co-SAs/N–C (top) and N–C (bottom) electrodes. (c) Calculated free-energy diagrams for the discharge–charge reactions involving Co-SAs/N–C. (d) The cycling stability and terminal voltages of a Co-SAs/N–C electrode at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright: 2020, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration of the reaction process of a Pt/g-C3N4 catalyst during cycling. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Side views, (b) top views, and (c) charge density differences of Li2CO3 adsorbed on graphene oxide, a single cobalt atom, and a cobalt dimer, respectively. (d) The first cycle charge voltage profiles of adjacent Co/GO–Li2CO3, SA Co/GO–Li2CO3, and GO–Li2CO3 electrodes up to 400 mA h g−1. (e) A schematic diagram of a Li–CO2 battery and the corresponding CO2 reduction and evolution reactions on an adjacent Co/GO electrode. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Models of N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene, N,S-doped graphene, and Fe/N-doped graphene structures with “FeN4” moieties at the center. (g) Fe/N-doped graphene with “FeN4” moieties at the edge. (h) The spin density distribution of edge “FeN4” moieties in the carbon skeleton. (i) A schematic diagram of the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 on the catalyst surface. (j and k) Schematic Gibbs free energy diagrams from the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 during discharging and charging. (l) The adsorption energy of *CO (ΔG*CO) as a function of the overpotential on the above-mentioned catalysts. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of M SA@NCF/CNF film in a wearable Zn–air battery. (b) Free energy diagrams of two models at U = 0 V and U = 1.23 V. (c) The ORR at Co–N4/C. (d) Voltage–capacity curves of the prepared Zn–air batteries. (e) A digital photo showing three wearable batteries in series as a scarf, with different light-emitting diodes lit up simultaneously. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) A schematic illustration of the fabrication process of NC–Co SAs. (g) Power–current density curves for batteries based on NC–Co SAs. (h) The LSV profiles of Co-POC-based cathodes in rechargeable Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) A model of a Co-POC-based battery. (j) The cycling stabilities of Co-POC and the Pt/C + Ir/C cathodes. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) A photograph of a toy car powered by one Zn–air battery. (b) A photograph of the solid Zn–air battery, showing an open-circuit voltage of 1.439 V. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright: 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) An illustration of the structure of the Co–Co3O4@NAC catalyst. (d) A photograph of a Zn–air battery with a high open-circuit voltage of 1.449 V. (e) The galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling performance of rechargeable Zn–air batteries based on Pt/C, Co–Co3O4@NAC, and Pt/C–IrO2. (f) Cycle-testing of Co–Co3O4@NAC in a rechargeable Zn–air battery. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. (g) A schematic illustration of the preparation of M3HITP2. (h) Different reaction cascades on Co3HITP2, showing the configurations and bond lengths during intermediate binding. (i) Free energy diagrams of intermediates along the reaction coordinates at a potential of 1.23 V. (j) Structural diagram of the flexible all-solid-state battery. (k) Rate capability testing of the flexible all-solid-state battery in various bending states. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The Fe–N4 site near graphitic edges (upper panel: top view; lower panel: side view). (b) A perfect Fe–N4 site (side view). (c) The differential charge density distribution of an Fe–N4 site near graphitic edges. (d) The free energy diagram for a 4e− transfer ORR on E-FeNC and FeNC at U = 1.23 V. (e) Typical galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries with E-FeNC and Pt/C as cathode catalysts at 50 mA cm−2. (f) Polarization curves and corresponding power density plots of a battery using E-FeNC compared with a Pt/C catalyst. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier. (g) A schematic diagram of an Fe–N/P–C catalyst with Fe–N3–P coordination configuration. (h) Long-term galvanostatic discharge curves from Zn–air batteries; inset: a photograph of two Zn–air batteries lighting an LED. (i) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the ORR on Fe–N4 and Fe–N3P active sites. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. (j) Top- and front-view models of the adsorption of HO*/O* on the P/Fe atoms of P/FeN4–CNS. (k) The calculated free energy diagram of the ORR/OER at the equilibrium potential. (l) The free energies of the ORR/OER limiting step using the models. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Energy profiles for the reduction of LiPS on N/G and Co-N/G substrates. (b and c) Energy profiles of the decomposition of Li2S clusters on N/G and Co–N/G. (d) The cycling performances of S@Co–N/G, S@N/G, S@Co/G, and S@rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) A schematic diagram of SC–Co. (f) Charging and discharging profiles of Li–S cells at different rates. (g) The cycling performance of interlayer SC–Co under a high loading of 3.6 mgS cm−2. (h) The cycling performances of Li–S cells with SC or interlayer SC–Co. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. Schematic diagrams showing (i) the approach for seeding a single atom on graphene, and the conversion processes on (j) graphene and (k) single-atom-seeded graphene in Li–S batteries. (l) The long-term cycling stabilities of S–G, S–NG, S-SACo@NG, and S-SAV@NG electrodes at 0.5C for 400 cycles. (m) Energy profiles for the reduction of polysulfides on graphene, NG, SACo@NG, and SAV@NG. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Calculated Li2S delithiation models with and without a SAFe catalyst. (c) A comparison of the delithiation energy barriers of pristine Li2S and Li2S@NC with/without the SAFe catalyst. (d) A comparison of the CV curves of the three composite cathodes. (e) In situ XANES spectra of the Li2S@NC:SAFe cathode in different charging states. (f) A proposed mechanism for the SAFe-catalyzed Li2S delithiation reaction. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (g) A model of Li2S@C:SACo. (h) A comparison of the rate performances of Li2S@C:SACo and Li2S@C electrodes. (i) The long-term cycling performance of the Li2S@C:SACo electrode. (j) A comparison of simulated delithiation energy barriers of Li2S on different carbon matrices. (k) A comparison of lithium-ion diffusion energy barriers on various nanocarbon surfaces. (l and m) Simulated Li2S4 adsorption on nitrogen-doped nanocarbon with and without SACo. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Free-energy diagrams of LiPS on Ni@NG and NG. (b) The binding energies between LiPS and Ni@NG or NG. (c) The catalytic mechanism of LiPS on the surface of Ni@NG. (d) Charge/discharge profiles of a Li–S battery based on the Ni@NG modified separator. (e) The cycling stabilities of Li–S batteries based on the Ni@NG modified separator. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) A schematic illustration of the operation of an Li–S battery with the multifunctional C–C–N–Co interlayer. (g) Gibbs free energy plots for the reduction of lithium polysulfides on NC@SA-Co (red line) and NC (black line). (h) The stability of the Li–S battery with a C–C–N–Co interlayer. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Li adsorption sites on CoNC. (b) A summary of the binding energies between a Li atom and different adsorption sites on CoNC. (c) Li nucleation overpotentials on Cu, CoNC, and NGM electrodes at different current densities. (d) Long-term cycling at 1.0C and (e) the rate capability performance of CoNC–Li|LiFePO4 and Li|LiFePO4 full cells. (f) The Coulombic efficiencies of CoNC, NGM, and Cu electrodes at a fixed capacity of 2.0 mA h cm−2. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) A comparison of the CEs of SANi–NG, PG, and NG electrodes. (h) The voltage profiles of the 20th Li plating/stripping cycles on SANi–NG, PG, and NG electrodes. (i) Top views of PG, NG, and SANi–NG; H, M, and K represent the most stable adsorption sites of lithium on their structures. C1 and C2 represent the C atoms that directly bond with N atoms. (j) Side views of the charge density differences of PG, NG, and SANi–NG with one Li atom adsorbed; yellow and blue represent the charge accumulation and loss regions; the inset images show top views. (k) Li adsorption energy distribution maps and corresponding schematic illustrations of Li nucleation and plating processes on a SA-metal–NG electrode; G, M, N, and Li represent graphene, a metal atom, a nitrogen atom, and a lithium atom, respectively. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright: 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction mechanisms related to dual-phase Li storage materials and their electrochemical behavior. (b) The 3D isosurface of the negative electronic charge redistribution of Zn. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) A schematic illustration of Na plating behavior on ZnSA–N–C electrodes. (d) The voltage profiles of galvanostatic Na deposition on different substrates. (e) The nucleation overpotentials of different substrates. (f) DFT calculations relating to the affinity between carbon and a single Zn atom site to evaluate the strong interactions with Na ions. (g) Long-term cycling stability with a high Coulombic efficiency of almost 100%. (h) The cycling performances of Na–ZnSA–N–C and Na-CC anodes. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

SAs@2D for Li–O2 batteries
Co-SAs/N–C	2.01 wt%	0.40 V	20105 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1	260	
93

Pt–CNHS	0.77 wt%	—	17059 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	100	
150



SAs@2D for Li–CO2 batteries
Co/GO	5.3 wt%	1.64 V	17358 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	100	
140

Fe-ISA/N,S-HG	0.7 at%	1.17 V	23174 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	100	
103


SAs@2D for Zn–air batteries
CoN4/NG	—	1.51 V	0.84 V	115 mW cm−2	100 cycles	
224

NC–Co SA	1.84 wt%	1.411 V	0.45 V	20.9 mW cm−3 at 31.0 mA cm−2	125 cycles	
138

Co–G@POF	2.48 wt%	—	1.04 V	78.0 mW cm−2 at 2.0 mA cm−2	164 cycles	
160

Co SA@NCF/CNF	2.05 wt%	1.41 V	0.6 V	—	90 cycles	
82

NGM–Co	1.23 wt%	1.44 V	0.7 V	152 mW cm−2	60 h	
161

Co SANC-850	1.27 wt%	1.48 V	0.79 V	—	44 h	
69

Fe–N4 SAs/NPC	1.96 wt%	—	1.45 V	232 mW cm−2	108 cycles	
87

P–O/FeN4–CNS	3.1 wt%	1.50 V	0.77 V	232 mW cm−2	450 cycles	
166

Fe SAs/GO	4.3 wt%	—	—	275 mW cm−2	120 h	
168

Fe-NSDC	—	1.64 V	0.71@50	225.1 mW cm−2	400 cycles	
225

1.0@100
NiN4–C	4.2 ± 0.4 wt%	1.45 V	—	95 mW cm−2	—	
169



SAs@2D for Zn–CO2 batteries
Cu–N2/GN	1.45 wt%	—	1.7 V	0.6 mW cm−2 at 1.06 mA cm−2	40 h	
142

NiPG	1.09 wt%	—	2.11 V	—	12 h	
180

SAs-Ni–N–C	5.05 wt%	—	—	1.4 mW cm−2	50 h	
181

Fe1NC/S1-1000	0.38 wt%	0.727 V	0.5 V	526 mW cm−2	25 h	
182



SAs@2D for Al–air batteries
Co SANC-850	1.27 wt%	1.80 V	—	494 mW cm−2	10 h	
69

NCALR/Fe	1.3 wt%	1.81 V	—	181.1 mW cm−2	14 h	
185


Li–S batteries	Co–N/G	—	1210 mA h g−1 at 0.2C	500 cycles at 1C	
63

SC–Co	0.70 wt%	1130 mA h gS−1 at 0.5C	300 cycles at 0.5C	
191

SAV@NG	4.3 wt%	645 mA h g−1 at 3C	400 cycle at 0.5C	
131

Fe–PCN/S	1.0 wt%	1138.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C	300 cycles at 0.5C	
193

SAFe@g-C3N4	8.5 wt%	1379 mA h g−1 at 0.1C	200 cycles at 0.2C	
194

CoSA–N–C	15.3 wt%	1574 mA h g−1 at 0.05C	120 cycles at 0.2C	
142

SA-Zn–MXene	1.5 wt%	1136 mA h g−1 at 0.2C	200 cycles at 4C	
93

Li2S@C:SACo	5.357 wt%	708 mA h g−1 at 1C	1500 cycles at 2C	
198

Ni@NG	—	1598 mA h g−1 at 0.1C	500 cycles at 1.0C	
139

Fe@NG	0.67 at%	1616 mA hg−1 at 0.1C	200 cycles at 2C	
199

NC@SA-Co	4.1 wt%	1160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C	700 cycles at 2C	
200

Fe SACs	0.57 at%	1028 mA h g−1 at 0.2C	750 cycles at 0.5C	
201

Li–Metal batteries	Zn–MXene	0.87 at%	158 mA h g−1 at 0.2C	1200 h at 1.0 mA cm−2	
167

SANi–NG	0.63 at%	—	250 cycles at 4 mA cm-2	
141

CoNC	0.40 wt%	115 mA h g−1 at 2C	340 cycles at 1.0C	
213

FeSA–N–C	—	1 mA h cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	200 cycles at 1C	
216

PCF-E (Zn)	—	0.2 mA h cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2	350 cycles at 0.2 mA cm−2	
214

Na-Metal batteries	ZnSA–N–C	—	1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.2C	1000 cycles at 0.5C	
215

Li-Ion batteries	Pt1/MC	0.66 at%	846 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1	6000 cycles at 5 A g−1.	
223

V2C@Co	—	1117.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	15000 cycles at 8 A g−1	
112

Na-Ion batteries	Cu/PTA-MOPF	26.3 wt%	107.7 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1	1000 cycles at 1 A g−1	
221

K-Ion batteries	NiSA/S/C	8 wt%	608 mA hg−1 at 100 mA g−1	500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1	
222

Footnote
† Peng Wang and Danyang Zhao contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
