Recent advances in the fabrication of graphene–ZnO heterojunctions for optoelectronic device applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC00172C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC00172C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3815-3833Recent advances in the fabrication of graphene–ZnO heterojunctions for optoelectronic device applications

        
          
            Feng-Xia 
            Liang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Xie
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Wei 
            Tong
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhong-Jun 
            Li
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Lin-Bao 
            Luo
          
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering and Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials and Devices, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, China
bInstitute of Industry and Equipment Technology, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, Anhui, China
cSchool of Electronic Sciences and Applied Physics, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, China. E-mail: zjli@hfut.edu.cn; luolb@hfut.edu.cn
Received 
      11th January 2018
    , Accepted 19th February 2018First published on 19th February 2018AbstractRecently, by taking advantage of the synergistic effects of both graphene and ZnO, various photoelectric devices that combine graphene and ZnO have exhibited excellent device performances and attracted increasing research interest. However, although significant achievements have been made, many challenges still exist. In this review paper, we comprehensively summarize the recent advances in the fabrication of various graphene (also including reduced graphene oxide)–ZnO (e.g. ZnO films, nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods etc.) hybrid heterostructures, and their application in a number of optoelectronic devices, including photodiodes, phototransistors, solar cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers and so on. We start by briefly surveying the recent progress in the fabrication methodologies such as low-temperature and high-temperature methods. And then, we will elaborate on the optoelectronic device application in terms of device physics, performance analysis, and device optimization approaches. Finally, we close with some unresolved issues and challenges in this field.
Feng-Xia Liang
Feng-Xia Liang, received her BS degree from Liaocheng University, MS degree from University of Science and Technology of China, and PhD degree from City University of Hong Kong, in 2003, 2006 and 2012, respectively. She is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hefei University of Technology. Her research interest includes the synthesis of low-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures for chemical, biological and optoelectronic devices applications.
Zhong-Jun Li
Zhong-jun Li, earned his BS degree from the Department of Physics at Anhui Normal University in 2000. He achieved his PhD degree from Department of Modern Physics, at University of Science and Technology of China in 2008, majoring Atomic & Molecular Physics. After graduation, he then joined the School of Electronic Science & Applied Physics of Hefei University of Technology, and is currently an associate professor. His research interests include the simulation and manipulation of electronic structures of low-dimension semiconductor materials and their applications in devices.
Lin-Bao Luo
Lin-Bao Luo is a full professor of applied physics at Hefei University of Technology. He received his MSc in inorganic chemistry at Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, and PhD degree in 2009 from Department of Physics and Materials Sciences, City University of Hong Kong. He joined the Hefei University of Technology in 2011. He has published more than 110 peer reviewed journals with a total citation of ∼3000 and an H-index of 30. His research interest mainly focuses on the controlled fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures for optoelectronic and electronic devices applications including photovoltaic devices, photodetector, and non-volatile memory device.
1. Introduction
ZnO is an important II–VI compound semiconductor material with a wide direct band gap (3.37 eV) and high exciton binding energy (60 meV) at room temperature.1,2 Due to their excellent properties in optics and electrical transport,3 ZnO nanostructures, in particular one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures (1D ZnO, e.g. nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes, etc.), have found wide application in various electronic devices such as field effect transistors (FETs),4,5 chemical or gas sensors,6,7 non-volatile memory devices,8 and piezoelectric nanogenerators.9,10 In addition, in the past decade, substantial efforts have been devoted to the development of various ZnO-based optoelectronic devices such as solar cells,11,12 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),13,14 ultraviolet photodetectors (UVPDs) and lasers.15,16
Graphene is another pivotal material that has a typical two-dimensional geometry with a single layer of carbon arranged in a honeycomb structure. It has drawn global research interest in the past decade due to its excellent properties, such as ultrahigh carrier mobility (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1), excellent optical transparency, chemical and mechanical stability and good mechanical strength and elasticity.17–19 These beneficial characteristics along with the tunable electrical and optical properties and good compatibility of graphene with the modern Si-based technologies20 render graphene a promising building block for assembling various photonic and optoelectronic devices and systems that can afford multiple functions of signal emitting, transmitting, modulating, and detection.21 In spite of these numerous progresses, it is undeniable that graphene-based devices have their own shortcomings.22–24 Because of the short light–matter interaction length, the intrinsic low optical absorption of only 2.3% for single-layer graphene is insufficient for light-harvesting device applications.25 On the other hand, the ultra-short lifetime of excitons in pure graphene causes fast carrier recombination, which is detrimental to the generation of photocurrent or photovoltage.26 The emergence of graphene–semiconductor hybrid heterostructures provides a feasible solution to the above dilemma in that the hybrid structure can profit from the synergistic characteristics of both materials.27,28 Taking graphene–ZnO based photodiodes for example, when graphene is in contact with ZnO, a built-in electric field will be formed at the graphene–ZnO interface due to the difference in work functions between the graphene and ZnO. Once illuminated by UV light with an energy larger than the band gap of ZnO, the ZnO will absorb photons and the resultant photo-generated electron–hole pairs will be efficiently separated by the electric field, forming a photocurrent in the external circuit. In comparison with conventional photodetectors solely composed of ZnO material, the graphene–ZnO hybrid photodiode is characterized by the following three features:29,30 (1) fast response speed. Owing to the built-in electric field, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs can be efficiently separated, leading to a relatively fast response speed; (2) large responsivity and detectivity. Because of the rectifying behavior, the current under dark conditions is much lower than other photoconductive-type photodetectors, which is beneficial for high responsivity and detectivity; (3) low energy consumption. Like conventional metal–semiconductor (M–S) Schottky junction, the graphene–ZnO heterojunction often exhibits typical photovoltaic behavior, which allows the heterojunction to act as a self-driven photodetector without an external power supply. Besides photodiode application, the graphene–ZnO heterostructures have also proved to be ideal building blocks for assembling other optoelectronic devices including phototransistors, solar cells, LEDs, lasers, and waveguides.31,32 In order to gain a straightforward insight into applications of graphene–ZnO hybrid structures, some representative optoelectronic devices are summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the graphene–ZnO heterojunction for various optoelectronic device applications. 
In this paper, we will review recent progress in the fabrication of graphene–ZnO (e.g. ZnO thin films, nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods etc.) hybrid heterostructures using either low-temperature or high-temperature methods. This is followed by discussing the applications of graphene–ZnO hybrid structures in a number of optoelectronic devices, including photodiodes, phototransistors, solar cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers and so on. In the final section, conclusions of the existing techniques are presented and future challenges in optoelectronic applications of graphene–semiconductor hybrid heterostructures are also proposed.
2. Fabrication of graphene–ZnO hybrid heterojunction
The most convenient way to achieve a graphene–ZnO heterojunction is to simply transfer a large-area graphene sheet onto the surface of ZnO via an aqueous transfer process after separate synthesis of both materials.33 The graphene is grown at 1000 °C by using a mixed gas of CH4 and H2via a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method in which Cu foils were used as the catalytic substrates. After growth, the graphene was spin-coated with 5 wt% polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) in chlorobenzene, and then the underlying Cu foils were removed using a marbles's reagent solution. In a typical transfer process, the ZnO was usually first cleaned with alcohol and acetone under ultrasonication. Afterwards, the ZnO was soaked in deionized water, and then slowly lifted to mount the graphene onto ZnO. In fact, such an aqueous transfer method has been widely utilized to obtain other van der Waals graphene–semiconductor (e.g., Ga2O3, Si, GaAs and so on) heterojunctions.34–36 On the other hand, a number of synthetic techniques such as CVD, electro-chemical deposition method, hydrothermal method, metal–organic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), etc., have also been developed to grow ZnO thin film or nanostructures directly on graphene. Generally, these methods can be classified into two groups: low-temperature methods (e.g., hydrothermal process, electrodeposition, etc.) and high-temperature methods (e.g., CVD, MOVPE, and PLD). Liu's group reported the synthesis of ZnO nanorod arrays with high optical qualities on few-layer graphene sheets by using zinc nitrate hexahydrate and hexamethylenetetramine as precursors under hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 1).37 It was observed that the dimensions, density as well as morphology of the ZnO nanostructures can be readily tailored by changing the growth conditions, such as the temperature, reagent concentration and pH values. Further photoluminescence and cathodoluminescience spectra revealed strong near-band-edge emission, which confirms the high optical quality of the as-synthesized nanostructures. In fact, under similar mild conditions, ZnO nanoparticles and nanowire arrays can also be combined with graphene oxide to form ZnO–graphene oxide nano-composites, which found important applications in photodetectors from the visible to near-infrared range,38 and photocatalytic reaction.39,40 Electrochemical deposition that has advantages including simplicity, low cost, and rapid growth at a low temperature, has also become a popular method for the synthesis of ZnO nanostructures on graphene.41,42 For example, dense and vertical ZnO nanotubes (NTs) have been successfully grown on graphene using a seedless electrochemical deposition method in pure zinc nitrate solution.43 The electrochemical growth of ZnO nanotubes on graphene film was performed in a three-electrode cell at 90 °C using a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), graphite sheet and graphene on glass as the reference, counter, and working electrodes, respectively. During the electrochemical growth, the electrolyte solution (0.01 M Zn(NO3)2) was kept stable without stirring and current density (vs. the SCE reference electrode) was kept at −0.5 mA cm−2 for 3 hours (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (a) Transfer of graphene on SiO2/Si substrates, (b) growth of ZnO nanostructures on graphene through a hydrothermal process, and (c) SEM image of the ZnO nanorods on graphene. Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245603. Copyright 2011 Institute of Physics. 
Compared with the above low-temperature methods, the ZnO obtained from high-temperature processing is often characterized by high-quality crystallinity with a relatively low density of defects and good transport properties. For this reason, high-temperature methods are more frequently used to fabricate high-quality graphene–ZnO heterojunctions for optoelectronic device applications.44,45 As an example, CVD proved to be a promising route to synthesize 1D ZnO nanostructure arrays (e.g., nanorods,46 and nanowires47,48) onto graphene layers, which was usually carried out in a tube furnace by oxidizing metallic Zn powder. The growth temperature was kept in the range from 450 to 900 °C. MOVPE represents another popular high-temperature method that has been widely adopted to grow ZnO on a graphene surface.49 Yi's group has successfully grown free-standing ZnO nanostructure arrays on graphene sheets with gaseous diethylzinc as the precursor. In their work, the structures of ZnO (aspect ratio, density, morphology) were observed to strongly depend on the growth temperature. Furthermore, the formation of aligned ZnO nanoneedles in a row and vertically aligned nanowalls was observed and explained in terms of enhanced nucleation on graphene step edges and kinks.
ZnO in many different nanoscale forms can be easily grown without much effort.50,51 It will bring about a native point defect (e.g., surface defects, Zn interstitials, and oxygen vacancy) during the growth process.52,53 Various studies have shown that these defects can lead to not only n-type conductivity of ZnO but also exhibit very strong blue or green emissions, which allow various novel devices to be achieved. Even though the characterization and origin of these defects in ZnO is still a question of debate, it has been widely observed from both experiment and theoretical simulation that O vacancies are deep donors, Zn interstitials are too mobile to be stable at room temperature. In addition, the famous green luminescence has several possible reasons, such as Cu impurities and Zn vacancies. This means precise control of its rich defect chemistry is of paramount importantance for achieving high performance optoelectronic devices, in particular solid-state white lighting devices.54
3. Graphene–ZnO hybrid structure photodetectors
3.1 Graphene–ZnO photodiodes
Thanks to the large surface-to-volume ratio and unique optoelectronic properties, low-dimensional ZnO nanostructures (e.g., NRs, NWs, quantum dots (DQs)) are highly preferable for ultraviolet photodetection application.55–57 Compared with a device solely composed of ZnO nanostructures, graphene–ZnO heterojunction photodetectors including photodiodes and phototransistors can take advantage of the synergistic benefits from both materials,58,59 and therefore they usually exhibit high responsivity, high specific detectivitity, high photoconductive gain, and low energy consumption.60,61 It is worth noting that the sensitivity of the graphene–ZnO UVPD could be optimized when ultrathin AlOx film was introduced between the graphene and ZnO wafer by electron beam evaporation.62 Remarkably, after the interfacial passivation, the dark current decreased a little bit from 2.8 × 10−4 to 2.38 × 104 A; however, the photocurrent was considerably increased from 5.85 × 10−4 to 2.89 × 10−3 A, leading to an increase in the on/off ratio from 2.1 to 12.1. Reasonably, this increase in sensitivity is due to effective suppression of recombination activities at the ZnO surface, as a result of reduced density of surface dangling bonds and defect after interfacial passivation with an AlOx ultrathin layer.
Nie et al. reported the first graphene–ZnO photodiode by simply coating undoped free-standing ZnO nanorod arrays with a layer of graphene film that was derived using a CVD method (Fig. 3a).33 Theoretical simulation results revealed that such a graphene–ZnO photodiode exhibited excellent light absorption, due to the strong light trapping effect, as indicated by Fig. 3b. This special optical characteristics allow the device to monitor pulsed ultraviolet light illumination with a frequency as high as 2250 Hz, and the fall/rise times were measured to be 0.7/3.6 ms, respectively. In addition, the responsivity and photoconductive gain of this UV photodiode were estimated to be 113 A W−1 and 385 at a bias of −1 V, respectively (Fig. 3c–e). By replacing the above undoped ZnO nanorods with an Al-doped ZnO nanorod array, a high-performance self-powered UV light photodetector exhibiting a UV-to-visible rejection ratio of 1 × 102, and a short rise time of 37 μs was developed. In order to eliminate the intrinsic defects such as oxygen vacancy or zinc interstitial, which may cause a response peak in the visible region, Duan et al. utilized a surface treatment in an oxygen-rich environment to passivate the ZnO nanorods. It was observed from the PL spectrum that after surface treatment, the sample indeed exhibited a near-band-edge emission peak at 380 nm, and an optimized spectral selectivity.63 Wu's group developed a seedless solution process for controllable growth of crystalline ZnO micro/nanowires on single-layer graphene sheets.64 The alignment of the ZnO micro/nanowire correlated well with the density of the wires, which was determined by the sample configuration in solution and the graphene surface cleaning. UV photodetectors based on the vertically aligned ZnO on graphene displayed a high responsivity of 1.62 A W−1 per volt. Such a value is a 500% improvement over epitaxial ZnO devices, a 300% improvement over ZnO nanoparticle devices, and a 40% improvement over the previous best results for nanowire/graphene hybrid devices.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the graphene–ZnO NWs array UV photodiode. (b) Simulated electric field energy density distribution of the photodiode at 365 nm illumination. (c) I–V curves of the photodiode in the dark and under 365 nm illumination. (d) Relative balance of the UV photodiode as a function of different frequencies. (e) A single normalized cycle for estimating the rise time and fall time. Reproduced with permission from Nie et al., Small, 2013, 9, 2872. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
Sandwiching a single ZnO NW between two graphene layers can lead to sensitive UV light photodetectors as well.65 The on–off ratio of the as-sandwiched UV device was as high as 8 × 102 at a bias of 3 V, with a rise time of 0.7 s, which is much better than the device solely assembled from ZnO NW. This relatively good device performance is not only ascribed to the existence of the Schottky barrier between the graphene and ZnO NW, but also to the larger light absorption efficiency and effectual interface area than other ZnO-based Schottky barrier UV detectors using metal electrodes.66 Later on, a more sensitive UV photodetector was achieved when a free-standing ZnO NW array was sandwiched by two graphene layers.67 The as-assembled structure allows the NW array to be in direct contact with the graphene layers, minimizing the effect of the substrate or metal electrodes. Optoelectronic analysis revealed that the as-sandwiched graphene–ZnO NW array–graphene heterostructures demonstrated a high sensitivity and excellent photo-elastic response under UV illumination along with a faster response and recovery time.
Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) with promising optical and electrical properties offers the potential for cost-effective and large-scale production, and thereby it is also an ideal building block for assembling hybrid heterojunction UV devices.68 For instance, Liu et al. reported an rGO film/ZnO NW hybrid device through electrophoretic deposition of rGO sheets on the top of ZnO NW arrays.69 It was found that the hybrid devices exhibited a fast and greatly enhanced broadband photovoltaic response that resulted from the formation of interfacial Schottky junctions between ZnO and rGO. In order to optimize the device performance of the UV photodiode, Dhar et al. tried to sensitize a ZnO NRs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction with graphene QDs (GQDs), a new type of zero dimensional material with strong optical absorption, and unique size-dependent optical and electrical properties.70 These devices possessed a fast photodetection speed along with a higher responsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE). Furthermore, the photodetectors could keep the responsivity under low light conditions, with the response spectrum extended to the near infrared (NIR) region.
For the above graphene–ZnO based devices, the interface, in particular the barrier height of the Schottky junction virtually plays a very important role during the photosensing process.71,72 In this sense, modulation via a strain-induced piezotronic effect has become a popular approach to tailor the optoelectronic process, where the generation, separation, and recombination of electron–hole pairs can be efficiently tuned by the piezo-potential.73 For example, Zhang's group developed a strain modulation approach in an effort to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency.74 It was unveiled that under a compressive strain of 0.349%, 17% enhancement in photosensing property was realized. Such an increase in photoresponse, according to the energy band theory and simulation result, is related to higher Schottky barrier height and widened depletion region, which are induced by the piezoelectric field (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of a graphene–ZnO UV photodiode. (b) I–V curves of the graphene–ZnO UV photodiode under different compressive strains. (c) Schematic band diagrams of the graphene–ZnO UV photodiode with compressive strain. (d) Theoretical simulation of the pizeoelectronic potential distribution in the ZnO NWs under different strains. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347–1353. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
Even though the integration of graphene with ZnO is beneficial for UV light photodiode applications, it is undeniable that the carrier transfer between graphene and the semiconductor will decrease the barrier height of the diode, which limits the performance improvement of the graphene–semiconductor UV photodiode. To overcome this issue, Wu et al. introduced an insulating h-BN layer into a graphene–ZnO Schottky junction.75 The resultant graphene/h-BN/ZnO hybrid structure exhibited an enhanced rectifying behavior and very high UV photoresponse, with a responsivity as high as 1350 A W−1. Such an optimization in photoresponse is mainly related to the introduction of an insulating h-BN layer that can act as a tunneling layer for holes produced in the ZnO and a blocking layer for holes in the graphene (Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of device performance of various graphene–ZnO heterojunction based photodetectors. The PD, PT, and CO in brackets denote photodiode, phototransistor, and composite respectively




Device geometries
On/off ratio
Response speed
Responsivity (A W−1)
Detectivity (Jones)
Ref.




Gr–ZnONW (PD)
103
3.6 ms
113
—

33



rGO–ZnONW (PD)
2
0.11 s
0.55 (mV W−1)
—

38



Gr–ZnO film (PD)
104
280 μs
0.5
3.9 × 1013

58



Gr–ZnO film (PD)
102
—
—
—

60



Gr–ZnO wafer (PD)
12.1
<1 s
3.0 × 104
4.33 × 1014

61



Gr–ZnO QDs (PD)
230
14 ms
247
—

62



Gr–ZnO:Al NW (PD)
102
37 μs
5 × 10−4
750

63



Gr–ZnONW–Gr (PD)
800
0.7 s
—
—

65



Gr–ZnONW–Gr (PD)
—
3
23
—

66



GrQDs–ZnONW–polymer (PD)
—
—
36
1.3 × 1012

70



Gr–ZnONW (PD)
—
<1 s
85
—

74



Gr–hBN–ZnO (PD)
3
<5 s
1350
—

75



Gr–ZnONW (PT)
1.30
3.2
3 × 105
—

79



Gr–ZnONW (PT)
1.25
10 s
2.5 × 106
—

80



Gr foam–ZnONW (PT)
2
9.5 s
8



81



rGo–ZnO NW (PT)
5
0.1
—
—

83



Gr–ZnOQDs (CO)
1.1 × 104
2
—
—

86



Gr–ZnOQD (PT)
—
—
1.1 × 108
5.1 × 1013

90



Gr–ZnOQD (PT)
1.7
5
9.9 × 108
7.5 × 1014

91



Gr–ZnOQD (PT)
500
1000
1.7 × 103
—

92





3.2 Graphene–ZnO phototransistors
Graphene–ZnO UV light phototransistors are geometrically characterized by two metal electrodes on the graphene layer, which suggests a completely different operation mechanism from the photodiode.76 Under UV light illumination, the graphene will act as a carrier transport channel, while the ZnO is used as the photo absorbing material.77,78 Although a built-in electric field is also formed at the graphene–ZnO interface, it is nevertheless not used to separate the photo-generated electron–hole pairs, as often in graphene–ZnO UV photodiodes. Dang et al. reported a hybrid channel UV phototransistor composed of graphene–ZnO NW arrays, which was capable of detecting both photocurrent and photovoltage (Fig. 5a).79 Device analysis revealed that the phototransistor had a high sensitivity and selectivity towards the near UV region (Fig. 5a). Additionally, the device could work at a low voltage and show good reproducibility, and high responsivity and photoconductive gain (Fig. 5c). Flexible and sensitive graphene–ZnO NW hybrid UV phototransistors were also successfully assembled on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates.80 From the negative shift of the Dirac point in the transfer characteristics, the responsivity was calculated to be 3 × 108 V W−1, which can be ascribed to the transfer of electrons from ZnO to graphene with a transferred electron concentration of 6 × 1012 electrons per mW cm−2. Remarkably, the flexible graphene–ZnO hybrid phototransistor had excellent device stability, even after 10000 cycles of bending at a strain of 0.5%.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor. (b) Transfer characteristics of the graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor under UV illumination with different intensities. (c) Photoresponse of the graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor at a bias voltage of 1 V. Reproduced with permission from Dang et al., Small, 2015, 25, 3054–3065. Copyright 2015 Wiley. 
Similarly, highly dense ZnO NW arrays could be grown onto graphene structures including three-dimensional graphene foam and rGO to form sensitive UV light phototransistors.81,82 For instance, by using a resistive thermal evaporation technique, Boruah et al. fabricated a ZnO NWs–graphene foam hybrid structure that showed an excellent UV photoresponse, with fast response and recovery times of 9.5 and 38 s, respectively, and an EQE as high as 2490.8%. The photosensitivity of the device could be understood as follows: under UV illumination, electron–hole pairs were produced with an energy higher than or equal to the bandgap of the ZnO and caused desorption of oxygen molecules for trapping of generated free holes by oxygen ions present on the surface. A decrease in the depletion layer led to an increase in free charge carrier concentrations, which increases the conductivity of the device. Yang's group developed a seed/catalyst-free and selective-growth process for in situ growing single-crystalline ZnO NWs on an rGO layer that is abundant with oxygen-containing functional groups.83 The as-assembled device exhibited a self-driven and fast photoresponse to UV light.
Phototransistor involving QDs/nanoparticles and graphene can offer a unique scheme for high-efficiency exciton dissociation through atomistic design and engineering of the heterojunction.84,85 This geometry has exhibited distinctive advantages over conventional devices because of not only strong QDs that yield superior electronic and optoelectronic properties such as higher light absorption, charge mobility, and spectra tenability, but also exciton dissociation and charge transfer at the heterojunction interface with favorable interfacial electronic structures for the generation of carriers. Son et al. successfully fabricated a highly sensitive colloidal graphene–ZnO QD UV phototransistor using a simple wet spin-coating method. The UV device with ZnO QDs uniformly distributed between the voids of the surface circumferences of the graphene layer displayed a high on/off ratio of 1.1 × 104, and a rise time of 2 s.86 By systematically analyzing the optoelectronic characteristics of a device with a similar structure,87 Guo et al. observed that the sensitive photoresponse to UV light is largely due to the charge transfer: in the dark, oxygen molecules adsorb on the surface of the QDs and capture free electrons from the n-type ZnO QDs, resulting in a decrease in the conductance of the ZnO QDs. Under UV illumination, photo-generated holes will migrate to the surface and discharge the adsorbed oxygen ions through surface electron–hole recombination [O2(ad) + h+ → O2(g)], the unpaired electrons thus enhance the conductance.88 It should be pointed out that the mobility of graphene transistors on SiO2 is orders of magnitude lower than that of the free-standing graphene, which adversely influences the performance of the above graphene–ZnO QDs phototransistors.89 In order to improve the carrier mobility of graphene, a feasible method is to insert an organic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) between SiO2 and graphene as a spacer. As an example, Shao et al. demonstrated an ultrasensitive UV phototransistor featuring an organic SAM sandwiched between an inorganic ZnO QD decorated graphene channel and SiO2 (Fig. 6a–c),90 in which the electron transit-time in the channel was considerably decreased and the room-temperature mobility of the CVD derived graphene was increased by one order of magnitude (Fig. 6d). The resulting recirculation of the electron increased the photoresponsivity and photoconductive gain of the transistor to ∼108 A W−1 and ∼3 × 109 (Fig. 6e), respectively, which are comparable to some commercial phototransistors.
 Fig. 6  (a) Device structure of the ultrasensitive graphene–ZnOQD UV phototransistor. (b) Transient response of the UV phototransistor under excitation of 335 nm. (c) Photocurrent of the device under varying light illumination. (d) Schematic illustration of the operation mechanism of the ultrasensitive graphene–ZnOQDs UV phototransistor. (e) Comparison of the photoconductive gain of the present devices and previously reported devices. Reproduced with permission from Shao et al., Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3787–3792. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
To further improve the reproducibility as well as sensitivity of the phototransistors, Gong et al. developed a simple precursor printing technology, via which a clean van der Waals interface was formed between the ZnO QDs and the graphene layer, enabling high-efficiency exciton dissociation and charge transfer across the graphene–ZnO QD interfaces.91 This special UV photodetector benefited from the advantages of strong light–mater interaction, quantum confinement of the QDs, and high charge mobility of the graphene. As a result, the device exhibited ultrahigh photoresponsivity up to 9.9 × 108 A W−1 and a high detectivity of 7.5 × 1014 Jones. By using a similar precursor printing technology, a wafer-size graphene–ZnO nanoparticle UV phototransistor was fabricated.92 The device achieved a responsivity of 1000 A W−1, and a photoconductive gain of 1.8 × 104. These values are much smaller than that of the printable graphene–ZnO QD device mentioned above, but are at least one order of magnitude higher than that of previously reported UV photodetectors.
3.3 Graphene–ZnO composite UV photodetectors
The last building block for UV sensors is graphene–ZnO composite fiber, which can be fabricated by a simple and one-step electrospinning method across electrodes.93 During the fabrication process, the duration of operation of electrospinning was vitally important for the alignment of a single nanofiber between prepatterned electrodes. Unlike the conventional ZnO UV sensors that suffer from issues related to the recombination of charge carriers, the UV photodetector assembled from the graphene–ZnO nanocomposite fiber exhibited superior UV sensing with a 1892 fold increase in conductance for 0.5 wt% of graphene. This excellent photoresponse was due to the transfer of photo-generated electrons and holes from ZnO to graphene under UV illumination.
The UV photodetectors composed of rGO–ZnO nanostructure (NPs, NWs or nanofilms) composites have recently attracted huge research interest.94–96 Taking the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid structure as an example, Shao and colleagues utilized a simple and one-step chemical method to achieve a ZnO NPs–graphene core–shell structure (Fig. 7a). This geometry was capable of detecting UV illumination with a fast transient response and high responsivity (Fig. 7b and c), which is attributable to the improved structural integrity and carrier transport efficiency through graphene encapsulation (Fig. 7d).97 In fact, a similar sensitive photoresponse has also been observed on rGO–ZnO NW heterojunctions that were fabricated through separate synthesis of ZnO NWs and graphene, followed by ultrasonic treatment in solution.98,99 Recently, Wang et al. reported a highly sensitive UV photodetector from rGO decorated hydrangea-like ZnO structures on a flexible PDMS substrate.100 The on/off ratio of the rGO-hydrangea-like ZnO device could be dramatically enhanced upon introduction of an appropriate weight ratio of rGO, and the photocurrent can reach as high as 1 μA and exceed 700 times over that of pure ZnO UV sensors.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector. (b) I–V characterization of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector. (c) Photoresponse of the rGO–ZnO NPs UV photodetector. (d) Energy band diagram of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector under UV light illumination. Reproduced with permission from Shao et al., Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3664–3667. Copyright 2013 RSC. 
4. Graphene–ZnO hybrid structure solar cells
4.1 Dye sensitized solar cells
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), as a next-generation photovoltaic device, have drawn much interest due to their unique properties and potential applications with low manufacturing cost.101,102 A typical DSSC consists of a photoanode, sensitizer (dye), electrolyte and counter electrode (CE),103,104 most of which can be realized by graphene–ZnO hybrid nanostructures.105–107 Siwach et al. reported the application of a graphene–ZnO composite film for DSSC as a photoanode.108 A significant increase in short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) was observed after incorporation of a graphene–ZnO nanocomposite. Understandably, this improvement in device performance is due to the ZnO NPs on the surface of flat graphene, which can make more surface area available for efficient loading of dye molecules on the ZnO NPs.109,110
In comparison with ZnO NPs, 1D ZnO nanostructure arrays grown vertically on the substrates can provide a direct electrical pathway to ensure the rapid collection of carriers generated throughout the device and greatly reduce the carrier recombination.111,112 On this account, vertically aligned ZnO NRs grown on GO–FTO substrates using a low temperature hydrothermal method have been developed as an efficient photoanode for DSSCs, with a PCE of ∼2.5%.113 Such an efficiency is relatively low due to the insufficient surface areas, which limits the absorption of dye and light harvesting efficiency.114–116 In order to overcome this problem, researchers tried to combine ZnO nanostructures with multidimensional and hierarchical structures. For example, Xu and colleagues modified a ZnO hierarchically structured nanoparticle (HSN) onto 2D graphene scaffolds as the “tentacle” and “speedway”, as shown in Fig. 8a.117 The graphene/ZnO composite photoanode with a highly porous nature is expected to have a higher surface area. It was found that incorporating graphene effectively decreased the internal resistance within the photoanode and prolonged the electron lifetime (Fig. 8b), which can reduce the electron recombination loss and lead to a PCE as high as 3.19% (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the operation mechanism of the DSSC with ZnO HSN and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. (b) Nyquist plots of the electrochemical impedance spectra of the ZnO HSN photoanode and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. (c) J–V characteristics of the DSSCs assembled using both a ZnO HSN photoanode and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8619–8627. Copyright 2013 ACS. 
Another important application of the graphene–ZnO hybrid structure in DSSC is CE. It plays a key role in regulating the DSSC performance by catalyzing the reduction of the iodide–triiodide redox species that are used as a mediator to regenerate the sensitizer after electron injection.118 A DSSC with a PCE of 0.52% has been fabricated by using graphene–ZnO NPs as CE. The JSC was observed to increase significantly, while the VOC remained nearly unchanged as compared with devices based on ZnO NPs.119 To reduce the aggregation of graphene, graphene–ZnO NR array hybrid nanostructures have been utilized as CE.120 Compared to other devices, the graphene–ZnO NRs hybrid DSSC without aggregations had a considerable enhancement in catalytic performance towards the reduction of triiodide, which was confirmed by their electrochemical properties such as high current density, low charge transfer resistance, and narrow peak-to-peak separation. Notably, this graphene–ZnO NR hybrid DSSC had a PCE of 8.12%, with Voc, JSC and FF values of 765 mV, 21.7 mA cm−2, and 67%, respectively, which can nearly compete with that of Pt CE based DSSC.
4.2 Polymer solar cells
Over the past few decades, polymer solar cells (PSCs), have drawn extensive attention due to their potential as renewable, lightweight, and low-cost energy sources.121,122 However, it is undeniable that PSCs often suffer from relatively poor air stability, for use of some low work function metal cathodes, such as aluminum and calcium. A possible solution to this issue is to replace these active metals with ZnO nanostructures (e.g., NRs, NPs) or rGO–ZnO nanocomposites.123–125 Chen′s group reported a ZnO@rGO–poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) nanocomposite cathode buffer layer by in situ growth of ZnO NPs on a rGO–PVP substrate.126 The PVP not only facilitates the homogenous distribution of the rGO between the PVP and graphene, but also acts as a stabilizer and bridge to direct the growth of ZnO NPs on graphene. Meanwhile, from the perspective of an energy band diagram, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of ZnO was improved once modified with rGO–PVP. As a result, the use of a ZnO@rGO–PVP cathode buffer layer substantially decreases the recombination activity, improves the electrical conductivity, and increases the electron extraction, eventually giving rise to a PCE as high as 7.5% with improved long-term stability. Later on, the same group further increased the PCE to a record value of 8.1% by choosing an amphiphilic fullerene modified 2D graphene–ZnOgraphene–ZnO NRs hybrid as the cathode buffer layer (Fig. 9a).127Fig. 9b shows the energy band diagram of ZnO NR arrays, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays, ZnO NR arrays@rGO, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO and C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO treated by plasma, all of which confirmed a better energy alignment for charge extraction. The fitted curves using the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model of electron-only devices are shown in Fig. 9c. Obviously, the electron mobility of the ZnO NR arrays is higher than that of ZnO NPs, and can be further improved by combining with rGO and C60–PEG to as high as 9.56 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which could reduce the recombination activity of the carriers.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the C60–PEG modified ZnO NR arrays@rGO cathode buffer layer. (b) The energy level diagram of the ZnO NR arrays, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays, ZnO NR arrays@rGO, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO and C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO treated by plasma of the devices. (c) Mott–Gurney SCLC fitting logJ–logV plots of the electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/cathode buffer layer/Al, the inset shows the schematic illustration of the electron-only device. Reproduced with permission from Hu et al., J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10890–10899. Copyright 2015 RSC. 
Like a cathode buffer layer, the electron transport layer (ETL) in PSCs also plays an important part in determining the PCE. To date, while various organic materials and inorganic materials (e.g., TiOx, and LiF) have been selected as ETL to achieve PSCs with a high PCE, the use of a graphene–ZnO nanocomposite based ETL is also emerging.128 Hu et al. developed an efficient cathode buffer layer by in situ growth of ZnO NPs onto a uniformly distributed graphene matrix in ethyl cellulose solution for high performance PSCs.129 Compared with pure ZnO NPs, the resultant ZnO@graphene:EC possessed higher conductivity, smoother morphology, and lower work function, all of which can facilitate the electron transport and extraction between the active layer and cathode, and reduce the carrier recombination. It was found that the incorporation of a ZnO@graphene:EC nanocomposite as the ETL can lead to a PCE as high as 8.4%.
4.3 Hybrid solar cells
Recently, various bulk heterojunction photovoltaics that integrate a conjugated polymer and inorganic semiconductors have been reported.130 This unique photovoltaic geometry may take advantage of the beneficial effects of both materials such as the high mobility of inorganic semiconductors and solution processing of organic materials.131 To optimize the light absorption and carrier transport, various nanocomposites based on graphene/rGO and ZnO nanostructures (e.g., NPs,132 NWs/NRs,133 and even nanotubes134) have been synthesized to assemble a number of hybrid solar cells with different geometries. Yin et al. reported the electrochemical deposition of ZnO NRs on rGO film and utilized the as-synthesized structure to assemble inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells with a layered structure of quartz/rGO/ZnO NRs/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au.135 Under AM 1.5G illumination, the PCE of the device can reach 0.31%, which is higher than that reported previously. Apart from this study, some hybrid solar cells based on rGO/ZnO/ZnS/poly(3-hexylthiophene) core–shell NR arrays,136 graphene@ZnONPs:PCPDTBT:PCBM,137 and graphene-enriched poly(3-hexylthiophene)(G-P3HT) and tetra(4-carboxyphenyle) porphyrin-grafted ZnO NWs arrays have also been developed.138 These devices exhibited PCEs in the range from 0.4 to 3.65%.
Most hybrid solar cells are assembled on conducting electrodes such as ITO and FTO that have poor contact with the ZnO nanostructure, leading to the accumulation of electrons in the semiconductor layer. Therefore, these devices are often characterized by a relatively low PCE. Graphene with a high electron mobility and outstanding mechanical property becomes a promising candidate as an electrode to replace ITO or FTO in optoelectronic devices. Park et al. successfully grew highly uniform ZnO NWs on a graphene sheet by modifying the graphene surface with conductive polymer interlayers (Fig. 10a–c). Using the as-fabricated structure as an ETL, the PCEs can reach 4.2% and 0.5%, respectively, for devices using PbS QDs and P3HT as the photoactive materials (Fig. 10d and e),139 which are close to ITO-based devices with similar architectures.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of a graphene–ZnO NW based hybrid solar cell. (b) Energy level diagram of the solar cells. (c) Raman peak of the full graphene/PEDOT:PEG(PC)/ZnO hybrid structure solar cell. (d) J–V characteristics of the champion graphene/ZnO based PbS QDs hybrid solar cells. (e) J–V characteristics of the champion graphene/ZnO based P3HT hybrid solar cells. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 233–239. Copyright 2013 ACS. 
4.4 Others
Perovskite solar cells composed of a conducting glass substrate (ITO or FTO), an electron-transporting layer (ETL), an active perovskite layer, a hole-transport layer (HTL) and an electrode, have developed rapidly in the past couples of years,140,141 owing to the high carrier mobility, direct optical bandgap, broad absorption rang, and low-cost processing of perovskite materials.142,143 In perovskite solar cells, ZnO/graphene composites have been frequently used as an ETL which is able to transfer electrons from the perovskite layer to the conducting glass substrate. Various studies have shown that the utilization of a ZnO/graphene composite is beneficial for both the PCE and stability in that it can reduce charge recombination, improve charge collection efficiency,144,145 and prevent decomposition of the perovskite film.146 Tavakoli and colleagues reported a high performance perovskite solar cell with rGO/ZnO as the ETL. Thanks to the presence of a low amount of hydroxide groups, the perovskite materials exhibited excellent stability on top of the ZnO/rGO layer after annealing at 100 °C. In addition, the rGO/ZnO in the perovskite solar cell could extract the charge carriers quickly from the perovskite layer to reduce the carrier recombination, and thereby increase the EQE and JSC due to a quenching effect. Such a beneficial merit leads to a respectable PCE of 15.2% under AM 1.5G illumination.147 Recently, graphene/ZnO hybrid structures have also been applied in CdTe and Cu2ZnSn (SxSe1−x)4 (CZTSSe) based solar cells.148 The PCE of the hybrid structure based solar cells is close to that of ITO-based devices with similar architectures, suggesting that the graphene–ZnO heterostructure is a potential alternative for ITO in solar cells.149
5. Graphene–ZnO hybrid structure LEDs
By virtue of the unavailability of high-quality and stable p-type ZnO materials,150,151 the development of ZnO-based homojunction light emitting devices has been a great challenge.152,153 An alternative way to achieve ZnO-based UV electroluminescence (EL) is to fabricate heterojunction LEDs by utilizing other available p-type materials (e.g., p-GaN, p-Si, p-NiO, and p-type organic materials). Chung et al. reported a hetero-epitaxial method to grow high-quality GaN on ZnO thin film-coated graphene layers and transferred it onto arbitrary substrates (Fig. 11a).154 To fabricate LED, n-GaN, InxGa1−xN/GaN multiple-quantum-well (MQW) were deposited on the GaN film grown on graphene layers, as shown in Fig. 11b. A potential advantage is that lattice mismatch may not be considered seriously because the graphene layers have weak bonding to each other. Power-dependent EL spectra of the LED and optical images of the emissions at room temperature showed an increase of emission intensity with the applied current levels of 5.1, 6.4, and 8.1 mA (Fig. 11c and d). This group later on successfully developed high-quality and flexible GaN/ZnO coaxial NRs heterostructures LEDs by directly growing a high-quality GaN p–n homojunction on a graphene–ZnO NR array.155 The LEDs with strong blue emission were readily transferred onto flexible plastic substrates, which operate reliably in a flexible form without obvious degradation in performance. Moreover, some similar LED devices based on graphene/ZnO NR/p-GaN,156,157 graphene/ZnO NRs/GaN/InGaN,158 and rGO/ZnO:Ga NR/GaN were reported as well. These devices exhibited an improved EL performance when compared with other conventional structures using ITO as the current spreading layer.159 In addition to epitaxial substrate or current spreading current, graphene–ZnO NRs array hybrid structures have also been incorporated into GaN as a transparent conductive layer for low work voltage and high light extraction.160
 Fig. 11  (a) The fabrication processes for epitaxial GaN thin films. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and transfer processes for thin-film LEDs. (c) EL spectra of the LED transferred onto a plastic substrate, the inset shows the light emission at different applied current levels of 1.7–8.0 mA. (d) Current density and integrated EL intensity as a function of the applied bias voltage of a representative LED on a plastic substrate. Reproduced with permission from Chung et al., Science, 2010, 330, 655–657. Copyright 2010 AAAS. 
In spite of the wide use of hybrid structures combining ZnO nanomaterials and graphene sheets in various LEDs, the absence of bandgap in graphene has greatly restricted the emissive properties. A reliable solution to this issue is to use emissive ZnO QDs or GQDs, which can emit light with an adjustable wavelength. Son et al. reported the synthesis of emissive hybrid QDs composed of a ZnO QD core wrapped in a shell of monolayer graphene for white LED with a brightness of 798 cd m−2.161 New blue emissions were found from the graphene–ZnO QDs, which can be correlated with an electronic transition from LUMO and LUMO+2 to the ZnO valence band. White LED can also be achieved by synthesizing CdTe/ZnO/rGO quasi–core–shell–shell hybrid colloidal QDs (Fig. 12a), with a unique PL peak at 624 nm related to the CdTe core and additional peaks at 382, 404, 422, 440 nm attributable to the ZnO/rGO composite (Fig. 12b).162 As shown in Fig. 12c, multiple emission peaks are observed in the EL spectrum, which can be correlated to the recombination of carriers from LUMO and LUMO+2 of GO and holes in the valence band (VB) of ZnO and recombination process inside the CdTe core. Overall, the QD LED showed clear white color emission with a maximum luminance value of about 480 cd m−2 with CIE coordinates (0.35, 0.28). Additionally, a hybrid structure consisting of ZnO and graphene QD has been widely used in some flexible polymer LEDs that exhibited improved device stability,163 or higher current densities.164
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical synthesis process of CdTe/ZnO/rGO quasi–core–shell–shell QDs. (b) Normalized PL spectra obtained from CdTe–TGA, CdTe/ZnO and CdTe/ZnO/rGO. (c) EL spectra of white LED. Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19737–19743. Copyright 2016 RSC. 
6. Graphene–ZnO hybrid structure lasers
A laser is an optoelectronic device that converts energy into light with a mechanism for emitting electromagnetic radiation via stimulated emission.165 Hitherto, UV lasing of ZnO has been observed in various micro/nanostructures through random166 Fabry–Perot (F–P)167 and whispering-gallery mode (WGM)168 resonant approaches. Nevertheless, due to huge cavity losses and the diffraction limit,169 it is challenging to realize a high lasing output or miniaturized dimension lasers with high efficiency. Surface plasmon (SP)-mediated PL enhancement has already been observed at metal or metal alloy/ZnO interfaces,170 yet with difficulties of flexible design and development of novel functional photonic materials and devices, owing to a lack of flexibility in rigid devices and the large Ohmic losses.171,172 Various recent studies have shown that graphene has a very high quantum efficiency for light–matter interaction and strong plasmons, rendering graphene/ZnO as an ideal candidate for UV lasing.173 Li et al. reported on the induction of optical field confinement by graphene SP in a graphene-coated ZnO microrod, which acted as a whispering-gallery microcavity for lasing resonance.174 The district optical confinement and PL enhancement were experimentally observed, consistent with the theoretical simulations. As a functional application, improved WGM lasing performance with stronger lasing intensity, lower threshold, and a high-quality (Q) factor was realized. Through the coupling between graphene SP modes and optical microcavity modes of ZnO microbelt, enhanced F–P lasing performance was realized as well, including alowered lasing threshold, improved lasing quality and remarkably enhanced lasing intensity.175
High performance single-mode lasing has attracted intensive interest due to its high Q factor, lasing threshold and narrow spectral line width based on the total internal-wall reflection of the microcavity.176 Xu's group realized single-mode lasing resonance in a sub-micro ZnO rod based on serially varying the dimension of the WGM cavities (Fig. 13a and b).177 The lasing quality factor and lasing intensity were substantially increased by covering single layer graphene on the ZnO submicron-rod. Graphene-induced optical field confinement and lasing emission enhancement were revealed, indicative of an energy coupling between graphene SP and ZnO exciton emission (Fig. 13c–e). Raman scatting processes can convert pump lasers into new frequencies. The development of a Raman laser may allow tunable nanolasers and boost the development of innovative nanophotonics technology. Ruan's group reported the growth of a ZnO–graphene superlattice via a spatially confined reaction method for room-temperature thresholdless tunable Raman lasing. This Raman nanolaser is tunable from the visible to NIR range. A new mechanism called “selective surface plasmon amplification by stimulated Raman scattering” was believed to be responsible for the generation of the Raman nanolaser.178
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of one submicron-sized ZnO rod with a diameter of 596 nm and a smooth side surface. (b) The PL spectra of a bare submicron-sized ZnO rod and (f) the same ZnO covered with graphene under different excitation power densities. Dark field optical images of an individual ZnO microrod (c) before and (d) after being covered with graphene under the same excitation conditions. (e) Comparison of the PL spectra from the same ZnO microrod before (black line) and after (red line) graphene covering. Reproduced with permission from Li et al., ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6794–6800. Copyright 2015 ACS. 
7. Conclusion and outlook
Graphene–ZnO hybrid heterostructures have proved to be promising building blocks for assembling high-performance optoelectronic devices that can overcome intrinsic limitations of graphene. In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of recent achievements in the development of graphene–ZnO hybrid heterostructures for various optoelectronic device applications, such as photodetectors, solar cells, LEDs and lasers. We start by introducing the synthetic methodology of either bottom-up or top-down methods, followed by device performance analysis of different optoelectronic devices. Particular attention has been given to some critical issues that pertain to the device design, device performance and physics, and the processing techniques for performance optimization.
Even though graphene–ZnO hybrid heterojunction based optoelectronic devices have been around for less than 10 years, there are some great breakthroughs that deserve special attention. To name a few, the responsivity of the first graphene–ZnO hybrid UV light photodetector was only 0.5 A W−1 in 2012, and was recently improved to 9.9 × 108 A W−1. What is more, the detectivity was improved from 3.9 × 1013 to 7.5 × 1014 Jones, which can nearly compete with commercial Si-based photodetectors. Similar progresses have also been made in graphene–ZnO based solar cells. The first solar cell that used graphene–ZnO NPs as the CE had a PCE of only 0.52% in 2013. By reducing the aggregation of graphene with a graphene–ZnO NR array hybrid nanostructure, the PCE was substantially improved to 8.12%, which can nearly compete with that of Pt CE based DSSC.
In spite of the above achievements, there are still some unresolved issues. For photodetectors, there is much space to improve the responsivity, sensitivity and response speed. For example, it is feasible to optimize the properties of some sensing materials, e.g., more precise control of their morphology, hierarchical, crystallinity, orientation assembly, as well as physical and chemical properties such as carrier transport characteristics. Also, novel device designs including plasmonic techniques and integration with microcavities are useful avenues to enhance light–matter interaction for optical absorption enhancement. In addition, the uniformity of the sensing materials should be taken into consideration and the integration of photodetectors should be further explored to facilitate commercial applications. For solar cells, the PCE is still much lower in comparison to that of commercial Si-based solar cells. Therefore, to further improve the efficiency, particular attention should be given to optimizing the properties of the materials and rational device design. For instance, the sheet conductivity and work function of graphene can be optimized to facilitate more efficient transport and collection of photocarriers. Some passivation and modification schemes are also useful to optimize the band alignment and reduce charge carrier recombination. In addition, introducing new optoelectronic materials and structures may offer opportunities to further improve the device performance. Furthermore, due to excellent mechanical strength and elasticity of graphene, ZnO–graphene could be transferred to foreign substrates to extend their application in flexible and wearable optoelectronics. To realize practical applications, besides the performance improvement, long-term stability and durability, environment-friendly and cost-effective processing, as well as large-scale production and integration are some of the most important issues that need to be tackled in future research. In light of the simple device architecture, low-cost manufacturing process and the relatively high device performance, the ZnO/graphene hybrid heterostructures will provide a prospective platform for the development of high-performance optoelectronic devices in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, No. 61575059, 61675062, 21501038), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (JZ2015HGXJ0184, JZ2016HGBZ1046), the Anhui Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 1708085ME122), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (103471013).
References
S. Baskoutas and G. Bester, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15862 CAS .
E. Comini, G. Faglia, G. Sberveglieri, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1869 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 26 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha and R. Martins, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(22), 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Wang, J. Zhou, J. H. Song, N. S. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Q. Xu, Q. Xiang, Q. Y. Pan and P. C. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3430 CAS .
Q. Wan, Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, J. P. Li and C. L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3654 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Chang, Y. C. Lai, T. B. Wu, S. F. Wang, F. Chen and M. J. Tsai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 022110 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1625 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Bao, M. A. Zimmler, F. Capasso, X. W. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Tang, G. M. Li and S. M. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5046–5050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Wei and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Munshi, D. L. Dheeraj, V. T. Fauske, D. C. Kim, A. T. J. van Helvoort, B. O. Fimland and H. Weman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, Y. B. Pyun, J. Yi, J. W. Choung and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19134 CAS .
K. Ul Hasan, M. O. Sandberg, O. Nur and M. Willander, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 326 CrossRef .
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
W. Bao, L. Jing, J. Velasco, Y. Lee, G. Liu, D. Tran, B. Standley, M. Aykol, S. B. Cronin, D. Smirnov, M. Koshino, E. McCann, M. Bockrath and C. N. Lau, Nat. Phys., 2011, 7, 948 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Lu, H. Y. Lin, T. T. Chen and Y. F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 091106 CrossRef .
J. M. Lee, J. Yi, W. W. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, T. Jung, Y. Kim and W. I. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061107 CrossRef .
S. Kim, D. B. Janes, S. Y. Choi and S. Ju, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 063122 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, A. V. Babichev, G. Jacopin, P. Lavenus, F. H. Julien, A. Yu. Egorov, J. Zhang, T. Pauporté and M. Tchernycheva, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 234505 CrossRef .
W. Yang and X. Hu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 127403 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Chen, C. Meng, Z. Y. Yang, W. Li, S. S. Lin, T. Y. Gu, X. Guo, D. L. Wang, S. L. Yu, C. W. Wong and L. M. Tong, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 24276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nie, J. G. Hu, L. B. Luo, C. Xie, L. H. Zeng, P. Lv, F. Z. Li, J. S. Jie, M. Feng, C. Y. Wu, Y. Q. Yu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2013, 9, 2872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Kong, G. A. Wu, K. Y. Wang, T. F. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, D. D. Wang and L. B. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Wang, F. X. Liang, B. Nie, L. H. Zeng, L. X. Zheng, P. Lv, Y. Q. Yu, C. Xie, Y. Y. Li and L. B. Luo, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 630 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Luo, C. Xie, X. H. Wang, Y. Q. Yu, C. Y. Wu, H. Hu, K. Y. Zhou, X. W. Zhang and J. S. Jie, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, Hadiyawarman, A. Yoon, M. Kim, G. C. Yi and C. L. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245603 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Q. Sun, J. Xing, Z. Y. Zheng, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Lu and K. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6645 CAS .
J. L. Wu, X. P. Shen, L. Jiang, K. Wang and K. M. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2826 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saravanakumar, R. Mohan and S. J. Kim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 878 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. A. Aziz, M. R. Mahmood, K. Yasui and A. M. Hashim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 95 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. A. Aziz, T. Nishiyama, N. I. Rusli, M. R. Mahmood, K. Yasui and A. M. Hashim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 337 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Xu, B. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, M. J. Kim, S. W. Hwang, B. L. Choi, E. K. Lee, J. M. Kim and D. M. Whang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 72, 25 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali, K. Ali, Y. J. Yang, J. Jo and K. H. Choi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 05HA01 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, Y. Zhao and Y. J. Jiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 301, 391 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, M. Penchev, G. P. Wang, R. K. Paul, J. B. Zhong, X. Y. Jing, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Small, 2010, 6, 2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Cheng, Y. C. Yeh, M. L. Lu, C. W. Chen and Y. F. Chen, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 799 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Luo, X. B. Yang, F. X. Liang, J. S. Jie, Q. Li, Z. F. Zhu, C. Y. Wu, Y. Q. Yu and L. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1942 RSC .
Y. J. Kim, J. H. Lee and G. C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 213101 CrossRef .
A. F. Kohan, G. Ceder, D. Morgan and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 15019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 165202 CrossRef .
H. B. Zeng, G. T. Duan, Y. Li, S. K. Yang, X. X. Xu and W. P. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende and J. L. Macmanus-Driscoll, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 40 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. McCluskey and S. J. Jokela, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 071101 CrossRef .
C. Soci, A. B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Xu, C. X. Xu and J. G. Hu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 103105 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Q. L. Liao, Y. H. Yu, X. D. Yu and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 237 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Cheng, J. Y. Zhan, Y. M. Liao, T. Y. Lin, Y. P. Hsieh and Y. F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 053501 CrossRef .
H. Y. Yang, D. I. Son, T. W. Kim, J. M. Lee and W. Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, N. An, S. Jeong, S. H. Kang, S. Kwon, J. Lee, Y. Lee, D. Y. Kim and S. Lee, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 552 CrossRef .
D. L. Shao, X. Sun, M. Xie, H. T. Sun, F. Y. Lu, S. M. George, J. Lian and S. Sawyer, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 165 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Zhang, G. A. Wu, J. Z. Wang, Y. Q. Yu, D. Y. Zhang, D. D. Wang, J. B. Jiang, J. M. Wang and L. B. Luo, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 1073 CAS .
L. Duan, F. N. He, Y. Tian, B. Sun, J. B. Fan, X. C. Yu, L. Ni, Y. Zhang, Y. N. Chen and W. X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8161 CAS .
J. W. Liu, R. T. Lu, G. W. Xu, J. Wu, P. Thapa and D. Moore, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4941 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Fu, Z. M. Liao, Y. B. Zhou, H. C. Wu, Y. Q. Bie, J. Xu and D. P. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223114 CrossRef .
B. D. Boruah, A. Mukherjee and A. Misra, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 095205 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Boruah, D. B. Ferry, A. Mukherjee and A. Misra, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 235703 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Bazargan, F. Sharif, S. Mazinani and N. Naderi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 11108 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Q. Sun, J. Xing, Z. Y. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Z. Q. Lv and K. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6645 CAS .
S. Dhar, T. Majumder and S. P. Mondal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31822 CAS .
R. Liu, X. C. You, X. W. Fu, F. Lin, J. Meng, D. P. Yu and Z. M. Liao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, D. Y. Kim, E. B. Song and S. M. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 041301 Search PubMed .
P. Sahatiya, S. S. Jones, T. Gomathi and S. Badhulika, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025053 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Q. L. Liao, S. N. Lu, Z. Zhang, G. J. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, X. Li, H. Zhong, S. Zhang, P. Wang, T. H. Kim, S. S. Kwak, C. Liu, H. S. Chen, S. W. Kim and S. S. Lin, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 18864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, Q. J. Cheng, J. X. Zhong, W. W. Cai, Z. F. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu and F. Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 055501 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. Carcia de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, Y. Noh, K. Polat, A. K. Okyay and D. Lee, Solid State Commun., 2015, 224, 37 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Dang, T. Q. Trung, D. I. Kim, L. T. Duy, B. U. Hwang, D. W. Lee, B. Y. Kim, L. D. Toan and N. E. Lee, Small, 2015, 25, 2053 Search PubMed .
V. Q. Dang, T. Q. Trung, L. T. Duy, B. Y. Kim, S. Siddiqui, W. Lee and N. E. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11032 CAS .
B. D. Boruah, A. Mukherjee, S. Srishar and A. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10606 CAS .
R. K. Biroju, N. Tilak, G. Rajender, S. Dhara and P. K. Giri, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 145601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, J. L. Li, D. C. Yu and L. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 4831 CAS .
B. D. Boruah and A. Misra, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90838 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhan, L. X. Zheng, Y. Z. Pan, G. Z. Sun and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2589 RSC .
D. I. Son, H. Y. Yang, T. W. Kim and W. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 021105 CrossRef .
D. I. Son, H. Y. Yang, T. W. Kim and W. Park, Composites, Part B, 2015, 69, 154 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Guo, S. G. Xu, Z. F. Wu, N. Wang, M. M. T. Loy and S. W. Du, Small, 2013, 9, 3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Adam, M. S. Fuhrer, E. D. Williams and M. Ishigami, Nat. Phys., 2007, 4, 377 CrossRef .
D. L. Shao, J. Gao, P. Chow, H. T. Sun, G. Q. Xin, P. Sharma, J. Lian, N. A. Koratkar and S. Sawyer, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Gong, Q. F. Liu, B. Cook, B. Kattel, T. Wang, W. L. Chan, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel and J. Z. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Liu, M. G. Gong, B. Cook, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6427 RSC .
P. Sahatiya and S. Badhulika, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 82481 RSC .
A. N. Fouda, A. B. El Basaty and E. A. Eid, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Darbari, V. Ahmadi, P. Afzali, Y. Abdi and M. Feda, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2798 CrossRef .
H. X. Chang, Z. H. Sun, K. Y. Ho, X. M. Tao, F. Yan, W. M. Kwok and Z. J. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 258 RSC .
D. L. Shao, M. P. Yu, H. T. Sun, T. Hu, J. Lian and S. Sawyer, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3664–3667 RSC .
X. B. Liu, H. J. Du and X. W. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5136 RSC .
X. L. Ye, H. Liu, N. T. Hu, J. Wang, M. Li and Y. F. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 150, 126 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, Y. J. Wang, S. Muhammad, Y. Huang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2678 RSC .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and K. Hara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17011 CAS .
L. H. Hu, S. Y. Dai, J. Weng, S. F. Xiao, Y. F. Sui, Y. Huang, S. H. Chen, F. T. Kong, X. Pan and L. Y. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Bi, F. L. Meng, Y. Z. Zheng, X. Han, X. Tao and J. F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Li, G. Eda, Y. Zhang, W. Lei, M. Chhowalla, W. I. Milne and W. Q. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6084 RSC .
G. Zamiri and S. Bagheri, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 511, 318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Huang, P. H. Chen, Y. J. Wu, H. P. Chiang, J. S. Hwang, P. T. Lin, K. Y. Lai, F. S. Chien and T. Y. Lin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 045201 CrossRef .
B. Siwach, D. Mohan and D. Jyoti, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 11500 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kathalingam, J. K. Rhee and S. H. Han, Int. J. Energy Res., 2014, 38, 674 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Ghoreishi, V. Ahmadi and M. Samadpour, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 195 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Qiu, X. M. Li, F. W. Zhuge, X. Y. Gan, X. D. Gao, W. Z. He, S. J. Park, H. K. Kim and Y. H. Hwang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 195602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Baxter, A. M. Walker, K. V. Ommering and E. S. Aydil, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, S304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ameen, M. S. Akhter, M. Song and H. S. Shin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4405 CAS .
W. C. Chang, T. C. Tseng, W. C. Yu, Y. Y. Lan and M. D. Ger, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 9160 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Song and X. Wang, Physica E, 2016, 81, 14 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abdullah, N. A. Atiqah, A. Omar, I. Asshaari, S. Mahalingam, Z. Razali, S. Shaari, J. S. Mandeep and H. Misran, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 2263 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, J. Chen, X. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. X. Wang, J. Sun, H. C. Bi, W. Lei, Y. Ni and L. T. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8619 CAS .
B. G. Zhai, L. Yang and Y. M. Huang, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2015, 19, s15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Khurana, S. Sahoo, S. K. Barik and R. S. Katiyar, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 578, 257 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Chang, Z. J. Ma, J. Z. Wang, Y. Yan, W. Z. Shi, Q. Chen, Y. W. Huang, Q. J. Yu and L. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 459 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Small, S. Chen, J. Subbiah, C. M. Amb, S. W. Tsang, T. H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 317, 115 Search PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Janke and A. P. Alivistatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, W. Huang, P. Fan, Y. F. Zheng, J. Huang and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4898 CAS .
B. J. Moon, K. S. Lee, J. Shim, S. Park, S. H. Kim, S. Bae, M. Park, C. L. Lee, W. K. Choi, Y. Yi, J. Y. Hwang and D. I. Son, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 221 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, l. Chen, K. Yuan and Y. W. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 17178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, L. Chen, Z. Q. Deng and Y. W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10890 CAS .
S. R. Gollu, R. Sharma, G. Srinivas, S. Kundu and D. Gupta, Org. Electron., 2016, 29, 79 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Hu, Q. X. Wang, L. Chen, X. T. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. F. Wu and Y. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16078 CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. N. Yang and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Abbasi, A. Habib and M. Tanveer, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dutta, S. Sarker, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127 CAS .
K. K. Yang, C. K. Xu, L. W. Huang, L. F. Zou and H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 405401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Z. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. C. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sookhakian, Y. M. Amin, R. Zakaria, S. Baradaran, M. R. Mahmoudian, M. Rezayi, M. T. Tajabadi and W. J. Basirun, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 14301 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sharma, F. Alam, A. K. Sharma, V. Dutta and S. K. Dhawan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8142 RSC .
S. AbdulaAlmohsin and J. B. Cui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9433 Search PubMed .
H. Park, S. Chang, J. Jean, J. J. Cheng, P. T. Araujo, M. S. Wang, M. G. Bawendi, M. S. Dresselhaus, V. Bulović, J. Kong and S. Gradečak, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, M. Grätzel, T. Miyasaka, K. Zhu and K. Emery, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Qiu, Y. C. Qiu, K. Y. Yan, M. Zhong, C. Mu, H. Yan and S. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3245 RSC .
M. I. Ahmed, Z. Hussain, M. Mujahid, A. N. Khan, S. S. Javaid and A. Habib, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 065303 CrossRef .
P. S. Chandrasekhar and V. K. Komarala, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 28610 RSC .
W. L. Jiang, W. Zhou, J. F. Ying, T. Y. Yang and Y. M. Gao, J. Inorg. Mater., 2017, 32, 96 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, R. Tavakoli, Z. Nourbakhsh, A. Waleed, U. S. Virk and Z. Y. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500790 CrossRef .
K. J. Jiao, X. F. Wu, C. Y. Duan, D. W. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. F. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4757 RSC .
H. Bi, F. Q. Huang, J. Liang, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Yuan, W. J. Zhang, J. S. Jie, X. Fan, J. A. Zapian, Y. H. Leung, L. B. Luo, P. F. Wang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Lu, Z. Z. Ye, F. Zhuge, Y. J. Zeng, B. H. Zhao and L. P. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, L. Gan, L. Dai, H. Meng, F. Wei, Y. Dai, Z. J. Shi, B. Yu, X. F. Guo and G. G. Qin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11760 RSC .
X. B. Tang, G. M. Li and S. M. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chung, C. H. Lee and G. C. Yi, Science, 2010, 330, 655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, Y. J. Hong, S. R. Jeon, S. Bae, B. H. Hong and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Zhang, X. W. Zhang, F. T. Si, J. J. Dong, J. X. Wang, X. Liu, Z. G. Yin and H. L. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 121104 CrossRef .
J. J. Dong, H. Y. Hao, J. Xing, Z. J. Fan and Z. L. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 630 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Lee, J. Yi, W. W. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, T. Jung, Y. Kim and W. I. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061107 CrossRef .
W. Z. Liu, W. Wang, H. Y. Xu, X. H. Li, J. G. Ma and Y. C. Liu, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 095202 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Y. Y. Xie, H. L. Ma, Y. X. Du, F. G. Zeng, P. Ding, Z. Y. Gao, C. Xu and J. Sun, Solid-State Electron., 2016, 126, 5 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W. S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C. L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 71, 465 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Kim, J. S. Park, I. K. Han, S. O. Won, C. Park, D. K. Hwang and W. K. Choi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19737 RSC .
K. S. Lee, J. Shim, M. Park, H. Y. Kim and D. I. Son, Composites, Part B, 2017, 130, 70 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zubair, M. Mustafa, A. Ali, Y. H. Doh and K. H. Choi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 3344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kid, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cao, Y. G. Zhao, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig, Q. H. Wang and R. P. H. Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2278 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choy, E. S. Jang, J. H. Won, J. H. Chung, D. J. Jang and Y. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1911 CrossRef CAS .
C. Czekalla, C. Sturm, R. Schmidt-Grund, B. Cao, M. Lorenz and M. Grundmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 241102 CrossRef .
P. J. Pauzauskie and P. D. Yang, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 36 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lei, J. Li and H. C. Ong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 021112 CrossRef .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 795 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hill, Y. S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, T. D. Vries and P. J. V. Veldhoven, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 589 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Cheng, Y. C. Yeh, M. L. Lu, C. W. Chen and Y. F. Chen, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 799 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Li, C. X. Xu, H. Y. Nan, M. M. Jiang, G. Y. Gao, Y. Lin, J. Dai, G. Y. Zhu, Z. H. Ni, S. F. Wang and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10469 CAS .
J. T. Li, M. M. Jiang, C. X. Xu, Y. Y. Wang, Y. Lin, J. F. Lu and Z. L. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai, C. X. Xu, K. Zheng, C. G. Lv and Y. P. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 241110 CrossRef .
J. T. Li, Y. Lin, J. F. Lu, C. X. Xu, Y. Y. Wang, Z. L. Shi and J. Dai, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. Zhu, X. T. Xu, X. Q. Tian, J. N. Tang, H. W. Liang, L. L. Chen, Y. Xie, X. D. Zhang, C. Xiao, R. Li, Q. Gu, P. Hua and S. C. Ruan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604351 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Feng-Xia Liang
	Feng-Xia Liang, received her BS degree from Liaocheng University, MS degree from University of Science and Technology of China, and PhD degree from City University of Hong Kong, in 2003, 2006 and 2012, respectively. She is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hefei University of Technology. Her research interest includes the synthesis of low-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures for chemical, biological and optoelectronic devices applications.

Zhong-Jun Li
	Zhong-jun Li, earned his BS degree from the Department of Physics at Anhui Normal University in 2000. He achieved his PhD degree from Department of Modern Physics, at University of Science and Technology of China in 2008, majoring Atomic & Molecular Physics. After graduation, he then joined the School of Electronic Science & Applied Physics of Hefei University of Technology, and is currently an associate professor. His research interests include the simulation and manipulation of electronic structures of low-dimension semiconductor materials and their applications in devices.

Lin-Bao Luo
	Lin-Bao Luo is a full professor of applied physics at Hefei University of Technology. He received his MSc in inorganic chemistry at Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, and PhD degree in 2009 from Department of Physics and Materials Sciences, City University of Hong Kong. He joined the Hefei University of Technology in 2011. He has published more than 110 peer reviewed journals with a total citation of ∼3000 and an H-index of 30. His research interest mainly focuses on the controlled fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures for optoelectronic and electronic devices applications including photovoltaic devices, photodetector, and non-volatile memory device.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the graphene–ZnO heterojunction for various optoelectronic device applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (a) Transfer of graphene on SiO2/Si substrates, (b) growth of ZnO nanostructures on graphene through a hydrothermal process, and (c) SEM image of the ZnO nanorods on graphene. Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245603. Copyright 2011 Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the graphene–ZnO NWs array UV photodiode. (b) Simulated electric field energy density distribution of the photodiode at 365 nm illumination. (c) I–V curves of the photodiode in the dark and under 365 nm illumination. (d) Relative balance of the UV photodiode as a function of different frequencies. (e) A single normalized cycle for estimating the rise time and fall time. Reproduced with permission from Nie et al., Small, 2013, 9, 2872. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of a graphene–ZnO UV photodiode. (b) I–V curves of the graphene–ZnO UV photodiode under different compressive strains. (c) Schematic band diagrams of the graphene–ZnO UV photodiode with compressive strain. (d) Theoretical simulation of the pizeoelectronic potential distribution in the ZnO NWs under different strains. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347–1353. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

Gr–ZnONW (PD)	103	3.6 ms	113	—	
33

rGO–ZnONW (PD)	2	0.11 s	0.55 (mV W−1)	—	
38

Gr–ZnO film (PD)	104	280 μs	0.5	3.9 × 1013	
58

Gr–ZnO film (PD)	102	—	—	—	
60

Gr–ZnO wafer (PD)	12.1	<1 s	3.0 × 104	4.33 × 1014	
61

Gr–ZnO QDs (PD)	230	14 ms	247	—	
62

Gr–ZnO:Al NW (PD)	102	37 μs	5 × 10−4	750	
63

Gr–ZnONW–Gr (PD)	800	0.7 s	—	—	
65

Gr–ZnONW–Gr (PD)	—	3	23	—	
66

GrQDs–ZnONW–polymer (PD)	—	—	36	1.3 × 1012	
70

Gr–ZnONW (PD)	—	<1 s	85	—	
74

Gr–hBN–ZnO (PD)	3	<5 s	1350	—	
75

Gr–ZnONW (PT)	1.30	3.2	3 × 105	—	
79

Gr–ZnONW (PT)	1.25	10 s	2.5 × 106	—	
80

Gr foam–ZnONW (PT)	2	9.5 s	8	
	
81

rGo–ZnO NW (PT)	5	0.1	—	—	
83

Gr–ZnOQDs (CO)	1.1 × 104	2	—	—	
86

Gr–ZnOQD (PT)	—	—	1.1 × 108	5.1 × 1013	
90

Gr–ZnOQD (PT)	1.7	5	9.9 × 108	7.5 × 1014	
91

Gr–ZnOQD (PT)	500	1000	1.7 × 103	—	
92


 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor. (b) Transfer characteristics of the graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor under UV illumination with different intensities. (c) Photoresponse of the graphene–ZnO UV phototransistor at a bias voltage of 1 V. Reproduced with permission from Dang et al., Small, 2015, 25, 3054–3065. Copyright 2015 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device structure of the ultrasensitive graphene–ZnOQD UV phototransistor. (b) Transient response of the UV phototransistor under excitation of 335 nm. (c) Photocurrent of the device under varying light illumination. (d) Schematic illustration of the operation mechanism of the ultrasensitive graphene–ZnOQDs UV phototransistor. (e) Comparison of the photoconductive gain of the present devices and previously reported devices. Reproduced with permission from Shao et al., Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3787–3792. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector. (b) I–V characterization of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector. (c) Photoresponse of the rGO–ZnO NPs UV photodetector. (d) Energy band diagram of the rGO–ZnO NPs hybrid photodetector under UV light illumination. Reproduced with permission from Shao et al., Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3664–3667. Copyright 2013 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the operation mechanism of the DSSC with ZnO HSN and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. (b) Nyquist plots of the electrochemical impedance spectra of the ZnO HSN photoanode and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. (c) J–V characteristics of the DSSCs assembled using both a ZnO HSN photoanode and graphene–ZnO HSN photoanode. Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8619–8627. Copyright 2013 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the C60–PEG modified ZnO NR arrays@rGO cathode buffer layer. (b) The energy level diagram of the ZnO NR arrays, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays, ZnO NR arrays@rGO, C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO and C60–PEG/ZnO NR arrays@rGO treated by plasma of the devices. (c) Mott–Gurney SCLC fitting logJ–logV plots of the electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/cathode buffer layer/Al, the inset shows the schematic illustration of the electron-only device. Reproduced with permission from Hu et al., J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10890–10899. Copyright 2015 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of a graphene–ZnO NW based hybrid solar cell. (b) Energy level diagram of the solar cells. (c) Raman peak of the full graphene/PEDOT:PEG(PC)/ZnO hybrid structure solar cell. (d) J–V characteristics of the champion graphene/ZnO based PbS QDs hybrid solar cells. (e) J–V characteristics of the champion graphene/ZnO based P3HT hybrid solar cells. Reproduced with permission from Park et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 233–239. Copyright 2013 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The fabrication processes for epitaxial GaN thin films. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and transfer processes for thin-film LEDs. (c) EL spectra of the LED transferred onto a plastic substrate, the inset shows the light emission at different applied current levels of 1.7–8.0 mA. (d) Current density and integrated EL intensity as a function of the applied bias voltage of a representative LED on a plastic substrate. Reproduced with permission from Chung et al., Science, 2010, 330, 655–657. Copyright 2010 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical synthesis process of CdTe/ZnO/rGO quasi–core–shell–shell QDs. (b) Normalized PL spectra obtained from CdTe–TGA, CdTe/ZnO and CdTe/ZnO/rGO. (c) EL spectra of white LED. Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19737–19743. Copyright 2016 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of one submicron-sized ZnO rod with a diameter of 596 nm and a smooth side surface. (b) The PL spectra of a bare submicron-sized ZnO rod and (f) the same ZnO covered with graphene under different excitation power densities. Dark field optical images of an individual ZnO microrod (c) before and (d) after being covered with graphene under the same excitation conditions. (e) Comparison of the PL spectra from the same ZnO microrod before (black line) and after (red line) graphene covering. Reproduced with permission from Li et al., ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6794–6800. Copyright 2015 ACS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
