Wet chemical growth of semiconductor 1-D nanostructure arrays on conductive substrates  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC03594J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03594J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12019-12047Wet chemical growth of semiconductor 1-D nanostructure arrays on conductive substrates

        
          
            Joo-Won 
            Lee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joon-Soo 
            Yoon
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Young-Min 
            Kim
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yun-Mo 
            Sung
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Korea University, Anam-ro 145, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ymsung@korea.ac.kr
Received 
      3rd July 2019
    , Accepted 14th August 2019First published on 14th August 2019AbstractOne-dimensional nanowire arrays directly grown on substrates have been recognized to be superior to two-dimensional thin films and nanoparticle films since they demonstrate in general single crystallinity, larger surface area, fast charge separation, and good contact with substrates. Accordingly, they provide an accessible way to the development of high performance devices such as photovoltaic cells, sensors, photocatalysts, electrodes, light emitters, etc. Although high-temperature vapor-phase synthesis is the most commonly employed method to produce high-crystallinity and high-density one-dimensional nanostructures with high purity, it is not acceptable in terms of the growing demand for the use of TCO (transparent conducting oxide) glass substrates, cost-effectiveness, and large scale mass production. Also, it is very difficult to control the precursor vapor pressures to meet the stoichiometry of many compound semiconductors through the vapor phase growth. In this context, there is a high need for the development of appropriate and efficient wet-chemical growth methods for one-dimensional nanostructures for a broad range of applications. In this review, we provide an overview of various low-temperature wet chemical synthetic approaches. In each fabrication method, we summarize the brief synthetic routes, microstructures, and the mechanism of anisotropic growth. In addition, the last section introduces various applications of one-dimensional nanostructure arrays. This review provides the current status and prospects of the growth of one-dimensional nanostructure arrays via wet chemical routes.
Joo-Won Lee
Joo-Won Lee received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is pursuing research on the synthesis of one-dimensional nanorod arrays for photoelectrochemical applications. His recent research interest lies in interfaces and catalysis.
Joon-Soo Yoon
Joon-Soo Yoon received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is currently involved in research on the synthesis and photoelectrochemical applications of one-dimensional nanorod arrays. His research interests focus on the hybrid photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells.
Young-Min Kim
Young-Min Kim received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is conducting research on the synthesis and photoelectrochemical applications of one-dimensional nanorod arrays. His research is mainly focused on the facile and one-step fabrication of nanostructures.
Yun-Mo Sung
Yun-Mo Sung is a professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Korea University in South Korea. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. His current research is focused on the development of high-efficiency photocatalysts for water splitting through band engineering of hetero-nanostructured semiconductors. He is a leader of a National Strategic Research Laboratory (NSRL) funded by the Korean Ministry of Science & ICT and is currently serving as a director of the Korean Institute of Metals and Materials (KIM).
1. Introduction
Nanostructured inorganic semiconductors have attracted enormous attention due to their distinct or improved electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and catalytic properties compared to those of their natural bulk forms.1–5 Among several nanoscale morphologies, one-dimensional (1-D) nanostructures such as nanowires, nanotubes and nanoribbons are the critical research area due to their suitability for a variety of applications, which is mainly owing to their dimensional anisotropy.6–10 The performances of nanostructured devices are influenced by not only component materials themselves but also synthetic approaches of nanostructures, which results in different microstructural properties such as crystallinity, size, length, crystal phase and surface facets. Well-ordered and vertically aligned arrays on conductive substrates are particularly required for utilizing the 1-D semiconductor nanostructures. There have been various synthetic strategies designed to construct 1-D nanostructure arrays, which can be categorized into two major methods: vapor-phase synthesis and wet chemical growth.
The vapor-phase synthesis has been studied since the early 1960s including PVD (physical vapor deposition), CVD (chemical vapor deposition) and VLS (vapor–liquid–solid) to fabricate 1-D nanostructure arrays.11–16 In particular, the VLS strategy with a molten metal catalyst greatly reduces the activation energy for synthesizing 1-D nanostructures and hence has been widely adopted in the growth of 1-D nanowire arrays. In order to construct 1-D nanowire arrays effectively, the molten metal catalyst should be of nanometer size. The nano-sized catalyst not only dictates the diameter of each single nanowire but also modifies the catalysis and diffusion process.17 One may improve experimental procedures by understanding the catalytic properties affected by crystallographic facets, surface termination and melting temperature of the metal catalyst with the decrease of size. However, the vaporization of precursors is the essential process to supply vaporized sources for growing 1-D nanostructures, which generally requires a high-temperature region and inert gas flow. In comparison with the vapor-phase synthesis, low-temperature wet chemical growth is considered to have the benefits of energy saving ability, low cost, convenient accessibility and large-scale mass production.18–22 Nonetheless, the wet chemical growth has barely achieved an ideal design and predictable synthesis of various semiconductor 1-D nanostructures into aligned arrays.
The wet-chemical growth can be classified into bottom-up and top-down approaches. Although the majority of hydrothermal routes are a kind of bottom-up growth, some hydrothermal synthetic routes utilize the reforming or reshaping of bulk materials into small products, which is considered as a top-down wet chemical process.23–25 Liquid-phase exfoliation is a facile process for realizing 2-D (two-dimensional) nanostructures from layer-structured bulk materials. It is possible to produce nanostructures without complicated techniques or high-cost by this method. The separation of layered bulk materials usually results in 2-D nanostructures in the solution environment. In general, 1-D nanostructures are barely produced by top-down wet chemical growth. On the other hand, the typical bottom-up approaches including solution–liquid–solid and most of the hydrothermal methods are well matched techniques for 1-D nanostructures because nucleation and growth could be controlled separately during the reaction. The outstanding control of nanostructure composition and morphology could be realized by the bottom-up wet chemical growth with the reaction parameter control. Therefore, 1-D nanostructures have been widely studied through the bottom-up wet-chemical growth. However, both top-down and bottom-up wet chemical syntheses have difficulty in integration into large-scale arrays in common.
In this review, we offer some selective successful bottom-up approaches of fabricating 1-D nanostructure arrays through the wet chemical growth in the category of (1) hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, (2) SLS (solution–liquid–solid) based route, (3) template-assisted method and (4) other synthetic routes including CBD (chemical bath deposition), ED (electrodeposition), anodization, spin coating and SILAR (successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction). An understanding of 1-D nano-array formation mechanism is provided for each synthetic route and each material, focusing on the fabrication details and wet chemical reactions. Also brief outcomes of various applications are provided in the last section, which utilize the successfully grown 1-D nanostructure arrays on conductive substrates.
2. Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthetic routes
Over the past two decades, the hydrothermal/solvothermal synthetic route has attracted increasing attention due to its facileness and convenient manipulation of experimental factors.26 To date, a number of papers have been published on the fabrication of respective ideal nanostructure morphologies. However, we still require research studies about 1-D nanostructure arrays on conductive substrates because 1-D nano-arrays are hardly achieved compared to colloidal nanostructures. Fabrication of desired products via the hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis highly depends on chemical reactions, solubility changes and ambient temperature and pressure.27,28 In this context, many researchers have tried to control the synthetic reactions by offering a condition where heterogeneous nucleation at the surface of substrates occurs predominantly compared to homogeneous nucleation in the solution. Additionally, the one-dimensional morphology of semiconductors demands high anisotropic preferential growth direction along the c-axis. Herein, we will describe oxide and non-oxide semiconductor 1-D nanostructure arrays on conductive substrates, focusing on hydrothermal/solvothermal approaches to promote 1-D nano-arrays.
2.1 Oxide semiconductors

2.1.1 ZnO nanostructure arrays. 
Nanostructured ZnO has received tremendous attention due to its various applications in optics, optoelectronics, photo-catalysis and biomedical sciences, which originate from its one-dimensional growth nature.29–32 In general, the growth of densely aligned 1-D nanostructures such as nanowires, nanorods and nanotubes is a key point for the optoelectronic and photo-catalytic applications. In earlier studies, the fabrication of 1-D ZnO nanostructure arrays was mainly achieved by vapor-phase synthesis such as VLS and VSS (vapor–solid–solid) at a relatively high temperature.33 On the other hand, Vayssieres et al. suggested a wet chemical method for fabricating 1-D ZnO arrays on substrates.34 Although highly oriented ZnO microtubes were chemically grown on a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate, the dimension of ZnO arrays were not further reduced to nanoscale.
To realize ZnO nanowire arrays, initial hydrothermal synthetic strategies introduced a seed layer in the form of ZnO nanoparticles.35,36 In brief, the ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized via a conventional hydrothermal reaction and then condensed on the conductive substrates as seed layers by spin coating and further heat treatment. Then, the ZnO nanowire arrays were epitaxially grown on the preexisting ZnO seed particles through hydrothermal reactions using zinc salts and amines. However, after the research by the Peidong Yang group with a convenient method to form seed layers,37 many studies adopted their method to realize ZnO nanowire arrays.38 In their work, conductive substrates were wet using 5 mM zinc acetate dihydrate dissolved in ethanol and then dried several times. Subsequently, the pre-deposited zinc acetate salts were decomposed by heat treatment at 350 °C under ambient conditions for 20 min. As a result, ZnO seed islands were produced with their (002) planes aligned vertical to the substrates. The ZnO nanorod array exhibited more strictly vertically-aligned morphology in the case of using the zinc acetate decomposition method than typical ZnO nanorod arrays grown on spin-coated ZnO nanoparticles (Fig. 1a). The authors demonstrated that the verticality of ZnO nanorods was directly related to the orientation of ZnO seed layers. As shown in the X-ray diffraction patterns of Fig. 1a, the seed layer of spin-coated ZnO nanoparticles presented more random-orientation tendency, compared to the well-aligned acetate-decomposed seed islands.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD and SEM data of an array grown from a ZnO seed layer via the decomposition of zinc acetate at 350 °C and those of ZnO nanorods grown from particle seeds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (b) Tilted SEM views of the 1-D ZnO nanowire arrays on a GaN substrate. The ZnO nanowires were grown out of 400, 200, and 100 nm sized holes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) XRD data of thin film ZnO seed layers: (i) ZnO-a, (ii) ZnO-b, (iii) AZO, and (iv) GZO [left] and XRD data of ZnO nanorod arrays grown on each seed layer [right]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
In some studies, ZnO itself or noble metal thin films were investigated as seed layers for offering heterogeneous nucleation sites to promote ZnO 1-D nanostructures.39,40 Lim fabricated a series of sputtered ZnO thin films such as ZnO, AZO (Al-doped ZnO) and GZO (Ga-doped ZnO) to identify the morphology of ZnO nanorods on each thin film in terms of density, size and length. Also, they demonstrated that the growth rate of ZnO nanorods was strongly determined by the intensity of the (002) orientation in each thin film. The sputtered GZO seed layers showed the strongest (002) oriented microstructures and thus exhibited the highest growth rate of ZnO nanorods (Fig. 1c). In addition, the as-grown ZnO nanorods on thin films with strong (002) orientation also presented the intense (002) texture (Fig. 1c). It is generally acceptable that the (002) textured thin films could promote the growth of ZnO nanorods especially in the [002] direction, considering the wurtzite crystal nature of ZnO.33 Xu et al. reported density-controlled ZnO nanowire arrays on a Si wafer with an Au film deposited as the seed layer. To get density-controlled and vertically aligned ZnO nanowire arrays, they thoroughly controlled the reaction parameters such as precursor concentrations, growth temperature and growth time based on the following hydrothermal reactions. (CH2)6N4 + 6H2O ↔ 4NH3 + 6HCHO(1) NH3 + H2O ↔ NH3·H2O(2) NH3·H2O ↔ NH4+ + OH−(3) Zn2+ + 2OH− ↔ Zn(OH)2(4) (5)Generally, zinc nitrate and HMTA (hexamethylenetetramine, [(CH2)6N4]) in an aqueous solution offer Zn2+ and OH− ions, respectively, for synthesizing ZnO nanowires hydrothermally. It is believed that HMTA serves as a weak base which could offer OH− ions steadily by slow hydrolysis under aqueous conditions [eqn (1)–(3)]. If a strong base instead of HMTA is used to offer tremendous OH− ions at once, a Zn(OH)2 precipitate would be largely produced very fast due to the high OH− concentration in the aqueous environment [eqn (4)], which would hinder the growth of ZnO nanowires by consuming Zn2+ ions. So the HMTA usually plays an important role in the hydrothermal synthetic route for ZnO nanowire growth by preventing the precipitation of Zn2+ ions at once.
For some particular applications, the ZnO nanowire arrays are required to be strictly vertically-aligned and regularly patterned. To meet the demand for highly ordered arrays, ZnO nanowires are usually fabricated via high-temperature vapor-phase synthesis using metal catalysts.15,16 Due to the high-temperature process, however, the substrate and ZnO nanowire have the risk of contamination by metal catalyst atoms and the lateral growth of the nanowire. The Z. L. Wang group reported a synergistic synthetic method, which took advantages of the low-temperature hydrothermal method and EBL (electron beam lithography).41 In a typical synthesis, the authors utilized the conventional low-temperature hydrothermal method to grow the ZnO nanowire array on a Si wafer with a sputtered ZnO thin film as the seed layer. So they got rid of the risk arising from the high-temperature vapor-synthesis such as lateral growth and metal atom contamination. With the aid of PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate) photoresist and EBL techniques, the synthesized ZnO nanowire arrays presented more strictly vertically-aligned and highly ordered patterns than ZnO arrays grown without PMMA as shown in Fig. 1b.


2.1.2 TiO2 nanostructure arrays. 
TiO2 has been highlighted in various commercial applications such as photocatalysis, corrosion-resistant coatings, biomedical agents, air purification and UV absorbers.42–46 The need for aligned and nanostructured 1-D TiO2 is getting larger especially for high-end applications such as solar cells, gas sensors, photovoltaics and photoelectrochemical cells. Some earlier studies used hydrothermal methods to synthesize 1-D TiO2 nanotubes. Kasuga et al. used hydrothermal reactions of reshaping bulk materials to TiO2 particles with NaOH solution.47 Then, the resulting powders were washed with hydrochloric acid (HCl) to form TiO2 nanotubes. M. Adachi et al. studied anatase TiO2 nanowires formed by oriented attachment of as-synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles.48 In their study, the TiO2 nanoparticles were firstly synthesized in an aqueous solution containing LAHC (laurylamine hydrochloride), TIPT (tetraisopropyl orthotitanate) and ACA (acetylacetone). Then the formation of TiO2 nanowires occurred by oriented attachment of TiO2 nanoparticles. In the works mentioned here, however, colloidal 1-D TiO2 nanostructures should be condensed on conductive substrates to be utilized in further applications.
Some researchers tried to fabricate aligned 1-D TiO2 nanostructures directly grown on substrates. Miao et al. reported a sol–gel induced electrodeposition method to prepare TiO2 single-crystalline nanowire arrays with the aid of AAO templates.49 Weng et al. studied the effect of patterned TiO2 seeds on the fabrication of arrayed TiO2 nanostructures.50 They utilized PS-b-P4VP [polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine)] as a diblock copolymer template with incorporated Ti(OH)22+ pre-synthesized nanoparticles (Fig. 2a). Although TiO2 nanostructures were fabricated via wet chemical reactions with the aid of various templates, the morphologies of TiO2 nanostructures were still not vertically aligned on the substrates.49,50
 Fig. 2  (a) FE-SEM image of TiO2 seeds from TiO2/diblock copolymer reacted in a Ti precursor solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (b) HR-TEM image of a single rectangular parallelepiped rutile TiO2 microtube. The inset is a low-magnification image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic formation mechanism of the single crystal rutile TiO2 nanowires grown on FTO glass through an interaction between octanoic acid and titanium trichloride. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new TiO2 morphology directly grown on borosilicate glass was reported by Hosono et al. using wet chemical growth.51 They established TiO2 thin films with a highly crystalline parallelepiped tube array on a submicron scale. TiO2 microtubes were synthesized via the hydrothermal reaction of titanium trichloride and highly concentrated NaCl solutions. In their work, it turned out that the NaCl or Cl− ions played two critical roles. First the Cl− ions could delay the precipitation of TiO2 in solution at once by tuning the composition and structure of growing units. The other is that Cl− would slow down the growth rate of the (110) planes of TiO2 through an adsorption onto the (110) plane like surfactants. The formation of TiO2 can then be controlled to grow rapidly in the [001] direction and slowly in the [110] direction at the same time as shown in Fig. 2b.
Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis for vertically-aligned TiO2 nanowire arrays on TCO was developed in late 2008. Feng et al. presented the method to fabricate 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays directly on TCO glass substrates through utilizing high-energy non-polar/hydrophilic interfaces.52 The FTO glass was cleaned and placed in a sealed Teflon reactor with toluene solution containing tetrabutyl titanate, titanium tetrachloride and highly concentrated hydrochloric acid. The synthesis of 1-D TiO2 was conducted at 180 °C for times ranging from 30 min to 48 h. During the synthesis, the toluene as a famous non-polar solvent would develop high-energy interfaces with polar water molecules from hydrochloric acid. As the temperature increases, the reaction system will try to reduce the energy by water diffusion away from toluene, which results in a water/FTO hydrophilic interface. Simultaneously, the hydrolysis of Ti4+ ions of precursors will occur at the water/FTO interface, causing the formation of a nucleus of TiO2 on the FTO substrate. After the nucleation reaction, TiO2 will be continuously grown at a new interface between hydrophilic TiO2 and the non-polar toluene solvent. Vertically-aligned 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays were successfully fabricated with a length of ∼2–5 μm. Aydil reported the direct growth of 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO substrates and studied the effects of growth temperature, substrates, reactant concentration, acidity and extra precursors on TiO2 nanowire growth.53 In particular, they demonstrated that the epitaxy between the substrate crystal structure and TiO2 is critical to form nanowire array structures. If the lattice mismatch between the substrate and TiO2 was relatively large enough, the nucleation and growth was not initiated on the substrate. In addition, the effect of acidity on the growth of TiO2 nanowire was investigated. It is well known that the Ti4+ species would easily hydrolyze under basic conditions similar to Zn(OH)2 precipitation.54 If the concentration of hydrochloric acid was quite low, immediate precipitation of all the titanium precursors occurred and the precipitate sank to the bottom. In contrast, extremely low pH (almost hydrochloric acid alone) suppressed the hydrolysis of titanium precursors and thus nothing was grown. The authors concluded that for the growth of oriented TiO2 nanowires moderate hydrochloric acid concentration should be used to control the rate of TiO2 hydrolysis.
For solar energy conversion applications such as solar cells or photoelectrochemical water splitting, 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays are usually realized on TCO substrates. One might consider the conductivity of TCO substrates to establish the high-efficiency devices. However, in many synthetic methods of 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays, highly concentrated hydrochloric acid was used to control the fast hydrolysis of Ti precursors. The hydrochloric acid tends to attack the coated layer of TCO and thus reduces the conductivity of TCO. Huang et al. tried a mixture of hydrochloric acid and glacial acetic acid to offer a mild synthesis environment for conserving the TCO substrate's conductivity.55 The addition of acetic acid still controlled the hydrolysis rate of the titanium precursor by a ligand exchange mechanism. The 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays synthesized in the acid mixture presented faster electron diffusion and higher conversion efficiency compared to those obtained from a single acid route. A hydrothermal synthetic strategy without any hydrochloric acid was developed by Wang et al.56 1-D TiO2 nanowire arrays were realized via a synergistic reaction of octanoic acid and titanium trichloride. In their work, the octanoic acid could suppress the fast hydrolysis of Ti species like hydrochloric acid and supply the support chain structure for the adsorption of Cl− ions of titanium trichloride (Fig. 2c). Ti3+ + H2O → TiOH2+ + H+(6) TiOH2+ + O2 → Ti(IV)oxospecies + O2− → TiO2(7)The Ti3+ ions from titanium trichloride hydrolyze into TiOH2+ in the aqueous solution. In eqn (7), the oxidation of TiOH2+ to form Ti(IV)oxospecies slowly occurs by consuming dissolved oxygen in the solution. The Ti(IV)oxospecies is known as an intermediate between TiO2+ and TiO2, which is dehydrated into final TiO2 in the solution. During the reactions, the Cl− ions from titanium trichloride would be naturally adsorbed on the (110) planes of TiO2, which promotes the one-dimensional growth of TiO2 in the [001] direction (Fig. 2c).


2.1.3 WO3 nanostructure arrays. 
Tungsten trioxide (WO3) has been highlighted due to its versatile properties suitable for various applications such as in electrochromic devices, photocatalysis and gas sensing.57–59 Before the development of a hydrothermal synthetic strategy for 1-D WO3 nanostructures, WO3 thin films were mainly researched via sol–gel processes, electrodeposition, anodic oxidation, thermal evaporation, sputtering and chemical vapor deposition. Gu et al. reported 1-D nanoscale building blocks of WO3 including urchinlike and ribbonlike structures under different synthetic conditions.60 In the synthesis, a well-known H2WO4 sol was prepared by mixing Na2WO4 and HCl with a pH range of 1–1.2. The urchinlike building blocks were synthesized by mixing the H2WO4 sol and Rb2SO4 sulfates in the autoclave. The ribbonlike structures were fabricated by simply adding K2SO4 instead of Rb2SO4. These building blocks exhibited the morphologies of particle/nanowire composites or nanowire ribbons as shown in the SEM images of Fig. 3a. Although WO3 nano-arrays could be fabricated by assembling these 1-D nanoscale building blocks, still direct growth of 1-D WO3 nanostructures was not developed. However, the authors found that sulfate-assisted oriented attachment played a critical role in the growth of 1-D hexagonal WO3 nanowires along the c-axis.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM views of the urchinlike [top] and ribbonlike [bottom] h-WO3 structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM top-view and cross-sectional images of the flake-like WO3 thin films. [X: flakes, Y: nanocrystalline WO3, and Z: SnO2 glass] Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM data of a 1-D TiO2 nanowire [left] and schematic representation of the formation processes of WO3 nanowires and micro-bricks [right]. XRD data exhibit the hexagonal nanowires and orthorhombic micro-bricks. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some relatively recent studies in 2010 reported the direct growth of 1-D or 1-D related WO3 nanostructures on substrates. Amano et al. realized WO3 thin films with perpendicularly oriented flake-wall structures on conductive substrates through a solvothermal method using anisotropic growth characteristics.61 The WO3 seed layers were deposited before the solvothermal synthesis via coating of the H2WO4 sol and subsequent heat treatment. The authors used tungsten(VI) ethoxide as a W source generated by alcoholysis of WCl6 in ethanol solution. The as-prepared substrate with the seed layer was soaked in the WCl6-containing ethanol solution and the solvothermal reaction was conducted at 100 °C. The authors successfully obtained monoclinic WO3 thin films of 1-D flake-wall structures with selective orientation of monoclinic (220) planes (Fig. 3b). However, oriented growth along the c-axis of monoclinic WO3 was not strong enough to realize the 1-D structures compared to hexagonal WO3 nanowires which will be described later. An advanced method for 1-D WO3 nanostructure arrays was reported by Tu,62 which is based on sulfate assisted hydrothermal growth by Gu et al.60 Based on the hydrothermal method of Gu et al., tungsten foils and α-alumina plates were used as substrates. Briefly, Na2WO4, HCl, oxalic acid and ammonium sulfate were dissolved in deionized water to prepare the reaction solution which was then heat treated at 180 °C together with substrates. The urchinlike WO3 nanowire arrays were directly obtained on substrates with the array less vertically-aligned.
Vertically-ordered 1-D WO3 nanostructures on TCO substrates were studied in various reports. Su et al. established vertically aligned 1-D WO3 nanowire arrays on FTO substrates for photoelectrochemical applications.63 First an H2O2 solution containing H2WO4 was spin-coated on the FTO glass substrate and heat treated to construct a WO3 seed layer. The WO3-deposited FTO substrate was put in the reaction vessel with an aqueous solution of H2WO4, HCl and acetonitrile. By varying precursor concentrations, the effect of precursors on WO3 morphologies was investigated. In particular, the authors investigated the growth mechanism of 1-D hexagonal WO3 nanowires. The Cl− ions from HCl dominantly controlled the growth direction of WO3 like capping reagents, which resulted in growth along the c-axis. Interestingly, only WO3 nanowires exhibited the hexagonal phase while nanosheets were in the monoclinic phase. It is difficult to grow WO3 in a one-dimensional direction compared to ZnO having high polar surfaces.33 Therefore, strong capping agents, in this case the Cl− ions, are essential for realizing 1-D WO3 nanostructure arrays. Zhang et al. also reported hydrothermal synthesis of WO3 nanowire arrays on FTO substrates with the aid of ammonium sulfate as a capping agent.64 In their work, the WO3 seed layer was deposited on FTO glass through conventional H2WO4 sol spin-coating and further heat treatment. The hydrothermal reaction solution was prepared by mixing sodium tungstate and hydrochloric acid in an aqueous solution with ammonium sulfate as the capping agent. The solution and WO3-deposited FTO substrate were transferred to the autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 4 h. The WO3 nanowire arrays were grown on the FTO glass vertically and well aligned. The morphology of synthesized WO3 was changed to micro-bricks under the hydrothermal solution without ammonium sulfate as shown in the scheme of Fig. 3c. The authors explained the one-dimensional growth nature of WO3 nanowires in the presence of ammonium sulfate by hydrothermal reactions. WO42− + 2H+·nH2O ↔ H2WO4·nH2O(8) H2WO4·nH2O ↔ WO3 + (n + 1)H2O(9)The primarily synthesized WO3 particles by reactions (8) and (9) would aggregate along the c-axis of the nanowire which is the [0001] direction of the hexagonal WO3 phase (Fig. 3c) because the sulfate ions could be selectively adsorbed on the surfaces parallel to the c-axis of nanowires (scheme of Fig. 3c). Also, the ammonium ions promoted the hexagonal crystal structure of the synthesized WO3 structures.65,66 On the other hand, orthorhombic WO3 micro-bricks were fabricated with no added ammonium sulfate precursors as shown in the XRD patterns of Fig. 3c.


2.1.4 Fe2O3 nanostructure arrays. 
Iron oxide shows various allotropic forms and has been extensively focused due to its abundance, non-toxicity, low cost and stability. Iron oxide has been studied in various applications such as photocatalysis, magnetic storage techniques and biomedicine.67–69 Among allotropic iron oxide forms, hematite (α-Fe2O3), which is a thermodynamically stable crystal structure, is considered as the most important iron ore due to its natural abundance and outstanding semiconducting properties.
Vayssieres et al. reported 1-D arrays of α-Fe2O3 by thermal decomposition of β-FeOOH (akaganeite) which is grown by wet chemical synthesis.70 To fabricate one-dimensional anisotropic nanostructures, the authors took into account the thermodynamic and kinetic concepts of nucleation and growth along with the surface free energy. The nanowire arrays of β-FeOOH were successfully obtained not in the solution but on the substrate by considering a high concentration of precursors, a low pH and a high ionic strength. In their work, FeCl3 and NaNO3 were dissolved in deionized water with hydrochloric acid. The substrates were placed in the solution and heat treated at 100 °C for 24 h. The as-synthesized β-FeOOH nanowire arrays were further annealed above 390 °C to obtain thermodynamically stable α-Fe2O3 as shown in Fig. 4a.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM micrographs of oriented Fe2O3 nanorods grown on a tin oxide glass substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagrams of β-FeOOH films prepared at 100, 120, 140, 160 and 180 °C. The red products are β-FeOOH and the green spots exhibit the Cl− ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Ling et al. reported 1-D α-Fe2O3 nanowire arrays grown on FTO substrates through the β-FeOOH decomposition method.71 The HCl in the solution would give a low pH environment to decrease the rapid hydrolysis of Fe species, and NaNO3 with high ionic strength was used to enhance the anisotropic one-dimensional growth of Fe2O3. The influence of thermal treatment conditions (ambient, ambient + N2 and only N2) on the decomposition of β-FeOOH nanowire arrays was investigated. Li et al. also studied α-Fe2O3 nanowire arrays based on the method established by Vayssieres et al.70 In their work, the relation between temperature and morphology was investigated.72 At higher reaction temperatures, a larger size of bare β-FeOOH nanowire arrays was realized and even spherical particles at higher than 160 °C (Fig. 4b). During the hydrothermal reaction, the high temperatures promote the agglomeration of Fe2O3 nuclei because of weakly adsorbed Cl− ions by thermal vibration.


2.1.5 Co3O4 nanostructure arrays. 
Cobalt oxide (Co3O4), one of the transition metal oxides, is applicable in various fields such as batteries, photoelectrochemical cells, gas sensing and electrochromic devices.73–76 After the investigation of cobalt oxide with high specific capacitance, there have been a lot of studies on using Co3O4 in batteries or supercapacitors. However, there is still a demand for the direct growth of 1-D Co3O4 nanowire arrays to achieve improvement in applications.
Li et al. reported freestanding quasi-single-crystalline Co3O4 nanowire arrays through the hydrothermal synthetic route.77 In a typical synthesis, Co(NO3)2·6H2O and concentrated ammonia were mixed in aqueous solution. The substrates and solution were transferred into an autoclave and heat treated at 90 °C for 14 h. The as-synthesized nanowire arrays were changed into the pure spinel Co3O4 phase by annealing at 250 °C. Through XRD and TEM analysis, the c-axis of the nanowire was demonstrated to be the [111] direction of the Co3O4 spinel structure. At the initial stage of hydrothermal growth, β-Co(OH)2 was crystallized into the nanowire with the [001] direction parallel to the c-axis of the nanowire. The nanowire arrays were then converted into the pure spinel Co3O4 structure according to the following reaction: 6Co(OH)2(s) + O2(aq) → 2Co3O4(s) + 6H2O(l)(10)It is interesting that the intense (111) orientation of Co3O4 did not originate from the preferential growth of Co3O4. Rather, the (111) plane parallel to the c-axis of the Co3O4 nanowire has a relation with the topotactic reaction between [001] Co(OH)2//[111] Co3O4.78 During the synthesis, the nanowire was grown along the [001] direction of Co(OH)2 and then changed to the [111] direction of Co3O4 by the annealing process.
Jiang et al. reported the 1-D Co3O4 nanowire arrays directly grown on not only conductive substrates but also glass slides and ceramics with smooth surfaces.79 Mechanically stable nanowire arrays were fabricated with firm adhesion between substrates and final arrays by adding F− ions during the hydrothermal synthesis. In their work, a hydrothermal solution containing Co(NO3)2·6H2O, NH4F, and CO(NH2)2 and the substrate were transferred into an autoclave and then heat treated at 120 °C. The authors suggested that the F− ions influence the adhesion between the substrate and nanowire array in four successive steps. In the first step, Co2+ ions from cobalt nitrate [Co(NO3)2] are captured and coordinated by F− ions to form CoF(x−2)x in the reaction solution. In step 2, the precipitation of Co nucleus occurs with an increase of OH− concentration. The Co2+ ions are gradually released from CoF(x−2)x, which limits the rate of Co nucleus precipitation. So there is enough time to develop firm contacts between the Co nucleus and the substrate surfaces owing to the CoF(x−2)x intermediate. The cobalt-hydroxide-carbonate nuclei are successively grown along a specific preferential direction to form the nanowire array in step 3. In the final step, the crystallized 1-D Co3O4 nanowire arrays are obtained by thermolysis of cobalt-hydroxide-carbonate. This method was adopted and reproduced for the applications using Co3O4 nanowire arrays (Fig. 5a).80–82
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of a Co3O4 nanowire array grown on a nickel substrate. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Co-doped V2O5 nanowire grown on a Ti substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Top-view SEM image of the as-prepared Nb2O5 nanorod arrays synthesized by the hydrothermal method. The inset presents the cross-sectional image. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of vertically aligned Ta2O5 nanorod arrays grown hydrothermally for 24 h. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.6 X2O5 nanostructure arrays (X = V, Nb and Ta). 
Vanadium is one of the rich elements on the earth, existing in the form of oxide such as VO, V2O3, VO2 and V2O5. V2O5 is the common form of vanadium oxide and has been widely researched for the applications in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. For the enhanced performance of V2O5 in various applications, various morphologies of V2O5 and their heterostructures were studied and reported. Ji et al. reported V2O5 nanowire preparation using a simple hydrothermal synthetic route on Ti foils.83 In their work, pure V2O5 and cobalt doped V2O5 nanowire arrays were prepared through different ratios of cobalt and vanadium precursors. In a typical synthesis, ammonium vanadate (NH4VO3), oxalate acid (H2C2O2), hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4) and cobalt acetate (Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O) for the doping process were dissolved in deionized water and transferred to an autoclave. A Ti foil polished with sand paper was prepared as the substrate of V2O5 nanowire arrays. The reaction system was heated at 150 °C for 1 h and the as-synthesized nanowire arrays were calcined at 200 °C. The annealed V2O5 nanowire arrays were in the orthorhombic phase and exhibited vertically-aligned arrays with a length of ∼8 μm (Fig. 5b).
Niobium oxides (NbO, Nb2O3, NbO2 and Nb2O5) are also important semiconductor materials in the fields of photocatalysts, gas sensors, electrochromic devices and biomedical studies. Nb2O5 is the most thermodynamically stable phase like V2O5 and has been studied for establishing 1-D nanostructures using various methods. He et al. studied the direct hydrothermal growth of Nb2O5 nanorod arrays on a Nb foil itself with NH4F and H2O2 precursors as shown in Fig. 5c.84 In their work, the reaction solution was prepared by dissolving NH4F and H2O2 in deionized water and transferring into an autoclave with the Nb foil as the substrate. The autoclave was heated at 125–175 °C for 5–20 h. The crystal structure of as-synthesized Nb2O5 was clarified to be hexagonal. Nb2O5 showed intense (001) diffraction peaks due to preferential c-axis growth of Nb2O5 nanorods. The nucleation and growth of Nb2O5 nanorods was suggested based on the following reactions: 2Nb + 5H2O2 → Nb2O5 + 5H2O(11) Nb + 5NH4F + 2.5H2O2 → (NH4)2NbOF5 + 3NH3 + 4H2O(12) (NH4)2NbOF5 → NH4NbOF4 + NH4F(13) NH4NbOF4 + 1.5H2O → 0.5Nb2O5 + NH4F + 3HF(14)During the reactions, both NH4F and H2O2 were used as oxidant materials. At the initial stage of hydrothermal growth, the Nb bulk foil was attacked by F− ions from NH4F [eqn (12)] to give Nb ions and then oxidized by H2O2. The intermediate (NH4)2NbOF5 is converted into more stable NH4NbOF4 by releasing NH4F into the solution again [eqn (13)]. Finally, Nb2O5 was produced through the decomposition of NH4NbOF4. During the synthesis, the oriented growth of Nb2O5 mainly originates from the nature of its hexagonal phase, which results in a nanorod morphology.
1-D Ta2O5 nanorod arrays were developed by Su et al. on Ta substrates using the hydrothermal method similar to Nb2O5 nanorod arrays.85 Ta foil as the substrate was immersed in the hydrothermal solution containing hydrofluoric acid and hydrogen peroxide. Then the autoclave was heat treated at 240 °C for 24 h. The crystal structure of Ta2O5 was found to be the orthorhombic phase and intense (001) orientation of the nanorod was revealed by XRD. The authors suggested the hydrothermal reactions during Ta2O5 growth as follows. 2Ta + 14HF ↔ 2H2TaF7 + 5H2(15) 2H2TaF7 + 5H2O ↔ Ta2O5 + 14HF(16)The intermediate Ta sources, H2TaF7, are only provided by etching of the Ta foil. However, the Ta foil shows good corrosion resistance to HF, making the reaction in eqn (15) very slow. As a result, the low concentration of H2TaF7 is maintained at the initial stage of reactions. Thus, the rate of Ta2O5 formation is also lowered by eqn (16), which makes the growth of Ta2O5 possible in a nanorod morphology. The orthorhombic Ta2O5 by wet chemical synthesis usually tends to grow along the [001] direction due to the minimization of surface energy under a slow enough growth rate condition.86 In addition, HF could serve as a capping agent to restrict the lateral growth of Ta2O5 nanorods. The formation mechanism above successfully realized 1-D Ta2O5 nanorod arrays (Fig. 5d).


2.1.7 XCo2O4 nanostructure arrays (X = Cu, Mn, Ni, Zn and Mg). 
Transition metal oxides, especially monometallic oxides such as ZnO, RuO2, NiO, TiO2, MnO2 and CuO, have been widely researched as promising materials for various applications. Recently, binary metal oxides have been highlighted due to their distinct band structure, high conductivity and electrochemical activity compared to single metal oxides. Among them, spinel structure metal cobaltites (CuCo2O4, MnCo2O4, ZnCo2O4, MgCo2O4 and NiCo2O4) are potential candidates for energy storage applications due to their advanced performances.87 Herein, we briefly introduce some reports about metal cobaltite nanowire arrays.
Wang et al. studied 1-D CuCo2O4 nanowire arrays fabricated by a facile hydrothermal strategy (Fig. 6a).88 For the synthesis, CuCl2·2H2O, CoCl2·6H2O and CO(NH2)2 were dissolved in aqueous solution with a stoichiometric amount and transferred to an autoclave. A Ni plate was put in the solution as a substrate and then heat treated at 100 °C for 8 h. The as-synthesized sample was further annealed at 300 °C to obtain crystallized CuCo2O4 nanowire arrays. As a result, a cubic spinel copper cobaltite nanowire was obtained. Li et al. reported MnCo2O4+x nanowire arrays which are a mixture of MnCo2O4 and MnCo2O4.5 (Fig. 6b).89 In their synthesis, the carbon substrate and the reaction solution containing MnSO4·H2O, CoSO4·7H2O and CO(NH2)2 were placed in an autoclave. The autoclave was sealed and heated at 95 °C for 8 h. Further heat treatment at 450 °C was conducted for calcination of the as-synthesized nanowire arrays. According to XRD analysis, the mixture of MnCo2O4 and MnCo2O4.5 was formed on the substrate with a cubic spinel structure. NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays on Ni substrates were studied via a simple hydrothermal method and a further annealing process (Fig. 6c).90 In the experiment, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, NH4F and CO(NH2)2 were dissolved in deionized water and transferred to an autoclave with a Ni substrate. The solution was heat treated at 120 °C and further annealing was conducted at 400 °C to obtain final nanowire arrays. The synthesized NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays were found to be in the cubic spinel phase. Wang et al. studied the hydrothermal growth of ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays (Fig. 6d).91 In their work, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, CO(NH2)2 and NH4F were mixed together in aqueous solution. The nickel substrate and the mixed solution were transferred into an autoclave and heat treated at 120 °C for 5 h. The subsequent heat process was conducted at 400 °C for 2 h and finally cubic structured ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays were obtained. The schematic fabrication process of ZnCo2O4 is presented in Fig. 6e.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of CuCo2O4/CuO nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) TEM image and SAED pattern of MnCo2O4+x grown on a carbon substrate. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays on a nickel substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) SEM image of ZnCo2O4 nanowires and (e) schematic formation process of the ZnCo2O4 nanowires on the nickel substrate. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Guan et al. studied MgCo2O4 nanostructures grown on Ni substrates, with several morphologies of nanostructures by simply tuning the solvent composition.92 The Ni substrate was put in the hydrothermal solution prepared by dissolving Mg(CH3CO2)2·4H2O, Co(CH3CO2)2·4H2O and CO(NH2)2 in a mixed solvent of deionized water and diethylene glycol. The synthesis temperature was 180 °C and was maintained for 4 h. Additional annealing was conducted to obtain crystallized MgCo2O4 nanowire arrays. When diethylene glycol was not added into the solution, the MgCo2O4 was synthesized in the form of nanosheets. By increasing the diethylene glycol content in the solution, the morphology was changed to nanobelts. In the case of diethylene glycol/deionized water >3, MgCo2O4 nanowire arrays were fabricated.

2.2 Non-oxide nanostructure arrays

2.2.1 CdS nanostructure arrays. 
Among group II–VI semiconductors, CdS is one of the most attractive materials for various applications including optical devices, LEDs, solar cells and photoelectrochemical cells due to its visible bandgap of 2.4 eV. The wet chemical development of 1-D CdS nanostructure arrays is a promising technique due to the industrial demand for mass production.
The solvothermal synthetic route for aligned CdS nanowire arrays was developed by Cao et al. through using a Cd foil as the Cd source and thiosemicarbazide for the S source in ethylenediamine (en) solution.93 In their synthesis, the Cd foil and thiosemicarbazide were firstly transferred into an autoclave and ethylenediamine was poured into the autoclave. The autoclave was heat treated at 180 °C for 10–24 h. The CdS nanowires with a wurtzite structure were vertically grown on the Cd foil substrate. The strong (002) X-ray diffraction peak implies the preferential growth direction of the nanowire. A possible formation mechanism of CdS nanowires was proposed as follows. Cd + S → CdS ↔ Cd2+ + S2−(17) Cd2+ + S2− + 2en ↔ Cd(en)22+ + S2− ↔ CdS + 2en(18)The strongly nucleophilic N atoms of en could attack the surface of the Cd foil and thiosemicarbazide molecules to offer active Cd and S ions. CdS nuclei will form on the surface of the Cd foil. Because the CdS nuclei themselves can also be dissolved by strong N atoms of the en solvent, an equilibrium would be established as in eqn (17) at a relatively low temperature. However, with an increase of temperature, the Cd2+ ions could be coordinated by en to form stable Cd(en)22+ complexes. Then, the crystallization of CdS on the Cd foil surface would be favoured with an elimination of en to the solution as shown in eqn (18). During the crystallization of CdS, the nanowire would grow in the wurtzite [001] direction due to the surface polarization and repulsion effects like the well-known ZnO nanorods.33 Lin et al. also adopted a solvothermal method utilizing a Cd foil and thiosemicarbazide as starting materials.94 In their work, the CdS nanowire was revealed to have a composite structure of alternating wurtzite and zinc blende planes with each growth direction of wurtzite [001] and zinc blende [111], respectively (Fig. 7a and b).
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD data of the CdS nanowire arrays prepared by the hydrothermal process. (b) HRTEM image of a single CdS nanowire with alternating wurtzite and zinc blende phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2008, AIP Publishing LLC. (c) Possible formation mechanism of the CdS nanorod arrays by the direct hydrothermal approach. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al. reported the direct fabrication of CdS nanorod arrays on ITO glass substrates via solution chemistry.95 In a typical reaction, cadmium nitrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O), thiourea and glutathione were dissolved in deionized water and ITO glass substrates were placed in the solution. The autoclave was sealed and heat treated at 200 °C for 3.5 h. The crystal structure of the CdS nanorod was found to be wurtzite similar to other works. The authors studied the formation mechanism of CdS nanorod arrays. At an initial stage, the CdS nanoparticles were deposited on top of the ITO substrate and the shape of CdS was changed to nanorod arrays due to the glutathione capping agent and crystal nature of the wurtzite phase as shown in Fig. 7c. The amino and mercapto functions of glutathione would be selectively adsorbed on the lateral surfaces such as (010), (100), (110), etc. As mentioned above, the polarization effect of wurtzite promotes the growth of CdS nanorods preferentially along the c-axis.


2.2.2 ZnS nanostructure arrays. 
Zinc sulfide (ZnS) has attracted attention due to its wide direct band gap of 3.6 eV and large exciton binding energy (40 meV). Various applications demand the architecture of well aligned 1-D nanowire arrays. Many studies tried to fabricate ZnS 1-D arrays by the hydrothermal reaction with the aid of templates.
Yu et al. studied well-aligned ZnS nanorod arrays through a simple hydrothermal method.96 The various factors were investigated including the reaction time, precursor concentration, acidity and the substrate effect to understand the ZnS nanorod growth mechanism. In their synthesis, 1-D ZnS nanorod arrays were fabricated by two step procedures. First, the Zn seed layer was deposited on the Cu substrate by the pulsed-plating method. Then, the reaction solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate, thiourea (NH2CSNH2) and NaOH for adjusting pH in deionized water. The solution and Zn deposited substrate were transferred into an autoclave and heat treated at 95 °C for 1 h. The as-grown ZnS was determined to have a wurtzite phase by the X-ray diffraction peaks. The possible growth mechanism was suggested by the following reactions. NH2CSNH2 → CH2N2 + H2S(19) H2S ↔ H+ + HS− ↔ 2H+ + S2−(20) Zn2+ + S2− ↔ ZnS(21)With the high concentrations of zinc acetate and thiourea, the formation of ZnS will be promoted by reactions (20) and (21). In their work, well-aligned ZnS nanorod arrays were successfully realized in the basic environment. The hydrolysis of thiourea in reaction (19) would be promoted under the alkaline condition, which resulted in increased S sources in the solution. Also, the higher number of OH− ions can accelerate the preferential (001) growth of ZnS to obtain a high aspect ratio.97 The as-deposited Zn seed layers played a crucial role in the growth of ZnS nanorods. No ZnS nanorod arrays were found in the substrates without Zn deposition. The oxidation of the Zn layer during the hydrothermal reaction served as the ‘template’ for ZnS nanorods as shown in Fig. 8a.
 Fig. 8  (a) Suggested formation process of the ZnS nanorod array on Zn nanocrystallites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2009 Materials Research Society. (b) FESEM images with low and high magnification, TEM image of the Bi2S3 nanowire and the corresponding HRTEM image and SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2008 Elsevier. 


2.2.3 Bi2S3 nanostructure arrays. 
Bismuth sulfide (Bi2S3) has a direct optical band gap of 1.3 eV and is widely studied for the applications of photovoltaic devices, photodiodes, and thermoelectric and IR sensors. Tang et al. reported the facile two-step hydrothermal synthetic route for Bi2S3 nanowire arrays.98 In a typical synthesis, bismuth nitrate and thiourea (Tu) were dissolved in glycol solution for the pre-deposition process. The glycol solution was exposed to microwave radiation at a power of 600 W and 150 °C for 1.5 h to prepare nanocrystals. The pre-deposition was conducted via spin-casting on a Si wafer using the as-synthesized nanocrystal-containing solution and further annealing at 350 °C. For preparing the reaction solution for nanowires, bismuth nitrate and thiourea were dissolved in deionized water and the aqueous solution was transferred into an autoclave with the pre-deposited Si substrate. The autoclave was heat treated at 170 °C for 20 h to obtain Bi2S3 nanowire arrays. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the Bi2S3 nanowire was well matched to the orthorhombic phase. By the TEM analysis, it was found that the c-axis of the nanowire is parallel to the orthorhombic [001] direction of Bi2S3. The Bi2S3 crystals were grown preferentially through the [001] direction with the nanowire almost single crystalline as shown in Fig. 8b. The authors found the effect of pre-deposited Bi2S3 seed layers through the comparison. If the substrates with no pre-deposition were used for Bi2S3 growth, the morphology of nanostructures was changed to a nano-flower instead of a 1-D nanowire. The thiourea was determined to be the best S sources for the formation of Bi2S3 nanowires and the formation reaction was suggested as follows. A bismuth ion–thiourea complex was generated as an intermediate product, where the bismuth sulfide was finally obtained by thermal decomposition. Bi3+ + nTu ↔ [Bi(Tu)n]3+ → Bi2S3(22)


2.2.4 CdTe nanostructure arrays. 
Cadmium telluride has a direct band gap of 1.5 eV and is widely studied for photovoltaics, solar cells, LEDs and photoelectrochemical cells due to its high absorption coefficient. Yuan et al. established a two-step solvothermal method for CdTe nanowire fabrication.99 First, tellurium (Te) nanorod arrays were deposited on a glass substrate through magnetron sputtering at 200 °C for 1 h. Next, 1-D CdTe nanorod arrays were solvothermally synthesized via utilizing the Te nanorod array as a sacrificial template. The solvothermal solution was prepared by dissolving cadmium nitrate and potassium hydroxide in ethylene glycol. The as-prepared Te template substrate and the solution were placed in an autoclave and heat treated at 180 °C for 4 h. The crystal structure of CdTe nanorod arrays was the zinc blende phase. Even though the nanorod surfaces became uneven due to the chemical reaction of the phase transition, the synthesized CdTe nanorod arrays still remained in the form of well-aligned 1-D nanorods. The reaction paths for solvothermally grown CdTe nanorods were suggested as follows. 3Te(array) + 6OH− → TeO32− + 2Te2− + 3H2O(23) Te2− + Cd2+ → CdTe(array)(24)By the reactions, the KOH concentration needs to be maintained at a sufficient level for the total consumption of reactants to ensure no residual Te in the nanorod array. However, excessively high concentration of KOH could result in the destruction of Te nanorods before the completion of CdTe synthesis.

3. Solution–liquid–solid based synthetic routes
Semiconductor nanowires have been widely studied as nanostructured building blocks for designing bottom-up construction of application devices.100–102 And the performance of nanostructured devices is directly related to the quality control of nanowire fabrication.103,104 In this context, a variety of synthetic routes have been researched and applied to realize high-quality semiconductors and highly ordered nanowire arrays. For instance, there have been so many reports about vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) and solution–liquid–solid (SLS) synthetic routes which are growing processes of 1-D nanowires utilizing a molten metal catalyst at each appropriate temperature. In general, the vapor-phase synthesis including VLS demands a high temperature for the melting of catalysts and precursor vaporization, which is a costly and time consuming process. Nevertheless, the VLS method has been a typical synthetic route for building nanowire devices due to their highly aligned ordering. The SLS growth process produces high-quality semiconductor nanowires at quite lower temperatures than VLS. However, SLS synthesis generally fabricates dispersed nanowires instead of well-aligned nanowire arrays on the substrate due to the floating molten metal catalyst in the solution. It is still challenging to construct well-aligned nanowire arrays vertically grown on the substrate through the SLS method. Herein, we will describe the fabrication of 1-D nanowire arrays through the SLS synthetic route, focusing on the formation mechanism of nanowire arrays.
3.1 CdS nanostructure arrays
Ouyang et al. reported axially heterostructured CdS/CdSe nanorod arrays grown on a Si substrate via a Bi catalyst-assisted SLS method.105 In their work, the Si wafers were cleaned and coated with Bi nanoparticles as catalysts using a high vacuum thermal evaporator. The size of Bi catalysts was controlled to be a few nanometers. The polymer string was attached to the Si substrate before being loaded into a 3-neck flask. In the 3-neck flask, CdO (cadmium oxide), TDPA (n-tetradecylphosphonic acid) and TOPO (tri-n-octylphosphine oxide) were mixed and heat treated at about 300 °C to get a clear solution. The temperature was adjusted to the reaction temperature (270 °C) and then S/TOP shot and Se/TBP shot for CdS and CdSe growth, respectively, were injected into the 3-neck flask. After the reactions, the Si wafer was removed from the solution by pulling out the string. The crystal structure of the synthesized CdS/CdSe was determined to be wurtzite and the growth direction (c-axis) of the nanowire was parallel to the wurtzite [002] direction. Although axially heterostructured nanowires were successfully synthesized, nanowire arrays were grown almost horizontally on the Si substrate.
The improved SLS nanowire growth on the substrate was developed by Kwak et al. by using a Bi catalyst and PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) polymer.106 The PVA film on the Bi catalyst layer played a crucial role of holding the molten Bi catalyst during the reaction as shown in Fig. 9c. For the synthesis, FTO glass was used as the substrate on which a CdS buffer layer and the Bi catalyst layer with ∼5 nm thickness were deposited by magnetron sputtering. The Bi/CdS/FTO substrate was then coated with a PVA protection layer by dip-coating in PVA solution. For preparing the Cd solution, cadmium oxide, oleic acid, hexadecylamine, TOPO and ODE (1-octadecene) were loaded in a 3-neck flask. After the temperature of solution reached 220 °C, the PVA/CdS/Bi/FTO substrate and TBP:S shot were injected rapidly to the solution. A sharp increase of temperature induced the transition of the Bi layer into Bi nanoparticle catalysts, which promoted the CdS formation (Fig. 9c). After the reaction, the solution was cooled down to room temperature and the as-synthesized nanowire arrays were rinsed with non-polar solvents.
 Fig. 9  (a) FE-SEM cross-sectional view image and (b) HRTEM image of CdS nanowires grown on FTO substrates; the inset denotes the SAED pattern. (c) Schematic images present the solution–liquid–solid (SLS) nanowire growth directly on the substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (d) SLS fabrications of nanowire arrays using Bi thin films and Bi nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic experimental setup for growing InP nanowire arrays using the electrically controlled SLS method and optical photograph of the sample holder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Like CdS nanowires reported elsewhere, the CdS nanowire array exhibited the wurtzite phase with a very intense X-ray diffraction peak of (002) due to their preferential growth along the c-axis. The average diameter of the nanowire was ∼40–80 nm and length was ∼2–3 μm as shown in Fig. 9b. The Bi nanoparticle tips at each single nanowire imply that the breakage of the Bi layer is critical to SLS growth of CdS nanowires as shown in Fig. 9a. The CdS buffer layer was introduced to improve the adhesion between the synthesized CdS nanowire and the FTO substrate. Two important factors were highlighted to understand the successful fabrication of CdS nanowire arrays on the substrate. First, the Cd and S sources in the solution should not be fully or fairly consumed before completion of nanowire growth, through homogeneous nucleation in the solution by supersaturation. Similar to the suppression of rapid hydrolysis by pH adjustment in hydrothermal synthetic routes, the homogeneous nucleation was reduced by low initial concentrations of Cd and S precursors and a moderately low synthesis temperature of 220 °C. When the reaction temperature is lowered below 220 °C, the melting of the Bi layer can hardly occur as the melting temperature of Bi is 271 °C. In this study, the as-set temperature of 220 °C was appropriate to activate the Bi catalysts because of the decreased melting temperature of Bi by the nanometer-scale effect.107 If the reaction temperature is higher than 220 °C, the homogeneous nucleation of CdS nanoparticles will rapidly occur in the solution. Second, Bi catalysts formed by the molten Bi seed layer should settle down on the top surface of the CdS buffer layer and not float away on the solution (Fig. 9c). The over-coated PVA layers successfully improved the adhesion between Bi catalysts and the surface of the substrate, allowing the penetration of Cd and S precursors at the initial stage of the reaction.
3.2 CdSe nanostructure arrays
Wang et al. reported the growth of CdSe quantum wire films grown on substrates by the SLS synthetic route.108 They synthesized mono-dispersed Bi nanoparticles as a catalyst for future SLS reaction. In their work, the Bi nanoparticle-containing stock solution was prepared by a reported procedure.109 The substrate was coated with droplets of the Bi nanoparticle solution and heat treated at above 235 °C to prepare the Bi nanoparticle catalyst layer. In a typical preparation, cadmium oxide, oleic acid, tetradecylphosphonic acid, di-n-octylphosphonic acid and TOPO were loaded into a Schlenk reaction tube and heat treated at 320 °C for a clear Cd solution. The as-prepared substrate was injected to the Cd solution at 262 °C and after 2 min, the mixture of TOP and TOP:Se shot was injected. After a few minutes, the substrate was removed from the solution. In general, the Bi catalysts formed by the molten Bi layer tend to have a size distribution, which results in nanowire arrays with a non-uniform size. However, size and density controlled CdSe nanowire arrays were successfully fabricated due to the use of mono dispersed Bi nanoparticles as the catalyst for SLS growth (Fig. 9d).
3.3 CdTe nanostructure arrays
CdTe nanowire arrays on glass substrates were reported by Sung et al. through the SLS synthetic route.110 The method for CdTe nanowire arrays was analogous to that in a previous report of CdS nanowires. The Bi/CdTe/FTO substrate was prepared by sputtering and then coated with a PVA protection layer. The cadmium stock solution was prepared in a 3-neck flask by dissolving CdO, oleic acid, HDA, and TOPO into ODE. After the temperature of the cadmium stock solution was increased to 220 °C, the PVA/CdTe/Bi/FTO substrate and TBP:Te shot were injected rapidly. After the reaction, the 3-neck flask was quenched to room temperature and CdTe nanowire arrays were washed with non-polar solvents. The crystal structure of CdTe was investigated to be zinc blende with strong (111) diffraction peaks in XRD analysis. The (111) plane of zinc blende could be analogous to (002) of the wurtzite phase except for stacking sequences such as ABCABC and ABABAB, respectively. During the synthesis, the CdTe nanowire preferentially grew in the [111] direction because of the polar surface effect of zinc blende (111) planes.
3.4 InP nanostructure arrays
Dorn et al. reported an electrically controlled SLS method for growing InP nanowire arrays on substrates.111 They controlled the density of nanowires through a bias voltage assisted SLS method in the solution as shown in Fig. 9e. In a typical synthesis, the electrode substrates (Bi/Pt/Ti-coated silica) were prepared by a thermal evaporation method. A 4-neck flask with the electrode substrate was prepared and TOP solution was poured. The temperature of the flask was set to 285 °C. The as-prepared InI3 containing oleylamine solution and tris(diethylamino)phosphine were mixed and injected together dropwise for 3 min to grow InP nanowire arrays.
4. Template-assisted synthetic routes
Template-assisted synthesis is a well-known facile method for growing semiconductor nanowire arrays. An anodized alumina membrane (AAM) is the most common template material due to its fascinating structure, and high thermal and chemical stability.112,113 The AAM has a highly ordered pore structure with a density of 1010–1012 cm−2. To obtain arranged pore structures, the aluminum sheets are treated via anodic oxidation under various acidic conditions such as sulfuric, oxalic or phosphoric acid.114 The pore structures such as the diameter, depth and interval could be controlled depending on the anodizing conditions.115–117 Another template widely used in nanowire array fabrication is a polycarbonate (PC) track-etched membrane.118 Although the PC membrane can be easily handled and removed during the synthesis, it has a disadvantage of being distorted during the annealing process. To achieve high quality 1-D nanowire arrays by the template assisted-method, the used template has requirements of chemical and thermal stability, insulating properties, pore uniformity and high wettability for solution reactants. It should be noted that corrosion, distortion and imperfect removal of template membranes can result in severe malfunctioning of 1-D nanowire arrays.
Electrochemical deposition or electrodeposition (ED) is one of the most widely used coating processes, suitable for mass production with a convenient manipulation.119 In particular for inorganic metals and semiconductor materials, electrodeposition is a promising method for preparing films and nanocomposites. Electrochemical deposition is carried out in a three-electrode electrochemical cell which consists of a working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode. A two-electrode cell system can also be applied without a reference electrode in some cases.120 In the case of template-assisted electrodeposition for 1-D nanoarrays, the working electrode would be composed of the template membrane combined with conductive metals or substrates. The electrolyte must be electrically conductive and can be any form of aqueous, non-aqueous solution or even molten materials. In general, 1-D nanowire arrays via template assisted ED are fabricated through the steps of ionic transport, discharge, ion–ligand decomposition and nucleation and growth in the membrane.121 Finally, 1-D nanowire arrays are obtained after removing the template membranes. Herein, we briefly introduce 1-D nanowire arrays fabricated by template-assisted approaches including ED and template filling.
4.1 Electrodeposition with a template membrane
The 1-D nanowire arrays have been significantly studied by template synthesis for their applications in fuel cells, solar cells and energy-storage devices. The ED synthesis of nanowire arrays on AAMs is quite difficult compared to the deposition on planar electrodes due to membrane corrosion such as re-anodization, dissolution and destruction. However, various metal chalcogenides (CdS, PbS, CdSe, CdTe and Bi2Te3), antimonides (InSb, CoSb) and oxides have been studied to grow 1-D nanowire arrays by template-assisted electrodeposition.
Routkevitch et al. successfully deposited CdS on an AAM using Cd2+ and elemental S mixed in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) with DC electrodeposition.122 PbS nanowire arrays were also electrodeposited on the AAM using PbCl2 and elemental S dissolved in DMSO.123 The 1-D nanowire arrays of CdS and PbS are shown in Fig. 10a and c. The as-synthesized CdS showed intense wurtzite (002) orientation, which is commonly reported elsewhere due to the wurtzite structure (Fig. 10b). Interestingly, the PbS nanowire arrays presented abnormally intense (200) diffraction peaks as shown in Fig. 10d, which is not a common phenomenon. PbS with a face centered cubic rocksalt structure is known to have polar surfaces of (111) planes. In some reports, the nanowires/nanorods were formed by nanoparticle-aggregation, so called oriented attachment through rocksalt (111) polar surfaces.124 In the study of epitaxial growth of PbS nanowires, the only nanowire grown on rutile TiO2 showed an intense (200) orientation due to preferential growth originated from epitaxy.125 For some reason, the PbS nanowire arrays were grown along the direction of rocksalt [200] preferentially through template-assisted electrodeposition.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional TEM micrographs of an Al/AAO/CdS film after anodization and CdS deposition. (b) X-ray diffraction peaks of the as-deposited AAO/CdS nanowire arrays for the variation of reaction time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society. (c) Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of PbS nanowire arrays fabricated in the AAM. (d) X-ray diffraction data of PbS nanowire arrays with the AAM removed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
1-D CdSe nanowire synthesis was carried out through a typical DC electrodeposition method by Peng et al.126 In the synthesis, the AAM was used as the template and the electrolyte was prepared using CdCl2 and SeO2. The CdSe nanowires with a diameter of 60 nm presented a polycrystalline structure according to the XRD and SAED analysis. The authors obtained highly crystalline CdSe nanowires with a Cd to Se ratio of almost unity by adjusting the pH of the electrolyte to 9. Chemical reactions were studied to understand the formation mechanism of CdSe nanowires with good stoichiometric composition as follows: SeO32− + 3H2O + 4e = Se + 6OH−(25) [Cd(NH3)4]2+ + 2e = Cd + 4NH3(26)The SeO32− species in the electrolyte would be reduced to elemental Se at the cathode by SeO32− diffusion from eqn (25). Cadmium can also be deposited on the pre-adsorbed Se atoms according to eqn (26). Then the nucleation growth would occur in the pores of the AAM, resulting in the anisotropic nanowire growth. Finally, the annealing process leads to the crystallized wurtzite CdSe nanowire arrays.
Bi2Te3 is the most studied thermoelectric material at room temperature. Prieto et al. reported 1-D Bi2Te3 nanowire arrays fabricated by electrodeposition using an AAM template for further implementation in devices.127 From the analysis of XRD and EDS (energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) measurements, the nanowire was found to be hexagonal Bi2Te3 with a fine stoichiometric composition. However, the Bi2Te3 nanowire arrays showed an intense (110) X-ray diffraction peak, which implies the highly textured (110) planes in Bi2Te3 nanowires. Bi2Te3 in general presents the highest electrical conductivity in the [110] direction. Thus, the preferential growth direction of the nanowires could be adjusted to the direction of highest conductivity under the electrodeposition process. The authors improved the degree of nucleated-pores up to ∼80% by using Ag as the cathode instead of Pt and applying ∼1 mA cm−2 and a template thickness of ∼50 μm.
In the electrodeposition field, the lack of suitable sources for Te2+ is one of the obstacles to fabricate metal telluride nanowire arrays due to its noble property. Li et al. developed ZnTe nanowire arrays through electrodeposition from an aqueous solution onto an AAM for the first time.128 The authors utilized TeO2 in deionized water as the electrolyte. Moreover, electrodeposition parameters such as the current density and pulsed time were controlled to increase the growth rate of ZnTe appropriately. All X-ray diffraction peaks were indexed to the rocksalt ZnTe structure with an intense (220) diffraction as shown in Fig. 11a. The diffraction intensities of (220) were verified with respect to current density and pulsed time. The best condition for ZnTe nanowire growth was found to be 10 mA cm−2 and 100 ms of pulsed time as shown in Fig. 11b. If the current density is very high, hydrogen bubbles from electrolysis would suppress the ZnTe growth. In the case of low current density, the ZnTe could not grow into nanowires properly. The preferential growth direction of ZnTe nanowires and the resultant 1-D ZnTe nanowire array are clearly presented in Fig. 11c and d. The 1-D CdTe nanowire arrays were fabricated through electrodeposition using a track-etched PC membrane.129 TeO2 in deionized water was used as the electrolyte. The CdTe nanowire arrays were successfully fabricated by adjusting the deposition temperature, potential and solution pH.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD pattern of highly oriented ZnTe nanowires. (b) Relative intensity of the (220) plane orientation of ZnTe nanowires with respect to current density (I) and pulsed time (t), respectively. (c) SEM images of ZnTe nanowire arrays after removing the AAM. (d) TEM image of an individual ZnTe nanowire and the corresponding HRTEM image. Insets are SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
InSb is a promising candidate for electronic or optoelectronic devices due to its direct bandgap of 0.18 eV and outstanding electron mobility. 1-D InSb nanowire arrays were fabricated through DC electrodeposition onto an AAM template and a subsequent heat treatment.130 The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving InCl3 and SbCl3 into citric acid. The electrodeposition parameters such as pH, temperature and applied potential were optimized by X-ray diffraction analysis of the mixed phase (In, Sb and InSb) to obtain stoichiometric InSb. For energy-storage application, there have been many efforts to fabricate 1-D CoSb nanowire arrays. Yang et al. reported CoSb nanowire arrays synthesized by pulsed electrodeposition onto an AAM template.131 The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving KSbOC4H4O6·1/2H2O, CoCl2·6H2O and H3BO3 in an aqueous solution. For making the atomic ratio of Co to Sb unity, the electrodeposition processes for CoSb nanowires were studied in three steps. [(SbO)C4H4O6]− + 2H+ + 3e− = Sb(s) + H2O + C4H4O62−(27) Co2+ + 2e− = Co(s)(28) Co2+ + [(SbO)C4H4O6]− + 2H+ + 5e− = CoSb(s) + H2O + C4H4O62−(29)During the electrodeposition, [(SbO)C4H4O6]− and Co2+ require electrons to precipitate elemental Sb and Co by reactions (27) and (28), respectively. The overall reaction for CoSb synthesis is described in reaction (29). Reaction (27) is related to the concentration of H+ (pH) and electron transport, which is dependent on the current density or applied potential. The composition of CoSb nanowires will be affected by the competition between reaction (27) and (28). And reaction (29) will directly have an influence on the crystallinity of the nanowire. By considering the above electrodeposition parameters, a 1-D CoSb nanowire with intense (102) orientation was obtained.
1-D NiO nanowire arrays were prepared by using electrodeposition onto an AAM template and a further annealing process.132 The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving Ni(NO3)2 and NaNO3 into an ethanol/water solution with a pH of ∼3.5 adjusted by nitric acid. In an acidic environment, the electrodeposition process can be described as follows.NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4+ + 10OH−As a result of NO3− hydrolysis from nickel nitrate, the OH− ions would be generated in the solution.Ni2+ + 2OH− → Ni(OH)2The Ni2+ species will be then precipitated as a nickel hydroxide starting from the electrode surface, which results in the growth of Ni(OH)2 nanowires.Ni(OH)2 → NiO + H2ODuring the annealing process, the NiO nanowire arrays will be formed by the decomposition process of Ni(OH)2. Conventional electrodeposition on an AAM typically results in the structure of NW/AAM/Al. After the etching of the AAM template, the remaining Al layer works as a substrate for 1-D nanowire arrays. Xu et al. reported the development of an AAM template grown on a Ti/Si substrate for the first time.133 1-D MnO2 nanowire arrays were fabricated using this AAM/Ti/Si substrate with an electrolyte containing Mn(CH3COO)2 and a further annealing process.
4.2 Template membrane filling deposition
Template filling synthesis with a sol–gel process is one of the facile wet-chemical methods to realize 1-D nanowire arrays. In the case of the sol–gel template method, the size and shape of the desired nanowires can be directly controlled through the qualified template membrane.134 Template filling with the sol–gel method allows the low temperature fabrication of homogeneous multicomponent nanoarrays due to easy chemical preparation simply by mixing of precursor solutions.
Generally, the 1-D nanowire arrays incubated in the template membrane are produced as polycrystalline materials through a sol–gel process. Since highly-crystalline nanowire arrays are highly desirable, many approaches have been studied to grow 1-D nanowire arrays with single crystals. Single crystal nanowire arrays were prepared through sol–gel template synthesis by Cao et al.135 First Na2S aqueous solution with mercapto ethanol and hexametaphosphate was poured on the AAM template. The S2− ions could cover the inner pore channels because of the active Al3+ sites on the pore surfaces. Then, the AAM template was immersed in a CdCl2 solution to form CdS nanoparticles. Finally, a further annealing process enabled the single crystal CdS nanowire arrays. In their work, the order of immersion was very important to form CdS nanowires. If the AAM template was placed in the CdCl2 solution first, only CdS precipitates were formed outside the AAM pore channels. For the 1-D SiO2 nanostructures, the morphology of the nanostructure was controlled by aging time and the temperature of the sol.136 The aging process for SiO2 sol was carried out for 2 days and 23 days. As a result, nanowire and nanotube structures were obtained from 2 and 23 days of aging, respectively. When the SiO2 sol was heated at 50 °C for 15 days before dipping, bamboo-like nanofiber structures were obtained.
Binary metallic oxide 1-D nanostructures were fabricated by mixing of sol precursors. Yang et al. reported the fabrication process for 1-D perovskite composite oxides of LaMO3 (M: Co, Ni and Fe) by the citrate-based sol–gel method.137–139 In this method, nitrate ions of lanthanum nitrate and metal nitrate act as oxidizers and citric acid is used as the chelating agent. The resulting lanthanum complex oxides were polycrystalline, while the overall structures were uniform and highly ordered in a large area. The schematic diagram shown in Fig. 12a exhibits the fabrication process for nanowire arrays using the AAO template. The highly-uniform and ordered structure of LaNiO3 nanowires is clearly presented in Fig. 12b and c. All X-ray diffraction peaks were indexed to the cubic perovskite-type LaNiO3 phase as shown in Fig. 12d. The template based approach also enabled the synthesis of nanoarrays of ferrite magnetic materials like ZnFe2O4 and CoFe2O4.140,141 Magnetic oxide nanowires are a subject of intense research because of their potential applications in high-density magnetic recording media along with metallic nanowires. LiCoO2 is of special interest as a high-energy density cathode material for use in lithium-ion rechargeable battery technology. Nanoarrays of cathode materials like LiCoO2 are expected to show better rate capabilities than conventional electrodes. Zhou et al. synthesized LiCoO2 nanowire arrays by dipping AAM into a sol prepared with precursors of Co(OAc)2 and LiOAc.142 The diameter of the fabricated LiCoO2 was around 100 nm which corresponds exactly to the template pore size. The TEM and SEM images show that nanowires are highly ordered, bottoms adhering to each other.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic image showing the possible fabrication mechanism of nanowire arrays through the AAO template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2006 Springer-Verlag. (b) SEM micrograph of LaNiO3 nanowires after the AAO template was partially removed. (c) TEM image of LaNiO3 nanowires without the AAO template. (d) X-ray diffraction peaks of LaNiO3 nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2005 Elsevier. 
5. Other synthetic routes
5.1 Chemical bath deposition
Chemical bath deposition (CBD) is a technique to precipitate a compound from a solution containing its components.143,144 This method has been widely used due to its various advantages such as cost effectiveness, feasible and scalable process, etc. Furthermore, CBD is nearly free from oxidation and corrosion of the substrate since the reaction is performed under ambient pressure and at low temperature. The quality of the product can be easily controlled by adjusting the parameters such as the temperature, concentration, and pH of the solution.
More et al. synthesized TiO2 nanorods on FTO substrates using a titanium trichloride solution via the CBD method.145 TiO2 nuclei are formed, as TiCl3 decomposed. Both as-deposited and annealed TiO2 nanorods have a diameter of ∼25 nm and a length of ∼80 nm and are grown vertically on the substrate. While showing good coverages, the product showed poor crystallinity. Li et al. prepared anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays under various CBD conditions.146 The authors demonstrated that the CBD technique was applicable to arbitrary substrates including stainless steel mesh, glass substrate, silicon wafer, and carbon cloth. The CBD process was conducted at 80 °C and in an open atmosphere to fabricate H2Ti5O11·3H2O nanowire arrays. After the subsequent calcination at 550 °C, well-crystallized anatase TiO2 was obtained. The treatment of diluted HCl enabled the phase transition to rutile TiO2. In this work, diluted Ti ions, H2O2 and nitric acid were used for the titania precursor solution, instead of commonly used aggressive NaOH. This technique provides a flexible selection of the substrates due to the mild condition.
Copper oxide or cupric oxide (Cu2O) is a p-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.2 eV. Cu2O has attracted a lot of interest as a promising candidate for photovoltaic and photocatalyst applications due to its earth abundance and non-toxicity. Xiong et al. suggested a modified CBD method to synthesize Cu2O films with sphere-like, rod-like and cone-like morphologies.147 It was found that the morphology was greatly affected by immersion cycles. While the only sphere-like film was made with less than 10 immersion cycles, 1-D rods were obtained after 15 cycles. Interestingly, the rod-like morphology disappeared and the sphere-like shape was restored after 20 cycles. This phenomenon repeatedly occurred when the number of cycles increased. The authors demonstrate the mechanism with the relationship between the concentration of OH− ions and the mass-surface energy of Cu2O particles. Initially, OH− ions react with Cu+ ions to make Cu2O particles and they can grow further by the same reaction. However, under an insufficient concentration of OH− ions, they cannot fully cover the Cu2O particles, which leads to anisotropic growth to form rod-like particles. Since the particles tend to maintain the lowest surface energy, the newly-formed Cu2O attached to the middle part of the rods after further immersion cycles (Fig. 13a). Aref et al. also reported 1-D Cu2O nanorod films fabricated by the CBD method in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB).148 CTAB is known to have the ability to tune the morphology of Cu2O crystals. The Cu2O nanorods were grown on FTO glass, Cu, and Ti substrates. After the Cu2O nuclei are formed, the OH− ion is absorbed in the form of a CuOH·OH− ion. In this process, the positively charged CTAB covers the Cu2O nuclei around the preferential plane, resulting in the one-dimensional growth of Cu2O nanorods. It was demonstrated that the length of nanorods increased as the CTAB concentration increased. Compared to the Cu2O film grown without CTAB, the 1-D Cu2O nanorod film grown with the assistance of CTAB showed higher crystallinity.
 Fig. 13  (a) Growth mechanism for the morphology control of Cu2O nanostructures after 10 immersion cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation showing the difference between single stage and double stage deposition processes of hexagonal MoO3 nanorod arrays. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) is an n-type semiconducting material, which has been recognized as a fascinating transition metal oxide. The 1-D MoO3 nanostructure is an attractive material for application in lithium batteries, gas sensors, and photochromic and electrochromic devices. Dhara et al. synthesized 1-D MoO3 nanorod arrays by two-stage chemical bath deposition.149 By conducting the CBD process into two steps, it was possible to control the rod dimensions and film texture. In the first step, only nucleation occurred by the CBD reaction as shown in Fig. 13b. The surface was rinsed with water after the first CBD reaction to ensure the separation of nucleation and growth. This step resulted in the chemical change of the nucleation layer. The authors demonstrated the growth mechanism as chemical heterogeneity-induced growth. By controlling the parameters such as the concentration of the precursor in the solution or the deposition time during the first step, rods with a wide range of lengths, diameters, and orientations can be produced.
5.2 Electrodeposition
Electrochemical deposition or electrodeposition is an attractive method for the fabrication of metal oxide films because of its simplicity, low cost, and environmental friendliness.150,151 There have been many research studies for growing 1-D nanostructure arrays through various electrodeposition techniques, including galvanostatic, potentiostatic, potentiodynamic and pulsed deposition.152
A number of metal oxide nanorods, such as ZnO,153,154 Fe2O3,155 MnO2,156 Mn3O4,157 Y2O3,158 CeO2,159 and Gd2O3,160 can be prepared directly on the substrate by template-free electrodeposition. Among them, a ZnO nanorod is the most widely studied material for electrochemical deposition. Skompska et al. extensively reviewed the electrodeposition of ZnO nanorod arrays on TCO substrates.161 Typically, the synthesis of ZnO nanorods consists of two steps: deposition of a seed layer and deposition of ZnO nanorod arrays. The seed layer can be prepared by acetate decomposition,37 sol–gel method and electrochemical deposition, which provides the nucleation sites for subsequent nanorod growth. The electrochemically deposited seed layer is preferred because a high density can be obtained by just increasing the potential for potentiostatic deposition or current density for galvanostatic deposition. The growth of ZnO nanorods by electrodeposition is achieved when an oxygen precursor is reduced at the interface of the electrode in the presence of zinc ions. Generally, molecular oxygen and nitrate ions have been widely used for the deposition. According to the demonstration of Elias et al., modifying the ratio between the OH−-generation rate and Zn2+ diffusion rate enabled the morphology control of ZnO nanostructures.153 In addition, additives such as hexamethylenetetramine162 and ethylenediamine163 caused a change in the morphologies of ZnO nanorods. The deposition yield was found to be significantly enhanced by increasing the KCl concentration. Under a high concentration of Cl− ions, the oxygen reduction mechanism is changed from a four-electron reaction to a two-electron process, which provides a suitable condition for the efficient growth of ZnO nanorods.
Some of the metal-oxide nanorods were obtained using electrodeposition and subsequent chemical transformation. Metal-hydroxide nanorods were firstly grown by electrodeposition and then the metal hydroxide transformed into corresponding metal oxides by thermal decomposition. For example, vertically aligned In2O3 nanorod arrays were prepared by dehydration of electrodeposited In(OH)3 nanorod arrays at 400 °C.164 In addition, α-MnO2,165 Y2O3,158 and Gd2O3160 nanorods were reported using the two-step process.
While many studies of nanorod growth by electrodeposition have focused on metal oxides, some electrodeposition synthetic strategies for non-oxide nanorods were achieved and reported.166–168 Chappaz-Gillot et al. fabricated CuSCN nanowires for the first time using template-free electrodeposition.166 Because Cu2+ and SCN− show poor stability in water, chelating agents are commonly used, which leads to 2D layer deposition. The 1-D CuSCN nanostructure was obtained by using EDTA under acidic conditions. Within the potential ranges between −0.05 V and −0.5 V, nanorods were obtained. At −0.1 V, the CuSCN nanowire array showed high density and uniformity in height and was perpendicular to the substrate as shown in Fig. 14a. CdTe nanorods arrays were prepared on ITO substrates via direct electrodeposition by Li et al.167 The authors verified the effective potentials at which the deposition of Cd and Te occurs through cyclic voltammetry. Although they could not determine the exact value of potential for the CdTe nanorod array deposition, the changes in morphology were demonstrated by varying the potential from −0.4 V to −0.5 V. While the products were mainly composed of spherical particles at −0.4 V, nanorods with about 500 nm and 1 μm in diameter and length, respectively, were made at −0.5 V. The nanorod growth was explained by Ostwald ripening under the supersaturated medium.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM micrographs of CuSCN nanowire arrays on various substrates with a variation of the deposition potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (b) Cross-sectional and top-view SEM micrographs of Cu2O nanorod arrays with different growth times. (c) Schematic concept of electrochemical flow-based solution–solid synthesis for the fabrication of Cu2O nanorod arrays. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 
The pulsed electrodeposition technique has been studied to make more refined nanostructures.169–171 In general, pulsed electrodeposition is carried out giving a square-wave pulse which can be applied either galvanostatically or potentiostatically. Unlike continuous DC electrodeposition, there is enough time for ion diffusion to occur during the pulse-off time, resulting in a reduction of the concentration gradient. This technique is advantageous in that it can precisely control the quality of materials by varying the parameters like the number of cycles, duty cycle, potential, etc. Various semiconductor films with distinctive nanostructures have been prepared by pulsed electrodeposition. Some of them grew into a nanorod shape.172–175
A ZnO nanorod array prepared by pulsed current (galvanostatic) electrodeposition was demonstrated.172 The nanorods were grown on a metal-coated ITO substrate with the pulse length, period, and current density set to be 0.01 s, 0.1 s, and −2 mA cm−2, respectively. The substrates greatly affected the characteristics of ZnO nanorods such as the diameter, density, and transmittance. A ZnO nanorod array grown on an Au-coated ITO substrate was 30 times denser than that grown on a bare ITO substrate. The size of the Au cluster was found to affect the density and diameter of the product. The pulsed potentiostatic electrodeposition was found to be unsuitable for 1-D ZnO nanorod growth. Rather, the pulsed potentiostatic electrodeposition can be applied for ZnO film growth. Manzano et al. demonstrated that various morphologies of ZnO films can be achieved by controlling the reduction potential through pulsed potential (potentiostatic) electrodeposition.173 The authors varied the reduction potential from −1.5 V to −0.5 V, where hexagonal nanorods were grown at the most negative potential and ZnO films having discrete morphologies like desert rose, flower, smooth film, etc. were synthesized at the other potential. Lee et al. prepared manganese oxide (MnOx) nanostructures by pulse reverse electrodeposition, which is a modified version of pulsed electrodeposition where the reverse pulse is applied instead of zero potential.175 The nanorod morphology was obtained only by the pulse reverse electrodeposition while the flower petal-like structure was obtained by pulsed electrodeposition. It is due to the dissolution and/or removal of passive intermediate species during the negative potential period.
The electrochemical flow-based solution–solid (electrochemical flow-SS), analogous to the flow based SLS method, was introduced by Shin et al.176 This method was successfully applied to synthesize Cu2O nanorod arrays on Cu foils and Au/Ti coated Si substrates as shown in Fig. 14b. The deposition was conducted using a two-electrode system. The electrolyte, dilute aqueous solution of CuSO4·H2O, flowed with a continuous rate during the deposition as presented in Fig. 14c. Instead of using metal catalysts as in the SLS growth, the electric field applied between the electrodes plays the role of the catalyst. Single crystalline Cu2O nanorods were grown along the [111] direction. The Cu2O nanorod arrays were perpendicular to the substrate and had a triangular column shape (Fig. 14b).
5.3 Anodization, spin coating and SILAR method

5.3.1 Anodization. 
Anodization or anodic oxidation is a traditional surface modification method for various metals. This oxidation process converts the surface of the metal to an oxide/hydroxide film which is generally a protective layer for the inner metal. Although anodization has been industrially utilized from the early 1900s, precise control of the anodizing process has been achieved only in the last couple of decades so that anodization can be used to fabricate nanostructures. Since then, many 1-D metal-oxide nanoarrays have been prepared by anodization of metal plates or metal thin films.
Chang et al. carried out anodization of Fe layers sputtered on FTO substrates.177 The anodization was conducted at 50 V for 90 s at room temperature in an ethylene glycol solution containing NH4F. According to a detailed study, iron was firstly oxidized into iron oxide. After that, the pores were created by F− ions and became bigger as the reaction time increased, resulting in self-oriented Fe2O3 nanorod arrays as shown in Fig. 15a. Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle and nanotube arrays were fabricated by anodizing a copper foil in an aqueous solution of KOH.178 It was found that the morphology of Cu(OH)2 was greatly affected by the concentration of KOH. After the Cu(OH)2 nanostructure was formed, it can be transformed into Cu2O just by annealing at temperatures above 500 °C.179,180 Highly ordered anatase TiO2 nanorod arrays were prepared, for the first time, by combining anodization and the hydrothermal method.181 Firstly, an amorphous TiO2 nanotube was fabricated by anodizing a Ti foil. In order to convert the amorphous nanotube into the crystalline nanowire, hydrothermal treatment was conducted in an electric oven at 180 °C for 2 h. The product showed high visible light absorption.
 Fig. 15  (a) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of Fe2O3 nanorod arrays prepared with different anodization times (15 s for top and 90 s for bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (b) Schematic growth process of the Sb2Se3 nanoneedle arrays through spin-coating. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of flower-like, ribbon grass-like, and long leaf weed-like nanostructures from different Cu precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 


5.3.2 Spin coating. 
Antimony selenide (Sb2Se3) is a narrow bandgap semiconductor with good chemical stability. It has attracted attention as a promising light absorber for photovoltaic devices, thermoelectric cooling devices, electrochemical hydrogen storage and lithium-ion battery devices. Kim et al. adopted a simple spin-coating to prepare Sb2Se3 nanoneedle arrays on FTO substrates.182 The Sb2Se3 precursor solution was obtained after preparing the Sb solution and Se solution, respectively. Sb2Se3 was spin-coated on the FTO substrate under a N2 atmosphere for 30 s. The substrate was immediately heated at various temperatures. This procedure was repeated six times. The Sb2Se3 nanorod structure was formed after the first spin-coating. As the spin-coating repeated, the nanostructures grew into a carrot shape owing to the capillary force as presented in Fig. 15b. As-made Sb2Se3 presented the preferential growth direction along [001] and the annual ring shaped interfacial defects originated from every iteration.


5.3.3 SILAR. 
The successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method is a modified type of chemical bath deposition, which was firstly reported in 1985 by Ristov et al.183 While unnecessary precipitation is inevitable in the CBD method, loss of precursors can be minimized in the SILAR method because the cation and anion precursors are kept separate.184 Bulakhe et al. prepared nanostructured copper hydroxide using the SILAR method on 3D nickel foam.185 In their work, three different precursors were used and each one produced different morphologies. Flower-like, ribbon grass-like, and leaf weed-like nanostructures were obtained with Cu(OAc)2, CuCl2, and CuSO4, respectively (Fig. 15c).

6. Applications
6.1 Photovoltaic application
The 1-D CdS nanowire array on a TCO substrate is suitable for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications because of the direct visible band gap of CdS (2.4 eV) and reduced carrier diffusion length of the 1-D nanowire array structure. Also, the heterostructured 1-D nanowire arrays can take the advantages of enlarged p–n junction area and low recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs. However, the TCO substrate could suffer from severe quality deterioration because of high-temperature vapor-phase synthesis for 1-D CdS nanowires. Various approaches have been reported to realize the low-temperature fabrication of 1-D nanowires on TCO substrates.
CIGS (copper indium gallium selenide)/CdS heterostructures were fabricated on FTO substrates through the low-temperature SLS (solution–liquid–solid) strategy and subsequent electrodeposition.186 1-D CdS nanowire arrays on FTO substrates were fabricated following the SLS method.106 The schematic fabrication processes are described in Fig. 16a. For the formation of the CIGS film on the as-synthesized 1-D CdS nanowire, the electrodeposition was used through a 3-electrode potentiostatic system. The Cu, In, Ga and Se species were electrodeposited on the surface of CdS nanowires and converted into the CIGS phase by further annealing at 400 °C. The photovoltaic performances of the CIGS/CdS-NW (nanowire) and CIGS/CdS-TF (thin film) were investigated under 1 sun illumination. The CIGS/CdS-NW showed an enhanced power conversion efficiency (Eff) of 6.18% than the CIGS/CdS-TF with 4.80% (Fig. 16b). The CIGS/CdS-NW exhibited enhanced current density because of the single crystallinity of the CdS nanowire and enlarged interface areas between CIGS and CdS compared with CIGS/CdS-TF. The power conversion efficiency of the CIGS/CdS-NW was increased by 28.7% by introducing 1-D CdS nanowire arrays through a low-temperature synthetic approach.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic image presenting the procedure for fabrication of the CIGS/CdS solar cell structure by SLS growth and electrodeposition and the resultant SEM images showing the CIGS film formation [electrodeposition time: (i) for 1 min, (ii) for 10 min and (iii) for 20 min]. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the CIGS/CdS nanowire cells and CIGS/CdS bilayer film cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) FESEM micrographs of bare CdS [left] and CdS/CdO core/shell [right] nanorod arrays. (d) The photocurrent and the dark current densities with respect to potentials and the chopped photocurrent responses of bare CdS and CdS/CdO core/shell nanorod arrays at 0 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
6.2 Photoelectrochemical application
CdS with a narrow visible band gap has been a promising material for solar photoelectrochemical application because of its intense light absorption properties. In photoelectrochemical application, 1-D nanowire arrays are strongly favoured due to their large surface area for catalytic reactions and reduced diffusion length for minority carriers. The low-temperature SLS method is believed to be one of the best fabricating methods for photoelectrochemical application because of precise diameter control of nanowires and the low-temperature process for TCO conductivity. Although several hydrothermally grown CdS nanowire arrays have been reported, their nanowires with large diameters have difficulty in maximizing the surface area.
The CdS/CdO nanorods on FTO substrates were reported by Cho et al. using a low-temperature SLS fabrication strategy.187 The 1-D CdS nanorod arrays on the FTO substrate were fabricated based on the SLS method with little change.106 To prepare the CdS/CdO core/shell structure, the as-synthesized CdS nanorod array was immersed in cadmium nitrate solution with concentration variations (0.125, 0.25, 0.5 and 1 mM). The annealing process was conducted at 400 °C to obtain the final CdS/CdO nanorod arrays (Fig. 16c). The photoelectrochemical properties were measured using a 3-electrode configuration with the Na2S and Na2SO3 electrolyte under illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The CdS/CdO nanorods showed an enhanced photocurrent density compared with bare CdS nanorods as presented in Fig. 16d. In their work, the detailed working mechanism of z-scheme construction was demonstrated including other photoelectrochemical properties. Particularly, the dimension scale of the CdS/CdO photocatalyst was controlled to be within or above the SCR (space charge region) width. The photoelectrochemical properties of samples within the SCR width were distinct from bulk or 2-D thin film photocatalysts. The fabrication of 1-D CdS nanorod arrays through the SLS method enabled an understanding of the unexpected nanoscale photoelectrochemical properties.
6.3 Electrochromic application
The commercially available smart windows require a material with good electrochromic properties, which enables a reversible optical color change of materials as a result of electrochemical reduction or oxidation. Co3O4 is a promising candidate material for industrial applications for smart windows due to its efficient energy-saving ability, good cyclic durability and low production cost. Many fabrication methods have been studied for Co3O4 electrochromic layers including sputtering, electrochemical deposition and sol–gel processes, etc. However, the compact Co3O4 films by those methods consequently cause low electrochromic performance such as a slow response time and unclear color contrast. Eventually, the development of well-ordered Co3O4 1-D nanoarrays has been highly requested to realize a large surface area and short diffusion length for maximizing the optical color change.
A 1-D Co3O4 nanowire array on an ITO substrate was reported by Xia et al. using the wet chemical growth strategy.76 The seed layer was introduced by spin coating of ethanol solution with cobalt acetate and a subsequent wet chemical reaction was conducted for the Co3O4 nanowire arrays. As shown in Fig. 17a and b, the Co3O4 nanowires with a diameter of ∼100 nm were vertically grown on the ITO substrate. The Co3O4 nanowires exhibit a curvy outline morphology because of the polycrystalline nature, which could increase the surface area of nanoarrays. The authors measured the cyclic voltammograms of 1-D Co3O4 nanowire arrays. It was found that the typical redox couple reaction between Co(OH)2 (pale yellow) and Co3O4 (dark grey) was presented in the voltammogram peaks of A1/C1 as shown in Fig. 17c. The Co3O4 nanowire array went through optical color changes during the cyclic voltammetry measurements. The optical transmittance spectra of bleached and colored Co3O4 1-D nanowire arrays are shown in Fig. 17d. The difference between colored and bleached samples is determined to be about 32%, which is higher than that of the compact Co3O4 film (15%).
 Fig. 17  (a and b) Morphological analysis of Co3O4 nanowire arrays through SEM. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of Co3O4 nanowire arrays. (d) Optical properties of bleached and colored Co3O4 nanowire array films. Insets are digital photographs of Co3O4 nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
6.4 Water-splitting photocatalysts
Artificial photosynthesis, the so called z-scheme water-splitting, which mimics natural photosynthesis of plants has been highlighted for water-splitting to generate O2 and H2. In general, z-scheme photocatalysts are composed of a pair of semiconductors. The individual half reactions of water-splitting (hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction) will be carried out by the photo-generated minority carriers at the surfaces of two semiconductors, while each majority carrier from two semiconductors would recombine at an ohmic contact. Colloidal powders have been a preferential form for z-scheme water-splitting studies because of the facile realization of heterostructured particles. However, the colloidal photocatalysts suffer from mixed generation of O2 and H2 gas and are not suitable for practical applications due to integration issues.
A fully integrated 1-D TiO2/Si nanowire array for z-scheme water-splitting was developed by Liu et al. through wet chemical growth.188 First, Si nanowire arrays were fabricated as a frame for TiO2/Si heterostructures through reactive-ion etching and photoresist patterning. The TiO2 nanowires were grown on the surface of the Si frame through the hydrothermal method. Briefly a mixture of titanium tetraisopropoxide and hydrochloric acid was heat treated with the Si frame introduced. As shown in Fig. 18a, the Si frame takes most part of photocatalysts and TiO2 nanowires are grown on each Si nanowire surface. The TiO2/Si heterostructures served as fully integrated z-scheme photocatalysts for direct water splitting. The 1-D TiO2/Si nanowire array photocatalysts utilize a large surface area, z-scheme process, and integrated O2 and H2 generation to increase the energy conversion efficiency as shown in Fig. 18b and c. The authors measured the H2 and O2 gas generation via gas chromatography as shown in Fig. 18d. Without any external bias, solar conversion with the 2:1 ratio of H2versus O2 was successfully achieved.
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a 1-D TiO2/Si nanowire array. (b) Schematic structure of the TiO2/Si photocatalyst which absorbs different parts of the solar spectrum. (c) Band diagram of the TiO2/Si heterostructure for z-scheme water-splitting. (d) Gas chromatography measurement of H2 and O2 evolution using the TiO2/Si photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e) FEMSEM micrographs of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures. (f) Graphs of the dynamic TMA sensing response of α-Fe2O3, TiO2 and α-Fe2O3/TiO2. (g) Schematic TMA detection mechanism of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
6.5 Gas sensors
1-D Semiconducting oxides such as In2O3, SnO2 and TiO2 are widely studied as gas sensors due to their appropriate electrical and optical properties. Although many research studies about gas sensors with 1-D oxide nanostructures have been reported, the sensitivity and selectivity of the devices are still required to be improved. Among various applications of gas sensors, the capture of trimethylamine (TMA) gas is very important to guarantee a fresh storage of fish. It is well-known that TMA gas is generated as the freshness of fish organs or proteins decreases.
Lou et al. developed 1-D branched α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures for TMA detection through the electrospinning and hydrothermal method.189 The TiO2 nanofiber backbone was constructed using tetrabutyl titanate, acetic acid, ethanol and PVP (poly-vinylpyrrolidone) solution via the electrospinning method. Then α-Fe2O3/TiO2 branched heterostructures were synthesized through well-known hydrothermal growth for iron oxide. The 1-D branched α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures are presented in Fig. 18e. The stem part of heterostructures was TiO2 with a diameter of about 600 nm and smooth surface, while branch parts of α-Fe2O3 showed a rough surface with a length of about 150 nm. The authors measured the TMA sensing properties of pristine α-Fe2O3 nanorods, TiO2 nanofibers and α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures as shown in Fig. 18f. The pristine α-Fe2O3 showed a better dynamic TMA-sensing response than TiO2 nanofibers due to the well-known catalytic activity of α-Fe2O3. The response of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures increased by about 2 and 6 fold compared to pristine α-Fe2O3 and TiO2, respectively. The authors demonstrated that branched α-Fe2O3/TiO2 nanostructures played an important role in increasing the gas sensing responses. First, the heterostructures induced enhanced charge separation and surface area, which led to the increase of the gas sensing response. Second, as shown in Fig. 18g the increased potential barriers at α-Fe2O3/TiO2 junctions could enhance the sensitivity of the gas sensors.
6.6 Photonics
Bismuth chalcogenides (Bi2S3, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3) are attractive candidates for photonic applications due to their favorable electronic, optoelectronic and electrical properties. In the photodetector field, graphene is the widely researched material due to its carrier mobility and outstanding performance. However, the small band gap of graphene reduces its further application validity. Huang et al. studied the fabrication method and photodetector applications of 2-D Bi2S3 nanosheets.190 Bi2S3 with a direct band gap of 1.2 eV exhibits a high absorption coefficient and prominent carrier mobility. Sun et al. studied the synthesis of Bi2Se3 and its optical absorption properties.191 Both research studies realized 2-D bismuth chalcogenides via the liquid-phase exfoliation method. As shown in Fig. 19a, bulk Bi2S3 powder was ground and mixed with NMP (N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) using an agate mortar and pestle. The mixture of Bi2S3/NMP was then treated with probe sonication and bath sonication in sequence. The 2-D Bi2S3 nanosheets were collected through centrifugation. Bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) has been studied as a saturable absorber induced by its topological insulator properties. Some research studies realized 2-D Bi2Te3 saturable absorbers through the liquid-phase exfoliation method.192–194 The raw Bi2Te3 and various solvent such as ethyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol and deionized water were used for fabricating Bi2Te3 photonic devices. Miao et al. fabricated 2-D Bi2Te3 nanosheets through the hydrothermal method and studied their nonlinear optical properties.195
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic image of liquid-phase exfoliation to synthesize Bi2S3 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram for fabricating 2-D tellurium nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (c) FESEM and TEM images of 1-D Te@Se nanotubes and the crystal structure of the Te@Se nanotube composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
Tellurium has been known as one of the promising candidates for photonic devices due to its good optical properties. 2-D Tellurium nanosheets were synthesized through liquid-phase exfoliation like layered bismuth chalcogenides. Xie et al. studied ultrathin 2-D tellurium nanosheets and their photoresponses.196 Wu et al. fabricated nonlinear photonic devices through 2-D tellurium nanosheets.197 A mixture of bulk tellurium and solvent was used for fabricating 2-D tellurium nanosheets through liquid-phase exfoliation as shown in Fig. 19b. On the other hand, Huang et al. developed a PEC-type broadband photodetector by synthesizing Te@Se roll-to-roll 1-D nanotubes using the hydrothermal method.198 The 1-D Te@Se nanotubes were fabricated by mixing PVP (polyvinylpyrrolidone), Na2TeO3, deionized water, acetone, hydrazine monohydrate and Se powder. As shown in Fig. 19c, the length of the Te@Se nanotubes was a few micrometers with a diameter of about 60 nm. To fabricate PEC-type working electrodes, the 1-D Te@Se nanotubes were dispersed in solution and drop cast on ITO glass substrates. The working electrodes were dried under vacuum and heat treated at 80 °C to enhance the adhesion between 1-D nanotubes and substrates. The photodetectors with the 1-D Te@Se nanotubes exhibited an enhanced broadband detection range and stability in an aqueous environment.
7. Conclusions
The low-temperature wet-chemical growth of 1-D nanostructure arrays has been covered in this review article with various synthetic strategies. The fabrication methods for 1-D nanowires using wet-chemical approaches take the advantages of simple manipulation, scalability to large area, mass production and cost-effectiveness. Although highly ordered and vertically aligned nanowire arrays have been realized through high temperature vapor-phase synthesis, the advanced wet chemical synthetic strategies offered a promising way for fabrication of outstanding 1-D nanostructure arrays recently. To fulfill the exceptional requirements for practical applications, many researches have concentrated on the precise control of chemical composition, crystallographic phase, morphology, etc. in each synthetic strategy.
Nevertheless, the wet-chemical synthesis has some challenging issues that hinder its practical progress. First, the coverage of materials is still crowded in selective oxides. Although we introduced the eminent results for 1-D non-oxide nanoarrays, the oxide semiconductors possess the majority portion of wet-chemical synthesis. The one-step fabrication of hetero-structured 1-D nanoarrays has been unusual so far. The fabrication of hetero-structured 1-D nanoarrays is essential for practical applications. And thus, the synthetic strategy should keep up with designed or calculated heterostructures. In the synthesis we still require a comprehensive understanding of wet-chemical reactions and intermediate complexes for the thorough control of fabrication. The formation mechanism of some anisotropic 1-D nanowire is still unclear or hypothetically understood. Metastable 1-D nanostructures are fabricated frequently and therefore further annealing processes are generally introduced to obtain the final products above 500 °C. The enhanced wet-chemical synthesis strategy would be promising for the above listed practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grants funded by the Korean government (NRF-2016R1E1A1A01942834).
References
F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O’Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Goesmann and C. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1362–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2877–2887 CrossRef .
F. Gu, L. Zhang, X. Yin and L. Tong, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2757–2761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Yu, S. F. Yen, W. C. Tang and P. J. Burke, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 753–756 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kar, B. Satpati, P. V. Satyam and S. Chaudhuri, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19134–19138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ohwada, K. Kimoto, K. Suenaga, Y. Sato, Y. Ebina and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1820–1823 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu and Z. Xu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 133, 148–157 CAS .
B. Xiang, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. H. Luo, Y. W. Zhu, H. Z. Zhang and D. P. Yu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 1152–1155 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Zhao, G. Zhou, Y. Zhou and J. Qi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 024108 CrossRef .
N. M. Hwang, W. S. Cheong, D. Y. Yoon and D. Y. Kim, J. Cryst. Growth, 2000, 218, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuykendall, P. Pauzauskie, S. Lee, Y. Zhang, J. Goldberger and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1063–1066 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. A. M. Bakkers, J. A. Van Dam, S. De Franceschi, L. P. Kouwenhoven, M. Kaiser, M. Verheijen, H. Wondergem and P. Van Der Sluis, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 769–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, R. Fan and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 83–86 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheyssac, M. Sacilotti and G. Patriarche, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044315 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Z. Lu, J. Liu, X. Lei, Z. Chang, L. Luo and X. Sun, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2013, 23, 351–366 CrossRef .
G. S. D. Babu, X. S. Shajan, A. George, P. Parameswaran, S. Murugesan, R. Divakar, E. Mohandas, S. Kumaresan and G. M. Rao, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 63, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, W. R. Bae, H. S. Yang, C. W. Hong, H. R. Jung, M. P. Suryawanshi, K. V. Gurav, S. M. Pawar, P. S. Patil, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32530–32533 RSC .
C. Baek, J. E. Wang, S. Ryu, J. H. Kim, C. K. Jeong, K. I. Park and D. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2851–2856 RSC .
W. Zhu, G. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Xiang and S. Zhu, Powder Technol., 2010, 203, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L. P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. Sang, C. Xing, Z. Li, B. Dong, F. Xing, D. Fan, S. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, S. Song and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5714–5743 RSC .
S. Feng and R. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Cundy and P. A. Cox, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 663–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Willander, L. L. Yang, A. Wadeasa, S. U. Ali, M. H. Asif, Q. X. Zhao and O. Nur, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1006–1018 RSC .
C. García Núñez, J. L. Pau, E. Ruíz, A. García Marín, B. J. García, J. Piqueras, G. Shen, D. S. Wilbert, S. M. Kim and P. Kung, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 555, 42–47 CrossRef .
F. Solis-Pomar, A. Jaramillo, J. Lopez-Villareal, C. Medina, D. Rojas, A. C. Mera, M. F. Meléndrez and E. Pérez-Tijerina, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 18045–18052 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sung, K. Noh, W. C. Kwak and T. G. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33–71 CrossRef .
L. Vayssieres, K. Keis, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4395–4398 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, J. Goldberger, F. Kim, J. C. Johnson, Y. Zhang, R. J. Saykally and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3031–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, M. Guo, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 035605 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song and S. Lim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 596–600 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, C. Lao, B. Weintraub and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Res., 2008, 23, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Wei, M. Kirkham, J. Liu, W. Mai, D. Davidovic, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14958–14959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lazar and W. A. Daoud, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4130–4140 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Lou, C. Zhang, S. Yin, H. Li, D. Sun and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 43938–43949 RSC .
S. Wu, Z. Weng, X. Liu, K. W. K. Yeung and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5464–5481 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ao and S. C. Lee, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Egerton, N. J. Everall, J. A. Mattinson, L. M. Kessell and I. R. Tooley, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 193, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1307–1311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943–14949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Miao, D. Xu, J. Ouyang, G. Guo, X. Zhao and Y. Tang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 717–720 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Weng, K. F. Hsu and K. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4080–4086 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, K. Kakiuchi and H. Imai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7790–7791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, G. Chen, W. Zhang, M. Qiu, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, G. Ma and Y. Fu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 43630–43638 RSC .
Q. Huang, G. Zhou, L. Fang, L. Hu and Z. S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2145–2151 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, B. Li, H. Wang, W. Zhao, H. Huang, C. Liang, X. Yu, Z. Liu and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17531–17538 RSC .
G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127–156 RSC .
M. Shibuya and M. Miyauchi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1373–1376 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Zhu, J. C. She, J. Y. Luo, S. Z. Deng, J. Chen and N. S. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15504–15509 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gu, T. Zhai, B. Gao, X. Sheng, Y. Wang, H. Fu, Y. Ma and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23829–23836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Amano, D. Li and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2769–2771 RSC .
C. Gu, J. Zhang and J. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 352, 573–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. P. Tu, X. H. Xia, X. L. Wang and C. D. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5492–5498 RSC .
A. Phuruangrat, D. J. Ham, S. J. Hong, S. Thongtem and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1683–1690 RSC .
J. H. Ha, P. Muralidharan and D. K. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475, 446–451 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karunakaran and S. Senthilvelan, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Kartikowati, Q. Li, S. Horie, T. Ogi, T. Iwaki and K. Okuyama, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 40124–40130 RSC .
M. Testa-Anta, S. Liébana-Viñas, B. Rivas-Murias, B. R. González, M. Farle and V. Salgueiriño, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20462–20467 RSC .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, J. Reddy, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4074–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Zhang, F. Lyu, X. He, Z. Liang, M. S. Balogun, X. Lu, P. P. Fang and Y. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 186, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Chen, H. Li, Z. Ruan, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2521–2530 RSC .
M. Ebadi, M. A. Mat-Teridi, M. Y. Sulaiman, W. J. Basirun, N. Asim, N. A. Ludin, M. A. Ibrahim and K. Sopian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36820–36827 RSC .
T. Zhou, T. Zhang, J. Deng, R. Zhang, Z. Lou and L. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 242, 369–377 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Y. Xiang, X. L. Wang and X. B. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 386–389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Tan and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14258–14259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pralong, A. Delahaye-Vidal, B. Beaudoin, B. Gérand and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 955–960 RSC .
J. Jiang, J. P. Liu, X. T. Huang, Y. Y. Li, R. M. Ding, X. X. Ji, Y. Y. Hu, Q. B. Chi and Z. H. Zhu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and X. B. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1835–1841 RSC .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X. B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Xiong, X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, J. Chen, Y. Q. Zhang, D. Zhou, C. D. Gu and X. L. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 344–350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, D. Fang, C. Wang, Z. Zhou, Z. Luo, J. Huang and J. Yi, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 742, 567–576 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Hu, Z. Wang, W. Lu, S. Yang, G. Wu, Y. Wang, S. Wang, H. Gu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8185–8190 RSC .
Z. Su, L. Wang, S. Grigorescu, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15561–15564 RSC .
J. Duan, W. Shi, L. Xu, G. Mou, Q. Xin and J. Guan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7301–7303 RSC .
S. Vijayakumar, S. H. Lee and K. S. Ryu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 979–986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Shen, L. Niu, R. Li, H. Guo, Y. Shi, C. Li, X. Liu and Y. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9977–9985 RSC .
S. Li, J. Wang, M. Wang and Y. Ni, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 403–410 RSC .
X. Zhou, G. Chen, J. Tang, Y. Ren and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Pu, Y. Tong, Y. Cheng, Y. Gao and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5434–5440 RSC .
X. Guan, Q. Wang, P. Luo, Y. Yu, X. Li, Y. Zhang and D. Chen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 2272–2285 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, W. Wang, L. Wang, M. Niu, W. Zhang, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1501–1506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S. Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 022105 CrossRef .
F. Chen, R. Zhou, L. Yang, M. Shi, G. Wu, M. Wang and H. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13457–13462 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, P. Fang and S. Wang, J. Mater. Res., 2009, 24, 2821–2827 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, W. Cai, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Sun, S. H. Heo and S. O. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13385–13392 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Tang, G. Z. Wang, H. Q. Wang, Y. X. Zhang and G. H. Li, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3663–3665 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Wang and L. X. Liang, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2012, 29, 086801 CrossRef .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 851–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, C. Dun, Q. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Shi, D. L. Carroll, G. Liu and G. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21015–21020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4639–4643 RSC .
Y. Zhang, A. M. Sanchez, M. Aagesen, S. Huo, H. A. Fonseka, J. A. Gott, D. Kim, X. Yu, X. Chen, J. Xu, T. Li, H. Zeng, G. Boras and H. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 1803684 Search PubMed .
L. Ouyang, K. N. Maher, C. L. Yu, J. McCarty and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Kwak, T. G. Kim, W. Lee, S. H. Han and Y. M. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1615–1619 CrossRef CAS .
H. Okamoto and T. B. Massalski, J. Phase Equilib., 1991, 12, 148–168 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, V. L. Wayman, R. A. Loomis and W. E. Buhro, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5188–5194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and W. E. Buhro, Small, 2010, 6, 573–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Sung, W. C. Kwak and T. G. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 389–392 RSC .
A. Dorn, P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3260–3265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Furneaux, W. R. Rigby and A. P. Davidson, Nature, 1989, 337, 147–149 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Jin, G. W. Jiang, W. F. Liu, W. L. Cai, L. Z. Yao, Z. Yao and X. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1743–1746 RSC .
Y. Li, G. W. Meng, L. D. Zhang and F. Phillipp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2011–2013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Saedi and M. Ghorbani, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 91, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
D. Crouse, Y. H. Lo, A. E. Miller and M. Crouse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schönenberger, B. M. I. van der Zande, L. G. J. Fokkink, M. Henny, C. Schmid, M. Krüger, A. Bachtold, R. Huber, H. Birk and U. Staufer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5497–5505 CrossRef .
D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 487, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Iqbal, J. Lin, X. Luo, B. Jiang, V. Malgras, K. C. W. Wu, J. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1764–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. K. Pandey, S. N. Sahu and S. Chandra, Handbook of semiconductor electrodeposition,  1996 Search PubMed .
D. Routkevitch, T. Bigioni, M. Moskvits and J. M. Su, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 14037–14047 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, J. B. Shi, C. J. Chen and J. Y. Lin, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3618–3621 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Cho, D. V. Talapin, W. Gaschler and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7140–7147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. A. Lau, D. J. Chernak, M. J. Bierman and S. Jin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 934–940 RSC .
X. S. Peng, J. Zhang, X. F. Wang, Y. W. Wang, L. X. Zhao, G. W. Meng and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 343, 470–474 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Prieto, M. S. Sander, M. S. Martín-González, R. Gronsky, T. Sands and A. M. Stacy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7160–7161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yang, X. Huang, G. Li and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12394–12398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Kum, B. Y. Yoo, Y. W. Rheem, K. N. Bozhilov, W. Chen, A. Mulchandani and N. V. Myung, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 325711 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Hao, G. Meng and L. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, C664–C668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Yang, Y. B. Chen, F. Liu, X. Y. Chen and Y. C. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6420–6425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, T. Xie, B. Cheng, B. Geng and L. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 380, 521–525 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Xu, S. J. Bao, L. B. Kong, H. Li and H. L. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 1351–1355 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lee, S. M. Lee and J. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 517–520 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, Y. Xu, J. Hong, H. Liu, G. Yin, B. Li, C. Tie and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1393–1394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Bando, K. Wada and K. Kurashima, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1999, 18, 1911–1913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Dong, H. L. Li and S. Q. Shi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 84, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Dong and H. L. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Dong and H. L. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 274–281 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Hou, X. Quan and G. Chen, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 2684–2690 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ji, S. Tang, B. Xu, B. Gu and Y. Du, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 379, 484–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Shen and H. Li, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 146, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kostoglou, N. Andritsos and A. J. Karabelas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 3272–3283 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Mane and C. D. Lokhande, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2000, 65, 1–31 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. More, T. P. Gujar, J. L. Gunjakar, C. D. Lokhande and O. S. Joo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 2682–2687 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, J. M. Wu, T. T. Guo, M. Z. Tang and W. Wen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3046–3050 RSC .
L. Xiong, H. Yu, G. Yang, M. Qiu, J. Chen and Y. Yu, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6738–6745 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Aref, L. Xiong, N. Yan, A. M. Abdulkarem and Y. Yu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 127, 433–439 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhara, G. Hodes and S. K. Sarkar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 53694–53700 RSC .
G. F. Fulop and R. M. Taylor, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1985, 15, 197–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Lokhande and S. H. Pawar, Phys. Status Solidi, 1989, 111, 17–40 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ojo and I. M. Dharmadasa, Coatings, 2018, 8, 262 CrossRef .
J. Elias, C. Léuy-Clément, M. Bechelany, J. Michler, G. Y. Wang, Z. Wang and L. Philippe, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1607–1612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghannam, C. Bazin, A. Chahboun and M. Turmine, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 6618–6628 RSC .
Y. Park, M. Oh, J. S. Park, S. H. Baek, M. Kim, S. Kim and J. H. Kim, Carbon, 2015, 94, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yousefi, A. N. Golikand, M. H. Mashhadizadeh and M. Aghazadeh, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 193–198 CrossRef .
T. Yousefi, A. N. Golikand, M. H. Mashhadizadeh and M. Aghazadeh, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2012, 43, 614–618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aghazadeh, M. Ghaemi, A. N. Golikand and A. Ahmadi, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Lu, D. Z. Zheng, J. Y. Gan, Z. Q. Liu, C. L. Liang, P. Liu and Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7118–7122 RSC .
M. Aghazadeh and T. Yousefi, Mater. Lett., 2012, 73, 176–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skompska and K. Zarȩbska, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 467–488 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, Y. Lu, Y. Xie and Y. Liu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y. Guo, Q. Liao, J. Zhang and D. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13519–13522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gan, X. Lu, T. Zhai, Y. Zhao, S. Xie, Y. Mao, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14685–14692 RSC .
T. Yousefi, A. N. Golikand, M. H. Mashhadizadeh and M. Aghazadeh, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 190, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chappaz-Gillot, R. Salazar, S. Berson and V. Ivanova, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 24, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L. Tian, K. Chi, H. Yang, M. Sun and W. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 270, 707–711 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khosrow-Pour, M. Aghazadeh, S. Dalvand and B. Sabour, Mater. Lett., 2013, 104, 61–63 CrossRef CAS .
H. Natter and R. Hempelmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 19525–19532 CrossRef .
F. Xiao and Y. Xu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 7440–7450 CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Li and M. Pritzker, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 225–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, R. C. Chang and C. C. Lin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, D771–D776 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Manzano, O. Caballero-Calero, S. Hormeño, M. Penedo, M. Luna and M. S. Martín-González, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1502–1508 CrossRef .
X. M. Li, S. S. Li, X. Ma, K. Tang, Z. Wang, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, Mater. Lett., 2019, 238, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, H. Lee, M. S. Cho, J. D. Nam and Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14606–14611 RSC .
J. H. Shin, S. H. Park, S. M. Hyun, J. W. Kim, H. M. Park and J. Y. Song, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18226–18232 RSC .
C. Y. Chang, C. H. Wang, C. J. Tseng, K. W. Cheng, L. W. Hourng and B. T. Tsai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13616–13622 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Bai, J. Zhang, F. Chen and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22836–22842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M. K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. I. Salehmin, L. Jeffery Minggu, W. F. Mark-Lee, M. A. Mohamed, K. Arifin, M. H. H. Jumali and M. B. Kassim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 182, 237–245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, D. Zhu and S. Cao, Superlattices Microstruct., 2016, 90, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Lee, H. Shin, J. Kim and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2180–2187 RSC .
M. Ristov, G. Sinadinovski and I. Grozdanov, Thin Solid Films, 1985, 123, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Pathan and C. D. Lokhande, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2004, 27, 85–111 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Bulakhe, V. Q. Nguyen, D. Tuma, Y. R. Lee, H. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. J. Shim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 66, 288–297 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Kwak, S. H. Han, T. G. Kim and Y. M. Sung, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 5297–5301 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Cho and Y. M. Sung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 176–185 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lou, F. Li, J. Deng, L. L. Wang and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12310–12316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, C. Xing, Y. Wang, Z. Li, L. Wu, D. Ma, X. Dai, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2404–2412 RSC .
L. Sun, Z. Lin, J. Peng, J. Weng, Y. Huang and Z. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4794 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, K. Yang, S. Zhao, T. Li, W. Qiao, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. He, J. Bian, L. Zheng, L. Su and J. Xu, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 461–466 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Zhao, J. Chi, Z. Zhao, C. Yang, H. Hu and Y. Yao, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2014, 26, 1912–1915 CAS .
X. Jiang, S. Gross, H. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. J. Withford and A. Fuerbach, Ann. Phys., 2016, 528, 543–550 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, J. Yi, Q. Wang, D. Feng, H. He, S. Lu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2244–2251 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li, Z. Yang, B. Dong, J. Qu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705833 CrossRef .
L. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiang, J. Li, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806346 CrossRef .
W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. You, P. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. N. Huang, Y. Ge, L. Wu, Z. Dong, X. Dai, Y. Xiang, J. Li, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900902 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Joo-Won Lee
	Joo-Won Lee received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is pursuing research on the synthesis of one-dimensional nanorod arrays for photoelectrochemical applications. His recent research interest lies in interfaces and catalysis.

Joon-Soo Yoon
	Joon-Soo Yoon received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is currently involved in research on the synthesis and photoelectrochemical applications of one-dimensional nanorod arrays. His research interests focus on the hybrid photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells.

Young-Min Kim
	Young-Min Kim received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in South Korea. He is conducting research on the synthesis and photoelectrochemical applications of one-dimensional nanorod arrays. His research is mainly focused on the facile and one-step fabrication of nanostructures.

Yun-Mo Sung
	Yun-Mo Sung is a professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Korea University in South Korea. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. His current research is focused on the development of high-efficiency photocatalysts for water splitting through band engineering of hetero-nanostructured semiconductors. He is a leader of a National Strategic Research Laboratory (NSRL) funded by the Korean Ministry of Science & ICT and is currently serving as a director of the Korean Institute of Metals and Materials (KIM).

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD and SEM data of an array grown from a ZnO seed layer via the decomposition of zinc acetate at 350 °C and those of ZnO nanorods grown from particle seeds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (b) Tilted SEM views of the 1-D ZnO nanowire arrays on a GaN substrate. The ZnO nanowires were grown out of 400, 200, and 100 nm sized holes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) XRD data of thin film ZnO seed layers: (i) ZnO-a, (ii) ZnO-b, (iii) AZO, and (iv) GZO [left] and XRD data of ZnO nanorod arrays grown on each seed layer [right]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 
(CH2)6N4 + 6H2O ↔ 4NH3 + 6HCHO	(1)
NH3 + H2O ↔ NH3·H2O	(2)
NH3·H2O ↔ NH4+ + OH−	(3)
Zn2+ + 2OH− ↔ Zn(OH)2	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  (a) FE-SEM image of TiO2 seeds from TiO2/diblock copolymer reacted in a Ti precursor solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (b) HR-TEM image of a single rectangular parallelepiped rutile TiO2 microtube. The inset is a low-magnification image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic formation mechanism of the single crystal rutile TiO2 nanowires grown on FTO glass through an interaction between octanoic acid and titanium trichloride. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Ti3+ + H2O → TiOH2+ + H+	(6)
TiOH2+ + O2 → Ti(IV)oxospecies + O2− → TiO2	(7)

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM views of the urchinlike [top] and ribbonlike [bottom] h-WO3 structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM top-view and cross-sectional images of the flake-like WO3 thin films. [X: flakes, Y: nanocrystalline WO3, and Z: SnO2 glass] Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM data of a 1-D TiO2 nanowire [left] and schematic representation of the formation processes of WO3 nanowires and micro-bricks [right]. XRD data exhibit the hexagonal nanowires and orthorhombic micro-bricks. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
WO42− + 2H+·nH2O ↔ H2WO4·nH2O	(8)
H2WO4·nH2O ↔ WO3 + (n + 1)H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM micrographs of oriented Fe2O3 nanorods grown on a tin oxide glass substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagrams of β-FeOOH films prepared at 100, 120, 140, 160 and 180 °C. The red products are β-FeOOH and the green spots exhibit the Cl− ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 
6Co(OH)2(s) + O2(aq) → 2Co3O4(s) + 6H2O(l)	(10)

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of a Co3O4 nanowire array grown on a nickel substrate. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Co-doped V2O5 nanowire grown on a Ti substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Top-view SEM image of the as-prepared Nb2O5 nanorod arrays synthesized by the hydrothermal method. The inset presents the cross-sectional image. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of vertically aligned Ta2O5 nanorod arrays grown hydrothermally for 24 h. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
2Nb + 5H2O2 → Nb2O5 + 5H2O	(11)
Nb + 5NH4F + 2.5H2O2 → (NH4)2NbOF5 + 3NH3 + 4H2O	(12)
(NH4)2NbOF5 → NH4NbOF4 + NH4F	(13)
NH4NbOF4 + 1.5H2O → 0.5Nb2O5 + NH4F + 3HF	(14)
2Ta + 14HF ↔ 2H2TaF7 + 5H2	(15)
2H2TaF7 + 5H2O ↔ Ta2O5 + 14HF	(16)

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of CuCo2O4/CuO nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) TEM image and SAED pattern of MnCo2O4+x grown on a carbon substrate. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays on a nickel substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) SEM image of ZnCo2O4 nanowires and (e) schematic formation process of the ZnCo2O4 nanowires on the nickel substrate. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Cd + S → CdS ↔ Cd2+ + S2−	(17)
Cd2+ + S2− + 2en ↔ Cd(en)22+ + S2− ↔ CdS + 2en	(18)

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD data of the CdS nanowire arrays prepared by the hydrothermal process. (b) HRTEM image of a single CdS nanowire with alternating wurtzite and zinc blende phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2008, AIP Publishing LLC. (c) Possible formation mechanism of the CdS nanorod arrays by the direct hydrothermal approach. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 
NH2CSNH2 → CH2N2 + H2S	(19)
H2S ↔ H+ + HS− ↔ 2H+ + S2−	(20)
Zn2+ + S2− ↔ ZnS	(21)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Suggested formation process of the ZnS nanorod array on Zn nanocrystallites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2009 Materials Research Society. (b) FESEM images with low and high magnification, TEM image of the Bi2S3 nanowire and the corresponding HRTEM image and SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2008 Elsevier.	 
Bi3+ + nTu ↔ [Bi(Tu)n]3+ → Bi2S3	(22)
3Te(array) + 6OH− → TeO32− + 2Te2− + 3H2O	(23)
Te2− + Cd2+ → CdTe(array)	(24)

 	Fig. 9  (a) FE-SEM cross-sectional view image and (b) HRTEM image of CdS nanowires grown on FTO substrates; the inset denotes the SAED pattern. (c) Schematic images present the solution–liquid–solid (SLS) nanowire growth directly on the substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (d) SLS fabrications of nanowire arrays using Bi thin films and Bi nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic experimental setup for growing InP nanowire arrays using the electrically controlled SLS method and optical photograph of the sample holder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional TEM micrographs of an Al/AAO/CdS film after anodization and CdS deposition. (b) X-ray diffraction peaks of the as-deposited AAO/CdS nanowire arrays for the variation of reaction time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society. (c) Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of PbS nanowire arrays fabricated in the AAM. (d) X-ray diffraction data of PbS nanowire arrays with the AAM removed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 
SeO32− + 3H2O + 4e = Se + 6OH−	(25)
[Cd(NH3)4]2+ + 2e = Cd + 4NH3	(26)

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD pattern of highly oriented ZnTe nanowires. (b) Relative intensity of the (220) plane orientation of ZnTe nanowires with respect to current density (I) and pulsed time (t), respectively. (c) SEM images of ZnTe nanowire arrays after removing the AAM. (d) TEM image of an individual ZnTe nanowire and the corresponding HRTEM image. Insets are SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 
[(SbO)C4H4O6]− + 2H+ + 3e− = Sb(s) + H2O + C4H4O62−	(27)
Co2+ + 2e− = Co(s)	(28)
Co2+ + [(SbO)C4H4O6]− + 2H+ + 5e− = CoSb(s) + H2O + C4H4O62−	(29)
NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4+ + 10OH−
Ni2+ + 2OH− → Ni(OH)2
Ni(OH)2 → NiO + H2O

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic image showing the possible fabrication mechanism of nanowire arrays through the AAO template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2006 Springer-Verlag. (b) SEM micrograph of LaNiO3 nanowires after the AAO template was partially removed. (c) TEM image of LaNiO3 nanowires without the AAO template. (d) X-ray diffraction peaks of LaNiO3 nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2005 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Growth mechanism for the morphology control of Cu2O nanostructures after 10 immersion cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation showing the difference between single stage and double stage deposition processes of hexagonal MoO3 nanorod arrays. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM micrographs of CuSCN nanowire arrays on various substrates with a variation of the deposition potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (b) Cross-sectional and top-view SEM micrographs of Cu2O nanorod arrays with different growth times. (c) Schematic concept of electrochemical flow-based solution–solid synthesis for the fabrication of Cu2O nanorod arrays. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of Fe2O3 nanorod arrays prepared with different anodization times (15 s for top and 90 s for bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (b) Schematic growth process of the Sb2Se3 nanoneedle arrays through spin-coating. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of flower-like, ribbon grass-like, and long leaf weed-like nanostructures from different Cu precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic image presenting the procedure for fabrication of the CIGS/CdS solar cell structure by SLS growth and electrodeposition and the resultant SEM images showing the CIGS film formation [electrodeposition time: (i) for 1 min, (ii) for 10 min and (iii) for 20 min]. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the CIGS/CdS nanowire cells and CIGS/CdS bilayer film cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) FESEM micrographs of bare CdS [left] and CdS/CdO core/shell [right] nanorod arrays. (d) The photocurrent and the dark current densities with respect to potentials and the chopped photocurrent responses of bare CdS and CdS/CdO core/shell nanorod arrays at 0 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) Morphological analysis of Co3O4 nanowire arrays through SEM. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of Co3O4 nanowire arrays. (d) Optical properties of bleached and colored Co3O4 nanowire array films. Insets are digital photographs of Co3O4 nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a 1-D TiO2/Si nanowire array. (b) Schematic structure of the TiO2/Si photocatalyst which absorbs different parts of the solar spectrum. (c) Band diagram of the TiO2/Si heterostructure for z-scheme water-splitting. (d) Gas chromatography measurement of H2 and O2 evolution using the TiO2/Si photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e) FEMSEM micrographs of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures. (f) Graphs of the dynamic TMA sensing response of α-Fe2O3, TiO2 and α-Fe2O3/TiO2. (g) Schematic TMA detection mechanism of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic image of liquid-phase exfoliation to synthesize Bi2S3 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram for fabricating 2-D tellurium nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (c) FESEM and TEM images of 1-D Te@Se nanotubes and the crystal structure of the Te@Se nanotube composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
