Environmentally friendly anti-solvent engineering for high-efficiency tin-based perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00202K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00202K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2177-2186Environmentally friendly anti-solvent engineering for high-efficiency tin-based perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Yang 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Rao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Zhong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wangping 
            Sheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Tan
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yiwang 
            Chen
          
        
      *abc
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering/Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; tanlicheng@ncu.edu.cn
bNational Engineering Research Center for Carbohydrate Synthesis/Key Lab of Fluorine and Silicon for Energy Materials and Chemistry of Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China
cPeking University Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, 60 Chongzhou Avenue, Nantong 226010, China
Received 
      19th January 2023
    , Accepted 24th March 2023First published on 28th March 2023AbstractTin-based perovskites are the most likely alternative candidates for lead-based counterparts due to their low toxicity and excellent optoelectronic properties. However, their uncontrollable crystallization process limits the improvement of device performance. Here, a green anti-solvent (acetic acid, HAc) has been first applied to adjust the crystallization process of tin-based perovskites, that is, to accelerate solution nucleation by salting-out crystallization and to slow down the crystal growth rate by hydrogen bond interactions. Furthermore, the non-volatilized residual HAc reduces the loss of organic amine salts and passivates defect states in the perovskites. Consequently, a device prepared using HAc realizes the highest efficiency of 12.78% (an open circuit voltage of 0.92 V) among non-chlorobenzene-based devices. Pioneeringly, we point out a general principle that the congeners of HAc, whose ability to form a hydrogen bond is not higher than that of HAc, can act as anti-solvents to prepare tin-based perovskites.

Broader context
Throughout the preparation of tin-based perovskites, the use of an anti-solvent is closely related to the crystallization process of the precursor solution, but high-performance tin-based perovskite films generally involve toxic chlorobenzene (CB) so far. For the first time, we exploit an environmentally friendly anti-solvent acetic acid (HAc), to simultaneously regulate the nucleation and crystal growth process of tin-based perovskite films. Differing from the conventional anti-solvent CB, we revealed a more realistic nucleation crystallization theory (salt-out crystallization) for the perovskite crystallization process. That is, hydrogen bonds can be formed between HAc and the precursor solvent to weaken the solvation of SnI2 by DMSO, increase the effective concentration of pre-crystallized substances and make the substances to be crystallized from solution. It is also found that large amounts of residual HAc on the precursor film are conducive to slowing the crystal growth process, which indicates that HAc as an eco-friendly anti-solvent is capable of widening the processing window of tin-based perovskites for high-quality and large-scale fabrication. Most importantly, the HAc-treated device shows a high efficiency of 12.78% (open circuit voltage of 0.92 V), which is the highest efficiency among those of tin-based perovskite devices prepared using green anti-solvents to our knowledge.

Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have become a research hotspot in the field of solar cells due to their excellent light absorption properties, carrier transport capability and simple fabrication process, and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has reached a level comparable to that of traditional crystalline silicon solar cells.1–5 High efficiency, no pollution, and low cost have always been the goals pursued in the field of photovoltaics. However, Pb from halide perovskites is more dangerous than other sources of lead contamination already present in the environment as it is ten times more bioavailable, which greatly hinders the commercialization process of Pb-based PVSCs.6 Therefore, it is very important to find lead substituents with low or even non-toxicity. Among the numerous substituents, tin-based perovskites have received extensive attention due to their extremely similar optoelectronic properties to lead-based perovskites, and the highest PCE of tin-based PVSCs during this period has also reached 14.8%,7–9 showing great research potential.
In conventional spin coating procedures for preparing tin halide perovskite films, the degree of supersaturation in the as-formed perovskite precursor films is usually limited, which leads to a low number of crystal nuclei.10 Low nuclei concentrations usually lead to the local accumulation of solutes on the substrate, resulting in the formation of perovskite films with low surface coverage.11 Moreover, the tin-based perovskite crystal growth rate is usually rapid due to the fast reaction between FAI and SnI2, resulting in a smaller crystal size and numerous grain boundaries.12 Overall, the imbalance between the limited number of nuclei and the rapid crystal growth rate always leads to poor tin-based perovskite film quality. In response to such an uncontrollable crystallization process, much effort has been devoted to modulating the crystallization process of tin halide perovskites, such as additive engineering using piperazine dihydroiodide or acetic acid to tune the colloidal chemistry of perovskite precursor solution to reduce the energy barrier for perovskite nucleation,13,14 dimensional engineering by introducing large organic cations (PEA+, EA+, AVA+, etc.) to slow down the crystal growth,15–17 and coordination engineering by employing Lewis bases (DMSO, TMA, CDTA, etc.) to form Lewis acid–base adducts with perovskite components to retard crystal growth.18–20 However, few studies have considered in depth the important role of anti-solvents in the preparation process. The use of an anti-solvent can promote the rapid supersaturation of solution, which is the driving force of the crystallization process and has a significant impact on the crystallization quality of tin-based perovskite films.10 Chlorobenzene and toluene are the most commonly used anti-solvents, and both of them are toxic solvents that have inhibitory and anesthetic effects on the human central nervous system.21 The use of these anti-solvents goes against the original intention of developing tin-based perovskites and the social concept of green development. Moreover, both chlorobenzene and toluene have low polarities, making it difficult to remove the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent completely.22 The residue of DMSO will not only lead to the oxidation of Sn2+, but also cause voids at perovskite–substrate interfaces, which are detrimental to the efficiency and long-term stability of the corresponding device.23,24 Based on the above analysis, it is of great significance to find a green anti-solvent with strong polarity for the development of tin-based perovskites.
Here, acetic acid (HAc) is used as an anti-solvent to control the crystallization process of tin-based perovskites for the first time. On the one hand, HAc can accelerate the nucleation rate of the precursor through salting-out crystallization, that is, hydrogen bonds can be formed between HAc and the precursor solvent to weaken the solvation of SnI2 by DMSO, increase the effective concentration of pre-crystallized substances and make the substances to be crystallized from solution. On the other hand, the hydrogen bond between HAc and organic ammonium salt delays the continuous growth of the perovskite phase due to the slow volatilization of HAc during annealing. In general, such a fast nucleation process and slow crystal growth process are favorable for the preparation of high-quality tin-based perovskite films. In addition, the nonvolatilized residual HAc also shows an obvious passivation effect on the defects in the obtained tin-based perovskite films. As a result, the HAc-treated device shows a high efficiency of 12.78% (open circuit voltage of 0.92 V), which is the highest efficiency among those of tin-based perovskite devices prepared using green anti-solvents to our knowledge. Furthermore, we point out that HAc congeners, which are less capable of forming hydrogen bonds with organic ammonium salts than HAc, are also shown to have potential as anti-solvents. More importantly, the exploration of novel multifunctional green anti-solvents opens up a new path for the precise regulation of perovskite crystallization and practically provides more possibilities for the environmentally friendly preparation of high-efficiency PVSCs.
Results and discussion
Perovskite films are prepared using a typical one-step method and the film's crystallinity is controlled by applying a specific green anti-solvent HAc, resulting in high-quality perovskite films and optimized PVSCs. In general, the main role of an anti-solvent is to extract excess solvents, make the solution rapidly supersaturated, and then achieve efficient nucleation and crystallization, regardless of using HAc or traditional CB (Fig. 1). The difference is that HAc has stronger molecular polarity than CB, which makes it more effective for the extraction of dipolar solvents, equivalent to achieving the modulation effect of salting-out crystallization. Specifically, hydrogen from the hydroxyl in the HAc molecule has a positive charge, which can form a hydrogen bond with the negatively charged OS in DMSO (Fig. S1, ESI†), thus reducing the solvation degree of SnI2 by DMSO and promoting the rapid nucleation (Phase 2-2) of the precursor solution. However, as depicted in the schematic, the limited extraction ability of CB to the precursor solvent results in that SnI2 is present as a solvent complex (Phase 2-1) with DMSO after anti-solvent treatment, and the number of crystal nuclei formed is relatively insufficient. In the subsequent annealing process, organic ammonium salts can form hydrogen bonds with HAc to increase the potential barrier of HAc evaporation, resulting in a slow volatilization rate of HAc during annealing. The hydrogen bonds between the residual HAc and organic ammonium salts in turn delay the continuous growth of the perovskite phase and inhibit the volatilization loss of organic ammonium salts. Moreover, the defect passivation effect of residual HAc on perovskite crystals is also conducive to the preparation of high-quality perovskite films (Phase 3).
 Fig. 1  The process scheme of preparing perovskite films with CB or HAc as an anti-solvent and the composition of the film before and after each step. Phase 1: the thin film consists of colloidal precursors of photoinactive solid precursors (SnI2, FA+ and PEA+) and liquid solvents DMSO and DMF. Phase 2-1: the thin film consists of a solvent-complex, liquid solvents and anti-solvent (CB). Phase 2-2: the thin film consists of a perovskite crystal nucleus, solvent-complex, liquid solvents and anti-solvent (HAc). Phase 3: crystallized perovskite film. 
To determine whether a solvent can be used as an anti-solvent, the solubility of the solvent to the perovskite components is the first consideration. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, neither CB nor HAc have extremely limited solubility for the perovskite component, which means that HAc may be used as an anti-solvent like CB. Furthermore, the solubility of each substance is also analyzed by measuring the UV-vis spectrum of the corresponding supernatant. The solubility of SnI2 in both anti-solvents is extremely low, as is also mechanistically demonstrated by the experiment of preparing weak acid (HAc) from strong acid (HI) (Fig. 2c). However, compared with CB, HAc shows slight solubility for organic ammonium salts (FAI, PEAI), which may be related to the hydrogen bonding between molecules. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Fig. S2, ESI†) demonstrated the interaction between HAc and FAI. The peaks correspond to the stretching vibration of CO and the bending vibration of O–H in HAc are 1730 cm−1 and 1425 cm−1, respectively, while the peaks in FAI–HAc are red-shifted to 1716 cm−1 and 1407 cm−1. The C–N stretching vibration of FAI is located at 1037 cm−1, which blue-shifts to 1055 cm−1 in FAI–HAc. In addition to the solubility of the anti-solvent on the perovskite components, the solvent extraction ability of the anti-solvent should also be of great concern. As shown in Fig. 2d, adding a smaller amount of HAc to the same amount of precursor solution can play the role of extraction, while adding several times the amount of CB to the precursor solution failed to precipitate the black perovskite phase, which means that HAc might promote rapid supersaturation of the solution and accelerate the nucleation rate. The peaks in the corresponding fluorescence spectra also correspond well to the emission of perovskites (Fig. 2e), but there is a huge difference in the photoluminescence (PL) intensity, which also proves that HAc has stronger extraction ability than CB. The strong extraction ability comes from the strong hydrogen bond between HAc and DMSO (–O–H(δ+)⋯(δ−)OS). Therefore, a small amount of HAc can extract the solvent through hydrogen bond interactions, which resembles a salting-out crystallization process and is schematically depicted in Fig. 2f. In general, the more extractive capacity of the anti-solvent facilitates a more thorough removal of DMSO in perovskite films. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), the CB-treated SnI2 film shows stronger diffraction peaks than the HAc-treated SnI2 film at 9.0° and 10.8° (associated with the SnI2–DMSO complex), which demonstrates that DMSO can be extracted completely by HAc. In general, a low amount of DMSO residue is beneficial for reducing the generation of the voids at perovskite–substrate interfaces (Fig. S4, ESI†). Then, the S content in the final films prepared using different anti-solvents has been detected by energy-dispersive spectral (EDS) measurement (Fig. S5 and Table S1, ESI†). The relatively lower S content in the HAc-treated perovskite film compared to the CB-treated perovskite film proved that the low amount of DMSO residue in the HAc-treated film contributes to reducing the oxidation of Sn2+ by DMSO.24 Consequently, HAc as an anti-solvent not only regulates the nucleation rate by salting-out crystallization, but also effectively reduces the damage to device performance caused by residual DMSO.
 Fig. 2  Optical photographs of the solubility of the perovskite composition (FAI, PEAI and SnI2) in (a) CB and (b) HAc and UV-Vis absorption of the corresponding supernatant. (c) XRD patterns of the reaction products of SnAc2 and HI and the corresponding optical photos (inset). (d) The optical photos of precursor solutions before and after injecting different volumes of CB and HAc and (e) the steady-state PL spectra of precursor solutions after injecting CB and HAc. (f) Schematic illustration of the possible extraction process (HAc weakens the solvation effect of DMSO on SnI2 by forming hydrogen bonds with DMSO). 
During the preparation of perovskite thin films, not only rapid nucleation of the solution is required, but also the slow growth rate of crystals after nucleation is vital.25 Here, XRD measurements have been employed to investigate the effect of HAc and CB as anti-solvents on the crystallization process of tin-based perovskites. As shown in Fig. 3a, the HAc-treated perovskite film has a more distinct diffraction peak (14.0°) intensity variation than that of the CB-treated perovskite film, which may be related to the different crystallization processes. Then, semi-in situ XRD measurements shown in Fig. 3b and c (the raw XRD shown in Fig. S6, ESI†) have been applied to track the crystal growth process. With the increase of the spin-coating time, the rapid evaporation of the solvent leads to the rapid growth of crystals in the CB-treated perovskite film, which is not conducive to the preparation of high-quality perovskite films. In contrast, the diffraction peak intensity of the HAc-treated perovskite film did not change significantly with the increase of the spin coating time, indicating that HAc as an anti-solvent can retard the crystal growth. It may be that the hydrogen bonding between HAc and the organic ammonium salt makes a small amount of HAc remain in the wet film, which slows down the continuous growth of the Sn–I–Sn framework and increases the energy barrier of cation insertion into the SnI2 framework. Moreover, the wet film state created by the slowly evaporating HAc helps to provide sufficient fluidity in the film for the neighboring nuclei to coalesce into larger grains.26 In general, the slow crystal growth rate is beneficial for the preparation of high-quality perovskite crystals and reduces the lattice distortion brought about by the rapid growth process.27–29 The stress–strain characterization is applied to measure the residual strain of perovskite films prepared using different anti-solvents. As shown in the grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns (Fig. 3d and e), the diffraction peak of the HAc-treated perovskite film shows that less shifted to a large 2θ than the CB-treated perovskite film, and the corresponding fitted line of 2θ–sin2(Ψ) shows a less positive slope (Fig. 3f), which means that HAc-treated perovskite films suffer low stress.30 The results indicate that HAc-treated perovskite films exhibit low lattice distortion and higher crystal quality. In addition, such a slow crystal growth process may facilitate the preparation of high-uniformity perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 3g, 36 different positions have been uniformly selected for XRD measurement on a 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm size perovskite film. The XRD peak intensity distribution of the perovskite film exhibits that the HAc-treated perovskite film possesses a more uniform (100) peak intensity distribution than the CB-treated perovskite film (Fig. 3h and i), which also indicates that the perovskite film treated with HAc has higher film quality with excellent homogeneity.
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of perovskite films prepared with different anti-solvents (annealed and unannealed). Semi-in situ XRD pattern of perovskite films prepared using CB (b) and HAc (c) (unannealed). The diffraction peaks in the condition of φ = 1° shifts as instrumental Ψ values go from 10° to 50° for perovskite films prepared using CB (d) and HAc (e). (f) Linear fit of 2θ–sin2(Ψ) for the corresponding films. (g) Schematic illustration of the 36 different points on 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm perovskite film. The normalized peak intensity of (100) surfaces of CB-treated (h) and HAc-treated (i) perovskite films distributed in an area of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm. 
In addition to the crystallization quality, the intrinsic defect states within tin-based perovskite films also have a huge impact on final device performance.31–33 Due to the low defect tolerance of tin-based perovskites, the presence of impurities in the film can cause severe non-radiative recombination loss and open-circuit voltage loss.34 Therefore, reducing the density of defect states in tin-based perovskite films is of vital significance for improving device performance. The effect of HAc on the defect states in perovskite films has been characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S7, ESI†). Regarding XPS for C 1s (Fig. 4a), the CO peak of the HAc-treated perovskite film has higher binding energy than the CB-treated perovskite film, which is related to the decrease in the outer electron cloud density caused by coordination with electron-poor Sn2+. With synergistic passivation of HAc, the perovskite film showed a higher Sn2+ content (the Sn2+ content of the HAc-treated film is 89%, while the Sn2+ content the CB-treated film is 45%, Fig. 4b and c). The significantly reduced content of Sn4+ is conducive to the improvement of the device performance. In addition, the binding energy of the I 3d peak of the HAc-treated perovskite film shifted to lower energy compared with that of the CB-treated perovskite film (Fig. 4d), which is associated with the interaction between HAc and I−. The polar hydrogen group (Oδ−–Hδ+) of HAc and the electronegative iodide ion (Iδ−) can form hydrogen bonding (–OH⋯I−), inhibiting the migration of I− and the oxidation of I− to I2 or I3−.35 Thus, the HAc-treated perovskite film has a higher content of I− than the CB-treated perovskite film (Fig. 4e and f). Moreover, the hydrogen bonding between organic ammonium salts and HAc has been demonstrated by the N 1s spectrum of XPS (Fig. S8, ESI†), which helps in reducing the loss of organic cations and the density of defect states. The confocal photoluminescence (PL) (Fig. 4g and h) and the steady-state PL characterization (Fig. S9, ESI†) have been further implemented to study the trap states of tin-based perovskite thin films.36,37 The HAc-treated perovskite films show a stronger fluorescence intensity over a larger area than the CB-treated perovskite films, suggesting suppressed trap-assisted nonradiative recombination. Furthermore, charge carrier lifetimes have been probed by time-resolved PL spectra in Fig. 4i. The HAc-treated perovskite film shows a significantly improved average carrier lifetime (τave), fast decay lifetime (τ1) and slow decay lifetime (τ2) relative to the CB-treated perovskite film means that the markedly decreased defect state density in the bulk and on the surface of the perovskite film, which matched well with the increased steady-state PL intensity. Incidentally, the absorption of the HAc-treated perovskite film is also enhanced compared to the CB-treated perovskite film (Fig. S10a, ESI†), while the optical bandgap of the two perovskite films is identical, as demonstrated by the Tauc plots of the absorption spectra (Fig. S10b, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra of (a) C 1s, (b and c) Sn 3d and (d–f) I 3d of perovskite films prepared using CB and HAc. PL mappings of CB-treated (g) and HAc-treated (h) perovskite films. (i) TRPL decay profiles of perovskite films prepared using CB and HAc. 
To understand the probability of carrier recombination inside the devices, open-circuit voltage (Voc) dependent measurements on the light intensity are plotted in Fig. 5a. As reported, the slope that deviated from kBT/q is closely related to trap-assisted recombination.38 The device prepared using HAc shows 1.24kBT/q, while the device prepared using CB shows 1.50kBT/q. The smaller slope close to 1 obtained from the HAc-treated device indicates smaller energy loss from trap-assisted recombination. To clarify the charge transfer process of the devices, electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS, bias of 0.1–0.4 V) have been characterized as shown in Fig. 5b and c.39 The Nyquist plots of devices prepared using CB and HAc are all presented as a single semicircle, which is related to the charge recombination resistance (Rrec). The HAc-treated devices exhibit higher recombination resistance at any bias voltage, which indicated that the carriers are more difficult to recombine in HAc-treated devices. Moreover, the dark current plot (Fig. 5d) also indicates that the reverse current density of the HAc-treated device is nearly two orders of magnitude less than that of the CB-treated device, suggesting reduced background carrier density and excellent diode behavior. To further evaluate the elimination effect of the trap states in the perovskite films prepared using the HAc anti-solvent, the space-charge limited current measurements are performed on the electron-only (Fig. 5e) and hole-only devices (Fig. S11, ESI†) with the structures of ITO/SnO2/PVK/PC61BM/Ag and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag, respectively. The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) is connected with the defect density (Nt), and the defect density can be calculated using the following relation:Nt = 2ε0εVTFL/eL2where ε0, ε, e and L are the vacuum permittivity, relative dielectric constant (ε = 35), elementary charge and thickness of the perovskite film, respectively.40 The VTFL values for devices prepared using CB are 0.33 V (for electron-only) and 0.55 V (for hole-only), and the defect densities are 1.23 × 1016 and 1.95 × 1016 cm−3. The corresponding VTFL values of HAc-prepared devices are 0.13 V and 0.34 V, and the defect densities are 6.59 × 1015 and 1.77 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, confirming that the anti-solvent HAc eliminates the internal defects significantly.
 Fig. 5  (a) Light intensity dependence of Voc for PVSCs prepared using CB and HAc. (b and c) Nyquist plots of the EIS measurement and (d) dark J–V curves for PVSCs prepared using CB and HAc. (e) Dark J–V curves of the electron-only device with the structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite prepared using CB and HAc/PC61BM/Ag based on the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model. (f) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best device prepared using CB and HAc. (g) Histograms for the Vocs of CB-treated and HAc-treated devices. (h) PCE decays of the CB-treated and HAc-treated devices in a N2 atmosphere. (i) J–V curves of the HAc-treated device with the additive of NH4SCN. 
Inverted PVSCs with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ICBA/BCP/Ag are fabricated to estimate the effect of different anti-solvents on the photovoltaic performance (Fig. 5f). The device prepared using CB exhibits a PCE of 8.44%, Voc of 0.73 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 18.33 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 63.04%. While the device prepared using HAc displays a colossal improvement with a supernal PCE of 11.61% and a huge Voc of 0.91 V (Jsc of 18.48 mA cm−2 and FF of 69.24%). The integrated Jsc values obtained from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves are 17.33 and 18.36 mA cm−2 for CB-treated and HAc-treated devices (Fig. S12, ESI†), respectively. According to the histograms for Voc (Fig. 5g), the device prepared using HAc exhibits a significantly increased Voc than the device prepared using CB, which is closely related to the reduced non-radiative recombination loss caused by the reduction of defect states in the perovskite film. The large area devices (1 cm2) fabricated using HAc display better performance than devices prepared using CB, which also provides a direct and robust demonstration of HAc in preparing high-quality Sn-based perovskite films (Fig. S13, ESI†). In addition, the long-term stability of the device is also a concern in the process of device preparation. Fig. S14 (ESI†) shows that the absorbance of the CB-treated perovskite film decreases rapidly in air due to the destruction of the perovskite structure caused by oxygen erosion. However, the HAc-treated perovskite film can still maintain a relatively high absorbance, which may be related to the conversion of oxygen molecules to superoxide (O2−) induced by defects that have been partially inhibited.41–43 Thanks to the high-quality perovskite films, the device prepared using HAc can still maintain 90% of its initial efficiency after storing it in a N2 glove box for 4000 hours, while the device prepared using CB only maintains 60% (Fig. 5h).44–46 Then, the operational stability tests of the devices prepared using CB and HAc have been performed under maximum power point tracking (MPPT) conditions (Fig. S15, ESI†). No decay has been found in the HAc-treated device for 1000 min while the CB-treated device drops to 8.03%, which suggests that the HAc-treated device features very promising operational stability at the maximum power point. By further implementing additive engineering-assisted optimization with an appropriate amount of NH4SCN (Fig. 5i),47 the device prepared using HAc delivers a higher PCE of 12.78% (which is also a fairly high efficiency in a mixed cationic system with PEA+ and FA+, Table S2, ESI†), accompanied by a Voc value of 0.92 V, Jsc value of 18.84 mA cm−2 and FF of 73.72%, as well as a negligible hysteresis. The universality of HAc as an anti-solvent is confirmed by the maintained relatively high device efficiency, even in the case of different active layers ((FA0.9EA0.1)0.98EDA0.01SnI3)) and device structures (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/BCP/Ag). The detailed performance parameters are shown in Fig. S16 (ESI†). In addition, we compare other studies on the preparation of tin-based perovskites using green anti-solvents with this work (Table S3, ESI†). It is worth mentioning that there are a few studies on the preparation of tin-based perovskites using green anti-solvents so far. Only a few studies have used diethyl ether as an anti-solvent for preparing tin-based perovskites and the corresponding device performances are poor. In summary, HAc as an anti-solvent not only fills the gap in the field of tin-based perovskite preparation with a green anti-solvent, but also provides a new choice for the preparation of high-efficiency tin-based PVSCs.
Based on the fact that HAc as an anti-solvent can bring a huge improvement in device performance, we considered whether all HAc congeners can be used as anti-solvents. Alkyl acids (formic acid (AC), HAc and propionic acid (PA)) with different carbon chain lengths have been selected for the study. As displayed in Fig. 6a, the solubility of perovskite components in different acids is first considered. It can be seen from the optical pictures that none of the three acids dissolves SnI2. HAc and PA exhibit lower solubility to organic ammonium salts, while AC shows higher solubility to organic ammonium salts. The reason for the phenomenon can be concluded from the theoretical analysis of Fig. 6b. Taking –OH as the main body, the stronger the electron-withdrawing ability of the group it connects, the stronger the positive charge of H on –OH, and the stronger the hydrogen bond interaction between acid and the organic ammonium salt. The strong hydrogen bonding helps to increase the solubility of organic ammonium salts. The hydrogen bonding interaction is also confirmed by liquid-state 1H NMR measurement as shown in Fig. 6c–f. The FA+ cation contains two kinds of H, and their positions in the 1H NMR spectrum are 8.75 ppm (a) and 7.84 ppm (b), respectively. When FA+ forms hydrogen bonds with different acids, peak (a) splits into two different peaks (a′ and a′′) due to the changed chemical environment. It can be seen from the 1H NMR spectrum that the solubility of AC and the organic ammonium salt was the highest, followed by HAc and PA. The low solubility of the perovskite component is a prerequisite for considering that a substance can be used as an anti-solvent. Therefore, it is reasonable to think that the acid analogues with hydrogen bonding ability equal to or weaker than that of HAc can be used as relatively suitable anti-solvents for the preparation of perovskite films. The device with PA or AC as an anti-solvent is prepared to demonstrate the point. The device prepared using PA realizes an efficiency of 9.44%, while the device prepared using AC only shows an efficiency of 2.12% (Fig. 6g and h). Then, more HAc congeners with weaker hydrogen bonding ability (butyric acid, valeric acid and heptanoic acid) have been applied to prepare tin-based perovskite films to demonstrate the generality of this principle (Fig. S17, ESI†).
 Fig. 6  (a) Optical photographs of the solubility of the perovskite composition (FAI, PEAI and SnI2) in formic acid (AC), HAc and propionic acid (PA). (b) Chemical structures and electron-withdrawing ability of FA+, formic acid (AC), HAc and propionic acid (PA). 1H NMR spectra of (c) FAI, (d) FAI in AC, (e) FAI in HAc and (f) FAI in PA in DMSO-d6 solution. J–V curves of the best device prepared using AC (g) and PA (h). 
Conclusions
In summary, the crystallization process of tin-based perovskite films has been regulated by choosing a green and efficient anti-solvent (HAc). HAc can not only form hydrogen bonds with solvents (DMSO and DMF) to make the precursor solvent go through a process similar to salting-out crystallization, thus making the solution nucleate rapidly, but also form hydrogen bonds with organic ammonium salts to slow down the crystal growth rate. In addition, hydrogen bonding between HAc and the organic ammonium salts reduces the loss of perovskite components and decreases the defect state density in perovskite films. Consequently, the device prepared using HAc exhibits an excellent PCE of 12.78% with a significantly enhanced Voc value of 0.92 V. Besides, we reveal that HAc congeners with hydrogen bonding ability less than or equal to HAc can be used for the preparation of tin-based perovskite thin films. We believe that this thin-film processing technology will not only benefit the small area tin-based PVSCs but also bring new possibilities to larger area tin-based PVSCs. More importantly, it provides the possibility of the development of solvent systems with lower toxicity, which is an important step for the realization of all-green preparation of tin-based PVSCs.
Author contributions
Y. Su and J. Yang contributed equally to this work.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (52063019, 51973088, 51833004, and U20A20128), the “Double Thousand Plan” Science and Technology Innovation High-end Talent Project of Jiangxi Province (jxsq2019201107) and the Key Project of Jiangxi Provincial Natural Science Foundation (20224ACB203007).
References
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Wang, Y. Jin, J. Si, Z. K. Tan, H. Du, L. Cheng, X. Dai, S. Bai, H. He, Z. Ye, M. L. Lai, R. H. Friend and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2311–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Ma, Z. H. Qu, S. Q. Yu, T. Shen, H.-X. Deng, X. B. Chu, X. X. Peng, Y. B. Yuan, X. W. Zhang and J. B. You, Science, 2022, 377, 531–534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. L. Cao, W. B. Jiao, Q. Wang, M. D. Wei, I. Cantone, J. Lü and A. Abate, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pitaro, E. K. Tekelenburg, S. Shao and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 34, 2105844 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Zhou, M. W. Hao, Y. Zhang, X. Ma, J. C. Dong, F. F. Lu, J. Wang, N. Wang and Y. Y. Zhou, Matter, 2022, 5, 683–693 CrossRef CAS .
B.-B. Yu, Z. H. Chen, Y. D. Zhu, Y. Y. Wang, B. Han, G. C. Chen, X. S. Zhang, Z. Du and Z. B. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 965 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Liu, M. Ozaki, S. Yakumaru, T. Handa, R. Nishikubo, Y. Kanemitsu, A. Saeki, Y. Murata, R. Murdey and A. Wakamiya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 13405–13409 CrossRef .
J. F. Wang, Z. Gao, J. J. Yang, M. S. Lv, H. N. Chen, D.-J. Xue, X. Y. Meng and S. H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Meng, Y. F. Li, Y. Z. Qu, H. N. Chen, N. Jiang, M. H. Li, D.-J. Xue, J.-S. Hu, H. Huang and S. H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 133, 3737–3742 CrossRef .
Y. Su, J. Yang, G. L. Liu, W. P. Sheng, J. Q. Zhang, Y. Zhong, L. C. Tan and Y. W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2109631 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Y. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Q. Shang, H. F. Liu, J. L. Wei, W. J. Zhou, H. L. He, W. M. Liu and Z. J. Ning, Joule, 2018, 2, 2732–2743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Shao, J. J. Dong, H. Duim, G. Brink, G. Blake, G. Portale and M. A. Loi, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 810–816 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Xu, Y. Z. Jiang, T. W. He, S. S. Li, H. H. Wang, Y. Chen, M. J. Yuan and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807696 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Jiang, H. S. Li, Q. L. Zhou, Q. Wei, L. Z. Jiang, Z. Wang, Z. J. Peng, F. Wang, Z. H. Zang, K. M. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Teale, W. J. Zhou, R. Si, X. Y. Gao, E. H. Sargent and Z. J. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10970–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, N. Li, C. Y. Mao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703800 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Wu, X. Liu, X. He, Y. B. Wang, X. Y. Meng, T. Noda, X. D. Yang and L. Y. Han, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Yun, F. F. Wang, H. Y. Huang, Y. Y. Fang, S. Z. Liu, W. C. Huang, Z. C. Cheng, Y. Liu, Y. Z. Cao, M. Gao, L. Zhu, L. Wang, T. S. Qin and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jokar, P.-H. Hou, S. Bhosale, H.-S. Chuang, S. Narra and E. Diau, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4415–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pascual, G. Nasti, M. Aldamasy, J. A. Smith, M. Flatken, N. Phung, D. D. Girolamo, S. Turren-Cruz, M. Li, A. Dallmann, R. Avolio and A. Abate, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 1066–1070 RSC .
S. S. Chen, X. Z. Dai, S. Xu, H. Y. Jiao, L. Zhao and J. S. Huang, Science, 2021, 373, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Cui, X. Liu, T. H. Wu, X. S. Lin, X. H. Luo, Y. Z. Wu, H. Segawa, X. D. Yang, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. B. Wang and L. Y. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100931 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, K. Yan, D. W. Tan, X. Liang, H. M. Zhang and W. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2701–2707 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. B. Cheng and Z. Ge, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1653–1687 RSC .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Raino, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rao, X. C. Meng, S. Q. Xiao, Z. Xing, Q. X. Fu, H. Y. Wang, C. X. Gong, T. Hu, X. T. Hu, R. Guo and Y. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 14814–14821 CrossRef .
B. Li, B. H. Chang, L. Pan, Z. H. Li, L. Fu, Z. B. He and L. W. Yin, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3752–3772 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Wang, F. D. Gu, Z. R. Zhao, H. X. Rao, Y. M. Qiu, Z. L. Cai, C. Zhan, X. Y. Li, B. X. Sun, X. Yu, B. Q. Zhao, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. Bian and C. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. D. Tai, X. Y. Guo, G. Q. Tang, P. You, T. Ng, D. Shen, J. P. Cao, C. Liu, N. X. Wang, Y. Zhu, C. Lee and F. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. U. Hasan, D. Lee, S. H. Im and K.-H. Hong, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900310 CrossRef .
C. X. Li, Z. H. Su, M. Li, F. Yang, M. Aldamasy, J. Pascual, F. J. Yang, H. R. Liu, W. W. Zuo, D. D. Girolamo, Z. Iqbal, C. Nasti, A. Dallmann, X. Y. Gao, Z. K. Wang, M. Saliba and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101539 CrossRef .
W. P. Sheng, J. Yang, X. Li, J. Q. Zhang, Y. Su, Y. Zhong, Y. D. Zhang, L. Y. Gong, L. C. Tan and Y. W. Chen, CCS Chem., 2023, 5(3), 729–740 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Gong, J. Yang, W. P. Sheng, Y. Zhong, Y. Su, L. C. Tan and Y. W. Chen, CCS Chem., 2022 DOI:10.31635/ccschem.022.202201871 .
K. Nishimura, M. A. Kamarudin, D. Hirotani, K. Hamada, Q. Shen, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Efat, C. Cheng, C. Yu, F. Amir, R. Mohammad and D. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2353–2362 RSC .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. (Frank) Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. Islam and S. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aristidou, I. Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. Durrant and S. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655 RSC .
E. Jokar, C.-H. Chien, A. Fathi, M. Rameez, Y.-H. Chang and E. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2353–2362 RSC .
T. Wang, Q. Tai, X. Guo, J. Cao, C.-K. Liu, N. Wang, D. Shen, Y. Zhu, C.-S. Lee and F. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 1741–1749 CrossRef .
P. Dong, L. Yang, G. Du, W. Wang, N. Rolston and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 8, 2211304 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Jiang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, H. S. Li, Y. Q. Shang, W. J. Zhou, C. Wang, P. H. Cheng, Q. Chen, L. W. Chen and Z. J. Ning, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00202kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Throughout the preparation of tin-based perovskites, the use of an anti-solvent is closely related to the crystallization process of the precursor solution, but high-performance tin-based perovskite films generally involve toxic chlorobenzene (CB) so far. For the first time, we exploit an environmentally friendly anti-solvent acetic acid (HAc), to simultaneously regulate the nucleation and crystal growth process of tin-based perovskite films. Differing from the conventional anti-solvent CB, we revealed a more realistic nucleation crystallization theory (salt-out crystallization) for the perovskite crystallization process. That is, hydrogen bonds can be formed between HAc and the precursor solvent to weaken the solvation of SnI2 by DMSO, increase the effective concentration of pre-crystallized substances and make the substances to be crystallized from solution. It is also found that large amounts of residual HAc on the precursor film are conducive to slowing the crystal growth process, which indicates that HAc as an eco-friendly anti-solvent is capable of widening the processing window of tin-based perovskites for high-quality and large-scale fabrication. Most importantly, the HAc-treated device shows a high efficiency of 12.78% (open circuit voltage of 0.92 V), which is the highest efficiency among those of tin-based perovskite devices prepared using green anti-solvents to our knowledge.


 	Fig. 1  The process scheme of preparing perovskite films with CB or HAc as an anti-solvent and the composition of the film before and after each step. Phase 1: the thin film consists of colloidal precursors of photoinactive solid precursors (SnI2, FA+ and PEA+) and liquid solvents DMSO and DMF. Phase 2-1: the thin film consists of a solvent-complex, liquid solvents and anti-solvent (CB). Phase 2-2: the thin film consists of a perovskite crystal nucleus, solvent-complex, liquid solvents and anti-solvent (HAc). Phase 3: crystallized perovskite film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical photographs of the solubility of the perovskite composition (FAI, PEAI and SnI2) in (a) CB and (b) HAc and UV-Vis absorption of the corresponding supernatant. (c) XRD patterns of the reaction products of SnAc2 and HI and the corresponding optical photos (inset). (d) The optical photos of precursor solutions before and after injecting different volumes of CB and HAc and (e) the steady-state PL spectra of precursor solutions after injecting CB and HAc. (f) Schematic illustration of the possible extraction process (HAc weakens the solvation effect of DMSO on SnI2 by forming hydrogen bonds with DMSO).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of perovskite films prepared with different anti-solvents (annealed and unannealed). Semi-in situ XRD pattern of perovskite films prepared using CB (b) and HAc (c) (unannealed). The diffraction peaks in the condition of φ = 1° shifts as instrumental Ψ values go from 10° to 50° for perovskite films prepared using CB (d) and HAc (e). (f) Linear fit of 2θ–sin2(Ψ) for the corresponding films. (g) Schematic illustration of the 36 different points on 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm perovskite film. The normalized peak intensity of (100) surfaces of CB-treated (h) and HAc-treated (i) perovskite films distributed in an area of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra of (a) C 1s, (b and c) Sn 3d and (d–f) I 3d of perovskite films prepared using CB and HAc. PL mappings of CB-treated (g) and HAc-treated (h) perovskite films. (i) TRPL decay profiles of perovskite films prepared using CB and HAc.	 
Nt = 2ε0εVTFL/eL2

 	Fig. 5  (a) Light intensity dependence of Voc for PVSCs prepared using CB and HAc. (b and c) Nyquist plots of the EIS measurement and (d) dark J–V curves for PVSCs prepared using CB and HAc. (e) Dark J–V curves of the electron-only device with the structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite prepared using CB and HAc/PC61BM/Ag based on the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model. (f) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best device prepared using CB and HAc. (g) Histograms for the Vocs of CB-treated and HAc-treated devices. (h) PCE decays of the CB-treated and HAc-treated devices in a N2 atmosphere. (i) J–V curves of the HAc-treated device with the additive of NH4SCN.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Optical photographs of the solubility of the perovskite composition (FAI, PEAI and SnI2) in formic acid (AC), HAc and propionic acid (PA). (b) Chemical structures and electron-withdrawing ability of FA+, formic acid (AC), HAc and propionic acid (PA). 1H NMR spectra of (c) FAI, (d) FAI in AC, (e) FAI in HAc and (f) FAI in PA in DMSO-d6 solution. J–V curves of the best device prepared using AC (g) and PA (h).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00202k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
