Simple benzothiadiazole derivatives as buried interface materials towards efficient and stable n–i–p perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA00224H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00224H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8911-8922Simple benzothiadiazole derivatives as buried interface materials towards efficient and stable n–i–p perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Naiyuan 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Cuiping 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guojie 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guozheng 
            Du
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jidong 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhide 
            Luo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Yang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Jinbao 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Materials, Fujian Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Xiamen Key Laboratory of Electronic Ceramic Materials and Devices, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. E-mail: li.yang@xmu.edu.cn; stevenwy@xmu.edu.cn; jinbao.zhang@xmu.edu.cn
bShenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University, Shenzhen, 518000, China
Received 
      10th January 2022
    , Accepted 6th March 2022First published on 7th March 2022AbstractThe state-of-the-art electron transport materials (ETMs) in n–i–p perovskite solar cells (PSCs) strongly rely on inorganic metal oxides (e.g. TiO2), but they often require high-temperature fabrication and complicated manufacturing. Moreover, little attention has been paid to understanding the influences of the ETM surface nature on the upper perovskite microstructures. Here, we developed a series of organic benzothiadiazole (BT) derivatives as ETMs with simple synthesis and facile fabrication. Fine modulation of the pendant groups in BT-based ETMs enables effective optimization of the upper perovskite layer in terms of crystallinity, microstructures, morphology, and conductivity. F-substituted BTF–BA as a buried interface material produces a perovskite thin film with high uniformity, enhanced conductivity, suppressed nonradiative recombination and remarkable film stability, all of which are superior to conventional TiO2 and PCBM. Significantly, the resulting devices with BTF–BA yield a remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.6%, representing the record efficiency for organic non-fullerene ETMs in n–i–p devices, which is an over 10% efficiency enhancement compared to conventional TiO2 (17.8%) and PCBM (16.3%). Furthermore, the hydrophobic nature of F-substituted BTF–BA mitigates the water induced degradation mechanism and simultaneously improves the environmental stability of PSCs. The unencapsulated PSCs with BTF–BA exhibit promising stability by retaining over 90% of their initial performance after 1500 hours in air with 30% humidity. This work provides a deep understanding of buried ETM interfaces and offers an effective strategy of molecular engineering to optimize the device performance.
Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a new-generation photovoltaic technology have attracted great research attention in the materials field. Remarkable photovoltaic performance with over 25% power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been achieved within the last decade,1 which mostly benefits from the superior properties of perovskite semiconductors, including a strong absorption coefficient in the visible light region, a longer carrier diffusion length and lifetime, and high defect tolerance.2–4 Accompanied by the development of perovskite active layers, great efforts have also been made to modulate the contact materials and their interfaces in order to passivate perovskite defects as well as to enhance charge extraction and collection.5,6 Specifically, electron transport materials (ETMs) play essential roles in n–i–p PSCs, whose optoelectronic properties significantly influence both perovskite crystallization and electron collection yield in devices. The state-of-the-art PSCs generally contain metal oxides as an ETM (such as TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO) owing to their high electron mobility, low cost and good stability.7,8 However, recent research has revealed that TiO2 with high catalytic activity induces interfacial degradation of perovskite through some specific chemical reactions, especially under ultraviolet light, which in turn impose negative impacts on the long-term stability of PSCs.9–11 Besides, the fabrication of high-quality TiO2 at high temperature (>450 °C) results in high energy consumption and a high manufacturing cost, which greatly hinders the future application of PSCs in a scalable and flexible manner.12,13 In these respects, organic semiconductors offer several advantages compared to their inorganic counterparts, including versatile structures, fine-tuned optoelectronic properties, simple solution processability and good film-forming properties. Reviewing numerous efforts devoted to developing organic materials as hole-transporting materials (HTMs),14–16 there are only a few reports on designing organic ETMs for n–i–p PSCs due to the lack of suitable electrophilic building blocks.17–19 A qualified organic ETM often requires appropriate energy levels, high electron mobility and good film uniformity.20 Moreover, the film morphological properties and chemical resistance (i.e. hydrophilic properties and solvent compatibility) of ETMs as a bottom electrode play critical roles in perovskite crystallization and interfacial charge kinetics.21
To date, most organic ETMs rely on aromatic imide derivatives (see Fig. 1A) as electron-transporting components, which have been briefly investigated in n–i–p PSCs, organic solar cells (OSCs) and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).22–27 The ETM film with such unbound molecules can be easily washed away or destroyed by the solvents in the perovskite precursor solution, subsequently causing severe interfacial recombination losses in devices. Recently, Wu et al. designed a series of self-assembled molecules involving carboxylic acid as an anchoring group which can form homogeneous and stable thin films for the subsequent deposition of the perovskite layer. As a result, devices with 16–18% efficiencies were realized with good reproducibility.27 It is revealed that most of the imide compounds aggregate severely in the solid state, which leads to a rough film surface and poor homogeneity.28 Despite the superior properties of low cost and high flexibility of organic ETMs, their photovoltaic performance in n–i–p PSCs still lags behind those with their inorganic counterparts. In addition, several reports have recently shown that organic HTMs in p–i–n PSCs induce significant impacts on the buried interfaces in terms of microstructures and defects,29,30 but little attention has been paid to studying the influence of organic ETMs on the buried interface properties in n–i–p devices. Challenges remain in understanding the weakness of organic ETMs and visualizing the buried interfaces between ETMs and perovskites. It is urgently needed to develop alternative organic ETMs for efficient and stable PSCs.
 Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structures of aromatic imide derivatives as ETMs in previous work. (B) Chemical structures of benzothiadiazole (BT) derivatives as ETMs in this work. 
Considering these challenges, we introduce benzothiadiazole (BT) as a building block for the application in ETMs for the first time. By meticulous functionalization of the molecular backbone, a series of benzothiadiazole derivatives with fine-tuned electronic and morphological properties were developed, namely BT–BA, BTF–BA, BTCN–BA, and BBT–BA (Fig. 1B). Benzothiadiazole represents a well known and promising electron-withdrawing unit because of straightforward synthesis, easy functionalization, a highly planar structure and tunable energy levels, and has been widely used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),31 OSCs,32 and OFETs.33 In this work, we synthesized different functionalized BT backbones (i.e. fluorine substituted BT, cyano substituted BT and dithiazole functionalized BT) by using commercially available raw materials. Additionally, in order to endow BT molecules with interfacial functionalities, benzoic acid was incorporated on both sides of BT backbones to realize its bonding capacity on the ITO substrate and the passivation effect toward the perovskite surface as reported in the literature.34,35 Therefore, the resultant BT derivatives are expected to exhibit good resistance toward a perovskite precursor. The incorporation of hydrophobic fluorine units in BTF–BA may form a coordination bond with the perovskite, which can accelerate charge separation and inhibit carrier recombination, as discussed in previous work.36,37 The nitrile (C–N) groups have shown effective passivation of the trap density and suppression of charge recombination in the perovskite film.38 The functionalization by dithiazole could enable the adjustment of the energy levels of molecules. Besides, the electron-withdrawing properties of dithiazole units represent favorable components in electron transport materials.32 Besides, BT as the backbone of these molecules provides remarkable structural planarity, which is highly beneficial for having high carrier mobility and enhancing the molecular stacking in the film.34 We observe that BT molecular substitution induces significant effects on the microstructures of buried interfaces and charge conducting properties of perovskite thin films. Our results reveal that different BT molecules show distinct electronic and interfacial properties, among which BTF–BA shows the best capacity to form a superior perovskite film with reduced surface defects and improved interface contact. Consequently, these contribute to sufficient electron transfer and suppressed recombination at interfaces. As a result, the BTF–BA based ETM yields a remarkable efficiency of 19.60%, representing the highest reported PCE for organic non-fullerene ETMs in n–i–p devices, and outperforms both TiO2-based (17.8%) and PCBM-based (16.2%) devices. Moreover, the unencapsulated devices with BTF–BA demonstrate high reproducibility and extraordinary stability by maintaining 90% of their initial PCEs after 1500 hours in air with 30% relative humidity (RH). Our work demonstrates that molecular engineering of ETMs is critical for optimization of buried interfaces and enhancement of photovoltaic performance. BT units may provide a new avenue for the design of efficient organic ETMs for n–i–p PSCs, and pave ways for further optimization of BT derivatives.
Results and discussion
The simple structures of BT derivatives enable facile synthetic processes with only two steps, as shown in Fig. S1.† With commercially available BT raw materials in hand, Suzuki coupling was first performed with 4-(ethoxycarbonyl) phenylboronic acid under classical conditions, followed by effective hydrolysis reactions, leading to an excellent overall yield of 50–70%. The product colors are yellow, yellow-green, gray and brown for BT–BA, BTF–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA, respectively. The structures and purity of the final molecules were examined and confirmed by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) and elemental analysis (EA), as displayed in the ESI (Fig. S2 to Fig. S10†). We also briefly estimated the cost of these materials in comparison to fullerene ETMs, as summarized in Table S1.† BT derivatives exhibited a much lower cost than the commercial PCBM, which demonstrated their high promise in the application of low-cost solar cells. It is noted that these BT derivatives are mainly soluble in polar solvents, such as THF, DMSO, DMF and isopropanol, due to the existence of double highly polar carboxylic acid groups.
Based on the molecular structures, we proposed a possible interaction mechanism between the BT derivatives and perovskite at interfaces, as exhibited in Fig. 2A. The benzoic acid groups on BT derivatives can form a coordination bond with the ITO substrate which improves the binding ability. Besides, the functional groups on BT derivatives could passivate the buried interface of the perovskite to reduce the trap density and recombination losses.39 Their synergistic effects of morphological control and enhanced charge collection could enable efficient and stable PSCs, which will be discussed later. Fullerene derivatives, especially PCBM, represent the most widely used organic ETMs in PSCs, which will be also utilized as a reference in this work. Fig. 2B displays the ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra of BT derivatives, and the absorption spectra of PCBM is exhibited in the inset image. These molecules display various absorption bands ranging from 300 nm to 450 nm. Specifically, the introduction of –F and –CN induced blue-shifted absorption peaks and onsets compared to BT–BA, resulting in a broader optical band gap (Eoptg) , which is likely due to the strong electron-withdrawing effects of –F and –CN on the aromatic rings.40 In contrast, BBT–BA showed the narrowest optical band gap. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels are determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV), as shown in Fig. S11,† and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is calculated from the LUMO and Eoptg. As shown in Fig. 2C and Table S2,† the HOMO and LUMO energies derived from CV and UV-vis are −3.94 eV and −6.82 eV, −3.99 eV and −7.03 eV, −4.02 eV and −7.21 eV, and −3.98 eV and −6.51 eV for BT–BA, BTF–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA, respectively. From the results, we observed a strong –F and –CN positioning effect on the optical and electrochemical properties,40 and the results further confirm that the introduction of –F and –CN reduces both HOMO and LUMO levels. Besides, the energy levels of PCBM and TiO2 are also listed for comparison.41,42 BTF–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA show similar LUMOs to that of TiO2, which are all lower than those of BT–BA and PCBM. All ETMs show appropriate energy levels relative to the perovskite conduction band,43 indicating that they can efficiently extract electrons from the perovskite and prevent the back transfer of holes from the perovskite to ITO substrates. Fig. 2D shows the transmittance spectra of BT derivatives, together with TiO2 and PCBM. Compared to PCBM, BT derivatives show much higher transmittance in the range of 400–800 nm, indicating BT-based molecules with high transparency are superior in increasing light harvesting capacity in devices, which favors the generation of high photocurrent in n–i–p structure PSCs. In addition, we examined the chemical resistance of ETMs by spin-coating of DMF on top of ETM films. As shown in Fig. S12,† the absorption intensity of the PCBM film was reduced significantly after washing, but the BT derivative film maintained most of the absorption, which demonstrates that BT derivatives with benzoic acid have high tolerance to the perovskite precursor solution. The thermal stability of these organic ETMs was examined by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), as shown in Fig. S13.† Overall, these molecules exhibited different thermal stabilities. Specifically, BT–BA showed the highest decomposition temperature of over 350 °C, and BTF–BA decomposed at about 300 °C. However, much poorer thermal stability was observed for BTCN–BA and BBT–BA. The variation in their thermal stability could be due to the different bonding strength of the pendant group with the BT backbone, as discussed in previous work.44
 Fig. 2  (A) Diagram of the interaction mechanism between BTF–BA and the perovskite. (B) UV-vis absorption of BT derivatives in comparison with PCBM. (C) Energy level diagram of different ETMs which is estimated from their electrochemical potentials and absorption bands. (D) The transmittance spectra of the ITO substrate with different ETMs. 
The crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite film are strongly affected by the surface properties of the substrate, such as hydrophobicity. We studied the surface wetting properties of different electron transport layers (ETLs) by contact angle (CA) measurement, as shown in Fig. S14.† The CAs of BTF (73.6°) and BTCN (79.1°) are slightly higher than those of BT–BA (66.9°) and BBT–BA (64.4°), suggesting that the introduction of –F and –CN is favorable for increasing film hydrophobicity. In contrast, TiO2 shows a lower CA of 30.1°, but PCBM has the highest CA of 93.8°, which agrees well with the fact that inorganic metal oxides generally show higher wettability than their organic counterparts. We observed that the perovskite solution can be easily spread on the films with BT derivatives, enabling uniform perovskite films via a one-step solvent engineering method. Fig. S15† shows the pictures of different films from both the front side and back side. It is noted that the perovskite film covered on the BTCN–BA substrate showed small holes within the film, which may result from its relatively large water CA. The perovskite films on BTF–BA, BBT–BA and TiO2 are homogeneous and smooth without notable pinholes. In contrast, due to the high CA of PCBM, many pinholes were generated in the whole perovskite film, which could cause direct contact between the Ag electrode and ETMs, leading to severe charge recombination losses.
The perovskite crystallinity and grain structures have great impacts on the carrier transport rate and nonradiative recombination losses in devices. Visualizing the buried interface properties is essential to understanding the effects of ETM structures on the perovskite quality. We thus first evaluate the influence of ETMs on the perovskite microstructures by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as presented in Fig. 3. The top-view SEM images of perovskite films on different ETMs are illustrated in Fig. 3A–F. Clearly, the films based on BT–BA and BTF–BA exhibited relatively uniform grains with clear grain boundaries, showing little detectable pinholes in the film. But blurred and collapsed grains were observed in the case of BTCN–BA and BBT–BA. In contrast, the reference films based on PCBM and TiO2 demonstrated much larger variation in grain size compared to BT derivatives. This suggests that the molecular structure of the bottom ETM likely induced great impacts on perovskite nucleation and growth. To further visualize the ETM effects on the bottom side of the perovskite, the buried interfaces were examined by SEM, as shown in Fig. 3G–L and S16.† Overall, a significant difference in microstructures of the bottom perovskite film was recorded for different ETMs. Specifically, organic BT-based derivatives, especially BTF–BA, exhibited a relatively uniform and smooth perovskite film with clear grain boundaries, but notable pinholes or voids were observed in the films based on BT–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA. This result demonstrates that the pendant groups on BT derivatives have significant influences on the crystallization and microstructures of perovskite films. It is seen that the buried perovskite showed much better quality in devices based on four BT derivatives compared to PCBM and TiO2, indicating the structural properties in BT-based molecules favor the perovskite crystallization and film formation. Surprisingly, the perovskite film on top of PCBM and TiO2 exhibited deformed and distorted grains with smaller size and cracks. Notably, a large number of voids and pinholes were generated in the PCBM-based perovskite film (Fig. S16†). In comparison, BTF–BA promotes the formation of the highest quality perovskite film with ordered and uniform grains at both top and bottom sides, which could significantly reduce defect-related recombination losses in devices. According to previous experience, the wettability of the bottom electrode can greatly influence the crystallization process of the perovskite. Generally, the film with lower hydrophobicity and a smaller CA produces relatively smaller grains due to easier nucleation.45 Thus, BTF–BA with a moderate CA and appropriate surface wettability favors the formation of uniform and large grains in the perovskite film. In spite of their distinct perovskite morphology, all films showed comparable absorption intensity in the range from 400 nm to 800 nm, as shown in Fig. S17,† which likely benefits from the high extinction coefficient of the polycrystalline perovskite. A slightly lower absorbance at 500–800 nm was noticed for TiO2, which can be attributed to the lower transmittance of TiO2 at 500–800 nm, as demonstrated in Fig. 2D.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of (A–F) top and (G–L) bottom side views of perovskite films deposited on different ETMs. 
We also examined the surface topography of the perovskite film by atomic force microscopy (AFM), as shown in Fig. S18.† The films based on BT-derivatives showed comparable root-mean-square (RMS) values of about 30 nm, whereas RMS values of 38 nm and 24 nm were obtained for the films with PCBM and TiO2. The relatively small roughness guarantees sufficient interface contacts between the perovskite layer and the top HTMs considering the high thickness (>250 nm) of hole transport layers. To further investigate the effects of ETMs on the electronic properties of the perovskite film, the conducting properties were characterized by conductive AFM (c-AFM). Spatial current on the perovskite film was recorded when a bias voltage of 1.5 V was applied on the device of the ITO/ETL/perovskite, as exhibited in Fig. 4A to F. Significantly, a large variation of spatial current for different films was observed, indicating that the perovskite films present great differences in the conductivity, which could be mostly related to perovskite crystallinity, defect density and film density. Clearly, much lower current was seen at the grain boundaries for all the films, which means inhomogeneity of conducting properties across the film. It is noted that the films based on BBT–BA showed the highest number of boundaries and uneven current distribution compared to other ETMs, indicating a poor perovskite crystal quality, as seen in Fig. 3. In contrast, the film based on BTF–BA displayed the highest current with remarkable uniformity across the whole film, suggesting the high electrical conductivity in the perovskite film, which is consistent with the high uniformity and crystallinity of the perovskite film on BTF–BA (see Fig. 3). Surprisingly, the perovskite on PCBM demonstrated the lowest current in the entire region, revealing its poor charge conducting capacity. This agrees well with the observed high surface roughness and poor film quality with pinholes in the PCBM-based perovskite film. In comparison to organic ETMs, the TiO2 based perovskite film showed the highest current but with some nonconductive regions in the film. The current uniformity and conducting properties of the perovskite are crucial for the charge collection efficiency and recombination losses in the devices, which will be discussed later. We also evaluated the resistivity of perovskite films by a four-point probe test, as shown in Fig. S19.† From the current–voltage characteristics, the perovskite conducting properties can be briefly estimated. The films with BT–BA and BTCN–BA showed much higher resistivity than BTF–BA and BBT–BA. As expected, the perovskite film on TiO2 and PCBM exhibited the lowest and highest resistivity, respectively. These results agree well with those of c-AFM. Furthermore, the effect of buried ETMs on the structural properties of perovskites was investigated by characterizing their crystallinity and defect density by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. S20†) and photoluminescence (PL) measurements. By comparing the characteristic perovskite XRD peaks at 14.3° (Fig. 4G and H), we observed that the BTF–BA based film exhibited a much higher XRD peak intensity than other BT derivatives, indicating that higher crystallinity was obtained in the case of BTF–BA, as similarly illustrated in Fig. 3 and 4. In comparison to the reference samples with TiO2 and PCBM, a much higher peak was recorded for BTF–BA, which indicates better crystallinity and a large grain size. What's more, it was noticed that the peak position shows a slight shift, which indicates the subtle difference of the lattice constant of the perovskite deposited on different ETLs. For further investigation, the mean size of the crystalline domains L were calculated using the following equation:46,47  where K is the crystallite-shape factor, and the value usually is 0.9; λ represents the wavelength of X-ray. β is the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) in degrees, and θ is the Bragg angle. The calculation results are displayed in Table S3,† and the results indicate that the BTF–BA based film with a higher value of L means a large grain size, which is consistent with these results above. These further suggest that the buried interface materials play essential roles in the perovskite crystallization and optoelectronic properties, and the incorporation of F into molecules favors both film hydrophobicity and film crystallinity. The F-induced interfacial interaction and its working mechanism need further investigation. Moreover, we also studied the influences of buried ETMs on the defects in perovskites as well as the correlated nonradiative recombination by PL, as exhibited in Fig. 4I and J. The PL spectra were recorded with an excitation wavelength of 460 nm from the perovskite side in order to reduce the interference from the electron transfer at perovskite/ETM interfaces. Since most of the photogenerated carriers are located on the illumination side, the PL quenching provides important information on the defect-induced nonradiative recombination. Notably, BTF–BA and BBT–BA based devices exhibited much higher PL intensity than BT–BA and BTCN–BA, indicating that less nonradiative recombination occurred in the perovskite based on BTF–BA and BBT–BA, which likely originates from their higher crystallinity and less defects (e.g. pinholes), whereas the reference PCBM based film exhibited a very small PL peak, which is far lower than that for BTF–BA and TiO2, which further proves the poor perovskite film quality on PCBM, as similarly observed in Fig. 3. We have further studied the interface properties by measuring PL spectra with an excitation (460 nm) from the glass side, as exhibited in Fig. S21.† Clearly, all the devices based on BT derivatives, PCBM and TiO2 exhibited comparable PL intensities, indicating similar electron transfer kinetics at interfaces.
 Fig. 4  Conductive AFM (c-AFM) images of the ITO/ETL/perovskite films, coated on (A) BT–BA, (B) BTF–BA, (C) BTCN–BA, (D) BBT–BA, (E) PCBM, and (F) TiO2, respectively. (G and H) Zoomed-in X-ray diffraction signals at 2θ ranging from 14.0° to 14.7°; (I and J) steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of perovskite films fabricated on different ETMs. 
We then fabricated PSC devices based on BT derivatives in a device configuration of ITO/ETL/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag, as shown in Fig. 5A. Overall, the fabrication of the organic ETM film was carried out under mild conditions at low temperature, which is crucial for reducing the manufacturing complexity and cost. This represents one of the main advantages of BT derivatives as ETMs compared to inorganic TiO2. The detailed device fabrication procedures are mentioned in the experimental section. The thickness of organic ETMs was first optimized by tuning the concentration of BTF–BA, and the evolution of device parameters with the film thickness is illustrated in Fig. S22 and Table S4.† The cross-sectional image of devices is exhibited in Fig. S23,† which showed that the thicknesses of spiro-OMeTAD and the perovskite were 280 nm and 510 nm, respectively. The photovoltaic performance was measured by recording current density–voltage (J–V) curves under a standard AM 1.5 solar simulator. It is seen that an average PCE of about 14% was obtained for ETM-free devices. A gradual increase of PCE to above 19% was realized when increasing the ETM concentration from 1 mg mL−1 to 5 mg mL−1. The PCE enhancement was mostly due to a higher electron collection yield by reducing electron back transfer from the ITO substrate to the perovskite. Further increase of the ETM concentration induced a gradual PCE reduction to 14% when 15 mg mL−1 was applied. Based on these results, an optimal concentration of 5 mg mL−1 was selected for the following study. Fig. 5B displays the J–V curves of the champion devices with BT derivatives as buried interface materials. Remarkably, the best-performing device based on BTF–BA yields a high PCE of 19.60% (open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 1.06 V, short current density (Jsc) = 23.81 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) = 77.83%), which is about a 30% enhancement compared to BTCN–BA (PCE = 15.13%, Voc = 1.01 V, Jsc = 23.44 mA cm−2, and FF = 63.87%). In comparison, the device based on BT–BA shows a PCE of 18.66% with an Voc of 1.02 V, a Jsc of 24.57 mA cm−2, and a FF of 74.79%. The BBT–BA based device showed a PCE of 16.85% with an Voc of 1.02 V, a Jsc of 24.32 mA cm−2 and a FF of 67.94%. More than 10 devices for each ETM were evaluated in order to see the reproducibility of the device performance, as exhibited in Fig. 5C and S24.† We also observed light soaking effects for these devices; for example, the BTF–BA based device exhibited enhanced performance during the illumination, as illustrated in Fig. S25.† It is seen that Jsc was increased during light soaking from 21.5 mA cm−2 to over 23 mA cm−2. And once the light is off, the device performance degraded to the initial state. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was also performed to evaluate the output of BTF–BA based devices (Fig. S26†). The integrated current is consistent with the Jsc values of the devices before light soaking, but lower than the Jsc values obtained for the stabilized devices after light soaking, which is reasonable because the devices used for EQE measurement were not treated with continuous light illumination. Overall, the device based on BTF–BA exhibited the smallest PCE variation and highest average PCE among all BT-based ETMs. The improvement in the PCE of BTF–BA can be mainly attributed to the increase of both the Voc and FF. This suggests that the incorporation of the F component in the buried interface materials is beneficial to modulate the perovskite/ETM interfaces. We ascribed the PCE enhancement of BTF–BA to the high crystallinity, high conductivity and low defects in the corresponding perovskite film, as discussed above. The superior effects of the F atom on passivating defects have been similarly observed in previous studies.48,49 The photovoltaic performance of BTF–BA was further compared with the reference PCBM and TiO2 (Fig. 5D). In accordance with expectation, PCBM based devices displayed the lowest PCE of 16.26% with Voc = 0.99 V, Jsc = 23.81 mA cm−2, and FF = 68.83%. And the inorganic ETM TiO2 presented a PCE of 17.83% (Voc = 1.02 V, Jsc = 23.44 mA cm−2, and FF = 74.52%). The PCE statistics in Fig. 5E and S27† further prove that the device based on BTF–BA demonstrated superior parameters and higher reproducibility than PCBM and TiO2. Moreover, Fig. 5F and Table S5† show the efficiencies and molecular structures of some representative non-fullerene organic ETMs in n–i–p PSCs in recent years. To the best of our knowledge, BTF–BA presents the highest reported efficiency among all non-fullerene ETMs. The relatively poor performance of TiO2 can be attributed to the complex surface nature and high defect density, which together induced severe carrier losses. PCBM as an organic ETM has poor wettability with high hydrophobicity, which resulted in a perovskite film with low crystallinity and pinholes. Unsatisfactory conducting properties and interfacial charge losses are likely the major reasons for the low performance. In contrast, our newly developed BTF–BA with F incorporation enabled a fine optimization of the perovskite microstructure, including both enhancement of crystallinity and film compactness and suppression of defect density. All these properties enable the perovskite film to have high conductivity, a long carrier lifetime, little pinhole defects and high film uniformity.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic n–i–p structured PSCs (HTL: hole transport layer). (B) Current–voltage (J–V) curves and (C) PCE statistics of the optimized PSCs based on BT–BA, BTF–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA. (D) J–V curves and (E) PCE statistics of optimized PSCs based on BTF–BA, TiO2 and PCBM. (F) The representative efficiencies of non-fullerene based organic ETMs in n–i–p PSCs over the years. 
To further reveal how the buried interface material influences the device properties, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was conducted on different devices under dark conditions with a bias voltage of 1.0 V. Based on the equivalent circuit and the corresponding fitting Nyquist plots (Fig. 6A and B), the series resistance (Rs) and recombination resistance (Rrec) were derived and are shown in Table S6.†Rs refers to the high frequency intercept to the Z′ axis, which is likely related to the series resistance of the ITO, ETL and perovskite layer. The devices based on BT derivatives presented similar Rs values of about 20–25 Ω, which are slightly lower than that of TiO2 (27.23 Ω) and PCBM (36.23 Ω). Lower Rs favors the charge transport rate and improvement of the FF in the devices. The diameter of the semi-circle is associated with Rrec, which is inversely proportional to recombination rates. The BTF–BA based device exhibited a high Rrec value (432.30 Ω), which is more than two times higher than those of BT–BA (218.70 Ω), BTCN–BA (155.80 Ω), and BBT–BA (226.10 Ω). In comparison to BTF–BA, 33% and 85% lower Rrec was obtained for the devices with TiO2 (290.1 Ω) and PCBM (65.52 Ω). The high Rrec for BTF–BA based devices indicates the suppression of recombination losses, which explains the enhanced FF and Voc.50 And this mostly originates from the low defect-induced nonradiative recombination losses, as supported by the PL spectra (Fig. 4I and J).51
 Fig. 6  (A and B) Nyquist plots of PSCs based on different ETMs measured in the dark. (C and D) Mott–Schottky plots of PSCs with different BT-based ETMs. (E and F) Estimated electron lifetime of PSCs based on different ETMs. 
Moreover, capacitance–voltage measurement was employed to explore the interfacial electronic structures in devices with different ETMs. Fig. 6C and D display the typical capacitance–voltage (C−2–V) plots for devices. The built-in potential (Vbi) at perovskite/ETM interfaces can be calculated referring to the Mott–Schottky equation:52  where V is the applied bias, A is the active area, e is the charge of the element, ε is the static permittivity of the perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and NA is the carrier concentration. The built-in potential Vbi is determined by the X-axis intersection, and the slope reflects the carrier density of the interface. As shown in Table S7,† BTF–BA based devices showed the largest Vbi (1.013 V), which is higher than those of TiO2 (1.005 V) and PCBM (0.889 V). A larger Vbi indicates a higher driving force of carrier separation which favors the enhancement of charge transfer as well as the inhibition of carrier recombination.53 Notably, the Vbi in these devices followed the same trend as Voc, further suggesting that the buried interface materials are critical for modulating the Vbi in order to facilitate the charge separation and transport.54 To probe the recombination kinetics in different devices, open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCVD) is also adopted by applying a light modulation on complete devices. Based on the OCVD curves (Fig. S28†), the corresponding electron lifetime (τn) of the devices can be extracted based on the following formula:55  where KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The evolution of τn with different voltages is shown in Fig. 6E and F. Longer τn means a slower recombination process, which is beneficial for a higher charge collection efficiency. We ascribed the difference of τn for these ETMs to the buried interfaces, especially the distinct perovskite film properties. Again, longer τn for BTF–BA than other BT-derivatives, TiO2 and PCBM can be mostly associated with the high quality of the perovskite film in terms of crystallinity, conductivity, uniformity and defect density. Light induced photocurrent decay, as presented in Fig. S29,† further showed a more efficient charge collection efficiency for the device based on BTF–BA than other ETMs, which can be attributed to the high electron conductivity of BTF–BA, as illustrated by the current–voltage characteristics of different ETMs in Fig. S30.†
Stability is another important factor to evaluate ETM's reliability in PSCs. Previous studies have revealed that TiO2-based devices underwent severe degradation under ambient conditions, especially under conditions with incident UV light.56,57 Besides, the perovskite film compactness and crystallinity greatly alter the rate of water intake and perovskite decomposition.58 As mentioned above, the fluorine modified organic ETM BTF–BA is supposed to present high hydrophobicity and enhanced water stability of PSCs. Therefore, we evaluated the stability of the perovskite films as well as the corresponding devices based on TiO2 and BTF–BA for comparison. Fig. 7A shows the absorption change of the perovskite films under continuous light (100 mW cm−2) from the glass side under ambient conditions with 30% RH. A much faster decay of absorption intensity was recorded for the TiO2 based film compared to BTF–BA. This result indicates that photosensitive TiO2 is likely responsible for the fast perovskite decomposition.57 In contrast, organic ETM BTF–BA shows much higher photostability under the same conditions. To examine the operation stability of the devices, we tracked the long-term stability of unencapsulated devices at ∼30% RH at ∼30 °C in ambient air, as shown in Fig. 7B and C. Significantly, TiO2-based devices showed an increased series resistance, especially after 1200 hours from 500 Ω to over 2000 Ω. The high resistance in devices could cause severe charge collection losses. In contrast, little change in series resistance was observed in the case of BTF–BA. As a result, the unsealed devices with BTF–BA retained about 90% of their original PCEs after 1500 hours without notable degradation in the appearance of the devices. In contrast, all devices based on TiO2 fully degraded as indicated by the negligible PCEs after 1500 hours, when the devices completely became yellow, as illustrated in the inset images. The high stability of BTF–BA based devices mainly results from both the hydrophobic nature of BTF–BA and the high quality of perovskite films. The remarkably higher environmental stability of BTF–BA based devices than TiO2 further indicates high reliability of organic BTF–BA as ETMs in the application of PSCs.
 Fig. 7  (A) UV-vis absorbance change at 400 nm for perovskite films based on BTF–BA and TiO2 under continuous illumination in air (∼30% RH, 30 °C). (B) Series resistance change of the unencapsulated devices with BTF–BA and TiO2 in air (30% RH, 30 °C). (C) Long-term stability of unencapsulated devices with BTF–BA and TiO2 in air (30% RH, 30 °C) for 1500 hours. 
Conclusion
We have developed a series of carboxy-anchored benzothiadiazole (BT) derivatives as buried interface materials for n–i–p PSCs. By incorporation of different side groups in BT molecules, the effects of molecular structures on the perovskite properties and interfacial characteristics were revealed. It is found that the F incorporation in BTF–BA enables higher film crystallinity, better uniformity, a homogeneous microstructure, high conductivity and low defect density, compared to other BT derivatives. As a result, BTF–BA as a buried interface material yields a high PCE of 19.6%, which is the record efficiency for non-fullerene based organic ETMs in n–i–p devices. Based on detailed characterization, we suggest that the superior photovoltaic properties of BTF–BA can be mostly ascribed to the suppression of charge recombination losses and sufficient interfacial electron transfer, which together contributed to high charge collection efficiency and photovoltaic parameters. Besides, thanks to the hydrophobic nature of BTF–BA, the perovskite film exhibited remarkable water stability. The unencapsulated devices based on BTF–BA maintained 90% of their initial performance after 1500 hours, which is significantly superior to the reference TiO2. This work provides new insights into visualizing the buried interfaces in n–i–p PSCs and offers new strategies for designing efficient organic ETMs. Our results pave promising ways to further enhance the performance of organic ETMs by molecular engineering and interfacial optimization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Our research was financially supported by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515110068), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 20720200075), Central Guide Local Science and Technology Development Funds (No. 2021Szvup064), Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (JCYJ20210324121803009), Guangdong International Cooperation Project (No. 2019A050510002), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (No. 2021J01040) and Nanqiang Youth Talented Program of Xiamen University. The authors are grateful to Hengliang Huang and Weiying Song at Tan Kah Kee Innovation Laboratory (IKKEM), Xiamen University for device characterization.
References

          NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/nrel-record-cell-efficiency-data-table-guide.pdf, accessed  February 2022 Search PubMed.
J. Y. Kim, J. W. Lee, H. S. Jung, H. Shin and N. G. Park, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7867–7918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, N. Kumar Sinha, S. Tiwari and A. Khare, Sol. Energy, 2020, 198, 665–688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, N. Li, C. J. Brabec and H.-L. Yip, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, T. Duong, X. Zhou, H. Shen, Y. Wu, H. K. Mulmudi, Y. Wan, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Tsuzuki, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601768 CrossRef .
L. Lin, T. W. Jones, T. C.-J. Yang, N. W. Duffy, J. Li, L. Zhao, B. Chi, X. Wang and G. J. Wilson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008300 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lou, Y. Han, C. Liu, K. Zheng, J. Zhang, X. Chen, Q. Du, C. Chen and Z. Ge, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101416 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, X. Dai, S. Xu, H. Jiao, L. Zhao and J. Huang, Science, 2021, 373, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, S. Yang and S. Yang, Trends. Chem., 2020, 2, 148–162 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Yang, L. Lu, W. Xiao, H. Wu, S. Xiong, J. Tang, C. Duan and Q. Bao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thampy, B. Zhang, K.-H. Hong, K. Cho and J. W. P. Hsu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, W. Zhou, W. Hu, B. Li, Q. Qiao and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12696–12705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. J. Tang, S. Yang, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6521–6526 RSC .
C. Yang, H. Wang, Y. Miao, C. Chen, M. Zhai, Q. Bao, X. Ding, X. Yang and M. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2690–2696 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sathiyan, A. A. Syed, C. Chen, C. Wu, L. Tao, X. Ding, Y. Miao, G. Li, M. Cheng and L. Ding, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104673 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, H. Wang, C. Chen, H. Li, Y. Tian, Q. Li, C. Wu, L. Ding, X. Yang and M. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128328 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roose, Q. Wang and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803140 Search PubMed .
J. Lian, B. Lu, F. Niu, P. Zeng and X. Zhan, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800082 CrossRef .
X. Yin, Z. Song, Z. Li and W. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4057–4086 RSC .
C. Chen, C. Wu, X. Ding, Y. Tian, M. Zheng, M. Cheng, H. Xu, Z. Jin and L. Ding, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104604 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Xue, J. Han, Y. Q. Fu, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Li and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8724–8733 RSC .
Z. Zhu, J.-Q. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, Z. a. Li, X. Li, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10786–10793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Wu, E. Li, C. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Xu, G. Wu, M. Cai and W. H. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13239–13242 RSC .
G. Liu, C. Xiao, F. Negri, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2008–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fernández-Lázaro, N. Zink-Lorre and Á. Sastre-Santos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9336–9346 RSC .
F. Ye, D. Zhang, X. Xu, H. Guo, S. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Wu and W.-H. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000736 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Bhosale, M. Al Kobaisi, R. W. Jadhav, P. P. Morajkar, L. A. Jones and S. George, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9845–9998 RSC .
M. Xiao, T. Lu, T. Lin, J. S. Andre and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y.-H. Chiang, Y. Tu, R. Su, Q. Hu, H. Yu, G. Shao, W. Huang, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, S. D. Stranks, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Song, J. Qu, P.-C. Qian and W.-Y. Wong, Sci. China Chem., 2021, 64, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Nie, A. Tang, Q. Guo and E. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, C. An, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1196–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Liao, J. Chen, W. Huang, X. Zhuang, Y. Tang, B. Li, X. Yao, X. Feng, X. Zhang, M. Su, Z. He, T. J. Marks, A. Facchetti and X. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16632–16643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, Y. Wang, X. Yao, M. Su, B. Li, H. Sun, J. Huang and X. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16744–16753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J.-S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Pan, S. Chen, R. Wang, R. Sun, Z. Shang, B. Qiu, J. Min, M. Lv, L. Meng, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, C. Yang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Q. Xue, X. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, D. Cui, T. Wang, X. Meng, E. Bi, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900605 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jeong, W. Choi, M. Go Eun, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, W. Choi Hye, J. Lee, J.-H. Bae, K. Kwak Sang, S. Kim Dong and C. Yang, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Jung, D. S. Lee, M. H. Ann, S. H. Im, J. H. Kim and O. P. Kwon, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3882–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Yue, X. Lu, Z. Hu and Y. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 195, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, Y. Rao, M. Zhu, R. Li, J. Zhan, L. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Li, S. Pang and Z. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 17356–17361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Wang and J.-Z. You, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2015, 120, 1009–1025 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ahmad, M. A. Najeeb, R. A. Shakoor, A. Alashraf, S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, A. Soliman and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15406 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Najeeb, A. Alkareem, M. Awais, Z. Ahmad, R. A. Shakoor, A. Alashraf, A. M. A. Mohamed, J. Bhadra, N. J. Al-Thani, F. Touati and S. Rafique, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 19, 199 CrossRef .
C. Sun, F. Pan, S. Chen, R. Wang, R. Sun, Z. Shang, B. Qiu, J. Min, M. Lv, L. Meng, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, C. Yang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1905480 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J. S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Yan, Q. Cai, X. Wen, H. Dong and C. Mu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21917–21926 RSC .
D. Maccariello, A. Al Taleb, F. Calleja, A. L. Vázquez de Parga, P. Perna, J. Camarero, E. Gnecco, D. Farías and R. Miranda, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Q. Chen, R. Xue, Y. Zhan, C. Wang, J. Lai, J. Yang, H. Lin, J. Yao, Y. Li, L. Chen and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4593 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Duan, X. Yang, J. Du, Y. Wang, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11859–11866 RSC .
B. Roose, J.-P. C. Baena, K. C. Gödel, M. Graetzel, A. Hagfeldt, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 517–522 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Fan, Z. Li and S. Pang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 11551–11556 RSC .
M. Hu, C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Bai and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500301 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00224hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structures of aromatic imide derivatives as ETMs in previous work. (B) Chemical structures of benzothiadiazole (BT) derivatives as ETMs in this work.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Diagram of the interaction mechanism between BTF–BA and the perovskite. (B) UV-vis absorption of BT derivatives in comparison with PCBM. (C) Energy level diagram of different ETMs which is estimated from their electrochemical potentials and absorption bands. (D) The transmittance spectra of the ITO substrate with different ETMs.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of (A–F) top and (G–L) bottom side views of perovskite films deposited on different ETMs.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Conductive AFM (c-AFM) images of the ITO/ETL/perovskite films, coated on (A) BT–BA, (B) BTF–BA, (C) BTCN–BA, (D) BBT–BA, (E) PCBM, and (F) TiO2, respectively. (G and H) Zoomed-in X-ray diffraction signals at 2θ ranging from 14.0° to 14.7°; (I and J) steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of perovskite films fabricated on different ETMs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic n–i–p structured PSCs (HTL: hole transport layer). (B) Current–voltage (J–V) curves and (C) PCE statistics of the optimized PSCs based on BT–BA, BTF–BA, BTCN–BA and BBT–BA. (D) J–V curves and (E) PCE statistics of optimized PSCs based on BTF–BA, TiO2 and PCBM. (F) The representative efficiencies of non-fullerene based organic ETMs in n–i–p PSCs over the years.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A and B) Nyquist plots of PSCs based on different ETMs measured in the dark. (C and D) Mott–Schottky plots of PSCs with different BT-based ETMs. (E and F) Estimated electron lifetime of PSCs based on different ETMs.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  (A) UV-vis absorbance change at 400 nm for perovskite films based on BTF–BA and TiO2 under continuous illumination in air (∼30% RH, 30 °C). (B) Series resistance change of the unencapsulated devices with BTF–BA and TiO2 in air (30% RH, 30 °C). (C) Long-term stability of unencapsulated devices with BTF–BA and TiO2 in air (30% RH, 30 °C) for 1500 hours.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00224h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
