 Carbon nanotubes and organic solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02276H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02276H
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5919-5940Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Carbon nanotubes and organic solar cells

        
          
            Sebastiano 
            Cataldo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Patrizio 
            Salice
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Enzo 
            Menna
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bruno 
            Pignataro
          
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Chimica “S. Cannizzaro”, Università di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 17, 90100, Palermo, Italy. E-mail: bruno.pignataro@unipa.it;  Fax: +39 091 590015;   Tel: +39 091 6 59846
bDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, via Marzolo, 1, 35131, Padova, Italy. E-mail: enzo.menna@unipd.it;  Fax: +39 049 8275792;   Tel: +39 049 8275660
Received 
      3rd August 2011
    , Accepted 25th October 2011First published on 21st November 2011AbstractThe use of carbon nanotubes in photovoltaics is still challenging due to different issues connected to their synthesis, purification, functionalization, processing and device integration. From this perspective at first we review on selected contributions dealing with the above issues; then we focus on the advantages and limitations of carbon nanotubes for the development of organic solar cells.Sebastiano CataldoSebastiano Cataldo is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Palermo. He received a Master's Degree in Chemistry in 2003 and a PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2007 from the University of Catania. His research activity is set on the edge between surface science and nanotechnology. His main interests are studying the organization of materials (biological and organic) at surfaces and the engineering of thin films architectures down to the nano-scale for potential applications in the field of plastic electronics including organic solar cells.Patrizio SalicePatrizio Salice is a postdoctoral scientist at the Department of Chemical Sciences of the University of Padova. He defended his PhD thesis on the synthesis and characterization of photoactive theranostic nanoclinics under the supervision of Professor Giorgio A. Pagani at the University of Milano-Bicocca in 2009. During his PhD studies he also joined Professor Peter R. Ogilby's group at the University of Aarhus. His research interests are in the design and chemical manipulation of organic functional nanomaterials.Enzo MennaEnzo Menna received his PhD in Chemical Sciences in 1999. He is an Associate Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Padova, Department of Chemical Sciences. His current research activity is mainly focused on the synthesis of organic materials and nanomaterials with potential application in fields such as energy conversion and photonics. He is particularly involved in the synthesis of π-conjugated molecular structures and in the organic functionalization of carbon nanotubes, both at the outside (exohedral, covalent and non-covalent) and at the inside (encapsulation).Bruno PignataroBruno Pignataro, born in Bologna in 1972, is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received a degree in chemistry in 1995 and a PhD in materials science in 2000 at the University of Catania. His group research interests focus on the assembly of biological, organic and hybrid (organic/inorganic) materials at surfaces and on the development of electronic devices (transistors, photovoltaic cells, sensors/biosensors), including those related to plastic electronics.

Broader context
Organic solar cells achieved a lot of attention due to their potential efficiency/cost ratio competitiveness with respect to inorganic solar cells. Many materials and processing methods are actually under investigation in order to improve efficiency and reduce cost. Carbon nanostructures are very interesting and here we emphasize the versatility of carbon nanotubes, especially in combination with suitable electron donors. The recent progress in the separation of semiconducting single wall carbon nanotubes and the new derivatization techniques open interesting perspectives in this context. Applications may include both a niche market including low-power and short-term devices and a larger market including low-power, longer-term and portable devices.

1. Introduction
Since their discovery,1,2carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted considerable attention because of their outstanding properties and versatility. Indeed, promising nanostructured organic or hybrid (organic/inorganic) materials based on CNTs are expected to underpin, in a medium-long term, a variety of high-prospect applications including organic and plastic electronics.3–6
Nowadays, different groups are working worldwide to improve the optical and electrical properties of thin films for the next generation of solar/photovoltaic cells. Indeed, an exciting challenge is to enhance the generation of free charges from excitons, at the donor (D)/acceptor (A) interface, and their percolation through the material to the respective electrodes. In this respect, the most significant advance for the organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology based on a planar D/A heterojunction7 is the introduction of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) approach.8
The nanoscale structure of the organic film is a fundamental property. In particular, the probability that an exciton reaches the D/A interface and dissociates is high if the length scale of the network features is consistent with the exciton diffusion length (10–30 nm). Furthermore, for an efficient photocurrent collection each material must provide a continuous path for the transport of separated charges to the contacts, since isolated domains can give recombination.
The progress of thin film BHJ cells during the last few years has been spectacular: from a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.04% reported in 1995, efficiencies of 2.5% in 2000, 3.0% in 2003, around 5% in 2007, more than 6% in 20099,10 and 7.4% in 2010 have been achieved.11 More recently, by using proprietary materials, Konarka12 and Solarmer Inc.13 declared 8.3% and 8.41% respectively.
In considering PCE, one has to take into account several parameters which directly impact the short circuit current density (JSC), the open circuit voltage (VOC) and the fill factor (FF). In particular, VOC is a measure of the cell potential and typically scales with the energy gap between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of A and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of D.14,15 Thus, it is clear that the appropriate material design and screening of the D–A materials combination is fundamental to optimize VOC. On the other side, JSC represents the maximum current density that could be produced by the cell and it mainly depends on the band gap and on the absorption coefficient of D as well as on the charge extraction. Finally, FF denotes the fraction of power the cell can output with respect to the ideal maximum power defined by the product VOCJSC. An important point for improving this last factor is the D–A charge carrier mobility balance along with the BHJ morphology.16 Ultimately PCE = VOCJSCFF/Pin.
Advancing PCE to values larger than 10% requires a strategic combination of the energy levels of all the components (donor, acceptor and electrode materials) as well as a fine control of all interfaces. Actually, an accurate band engineering taking into account suitable band gaps of both materials and a fine HOMO–LUMO line-up between them is crucial. Indeed, this leads to reaching an enhanced overlap between the photoactive material absorption and the solar spectrum and to reducing the energy loss resulting from the exciton dissociation. Even more challenging, the control of the heterojunction architecture may take advantage of recent insights on the preparation and characterization of nanostructured thin films3,17–21 to improve performances.
A noteworthy example which led to the highest efficiency published to date is the preparation of BHJs of thieno[3,4-b]thienyl- and benzodithienyl-based polymers (PTBs) with fullerene phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM).11 Here, the complementary absorption of the low band gap (about 1.6 eV) conjugated polymers in the highest photon flux region of the solar spectrum (ca. 700 nm) and of PC71BM in the near-UV region results in a panchromatic-wide absorption material.
In addition, the low-lying HOMO of PTBs with a good electron acceptor as PC71BM results in high VOC values. Finally, the high solubilities of the donor polymer and of the acceptor prevent phase segregation allowing efficient exciton dissociation at the widespread D/A interfaces with transfer times of 100 fs.
While the flourishing field of low band-gap polymers has constantly proposed as novel donor materials for OPV applications, among all organic molecules experimented as acceptors,24fullerene derivatives25,26 are difficult to replace. Among the other acceptor materials proposed (also including small molecules based on Vinazene,27,28 polyboranes,29etc.) nanostructured allotropic forms of carbon such as graphene30 and CNTs stand out.31–36
CNTs, in particular, are one-dimensional nanostructures (i.e., their aspect ratio spans from 103 up to 106) characterized by a ballistic charge transport along their axis. Unlike fullerenes and graphene, the band-gap of CNTs can be tuned over a wide range by employing different radii and chiralities, hence allowing for a precise band engineering. Furthermore, thanks to the high surface area (about 1600 m2 g−1)37 and the electron-accepting properties, CNTs nicely fit the need of a wide conductive network and offer a tremendous opportunity for exciton dissociation. For these reasons, CNTs are expected to find a prominent position in electro- and photo-active nanocomposites in association with semi-conducting polymers.
Herein, we focus on the properties of CNT-based materials for the preparation and processing of OPV devices. Then we discuss the main drawbacks to overcome and the perspectives CNT-based OPV cells may offer in the field.
2. CNTs structure and electronic/optical properties
It is well known that the properties of carbon nanotubes are intimately related to their structure. Thus, also in the light of developing solar cell devices, one important aspect is the possibility to tune their optical and electronic properties within a wide range of band-gaps from metallic to semiconductive. This ability is not held by other nanoscopic forms of carbon like fullerenes.
Indeed, computational investigations40,41 have shown how the electronic properties of SWNTs strongly depend on the chiral angle offering both metallic and semiconducting behaviour in dependence of the nanotube indices (n,m). In particular, all SWNTs with chiral indices such that n − m = 3j (with j = 0) are metallic (m-SWNTs); those with n − m = 3j (with j ≠ 0) are very small-gap semiconductors (also referred as “semi-metallic”; Egap < kT) whereas when n − m = 3j ± 1, they are large-gap (ca. 1 eV for a 0.7 nm of diameter) semiconductive SWNTs (s-SWNTs) (see Fig. 1). Commonly, nanotubes with n = m are called “armchair” whereas those with chiral indices (n,0) are called “zig-zag”. The 1D structure of SWNTs gives rise to an electronic structure with a peculiar shape in the density of state (DOS) diagram characterised by the so-called van Hove singularities (Fig. 1). These are mirror-like spikes straddling the Fermi level (referred to as zero) in the DOS diagram. The optical spectra of CNTs are strictly related to van Hove singularities showing electronic transitions between these specular spikes as shown in Fig. 2a and b. A tight binding model42 study resulted in the so-called “Kataura plot” which relates the (n,m) structure and the diameter of SWNTs with the optical transition energies between the van Hove singularities (Eii). As observed in Fig. 3, higher Eii values correspond to smaller tubes. For s-CNTs, Egap ∝ 1/R ≈ 0.6 eV d−1 (nm)43 while for the semi-metallic ones the band-gap varies with diameter as 1/R2.44
 Fig. 1  Density of state diagrams showing typical van Hove singularities and energy band gaps for a semi-conductive, semi-metallic and metallic SWNT. [Reprinted from ref. 22 with permission of the Royal Society and from ref. 23. Copyright 1996 by The American Physical Society.] 
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical absorption spectrum of a SWNT sample with an average diameter of 1.3 nm. The inset shows the same spectrum after subtraction of the surface π-plasmon. [Reprinted from ref. 38. Copyright 2002 by The American Physical Society.] (b) Corresponding transitions in the DOS diagram for spectra in (a) and (c) showing van Hove singularities and the levels/bands involved; (c) PLE map for a SWNT sample; peaks in the white oval relate to the v2–c2 absorptions and c1–v1 emissions [from ref. 39. Reprinted with permission from AAAS]. 
 Fig. 3  Typical “Kataura plot” displaying the calculated energy separations between van Hove singularities ii (refer to Fig. 2b) for all (n,m) SWNTs with a diameter between 0.4 and 3.0 nm. Crosses and open circles indicate semiconductive and metallic nanotubes respectively. [Reprinted from ref. 46, with permission from Elsevier.] 
Different chiral structures give different photoluminescence emission (PLE) spectra as well.39 For instance, in Fig. 2c peaks into the oval arise from photon absorption by a s-SWNTs sample at energy E22 that gives fluorescence emission at E11. Obviously, E11 and E22 are different for the diverse (n,m) nanotube structure, the m-SWNTs not giving any signal since they are not endowed with a band-gap (Fig. 2b).
Similarly, vibrational features in Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 4) are closely related to the CNT structure.45 In particular, it is well known that the resonance frequency of Radial Breathing Modes (RBM; ωRBM ≈ 100 ÷ 300 cm−1; Fig. 4a and b) has a linear relation with the tube diameters, following the simple rule ωRBM ∝ 1/d, and does not depend on the (n,m) indices. Besides, the line shape of the G-bands (around 1500–1600 cm−1) is indicative of the semiconductive or metallic behaviour46 as shown in Fig. 4c for a (17,3) s-SWNT and a (19,1) m-SWNT respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Raman wide spectra for a single metallic and semiconductive SWNT. Radial Breathing Modes (RBM), D- G- and G′-bands are indicated. Features marked with asterisks refer to silicon substrate. [Reprinted from ref. 45, with permission from Elsevier.] (b) Raman spectra showing the low frequency RBM region for differently prepared SWNTs having different mean diameters. [Reprinted from ref. 42, with permission from Elsevier.] (c) Profiles of the high frequency Raman G-band features of semiconducting (left) and metallic (right) SWNTs. Frequencies and (n,m) structure are indicated. [Reprinted from ref. 46, with permission from Elsevier.] 
By matching Raman and PLE data, Bachilo et al.39 succeeded in assigning to every peak of a PLE plot (Fig. 4c) a couple of indices (n,m) making bulk SWNTs diameter chiral characterization very easy and rapid. These researchers settled also a worth and useful empirical method that allows for a precise calculation of the Eii transition energy for each (n,m) s-SWNT.47
As to applications, it is important to consider some relevant properties of CNTs in thin films. In particular, the thickness may significantly affect their transmittance. While CNT films with thicknesses between 10 and 100 nm show high transmittance in the visible spectrum due to the spare structure of the network,48 in thicker films transmittance decreases. However, CNT films are very transparent in the far-infrared up to 22 μm (Fig. 5a) that is much more than other widely used materials (see Fig. 5b for a comparison). This makes them interesting for IR-imaging, organic solar cells and/or IR solar cells and as effective transparent anodes with high work functions (see Section 6.2). In this respect, by comparing the reflectance of the widely used plastic polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-supported ITO electrode with that of the PET/CNT electrode, it was shown49 (Fig. 5c) that, thanks to the optimal polymer/nanotube film index matching, contrary to ITO, CNTs do not worsen the PET reflectance.
 Fig. 5  (a) Calculated reflection, transmittance, and absorption of SWNT thin films for a wide spectral range: from 400 nm up to 2 cm; (b) spectra comparison for various transparent conductive materials; (c) comparison of the reflection percentage between PET and PET supported CNTs and ITO films. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.] 
As to the electrical properties of CNT thin films, unlike m-SWNTs, s-SWNTs show a strict dependence on the temperature since the thermal excitation promotes carriers to the conduction band. On the other side, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) exhibit metallic or semiconducting properties depending on their outermost shell.50
These systems differ from the SWNTs by the coupling between the multiple walls as for CNT bundles.51,52 The length of the tubes is another important factor as CNTs shorter than 500 nm show a minimum resistance of about 6–7 kΩ that increases with a ratio up to 6 kΩ μm−1, as shown in Fig. 6.53 Also, Gomez-Herrero et al.54 found that the resistance depends on the bias voltage and on the nanotube defect density, but still the junction resistance between tubes may dominate the overall resistance of CNT thin films. Since carriers in their electronic band structure are weakly bound to phonons, SWNTs showed a “ballistic” charge transport along with carrier mobilities up to 100000 cm2Vs−1.56 Accordingly, nanotubes show outstanding charge transport properties such as high conductivity along their main axis (1000÷200000 S cm−1)57 which is further enhanced by their extremely high aspect ratio (up to 106) and high current carrying capacity (1000 times higher than a copper wire).58
 Fig. 6  Resistance vs. length of SWNTs. All data are at room temperature. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.] 
The CNTs behaviour can be also drastically altered by defects which are often present inside their structure as pentagons, heptagons, vacancies and/or dopants. Moreover, because of the oxidative doping in air, semiconducting CNTs generally show p-type behaviour that however may change in relation with the nature of the material they contact.59 Thus, introducing defects came as an interesting and effective method to manage the electronic properties of CNTs in order to develop new powerful devices and potential applications in organic electronics. Even small defects in the backbone of CNTs make them susceptible to small environmental effects. For example, chemical defects on the walls and on the edges of CNTs (e.g., dangling bonds, sp3carbon sites, isomerisms) are scattering sites which limit the current mobilities.60 Moreover, electron acceptors (e.g., buckyballs, metal oxides) and electron donors (e.g., metal catalyst residues) adsorbed on the walls, and even encapsulated inside carbon nanotubes, act as dopants in their electronic band structure and consequently alter the electrical characteristics of the final material.61
Contact resistance is a further fundamental issue since contact metals have a wide range of work functions, Fermi levels, and interfacial tensions. Typically, CNT work functions lie around 5 eV, that is about 0.1–0.2 higher than that of pyrolitic graphite because of hybrid σ–π valence states induced by the tube curvature.22,62 In this respect, particularly interesting are the properties of ultra-small diameter nanotubes (about 0.4 nm) showing superconductivity.63,64 Some authors found that for m-CNTs, the work function does not depend on chirality and increases only marginally with the diameter. Conversely, for s-CNTs it rapidly decreases with the tube diameter as shown in Fig. 7a.65 Work function and contact resistance may be tuned by annealing or chemical doping,66,67 for instance by intercalating metallic ions inside the tubes as in Fig. 7b.
 Fig. 7  (a) Work functions for metallic and semiconducting SWNTs versus the reciprocal of diameter. Squares and dots indicate armchair and zigzag nanotube type respectively. Extrapolating at infinite diameter led to a work function of 4.84 eV for m-SWNTs and 4.73 eV for s-SWNTs; (b) work function of alkali-metal doped SWNTs versus dopant fraction (denoted as x, whereas M stands for Metal). [Reprinted from ref. 65. Copyright 2002 by The American Physical Society.] 
Usefully, higher work functions may facilitate charge extraction.
3. New strategies for the separation and purification of SWNTs for OPV applications
If it is true that the aforementioned properties make CNTs promising functional materials, the carbon material obtained from the synthesis could not be processed as it is due to the presence of undesired species that would alter the final performance in an unpredictable way. Indeed, each step of the photogeneration and transport of free carrier in carbon-based nanocomposites is largely affected by the presence of (a) non-carbon impurities (mainly metal catalysts such as nickel and cobalt nanoparticles), (b) carbon impurities (e.g., amorphous carbon, buckyballs, graphitic structures) and (c) unsought carbon nanotubes (e.g., metallic CNTs when a semiconducting material is required by the application). Herein, we will consider the four steps involved in the energy conversion process (i.e., light absorption, exciton diffusion, exciton separation and collection of free carriers) and how the purification and separation of CNTs have a beneficial role in overcoming the actual limitations.68
The primary step is the absorption of a photon by either the donor or the acceptor in the photoactive layer. In this regard, not only the scarce chemical reactivity of CNTs ensures prolonged photostability, but also CNTs act as physical quenchers of oxidizing species, thus enhancing the photostability of codispersed P3HT.69 Even more interestingly, the seminal work by Kataura et al.70–72 describes in detail the resolution of HiPCO nanotubes in metallic and in 13 different chiralities of semiconducting SWNTs. Their method is based on the hierarchical interaction between carbon nanotubes and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and between the SDS and an allyl dextran-based size-exclusion gel column. The dispersion of SWNTs in aqueous SDS results in the selective interaction between the surfactant and the semiconducting tubes, whose strength depends on the electronic properties of the tubes, and hence on their chiralities. The retention times of the SDS-coated SWNTs are determined by the interaction between the surfactant molecules and the dextran gel. While the need to remove the surfactant and the low concentration involved in this purification process are still open issues, the resolution of the different chromatic components of SWNT mixtures permits the building of OPV devices with adjustable photoabsorption profiles.
In the second step of the photoconversion process, the exciton generated after photoabsorption migrates to the interface between donor and acceptor. Again, CNT-based photoactive materials benefit from dielectric constants, electron-lattice interaction and delocalization of electronic states in between the low performing organic materials and their inorganic counterpart.73 Moreover, a crucial help to overcome the exciton diffusion bottleneck comes from the design of nanomorphologies which combine long-range order and high active surface area to maximize the fractions of excitons reaching the D/A interface.68 To this aim, the dispersion of CNTs down to individual tubes and strategies to prevent reaggregation are needed. Indeed, in a wide range of systematic investigations, surface tension and van der Waals interactions of surfactants are engineered to separate insoluble metal residues and large bundles of CNTs from individually dispersed and small bundles of nanotubes in the supernatant.74 While the excess surfactant may alter the device performances if not removed,75 the design of functional surfactants with either electronic or optical properties compatible with the intended application gets rid of their removal. Aside the early examples of conjugated molecules in solar applications (e.g., porphyrins,76–78phthalocyanines,79 and oligothienyls80,81), Nicholas' group is proposing the employment of the conjugated polymers already used in OPV devices (i.e., regioregular P3HT, polyindenofluorene) to disperse CNTs in individual nanohybrids (Fig. 16). Indeed, highly soluble supramolecular aggregates in which different polymers are wrapped around the CNTs are obtained by sonication and ultracentrifugation cycles in different solvents.82,83 Detailed spectroscopic studies in solution showed an intense red-shift for the SWNT transition energies due to the formation of a type II heterojunction at the P3HT/SWNT interface where the charge separation occurs. Clue of this third step in the photogeneration process is the quenching of the photoluminescence of conjugated polymers (e.g., P3HT84 and poly(paraphenelene vinylene)s85,86) when intimately bound to carbon nanotubes. Specifically, time-correlated single-photon counting showed that the photoluminescence (PL) decay of P3HT is shortened from 1.7 ps to 0.43 ps when 1% of SWNTs individually wrapped with P3HT are added to P3HT in a blend.87 While PL decays may not necessarily be associated with the splitting of the exciton in free carriers, ultrafast transient absorption measurements of the P3HT delocalized polaron are direct evidence of charge separation. The results obtained from Nicholas' group show that the lifetime of the photogenerated polarons depends strongly on the morphology of the nanocomposite which should provide not only a uniform ordered interface between the polymer (D) and the SWNTs (A), but also percolation pathways for both electrons, provided by CNTs, and holes, provided by the conjugated polymer.87 From this picture emerged that just a few selected types of CNTs may be suitable for efficient charge separation at D/A interfaces. Following the reports of Blackburn et al.75 and Arnold et al.,88 the use of small-diameter semiconducting SWNTs is of paramount importance in extending the lifetime of the free charges photogenerated. Indeed, metallic SWNTs act as recombination sites either by electron transfer from the LUMO of the conductive polymers to empty states in the conduction band of m-SWNTs or by electron transfer from the valence band of m-SWNTs to the HOMO of P3HT. Time-resolved microwave conductivity on a blend of P3HT and enriched s-SWNTs, obtained by centrifuging raw SWNTs dispersed in SDS and sodium cholate (SC) in a iodixanol density gradient at 207000 g, showed that the removal of m-SWNTs improves the lifetime of free carriers up to three-magnitude,75 although care should be taken in the removal of metallic impurities. Indeed, the introduction of oxidative sites through treatment of CNTs with a mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide hinders the photogeneration of free carriers at the D/A interface.60 Not surprisingly, density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU) is traditionally employed to separate CNTs according to their aggregation degree (larger aggregates are collected at the bottom of the centrifuge tube, while individual carbon nanotubes at the top),89 length and diameter.90

Capillary or 
gel electrophoresis
 is a good alternative to DGU being based on the different mobilities of macromolecules on a substrate under the influence of an electric field. Since mobility depends on the mass/electric charge ratio, on the molecular weight of the analytes and on their interaction with the substrate, monodimensional structures such as CNTs can be separated according to their predominant dimension (i.e., length) and to their aggregation degree, while removing at the same time the non-carbonaceous impurities.91 Moreover, when the substrate is subjected to an alternate current, instead of a fixed voltage, dielectrophoresis takes place that makes it possible to separate semiconducting from metallic CNTs based on their different dielectric function (i.e., polarizability).92
CNTs play a dramatic role in the final step of the photoconversion process: charge transport. The one-dimensional conjugated structure of CNTs results in electron mobility as high as 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1 for SWNT,93 exceeding those of any other organic semiconductor at room temperature. Nevertheless, like any other semiconductor, the presence of impurities affects heavily the overall carrier merits, and indeed many efforts are dedicated to understanding and controlling the doping of CNTs as recently reviewed.94 CNTs in OPV devices do not affect only electron mobility, but they also induce a beneficial effect on hole transport. Indeed, SWNTs purified from amorphous carbon and metallic impurities by oxidative treatment with nitric acid induce a “crystallinity enhancement” of P3HT.95 The highly ordered supramolecular organization of P3HT ensures higher hole mobility via interchain transport, in particular if coupled to nanosheets of pure P3HT adjacent to the P3HT/SWNT interface.87 Moreover, a skillful design of the nanomorphology such that the ratio between the electron and hole mobilities is larger than a factor of 100 should improve the exciton dissociation probability.96
Despite these few outstanding results, further developments are required to produce materials with predictable behavior for advanced applications such as OPV and electronics. Moreover, the possibility to tune finely, and in a wide range, the band gap of a semiconducting material by selecting the appropriate nanotube diameter and helicity is tempting enough to drive much effort in developing different purification approaches, as outlined by comprehensive literature surveys.97–99
In light of remarkable recent progress,71,100,101 the obtainment of a monodisperse population of nanotubes with univocal optoelectronic properties appears much more accessible.
Indeed, the ability to address specifically the different purification stages and to combine them in a continuous multi-step process may result in the development of a purification tool compatible with different synthetic methodologies and batches. Such technology has to be:
• Scalable, economically accessible and environmentally sustainable. Concerns for the consumption of energy and resources required by the fabrication of CNT-based devices should encourage great efforts in the technological improvement of synthesis and purification yields.
• Nondestructive. Some purification approaches are particularly aggressive toward the sp2carbon structure of nanotubes and hence against the electronic properties. A careful choice among the possibilities offered by carbon chemistry could focus on mild methods based on non-covalent or reversible bonding (i.e., the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides)102
• Iterable. An ideal purification process entails auxiliary techniques that allow its effectiveness to be monitered providing a feedback in an iterative procedure. The implementation of continuous flow processes to support such an approach is an option to be considered.103,104
These statements have justified a rush for the best performing purification technique since the inception of carbon nanotubes as active components in optoelectronic devices.105 While some of the most successful attempts for each stage of the purification process have already been adopted for OPV applications (DGU, solubilization by surfactant and polymers, oxidative treatment), other underexploited significant achievements in this field will be addressed shortly.

Controlled 
growth
         is a synthetic procedure which affords a cleaner carbonaceous material facilitating subsequent purification steps.106 Since quality and properties of CNT products are heavily influenced by the synthetic method, it is then fundamental to point out the set of parameters which control the growth of CNTs. Progress has been made on a lab scale, highlighting the crucial role of catalysts,106noble gas carriers and redox active species,107 but there is still much work to do with processes to be up-scaled from the gram to the multi-kilos scale in the most optimistic view. Since approaches based on the selective growth of CNTs do not provide monodisperse samples, additional purification stages are required.
Interesting approaches are based on selective exohedral functionalizations.108 The interaction of CNTs with proper reactive species leads to the preferential formation of adducts with a specific population of nanotubes (i.e., nanotubes with specific properties). The nature of the interaction determines which population of tubes is interested by the functionalization. For example, the dependence of the density of state at the Fermi level on both the diameter and the length of carbon nanotubes ultimately leads to a different reactivity toward suitable reactants. Among these, diazonium salts,109carbenes,101nitronium ions,110hydrogen peroxide,111 and azomethine ylides112 have been considered as the means to enrich a particular population of CNTs. Higher solubilities are often reached by the classic oxidation of the CNT walls with either nitric acid or sulphonitric mixture followed by etching with hydrogen peroxide, conversion of carboxylic groups into acyl chlorides and reaction with nucleophiles (e.g., amino-polyethylene glycol (PEG)).113
A different chemical approach, the selective degradation,108 is based on the annihilation of the properties of undesired electronically active carbon materials through oxidation with oxygen, fluorine and hydrogen peroxide. Somehow analogous to this strategy, the selective exfoliation of the outer walls of MWNTs has been induced by applying electric currents with densities exceeding 109 A cm−2 and it is referred to as electrical breakdown.114
To summarize, all the techniques presented have to face two main issues: the raw carbon nanotubes are strongly contaminated by many different species and the amount of CNTs processed by each technique is not yet enough for large-scale applications. Therefore it is desirable to combine different technologies in a single multi-step purification process (i.e., partially controlled growth with engineered nanocatalysts, selective and reversible chemical functionalization, ultrapurification with physical methods) and to introduce industrially relevant aspects (e.g., continuous processes, low cost and nonflammable solvents, scalability, …) to fully exploit the advantages brought by CNTs to the photogeneration and transport of carriers in the active layer of OPV devices (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  The purification of carbon nanotubes should begin with a controlled synthesis which affords fewer by-products (buckyballs, graphitic structures, metal clusters, …). These contaminants are removed by chemical processes which are selective for the reactivity of carbon nanotubes. Furthermore the distribution of CNTs could be narrowed with the help of physical purification processes (e.g., electrophoresis, ultracentrifugation). 
4. Functionalization of CNTs by solubilizing agents and/or antennas
Chemical modification is a key step for the implementation of the appealing properties of CNTs within real world materials and devices. Functionalized CNTs were introduced in a bulk heterojunction solar cell in 2006 for the first time: encouraged by the first attempts to use CNTs in solar cell applications either as hole-collecting electrode115 or blended into the conductive polymer,116 Miller et al. functionalized MWNTs through the classic oxidation and esterification route.80
Different goals can be pursued through the functionalization of CNTs: the most relevant are the improvement of processability and the tailoring of specific properties for the envisioned application.117 The strong tendency of CNTs to form bundles and tight aggregates hampers their effective dispersion in solvents and other media. The attachment of proper residues to the walls of the nanotubes can bring solubility and induce the disentanglement of aggregates, thus helping also mixing within polymer matrices.118 Moreover a solubilizing functionalization can help with removing impurities trapped inside CNT bundles.102 On the other hand, chemical modification of CNTs can tune their native features or provide new ones. Functionalization with antenna systems absorbing in the range of frequencies of the solar spectrum, for example, can improve light absorption in the range of the solar spectrum, thus optimizing the material for the development of non-conventional photovoltaics.
Three main strategies (summarized in Fig. 9) can be followed for the chemical modification of CNTs:99,119 covalent linking to the nanotube structure, encapsulation inside the inner cavity, and supramolecular (non-covalent) binding to the outer wall.
 Fig. 9  Pictorial representation of different approaches to the functionalization of CNTs: endohedral (encapsulation), exohedral covalent and non-covalent. 

Covalent functionalization is based on the intrinsic reactivity of the curved sp2carbon network and on the possible presence of different kinds of defects.120 The degree of aggregation of the tubes is a crucial point too, since it determines the exposure of the structure to the reagents. The pristine CNT sp2 structure exhibits a chemical behavior comparable to fullerenes and, in general, more reactive than the similar structure of graphene due to the curvature-induced strain.121 Among the most common reactions for the functionalization of CNTs (mostly belonging to the families of cycloadditions and radical, nucleophilic or electrophilic additions),991,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides provides a convenient mean to get soluble and functional CNT derivatives (scheme in Fig. 10a).122,123 The resulting pyrrolidine ring can carry a wide range of functional groups and allows the simultaneous attachment of different moieties. A number of photophysical and electrochemical investigations have unveiled the behavior of CNT-pyrrolidine derivatives bearing photo-electroactive functional groups such as porphyrins124 and phthalocyanines125–127 or ferrocene.128Aryl diazonium derivatives (either pre-formed as diazonium salts or generated in situ through a solvent free reaction, as in Fig. 10b)129 are also a valuable family of reactive species for the functionalization of CNTs, for example with porphyrin derivatives130 or alkyne moieties as active sites for a subsequent grafting through click chemistry.131
 Fig. 10  General reaction scheme for the covalent functionalization of CNTs through 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides (a), addition of aryl diazonium derivatives (b) and amidation of oxidized CNTs (c). 
In particular, the preferential addition to metallic tubes offers the attractive possibility of some enrichment based on the electronic properties.132
During the last few years, an efficient, and in some cases selective,133 functionalization have been proposed, based on the alkylation/arylation of SWNT(n-) carbanions, obtained viaBirch reduction134 or by a nucleophilic addition of organometallic species.133,135–137 A very recent modification of the sequence extends the use of the reaction to carbonyl and even carboxylic moieties.138
Defects in the CNT structure can be deliberately created, as reactive sites for the subsequent functionalization, through an assortment of oxidation reactions.36 Typical defects are carboxylic groups that can be used to graft molecules through the formation of amide (Fig. 10c) or ester bonds. Carboxylate groups themselves, together with sulfonated groups from oxidations in sulphonitric mixture, provide solubility in water and polar solvents, thus allowing also dispersion within bulk heterojunction materials.139 Proper chain structures can effectively help to disentangle CNTs in order to achieve solubility and to improve the dispersion in polymer matrices.34,113,140,141 In some cases, disentanglement was so effective that phonon dynamics could be clearly observed in real-time through femtosecond-resolved pump-probe experiments.35 This kind of functionalization provides efficient disaggregation of CNT bundles and is particularly attractive for BHJ applications. Indeed it is expected to maximize π–π stacking interactions between the nanotube wall and the conjugate polymer. As discussed in Section 6, such interactions improve both the interface charge separation and the crystallinity of the polymer phase, that in turn enhance exciton diffusion. On the other hand, photophysical investigations35 showed that the density of defects introduced by chemical modification can be kept low enough to preserve most of the pristine CNT electronic features by carefully tuning the reaction conditions.36 As an alternative approach, the immobilization of radical polymerization initiators, such as 2-bromopropionate groups, to carboxylate sites on CNTs can be used for the subsequent growth of polymers (e.g., polystirene) to obtain soluble and disentangled derivatives.142 Carboxylic functionalization, in particular, has been successfully employed to link CNTs with photoactive structures, such as thiophene derivatives,143 tetrathiafulvalenes,144 antenna-like porphyrins145,146 and phthalocyanines125,147,148 or metallic and semiconducting nanoparticles, such as silver,149gold150 and CdS151 mediated by thiol bearing spacers.152 However, the resulting materials are usually poorly soluble in common organic solvents. A very simple approach to overcome such limitations is the simultaneous attachment of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) chains and aromatic fluorophores, that provide solubility and the desired photophysical properties respectively.33
In particular, while PEG does not directly affect optical absorption and emission, it has been shown that the choice of the organic fluorophore allows modulation of electron transfer from the chromophore to the nanotube.31
Still a covalent approach, though much different, is the substitutional doping of CNTs based on the replacement of C atoms with boron (B-CNTs) or nitrogen (N-CNTs). Organic solar cells could gain noticeable enhancement of performances from this kind of derivatives, since it has been recently proven that N- or B-CNTs dispersed in fullerene-based BHJs selectively enhance electron or hole transport, respectively.153
Effective solubilization of CNTs with non-covalent functionalization is easily achieved by means of molecular amphiphilic surfactants154,155 or through wrapping with polymers such as polysaccharides156–158 and DNA.101,159 Particularly interesting is the wrapping with π-conjugated structures, that can provide hybrid materials with relevant optical and electronic properties in view of possible photoconversion applications.160–164 A closely related example to possible OPV applications is given by the non-covalent wrapping of SWNTs with the water soluble electron donor copolymer of thiophene and 7-(thien-3-ylsulfanyl)heptanoic acid (PSCOOH).165Polymers can also be grown in situ through electrochemical polymerization.166
Noncovalent interactions with π-conjugated structures like pyrene32,167,168 (Fig. 11), tetrathiafulvalenes,169–171 or naphthalene172 derivatives can lead to soluble adducts. In particular, antennas such as phthalocyanine-pyrene conjugates125,173 or porphirins174 are known to form CNT adducts through π-stacking, giving rise to electron/energy transfer processes that could lead to photoconversion applications.
 Fig. 11  Computational model of a pyrene-C60 dyad paired with a SWNT. Non-covalent interactions between CNT and pyrene moiety have been characterized through photophysical and electrochemical investigations.32 [Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons.] 
The encapsulation of molecules inside the inner space of CNTs was initially achieved through diffusion of vapor phase C60fullerene, affording the so-called “peapod” derivatives.175,176 The subsequent development of milder processes177,178 disclosed the possibility to encapsulate thermally less stable fullerene derivatives179 and different organic molecules (Fig. 12).180–182 Peapod derivatives are particularly attractive when the preservation of native CNTs electronic or charge transport behavior is desired, while featuring new properties due to the encapsulated molecules.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation (bottom) of the encapsulation of a photoactive molecule (sexithienyl) in SWNTs that provides a hybrid “nanopeapod” featuring photoluminescence in the visible spectral range (top cartoon). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.] 
Guest structures are confined inside a one-dimensional space, subjected to a tight alignment and forced to assume anisotropic dynamics. These conditions, along with possible shielding effects and, especially, interactions with the host nanotube, make endohedral derivatives powerful candidates for the development of novel materials with unprecedented properties. On the other hand, since the CNT structure is retained, nano-peapods are also insoluble.
A possible mitigation of such a drawback and, in general, new interesting achievements, are expected to rise from the concurrent or sequential combination of different functionalization strategies, such as encapsulation and polymer wrapping or polymer grafting and non-covalent interactions with photoactive molecules like porphyrin systems.183 The combination of CNTs with inorganic nanoparticles seems also a promising playground for the design of novel functional architectures.184
The intrinsic insolubility of CNTs limits the productivity of any functionalization strategy, due to the prolonged reaction times, the large solvent volumes and the challenging work-up and isolation procedures. Efforts in particular should be devoted to devise and develop synthetic and processing methods allowing to scale up the production of CNT-based materials for OPV applications. Possible strategies could exploit unconventional processes such as microwave heating141,185 or continuous flow synthesis103,104 that have been proven to boost reaction rates and provide a simple scalable and green approach.
5. Preparation of CNTs rich thin films
In order to exploit the advantages of CNT properties, the achievement of stable dispersions has to be accompanied by the development of methods able to easily control the structure of large area films with precise density and possibly orientation and order.105,186
One of the most classical approaches is the spin-coating deposition, which is integrable to the fabrication process of fully organic devices, and from an industrial point of view, one of the most desirable techniques for large area thin film deposition. It consists of dispensing CNT solutions onto a substrate that rotates with a controlled angular velocity and for a determined time. Spin-coating processing allows deposition over a variety of substrates, with a wide range of surface coverages, both nude CNTs and polymer-CNT composites. Several papers showed the possibility to align nanotubes on the surface and control their density.187,188
As an unconventional variation of spin-coating, Meitl et al.189 developed a method called “Controlled Flocculation”. Accordingly, a nanotubes suspension and an appropriate solvent are simultaneously and continuously delivered on a spinning substrate and, as far as the suspension mixes with the solvent, CNTs precipitate aligning in a film growing with the desired thickness in a single step.
Yu et al.190 conceived a different interesting method, called Blown Bubble Deposition, based on the blown film extrusion process which allows manufacture of plastic nanocomposite films in large quantity, with width exceeding 1 m at rates of the order of 500 kg h−1.191,192 In particular, this process involves the expansion of a polymer/nanotube dispersion, stabilized by the covalent functionalization of CNTs with octadecylamine (see Section 4) through a circular die to form a bubble at controlled pressure and expansion rate, where stable vertical expansion is achieved using an external/vertical mechanical force (Fig. 13a). The balloon is then collapsed onto the substrate just to transfer a continuous flat film on its surface. This results in the formation of films with uniform thickness (200–500 nm) and high degree of lateral order with parallelly aligned CNTs over the centimetre scale.
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme for the blown bubble film deposition; the nanotube suspension (i) is blown by a nitrogen flow through a circular die to form a bubble (ii), then the film is transferred onto various substrates like crystalline wafers, flexible plastics or curved surfaces. Black stick-lines represent aligned nanotubes inside the bubble film. In the insets are reported a dark-field optical image (left, scale bars are 25 and 5 μm respectively) of a MWNT film and a photograph of the blown bubble during the deposition (right). [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: ref. 190, copyright 2007.] (b) Schematic depiction of the Electrophoretic Deposition method; the inset shows a scanning electron micrograph of a film obtained. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.] (c) Scheme for the laminar flow deposition of parallel and orthogonal aligned SWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.] (d) Schematic diagram for the Langmuir–Blodgett deposition of CNT thin films with different substrate orientations. [Reprinted from ref. 202. Copyright 2007 with permission from Elsevier.] (e) Schematic depiction showing the inkjet printing process. Drops are expelled by a pressure pulse generated by a piezo actuator. (f) Schematic drawing for ultrasonic spray deposition displaying carrier gas driving ultrasonically formed droplets on the substrate. [Reprinted from ref. 210. Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.] 
Interestingly, here CNTs are located in a restricted thickness (quasi 2D layer of tens of nanometres). This is in contrast with other methods like drop or spin-casting193,194 where CNTs are usually distributed over the whole film thickness. Although very well oriented, the density of CNTs into the film remains quite low but still useful for applications in fields like that of displays and nanoelectronic transistors or arrays for chemical sensing.
As another attractive technique for the fabrication of polymer-CNT nanocomposites, the Electrophoretic Deposition (EPD)195,196 is achieved via the coagulation of charged systems (particles, polymers, composites) in a stable suspension toward an electrode under the action of an electric field as depicted in Fig. 13b. As an example, Casagrande et al.195 achieved the separation of large nanotube bundles into individual functionalized CNTs through the polymer wrapping strategy (see Section 4). The use of polymer bearing tertiary amine moieties, protonated in water under acidic conditions, provided to the nanocomposite not only solubility, but also the charges allowing for the migration towards the cathode. The cathode neighbours are characterized by an increased pH (reduction of water and formation of hydroxide ions) and thereby the composite particles are locally neutralized giving an insoluble and highly uniform deposit with programmable (polymer concentration, deposition time, voltage) thickness up to 10 μm. It is worth noting that a great portion of SWNTs vertically aligned at the substrate surface is observed.197,198
Vichchulada et al.199 proposed the so-called Laminar Flow Deposition (LFD), sketched in Fig. 13c. By this method, the surface of a substrate is loaded with a CNT dispersion. A high purity laminar nitrogen flow is used to force the anisotropic drying along with the formation of aligned CNT arrays. LFD avoids the formation of CNT bundles and allows for the construction of layer by layer (LBL) architectures with arbitrary density and designed layers relative orientation on a number of substrates.200,201

Langmuir–Blodgett (LB), in Fig. 13d, is one of the most elegant methods to deposit CNT monolayers or multilayered organic thin films.202,203 In the LB technique, CNTs wrapped by a hydrophobic surfactant (see Sections 3 and 4 for some examples) lay on the free surface of a subphase compound (usually water) forming a film. This floating film is transferred on a substrate that is withdrawn vertically across the subphase-air interface. To obtain high quality SWNT LB films, solutions of stably suspended nanotubes are critical. An optimal combination of the organic solvent with a polymeric surfactant matrix was established by Li204 and Giancane205 which succeeded in depositing parallel CNTs perpendicular to the substrate withdrawal direction. Furthermore, a quasi-LB method was developed to prepare randomly oriented surfactant-free CNTs.206 Accordingly, a pure nanotube suspension is initially filtered through an alumina membrane. Then, the CNT layer is removed from the filter and floated on an aqueous subphase to be transferred on the substrate in a LB-like style.
More recently a big deal has been devoted to the employment of printing for the precise patterning of CNTs.207,208Inkjet printing technology derives directly from the graphic arts and newspaper industry and has been scaled for the production in the field of large area flexible electronics. The process (see Fig. 13e) essentially consists in the ejection of a fixed amount of “ink” from a nozzle through the pressure of a piezoelectric actuator within the ink chamber. Inkjet printing permits easy micrometric patterning of surfaces without any material waste and in principle may result in a strong cost reduction and low environmental impact. The formulation of the “ink”, i.e., the CNTs suspension to be printed, is a key requirement. Tailoring of electrical properties has been demonstrated by Okimoto et al.209 which succeeded in achieving metallic or semimetallic films, by simply modulating the density of the CNT surface coverage.
Different techniques are also widely used for the development of solid-supported CNT networks due to their simplicity, solution processability, applicability to flexible substrates and large area scalability.
Among those the Air Brushing211 consists in producing a stream of nebulized small droplets of a surfactant-stabilized CNT ink by using an air brushing pistol. This last directs the stream onto a substrate which is maintained at a relatively high temperature to facilitate solvent evaporation and film drying. This process results in CNT networks without much uniformity in thickness and surface density, thus producing films with heterogeneous properties.
A natural development of this technique has been the Ultrasonic Spraying212 deposition (see Fig. 13f) in which the brushing gun is implemented with an ultrasonicating nozzle.210 Ultrasonic nozzles produce picolitre droplets and permit precise amounts of CNTs to be reproducibly and uniformly dispensed over arbitrarily large areas. The thickness can be easily tuned via layer-by-layer deposition.
Since the presence of polymeric stabilizers may reduce the tube-tube conductivity, a polymer matrix-free deposition method is desirable. A dry single-step deposition technique based on aerosol methods has been refined by Zavodchikova et al.213 who deposit CNT films straight after their production in an aerosol synthesis reactor. The process is possible thanks to the spontaneous charging occurrence of CNT bundles at the exit of the aerosol reactor.214,215 The as-grown nanotubes are dragged out of the reactor by a carrier gas and then driven by an electric field inside an electrostatic precipitator to be collected over a biased substrate at room temperature. The density can be controlled by adjusting the electric field power and the collection time.
In order to obtain self-supported films of CNTs in a polymer matrix, mechanical stretching216,217 is a very simple method. It consists of mixing a dispersion of nanotubes with a solution of polymer (e.g., polycarbonate, polyethylene) and then heating the mixture to evaporate the solvent. Still hot, the composite obtained is mechanically stretched until the film reaches numerous times its initial length. The stretching operation can be repeated several times to enhance the degree of alignment and to improve the CNT/polymer interface.218 The result is a self-supporting nano-composite film with good electrical and mechanical properties.
To overcome the drawbacks of techniques like spin-coating, spin casting or airbrushing in terms of efficiency of production and quality of the CNT film, Wu et al. proposed the vacuum filtration method (Fig. 14a).219 According to this technique, a stable surfactant–CNTs suspension is vacuum-filtered through a soluble membrane. The resulting sample is then washed to eliminate the surfactant. The supported membrane can be detached as a free-standing film or moved on both rigid and flexible substrates by a technique called Transfer Printing.224,225After that, the soluble membrane is dissolved leaving a network of nanotubes on the substrate. Thanks to their rigidity and great persistence length, homogeneously dispersed CNTs tend to give highly packed and interpenetrated networks on the membrane. Furthermore, this method makes the film thickness readily controllable by the CNT load and the solution volume and allows easy accomplishment of large area deposition.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation for the vacuum filtration method (top) and transfer process of a SWNT network thin film from the anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) filter onto a substrate (middle). At the bottom, an optical image of the resulting flexible film. [Reprinted from ref. 220. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.] (b) Optical image (left) and scanning electron micrograph (right) of an MWNT film drawn from a nanotube forest. [From ref. 221. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.] (c) Scheme displaying the draw-down rod coating methods using a wire-wound Mayer coating rod. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.] (d) (left) Drawing of setup for the electric field assisted deposition of aligned nanotubes in a photo-polymerized matrix; (right) schematic depiction for the magnetic field (B) assisted deposition of aligned nanotubes onto a PET substrate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 222 (Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons) and from ref. 223 (Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier) respectively.] 
Equally scalable in a large area but more suitable for a continuous high-rate production is the solid-state process settled by Zhang et al.221 which prepared self-standing nanotube films by drawing them from MWNT forests (Fig. 14b). By using a simple adhesive tape, they pasted the sidewall of the forest and manually drew highly aligned CNT sheets up to metres long and 5 cm wide. The film thickness is on the micrometre scale and varies proportionally with the height of the forest. These films can also be densified in tens of nanometres thick sheets and fixed on a substrate. Since the ease of drawing CNT forests increases with their height, this method is very useful in aligning very long nanotubes.
A well-known method in the coating industry48,226,227 that allows for a continuous and controlled large scale fabrication of SWNT networks is the draw-down rod-coating (Fig. 14c). This method makes use of the so-called wire-wound Mayer rod: a tool composed of a metallic bar coiled tightly by stainless steel wire. A suspesion of SWNTs is cast on a substrate, then the rod is rolled over the substrate to push-off the liquid. The thickness of the film is determined by the SWNTs concentration as well as by the open space between the wire coils and the surface; the greater the section of the wound-wire, the thicker the film. This technique can be used to deposit uniform and randomly oriented SWNT networks on a variety of substrates both flexible and rigid, like PET227 and glass.48
Finally, integration of CNTs in thin solid films can be assisted by external electromagnetic fields, as depicted in Fig. 14d. It has been shown that both electric and magnetic fields can align nanotubes within a polymer matrix along the direction of the force lines.222,228 The fact that CNTs have a high and anisotropic magnetic susceptibility has been exploited by Steinert and Dean223 who simply cast a nanotube–polymer suspension on a substrate and insert it inside a magnet until the complete evaporation of the solvent. By exploiting the CNT anisotropic polarizability, Valentini et al.229 applied an electric field to a nanotube-polymer composite film, perpendicularly to the substrate, above the film glass transition temperature.
They obtained a vertically aligned CNT composite film that interestingly showed an increase in vertical conductivity of several orders of magnitude, due to the formation of charge percolating pathways.
With the same method but employing an alternate electric field, Radbeh et al.230 reported on the alignment of nanotubes induced by agitation that seems to generate around the nanotubes a sort of free space improving their orientation.231
6. Organic photovoltaic cells based on carbon nanotubes
The employment of CNTs in organic photovoltaics has been proposed according to different strategies and purposes. These include the direct integration of CNTs inside a BHJ photoactive film, the synthesis of CNT-polymer nanocomposites, the use of CNT thin films as a hole extraction layer or the construction of transparent flexible hole collecting electrodes.
6.1 CNTs as active component in BHJs

6.1.1 Why CNTs?. 
Nowadays the most performing OPV cells are based on fullerenes as A and on the concept of BHJ. Nevertheless, the efficiency of this kind of device is limited by both the small charge mobility, due to the hopping transport mechanism, and the clustering of fullerenes.232,233
The dominant incentive for the integration of CNTs in a BHJ is to substitute the more expensive, less conductive and less air-stable fullerenes and to combine the physico-chemical properties of conductive polymers with the unique charge transport characteristics of CNTs. This gives the possibility to obtain an efficient percolation network with highly efficient exciton dissociation in polymeric BHJs with the polymer acting as D and the CNT as A.60,84
Moreover, recent theoretical studies82,235 show that s-SWNTs and regioregular poly-3(hexylthiophene) (rrP3HT) give rise to a staggered heterojunction with a type II band line-up (see the energy level diagram in Fig. 15) where the HOMO and LUMO of the D are higher than those of the A. This band-offset may lead to full exciton dissociation at the interface, with a charge transfer from the polymer to the nanotubes. This kind of band offset is crucial allowing for free charge generation and may represent an effective scheme to apply during the materials screening with the view to maximize the interfacial charge separation and ultimately solar cell PCE, including the CNT based ones. This is supported by time-resolved microwave conductivity studies234 demonstrating that photoexcitation of P3HT results in long-lived carriers. This is due to the efficient spatial separation at the donor–acceptor interface and the nanotubes readily moving away the electrons, thus avoiding recombination. In contrast, no charge transfer to the polymer is observed after nanotube photoexcitation, and charge carriers are short-lived due to their confinement inside the tube along with the electron acceptor character of SWNTs.
Another advantage is that SWNTs induce organisation in numerous conjugated polymers thereby affecting their optical properties.85,95,163,236 It has been reported163 that CNTs may behave like a nano-substrate for rrP3HT. Thanks to the non-covalent π–π stacking interaction between the polymer backbone and the nanotube wall, rrP3HT forms crystalline monolayers that wrap-up the nanotube yielding highly ordered rrP3HT:SWNT nano-hybrids (see the drawing in Fig. 16) as confirmed by electron diffraction studies. These studies also show95 that P3HT crystallinity increases with the SWNT amount, and this could explain the improvement of exciton diffusion as well as of charge mobility in polythiophene:SWNT composites.237 Besides, femtosecond spectroscopy studies demonstrate that the photo-excitation of the P3HT shell produces an ultrafast electron transfer to the wrapped SWNT on the timescale of 400 fs.87 Charge separation efficiency similar to that of well optimized P3HT:fullerene heterojunctions may be achieved with only 1% SWNT content indicating these nano-hybrids as promising materials in CNT based OPV.
 Fig. 15  Schematic showing the type-II band alignment between s-SWNT and P3HT. m-SWNTs are reported for comparison. HOMO and LUMO for all components are reported. The grey boxes represent the uncertainty on these values for P3HT. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.] 
 Fig. 16  Graphic depiction of a (6,5) SWNT wound by a monolayer of rrP3HT. The carbon backbone is in red while the sulfur atoms are in blue. Additionally the molecular structure of P3HT is reported. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.] 
Optimizing the polymer:CNTs blend while discarding non-bonded nanotubes and polymer molecules could be a winning strategy to improve the interface charge separation and mobility of polymer:CNTs BHJs.
As stated in Section 4, the formation of nano-hybrids through polymer wrapping is also helpful for the effective solubilization of nanotubes. Furthermore, the electron injection from the polymer shifts up the nanotube Fermi level (Fig. 17), the reduced work function having been proposed to explain the typical high VOC of OPV cells of P3HT/SWNT composites.
 Fig. 17  Electronic band line-up of the P3HT:SWNTs. Energy is relative to vacuum level. The arrow indicates the up shift of the nanotube Fermi level. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.] 


6.1.2 CNTs as photoactive component. 
The most common method to integrate CNTs (both SWNTs80,238 and MWNTs37,116,239) within photoactive BHJs consists in dispersing nanotubes in a solution of the electron D polymer to be then spin-coated on a substrate (glass, plastic, etc.). The substrate is generally covered by a transparent electrode consisting of 60–100 nm of conductive ITO covered by a layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). This last layer assists the selective hole injection into the ITO electrode and smoothes the ITO surface minimizing fissure formation in the active film along with possible shorts and current leakages.
Polythiophenes like rrP3HT or poly 3-octyl-thiophene (P3OT) are usually employed as D components due to their ability to form semicrystalline films when cast onto the substrate. Indeed, the thiophene rings assemble via π–π stacking and generate alternating layers containing the polymer backbone or the alkyl side chains. Through these layers, polymers have high hole mobilities up to 0.1 cm2 V−1·s−1 and a conjugation length of 20–25 monomers.240
The deposition is generally followed by thermal annealing above the polymer glass transition temperature (Tg ≈ 100–120 °C). This allows for optimal separation of the BHJ components and aligns the polymer chains improving charge transfer, transport and collection with significantly enhanced PCE.241,242
Following this strategy, Kymakis et al.243 prepared a BHJ solar cell employing P3OT:SWNT (1% wt) as D:A couple to deposit a 100 nm thick photoactive film. After thermal annealing PCE was doubled to 0.22% with Jsc = 0.5 mA·cm−2, Voc = 0.75 V and FF = 60% for a 0.25 cm2cell. To date, the most efficient CNT-based BHJ solar cell was obtained by Lanzi et al.244 These authors employed new thiophene derivatives bearing a ω-methoxy-functionalized hexamethylene side chain as D, blended with SWNTs (3% wt) as A. This new class of polythiophenes is more soluble and resistant to atmospheric oxygen and leads to solar cells with PCE = 0.53% along with Jsc, Voc and FF of 1.93 mA·cm−2, 0.48 V and 42%, respectively. This suggests that the design of new D materials with optimized properties (chemical stability, extended light absorption, …) is of fundamental importance in order to gain the best photovoltaic performances.
In another study, Dissanayake and Zhong245 obtained a surprising external quantum efficiency exceeding 90% for a millimetre scale P3HT/SWNTs device. Instead of BHJs, they used a bilayer heterojunction, depositing on a quartz substrate horizontally aligned arrays of SWNTs (m- and/or s-ones) and directly contacting each of them at the extremes by metal electrodes (Al or Pd). Then, P3HT was deposited onto nanotubes and top-contacted by an ITO layer. They found that SWNTs behave like hole- instead of electron-acceptors. This is probably due to the heavy p-doping of P3HT. Hole transfer from the polymer to the nanotube is independent from the work function of electrodes and is uniquely regulated by the P3HT/SWNT energy levels line-up. Most importantly, they demonstrate that both m- and s-SWNTs act as efficient D components, leading to a fast carrier extraction. This would eliminate expensive separation and purification processes.
Despite these promising results, such as the high open circuit voltage and the extended near-infrared light harvesting, the power conversion efficiency of CNT based OPV cells is still low, i.e. about one order of magnitude smaller than the fullerene based devices. To get an idea, compare for example the performances listed above for the highest efficient CNT-based devices with those of a polytiophene:fullerene optimized solar cell (JSC = 14.5 mA·cm−2, VOC = 0.78 V; FF = 70% and PCE = 7.4%).11


6.1.3 Why low PCE?. 
The limiting factors for CNTs are several, including the incomplete exciton dissociation especially for the low amounts of CNTs at the percolative threshold. On the other hand, increasing the CNTs percentage in the polymer matrix to settle this problem increases shunts and recombination pathways due to their random distribution and high aspect ratio.
Nevertheless, the poor rectification behaviour and the low efficiency could be also due to the extreme heterogeneity of CNTs, although uniformity can be improved (under certain limits) through different strategies, as discussed in Section 3. Indeed, as-produced nanotubes are typically a mixture of m- and s-CNTs, and such an electronic diversity may affect the device efficiency. For example, the presence of an appreciable amount of m-CNTs as well as metallic CNT ropes/bundles induces electron-hole recombination involving their continuous “mid-gap” electronic states.235 In this case, a quenching effect arises from the electrons decay from the donor LUMO to the metallic empty mid-gap states and/or from the Fermi level of m-CNTs to the donor HOMO. Another detrimental effect of m-CNTs arises from possible charge transfers at the ground state. By computational studies on the electrostatic potential distribution at the P3HT/SWNTs interface of a BHJ (see Fig. 18), a strong potential fall on the donor polymer hampering the electron transfer to the metallic nanotube has been shown.235 In addition, even if a small amount of electrons is transferred to the nanotube, the built-in potential of the heterojunction would be too small to give charge migration. At variance, s-SWNTs result in a slight potential drop at their surface along with an optimal type-II band-offset. Unfortunately, due to the interfacial dipoles induced by the charge transfer, the polymer would interact preferentially with m-SWNTs leading to a number of photovoltaic-inefficient interfaces. Thus, different authors indicate s-SWNTs as the only desirable ones for OPV and 3-times long-lived charge carriers for the photocurrent generation have been demonstrated by eliminating m-CNTs.75,234,235 Surprisingly, a small lower limit for electron mobility in nanotubes of only 0.057 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been estimated. Researchers234 suggest that electron mobility may be limited by electronic and morphological perturbation. By exciting SWNTs they also reported no charge transfer to the polymer along with the formation of short-lived charge carriers confined within the nanotubes.
 Fig. 18  Charge induced (atomic units) in the electrostatic potential at the interface between P3HT and (10,2) s-SWNT:P3HT (left) and (12,3) m-SWNT (right) respectively. The contour plane approximately bisects the nanotubes. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.] 
Another interesting limiting factor is reported by Schuettfort et al.82,163 By studying a BHJ system composed of rrP3HT:SWNT nano-hybrids, they revealed an efficient energy transfer from the donor polymer to the SWNTs thus limiting the ability of this interface to separate excitons in free charge carriers. Nevertheless, exciton separation across this interface could be possible. Indeed, it has been revealed that energy transfer rates decrease with the diameter of the tubes. This agrees with the observed formation of a type II heterojunction between small diameter s-SWNTs and rrP3HT (Fig. 19), which allows for exciton separation.
 Fig. 19  Energy levels diagram of several conjugated polymers and SWNTs (for these latter, energies are calculated by a tight-binding model around a work function of −4.5 eV). E1 and E2 levels refer respectively to E11 and E22 transitions in SWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.] 
In contrast, Maligaspe et al.246 showed better performances for larger tube diameters (lower band-gap). These researchers compared charge separation rates and quantum yields for Zn-Porphyrin/SWNT nano-hybrids prepared by tubes with two different band gaps. It was demonstrated that charge separation and efficiency of (7,6)-SWNT, which have the lowest band gap, were slightly higher compared to a (6,9)-SWNT nano-hybrid. Researchers ascribe the faster charge transfer rate to the higher electron affinity which characterizes semiconductors with small gaps hence with lower conductive energy bands.
These results suggest that a key strategy for the maximization of free charge carriers generation and PCE could be the precise separation of only s-SWNTs and a balanced trade-off between the diameter and band gap.


6.1.4 CNTs as additives. 
While providing an optimal solution for a large increase of interfacial area, BHJs are not similarly effective in charge mobility. Besides the scarce mobility afforded by organic semiconductors, BHJs present a lack of percolative charge pathways. In this respect, CNTs are used in photoactive films not only as electron acceptors but also as pipelines which support carriers’ migration at the electrodes, thus improving charge extraction. For example, CNTs have been functionalized with C60247 and C70248fullerenes and/or implemented into P3HT-PCBM devices to mitigate shortcomings such as the low carrier mobility of fullerene and the coulombic recombination of the electron-hole pair after exciton dissociation. In this latter example, P3HT wraps the SWNTs (as illustrated in Fig. 16), improving holes extraction by the nanotube. Possible short circuits resulting from the contact between the hole-transporting SWNT and the electron transporting PCBM should be prevented by the shielding action of the wrapping polymer. Although this strategy of application is promising, only minor improvements in PCE were observed.249 While some authors pointed out an efficient charge transfer,75,234 the low efficiency of this last system might be ascribed to a lifetime increase hindering the electron transfer from photoexcited P3HT to the PCBM.250
As already mentioned in Section 4, another interesting study153 on the enhancement of charge mobility of OPV cells reports the use of MWNTs doped with Boron (B-CNTs) or Nitrogen (N-CNTs) integrated into a P3HT:PCBM BHJ. B and N atoms bring respectively one electron less and one electron more than C. This excess/dearth of electrons shifts the work functions of the MWNTs close to the LUMO level of PCBM for the B-CNTs and to the HOMO level of P3HT for the B-CNTs. Accordingly, N- and B-CNTs behave respectively like electron- and hole-only transporting materials. Doped MWNTs work like a channel between organic molecules. Indeed, they give improved charge mobility when integrated inside a BHJ device making the slow hopping charge transport more effective. In particular, the implementation of B-CNTs into a P3HT:PCBM device gives comparable electron and hole mobility of about 10−7 m2 V−1·s−1, which is strongly desirable for high performance photovoltaic devices. Moreover, both an improved JSC from 9 to 11.5 mA cm−2 and PCE from 3% to 4.1% were recorded. Furthermore, it was found that B- and N-doping also improve the nanotubes dispersion because of the local polarities induced on the nanotube surface.
Conversely, Rahman et al.77 obtained among the best EQE (9.9%) for a device made by poly[(vinylbenzyl)-trimethylammonium chloride] (PVBTAn+) wrapped SWNTs and Zn-porphyrins. Likewise, oxidised MWNTs (o-MWNTs) integrated in a poly[2-(3-thienyl)-ethoxy-4-butylsulfonate] (PTEBS, a water soluble polythiophene):C60 bilayer heterojunction led to an increase of 20% for the FF and to a corresponding enhancement of PCE.80 The authors ascribe the enhanced performances to the reduced series resistance (see in the I–V curve of Fig. 20 the increased slope at the x-axis interception) due to the charge percolative paths provided by the tubes along with the optimal alignment of the o-MWNTs Fermi level and the PTEBS HOMO.
 Fig. 20  Current–voltage curve of solar cell with (stars) and without (squares) o-MWNTs dispersed inside the PTEBS donor layer. Inset reports a schematic band line-up diagram of device integrating o-MWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.] 

6.2 CNT based extraction layers and transparent electrodes
In addition to photoactive material, CNTs may be used also as Hole Extraction Layers (HELs) or transparent electrodes. Indeed, the huge intrinsic charge mobility of an individual CNT, the high optical transparency over a wide range of frequencies219 (see Fig. 5b) and the amenability to solution processing are tempting enough to design electrically conductive, flexible, transparent and low-cost networks. Moreover, the CNT work function suitability (4.7–5.2 eV)64,251,252 has been exploited to replace either ITO transparent electrodes or PEDOT:PSS HELs in OPV and other optoelectronic devices (e.g., displays, touch screens, OLED).253,254 In this respect, indium is a toxic and expensive rare metal (up to 1000 $ kg−1)255 and ITO is scarcely compatible with flexible polymeric substrates because of its brittleness256,257 and high temperature deposition (600 °C). On the other hand, the widely employed PEDOT:PSS HEL may alter the photoactive layer through the corrosion of the usually underneath ITO surface.258 Conversely, CNTs are easily accessible, thermally and chemically stable and can be conveniently deposited through low cost solution processing techniques.
Unfortunately, despite very high expectations the sheet resistances (Rs) of a CNT network are much higher than the desired values for a ballistic conductor, albeit it can be improved by increasing the layer thickness at the expense of its transparency. Consequently, best performances for transparent conductive CNT networks need a precise trade-off between Rs and transparency. The overall series resistance of a CNT-based electrode is determined by chemical composition, density and alignment of nanotubes. In this regard, the seminal work by Staderman et al.259 and Nirmalraj et al.260 pointed out that electrical transport in CNT thin films is determined by the number and nature of nanotube junctions. A comprehensive analysis of Rs for a high number of transparent (T > 90%) nanostructured films indicated that the conductivity increases with the film thickness, following a percolation-like behaviour.224,261 Under this regime, chemical treatments aimed at improving the interconnectivity of CNT bundles have been proven to have a dramatic role in decreasing Rs. Postfunctionalization of CNT films by oxidation with nitric acid and thionyl chloride (o-CNTs) has a dual effect: a slight increase of the intrinsic conductivity of semiconducting tubes due to p-doping262,263 and a three-fold reduction of the junction resistance.260 It has been shown that P3HT:PCBM solar cells with either o-CNTs (both SW and MW) or PEDOT:PSS HLEs afforded similar performances264 exhibiting the possibility to replace the ubiquitous PEDOT. Furthermore, different studies265,266 show spray deposited transparent electrodes of o-CNTs (T = 70 to 90%) with low Rs (57 to 130 Ω sq−1) with remarkable conductivity up to 7700 S cm−1 (ITO is 4400 S cm−1),266 which led to OPV cells having similar PCE with respect to analogous ITO based devices. Interestingly, Feng et al.265 demonstrated that an acid treatment produces both a tenfold decrease in Rs and a 1.5 fold increase in transparency. This is strategic to build up a transparency/resistance trade-off for PCE optimization. Even better, Barnes et al.267 prepared OPV devices by spray deposited o-SWNTs electrodes giving lower Rs, higher JSC and increased PCE from 3.5 to 4.1% with respect to ITO-based devices.
Doping can be further tuned by deposition of a layer of PEDOT:PSS on top of the CNT film followed by thermal annealing.268 SWNTs and PEDOT:PSS HLEs were sequentially deposited on ITO at different strategic positions (see Fig. 21a) within a P3HT:PCBM cell by Chaudhary et al.250 They obtained a significant improvement in PCE from 4 to 4.9% (Fig. 21b) when SWNTs were used as HEL in configuration 2 and 3 (Fig. 21a). Furthermore, the co-deposition of PEDOT:PSS and MWNTs gave a minor increase in PCE, from 2.1 to 2.4%.269 Likewise, the use of a 3D hybrid anode of MWNTs/PEDOT:PSS on ITO270 has been shown to give a PCE improvement from 1.3 to 1.7% along with a 2-fold increase of Jsc.
 Fig. 21  (a) BHJ solar cells are prepared positioning SWNTs at different strategic places; (b) J–V curves for OPV cells (structures from 1 to 5) under AM 1.5G illumination. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.] 
The importance of the film morphology and cell architecture has been shown by vertically aligned nanotubes being more electrically and thermally conductive than randomly dispersed ones.219,271
Another important point in the optimization of electrodes and HELs is the use of electronically monodisperse CNTs. Recently, Tyler et al.268 used SWNTs sorted viaDGU as transparent anode material in OPVs and showed that a composition in m-SWNTs ≥70% affords a PCE 50-fold higher than monodisperse s-SWNT thin films. This is also in agreement with metallic-semiconductive CNTs junction resistances notably higher than the metallic-metallic ones.272 This result points out the necessity to use highly enriched metallic CNTs as electrodes with very low Rs.159,273 Sorting techniques like those discussed in Section 3 should be properly developed in order to provide the chiral separation of nanotubes with quasi-monodisperse diameters. The resulting narrow distribution of band gaps with a characteristic optical absorption would afford conductive and variously coloured CNT networks.255
Finally, CNTs offer the possibility for mechanical flexibility. In particular, after a bending up to 1 mm of the curvature radius, a CNT-based device had a performance drop of 20–25% that was completely restored by a simple thermal treatment.274 This, together with an extended lifetime with respect to ITO,252,275 makes CNTs well-suited for large scale fabrication employing low-cost roll-to-roll solution processes thus fitting the field of flexible electronics (including flexible displays like OLED, touch screens,276–278 rollable e-paper for the expanding market of e-readers, electrochromic, elecrophoretic, electrowetting, liquid crystal displays)279–281 and in particular OPV.
7. Conclusions and future perspectives
These outstanding contributions on each specific stage, such as synthesis, functionalization, purification, processing and device preparation, are a strong indication that science and technology provide a strong opportunity for the integration of CNT-based organic thin films in the next generation of OPV cells. Still, current research should be aimed to understand the structure–property relationships beginning from the molecular structure, through the microdomain organization, to the final device architecture. This multidisciplinary approach should start by developing refined theoretical models able to correlate the electronic properties and the morphology of CNTs with the merits of OPV devices. In this regard, simple and reliable computational models able to correlate chirality, diameter, and length of CNTs47,282 with current and voltage characteristics of a photoactive nanocomposite are an important feedback for the optimization of PCE.
Given these considerations, the growth of CNTs should require smaller amounts of metal catalysts while improving the control on chirality and length of the tubes. In the subsequent steps, industrially relevant aspects (i.e., continuous processes, use of low cost and nonflammable solvents, scalability, etc.) should be integrated in a multi-step purification procedure able to afford CNTs with the desired parameters. Actually, this aspect is faced through the design of chemical and physical methods showing preferential affinity for CNTs with specific chirality, thus enabling the separation of semiconducting and metallic tubes. Nevertheless, increasing efforts should be addressed to fill the gap between the small quantities required by academic researchers and the large amount of continuously processed CNTs needed for practical applications. In this respect, chemical modifications by means of covalent or non-covalent functionalizations have been extensively employed for the purification and separation of CNTs. Moreover, chemical post-processing is an attractive solution to tune the physical properties of the CNTs either by tuning the band-gap by p- and n-doping or by exploiting the interaction with photoactive dyes complementary to the prominent UV and IR absorption of CNTs. Even more interestingly, chemical processing is the gateway between the electronic characteristics of the individual nanotubes and their interaction with photoelectroactive matrices at a macroscopic scale. Covalent modification and supramolecular interactions offer the required solubility, stability, and versatility to engineer the electronic communication at the D/A interfaces and ultimately to improve the PCE of BHJ OPV cells through a controlled processing. Indeed, conveniently functionalized CNTs can be processed using lower boiling point solvents, thus allowing for low-cost mass-production, either by ink-jet printing or by different coating techniques from solution.
With this perspective, the employment of structurally versatile CNTs would have a major impact on OPV technology particularly thanks to the scaling-up of a variety of deposition and patterning methods available today.
Once these constrains are solved, future applications would first involve a niche market including low-power and short-term devices and then a larger market including low-power, longer-term and portable devices. Indeed, applications could include self-powered devices for both indoor and outdoor uses in fields like “portable energy” for electronic devices (e.g., cell phones, smart phones, portable audio/video players, sensors, digital cameras and camcorders), building integrated photovoltaics and rooftops (e.g., commercial buildings, industrial plants, government, academic institutions), residential photovoltaics (grid-tied and off-grid homes) and automotive (e.g., car standby power supply, starting, lighting, and ignition car battery sustaining systems).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Italian MIUR (grants FIRB-Futuro in Ricerca-RBFR08DUX6, FIRB-RBAP11C58Y, PRIN-20085M27SS) and University of Padova through HELIOS (grant STPD08RCX5) for financial support.
References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3338–3350 RSC .
M. C. Tanese, G. M. Farinola, B. Pignataro, L. Valli, L. Giotta, S. Conoci, P. Lang, D. Colangiuli, F. Babudri, F. Naso, L. Sabbatini, P. G. Zambonin and L. Torsi, Chem. Mater., 2005, 18, 778–784 CrossRef .
C. Musumeci, C. Cascio, A. Scandurra, G. F. Indelli, C. Bongiorno, S. Ravesi and B. Pignataro, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 993–1005 CrossRef CAS .

          D. M. Guldi and N. Martin, Carbon Nanotubes and Related Structures: Synthesis, Characterization, Functionalization, and Applications, Wiley-VCH,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792–7799 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.konarka.com/
        .

          http://www.solarmer.com/
        .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamanari, T. Taima, J. Sakai and K. Saito, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 759–761 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fabiano, Z. Chen, S. Vahedi, A. Facchetti, B. Pignataro and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5891–5896 RSC .
S. Fabiano and B. Pignataro, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14848–14860 RSC .
B. Pignataro, L. Sardone and G. Marletta, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 5912–5917 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raudino and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9189–9192 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raudino and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2116–2124 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, L. Sardone and G. Marletta, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 245 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, J. C. Charlier and E. Hernandez, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2004, 362, 2065–2098 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chico, V. H. Crespi, L. X. Benedict, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 971–974 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Delgado, P. A. Bouit, S. Filippone, M. A. Herranz and N. Martin, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4853–4865 RSC .
R. Po, M. Maggini and N. Camaioni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 695–706 CAS .
C. Villegas, E. Krokos, P. A. Bouit, J. L. Delgado, D. M. Guldi and N. Martin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 679–684 CAS .
C. H. Woo, T. W. Holcombe, D. A. Unruh, A. Sellinger and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1673–1679 CrossRef CAS .
Z. E. Ooi, T. L. Tam, R. Y. C. Shin, Z. K. Chen, T. Kietzke, A. Sellinger, M. Baumgarten, K. Mullen and J. C. deMello, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4619–4622 RSC .
S. Cataldo, S. Fabiano, F. Ferrante, F. Previti, S. Patane and B. Pignataro, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1281–1286 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cordella, M. De Nardi, E. Menna, C. Hébert and M. A. Loi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1264–1269 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, E. Menna, M. Maggini, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli, M. Prato, G. M. A. Rahman and S. Schergna, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3975–3983 CrossRef CAS .
M. D'Este, M. De Nardi and E. Menna, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 2517–2522 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gadermaier, E. Menna, M. Meneghetti, W. J. Kennedy, Z. V. Vardeny and G. Lanzani, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gambetta, C. Manzoni, E. Menna, M. Meneghetti, G. Cerullo, G. Lanzani, S. Tretiak, A. Piryatinski, A. Saxena, R. L. Martin and A. R. Bishop, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 515–520 CrossRef CAS .
E. Menna, F. Della Negra, M. Dalla Fontana and M. Meneghetti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 68, 193412 CrossRef .
B. J. Landi, R. P. Raffaelle, S. L. Castro and S. G. Bailey, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2005, 13, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Pichler, M. Knupfer, M. S. Golden, J. Fink, H. Kataura and Y. Achiba, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 66, 045411 CrossRef .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 6 CrossRef .
N. Hamada, S. Sawada and A. Oshiyama, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 1579 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saito, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 60, 2204–2206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kataura, Y. Kumazawa, Y. Maniwa, I. Umezu, S. Suzuki, Y. Ohtsuka and Y. Achiba, Synth. Met., 1999, 103, 2555–2558 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Physics Properties of Carbon Nanotubes, Imperial College Press,  1998 Search PubMed .
C. M. E. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1932 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, R. Saito and A. Jorio, Phys. Rep., 2005, 409, 47–99 CrossRef .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, A. Jorio, A. G. Souza Filho and R. Saito, Carbon, 2002, 40, 2043–2061 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Weisman and S. M. Bachilo, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1235–1238 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dan, G. C. Irvin and M. Pasquali, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 835–843 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Y. Hu, D. Hecht, C. Ladous, M. O'Connell, D. Thomas, G. Gruner, G. Irvin and P. Drzaic, MRS. Proc., 2009, 1109-B1110-1107 Search PubMed .
S. Frank, P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang and W. A.d. Heer, Science, 1998, 280, 1744–1746 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salvato, M. Cirillo, M. Lucci, S. Orlanducci, I. Ottaviani, M. L. Terranova and F. Toschi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 246804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kwon, S. Saito and D. Tomanek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1998, 58, 13314 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Yu, C. Rutherglen and P. J. Burke, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 5 CrossRef .
P. Sundqvist, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, F. Flores, M. Moreno-Moreno, C. Gomez-Navarro, J. S. Bunch and J. Gomez-Herrero, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2568 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 081103 CrossRef .
Q. Cao and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 29–53 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. Hiura, J. W. Bennett, H. F. Ghaemi and T. Thio, Nature, 1996, 382, 54–56 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins and P. Avouris, Sci. Am., 2000, 283, 62 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosho, Y. Ohno, S. Kishimoto and T. Mizutani, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 415202 CrossRef .
J. Geng, B.-S. Kong, S. B. Yang, S. C. Youn, S. Park, T. Joo and H.-T. Jung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2659–2665 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris and R. Martel, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shiraishi and M. Ata, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, L. Zhang, N. Wang, X. Zhang and G. Wen, Science, 2001, 292, 2462 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Su, T. C. Leung, B. Li and C. T. Chan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163103 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, J. Han and J. P. Lu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 65, 193401 CrossRef .
Y. Woo, G. S. Duesberg and S. Roth, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 095203 CrossRef .
K. H. An, W. S. Kim, Y. S. Park, J. M. Moon, D. J. Bae, S. C. Lim, Y. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Goutam, D. K. Singh, P. K. Giri and P. K. Iyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 919–924 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, H. Liu, S. Fujii and H. Kataura, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2011, 5, 301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Nishide, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 309 CrossRef .
K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 034003 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Blanch, C. E. Lenehan and J. S. Quinton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 9805–9811 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Holt, A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, B. A. Larsen, J. Bult, G. Rumbles and J. L. Blackburn, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4627–4633 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, K. Matsuda, A. F. M. M. Rahman, X. Peng, T. Kimura and N. Komatsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10876–10881 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. A. Rahman, A. Troeger, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, N. Jux, M. N. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, A. Mateo-Alonso and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8837–8846 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Sprafke, S. D. Stranks, J. H. Warner, R. J. Nicholas and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2313–2316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartelmess, A. R. M. Soares, M. Victoria Martinez-Diaz, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tome, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3490–3492 RSC .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123115 CrossRef .
J. E. Klare, I. P. Murray, J. Goldberger and S. I. Stupp, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3705–3707 RSC .
T. Schuettfort, A. Nish and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3871–3876 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nish, J.-Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lioudakis, A. Othonos and I. Alexandrou, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2008, 3, 6 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Yi, S. Wang, F. Li, W. Feng and Q. Gong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 451, 5 CrossRef .
C. Yang, M. Wohlgenannt, Z. V. Vardeny, W. J. Blau, A. B. Dalton, R. Baughman and A. A. Zakhidov, Phys. B, 2003, 338, 366–369 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, C. Weisspfennig, P. Parkinson, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 66–72 CrossRef .
D. J. Bindl, M.-Y. Wu, F. C. Prehn and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. O'Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2002, 297, 593–596 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kamaras, M. E. Itkis, H. Hu, B. Zhao and R. C. Haddon, Science, 2003, 301, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Doorn, M. S. Strano, M. J. O'Connell, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6063–6069 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krupke, F. Hennrich, H.v. Löhneysen and M. M. Kappes, Science, 2003, 301, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zhou, J. Y. Park, S. M. Huang, J. Liu and P. L. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 146805 CrossRef .
W. J. Yu and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 890–904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng and T. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16827–16833 CrossRef CAS .
V. Arkhipov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and M. C. Hersam, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 315–321 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 727134 Search PubMed .
X. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota and M. Zheng, Nature, 2009, 460, 250–253 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, D. Voulgaris, E. Vazquez, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, A. Kukovecz and H. Kuzmany, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14318–14319 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salice, P. Maity, E. Rossi, T. Carofiglio, E. Menna and M. Maggini, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9092–9094 RSC .

          M. Maggini, P. Salice, E. Rossi, E. Menna, T. Carofiglio, Italian Patent application no. PD2011A000153,  2011.

          E. Joselevich, H. J. Dai, J. Liu, K. Hata and A. H. Windle, in Carbon Nanotubes, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2008, vol. 111, pp. 101–164 Search PubMed .
Z. Ghorannevis, T. Kato, T. Kaneko and R. Hatakeyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9570–9572 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Harutyunyan, G. Chen, T. M. Paronyan, E. M. Pigos, O. A. Kuznetsov, K. Hewaparakrama, S. M. Kim, D. Zakharov, E. A. Stach and G. U. Sumanasekera, Science, 2009, 326, 116–120 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Liu and H. L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1901–1918 RSC .
M. S. Strano, C. A. Dyke, M. L. Usrey, P. W. Barone, M. J. Allen, H. Shan, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, J. M. Tour and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2003, 301, 1519–1522 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. An, J. S. Park, C. M. Yang, S. Y. Jeong, S. C. Lim, C. Kang, J. H. Son, M. S. Jeong and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5196–5203 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yudasaka, M. Zhang and S. Iijima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 374, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ménard-Moyon, N. Izard, E. Doris and C. Mioskowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6552–6553 CrossRef .
E. Menna, G. Scorrano, M. Maggini, M. Cavallaro, F. Della Negra, M. Battagliarin, R. Bozio, F. Fantinel and M. Meneghetti, ARKIVOC, 2003, 64–73 CAS .
P. G. Collins, M. S. Arnold and P. Avouris, Science, 2001, 292, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ago, K. Petritsch, M. S. P. Shaffer, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1281–1285 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 112–114 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sgobba and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 165–184 RSC .
Y. Lin, M. Meziani and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1143–1148 RSC .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, T. Hemraj-Benny and S. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 17–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hamon, M. E. Itkis, S. Niyogi, T. Alvaraez, C. Kuper, M. Menon and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11292–11293 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Holzinger and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 760–761 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 437–439 RSC .
S. Campidelli, C. Sooambar, E. L. Diz, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12544–12552 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6768–6816 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballesteros, S. Campidelli, G. De La Torre, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi, M. Prato and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2950–2952 RSC .
B. Ballesteros, G. De La Torre, C. Ehli, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Agulló-Rueda, D. M. Guidi and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5061–5068 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, N. Tagmatarchis, D. Tasis, E. Vázquez and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4206–4209 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Dyke, M. P. Stewart, F. Maya and J. M. Tour, Synlett, 2004, 155–160 CAS .
Z. Guo, F. Du, D. Ren, Y. Chen, J. Zheng, Z. Liu and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3021–3030 RSC .
S. K. Yadav, S. S. Mahapatra, J. W. Cho and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11395–11400 CAS .
C. A. Dyke, M. P. Stewart and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4497–4509 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gebhardt, R. Graupner, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 1494–1501 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Stephenson, A. K. Sadana, A. L. Higginbotham and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4658–4661 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Syrgiannis, F. Hauke, J. Roehrl, M. Hundhausen, R. Graupner, Y. Elemes and A. Hirsch, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2008, 2544–2550 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wunderlich, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1607–1614 CrossRef CAS .
R. Graupner, J. Abraham, D. Wunderlich, A. Vencelova, P. Lauffer, J. Roehrl, M. Hundhausen, L. Ley and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6683–6689 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gebhardt, Z. Syrgiannis, C. Backes, R. Graupner, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7985–7995 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Iqbal, M. Chhowalla and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2406–2411 RSC .
B. Pradhan, S. K. Batabyal and A. J. Pal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093106 CrossRef .
F. Della Negra, M. Meneghetti and E. Menna, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2003, 11, 25–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Qin, D. Q. Qin, W. T. Ford, D. E. Resasco and J. E. Herrera, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 752–757 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Stylianakis, J. A. Mikroyannidis and E. Kymakis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 267–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Herranz, N. Martin, S. P. Campidelli, M. Prato, G. Brehm and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4478–4482 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baskaran, J. W. Mays, X. P. Zhang and M. S. Bratcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6916–6917 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Li, R. B. Martin, B. A. Harruff, R. A. Carino, L. F. Allard and Y. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 896–900 CrossRef CAS .
G. De La Torre, W. Blau and T. Torres, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 765–771 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Xu, H. Z. Chen, M. M. Shi, R. Bai and M. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 94, 342–346 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zamudio, A. L. Elías, J. A. Rodríguez-Manzo, F. López-Urías, G. Rodríguez-Gattorno, F. Lupo, M. Rühle, D. J. Smith, H. Terrones, D. Díaz and M. Terrones, Small, 2006, 2, 346–350 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zanella, E. V. Basiuk, P. Santiago, V. A. Basiuk, E. Mireles, I. Puente-Lee and J. M. Saniger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16290–16295 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheeney-Haj-Ichia, B. Basnar and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, A. G. Rinzler, H. J. Dai, J. H. Hafner, R. K. Bradley, P. J. Boul, A. Lu, T. Iverson, K. Shelimov, C. B. Huffman, F. Rodriguez-Macias, S. Young-Seok, T. R. Lee, D. T. Colbert and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1998, 280, 1253–1256 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lee, J. S. Park, S. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 629–633 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wenseleers, I. I. Vlasov, E. Goovaerts, E. D. Obraztsova, A. S. Lobach and A. Bouwen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
C. Backes, C. D. Schmidt, K. Rosenlehner, F. Hauke, J. N. Coleman and A. Hirsch, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 788–802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Liang, H. Y. Zhang and D. S. Guo, Small, 2006, 2, 874–878 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Liu, C. Chipot, X. G. Shao and W. S. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5783–5789 CrossRef CAS .
O.-K. Kim, J. Je, J. W. Baldwin, S. Kooi, P. E. Pehrsson and L. J. Buckley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4426–4427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, A. Jagota, E. D. Semke, B. A. Diner, R. S. McLean, S. R. Lustig, R. E. Richardson and N. G. Tassi, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 338–342 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rud, L. S. Lovell, J. W. Senn, Q. Q. Qiao and J. T. McLeskey, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 1455–1458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, Q. Liu, X. Lv, Z. F. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, Y. S. Chen and S. G. Yin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2709–2718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, M. Kwak, J. Wildeman, A. Herrmann and M. A. Loi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schuettfort, H. J. Snaith, A. Nish and R. J. Nicholas, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 025201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kang, O.-S. Lee, P. Deria, S. H. Kim, T.-H. Park, D. A. Bonnell, J. G. Saven and M. J. Therien, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1414–1418 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. A. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, R. Cagnoli, A. Mucci, L. Schenetti, L. Vaccari and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10051–10057 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ben-Valid, B. Botka, K. Kamaras, A. P. Zeng and S. Yitzchaik, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2773–2781 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nakashima, Y. Tomonari and H. Murakami, Chem. Lett., 2002, 638–639 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi, M. A. Herranz, N. Martin, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1498–1503 RSC .
M. A. Herranz, C. Ehli, S. Campidelli, M. Gutiérrez, G. L. Hug, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, M. Prato, N. Martin and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 130, 66–73 CrossRef .
E. M. Perez, B. M. Illescas, M. A. Herranza and N. Martin, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 228–234 RSC .
J. L. Lopez, E. M. Perez, P. M. Viruela, R. Viruela, E. Orti and N. Martin, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 4524–4527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Paloniemi, T. Aaritalo, T. Laiho, H. Liuke, N. Kocharova, K. Haapakka, F. Terzi, R. Seeber and J. Lukkari, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8634–8642 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartelmess, B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, D. Kiessling, S. Campidelli, M. Prato, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16202–16211 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, U. Hartnagel, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9830–9838 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Smith, M. Monthioux and D. E. Luzzi, Nature, 1998, 396, 323–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Khlobystov, D. A. Britz and G. A. D. Briggs, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 901–909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yudasaka, K. Ajima, K. Suenaga, T. Ichihashi, A. Hashimoto and S. Iijima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 380, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Britz, A. N. Khlobystov, J. W. Wang, A.s. O'Neil, M. Poliakoff, A. Ardavan and G. A. Briggs, Chem. Commun., 2004, 176–177 RSC .
S. Campestrini, C. Corvaja, M. D. Nardi, C. Ducati, L. Franco, M. Maggini, M. Meneghetti, E. Menna and G. Ruaro, Small, 2008, 4, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, J. Gao, F. Cordella, P. Blondeau, E. Menna, B. Bartova, C. Hebert, S. Lazar, G. A. Botton, M. Milko and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1635–1639 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, P. Blondeau, P. Salice, E. Menna, B. Bártová, C. Hébert, J. Leschner, U. Kaiser, M. Milko, C. Ambrosch-Draxl and M. A. Loi, Small, 2011, 7, 1807–1815 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata and H. Kataura, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 437–441 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, S. Qin, M. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2152–2161 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, G. Chen, G. Mantovani, S. York and D. M. Haddleton, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4949–4951 RSC .
E. Vàzquez and M. Prato, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3819–3824 CrossRef .
L. Dai, A. Patil, X. Gong, Z. Guo, L. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 1150–1169 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. LeMieux, M. Roberts, S. Barman, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim and Z. N. Bao, Science, 2008, 321, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pradhan, R. R. Kohlmeyer and J. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 217–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Meitl, Y. Zhou, A. Gaur, S. Jeon, M. L. Usrey, M. S. Strano and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1643–1647 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yu, A. Y. Cao and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 372–377 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Quanbeck, Plastics Machinery & Auxiliaries,  2004, vol. 18 Search PubMed .

          K. Cantor, Blown Film Extrusion: An Introduction, Hanser Publishers,  2006 Search PubMed .
Z. Ounaies, C. Park, K. E. Wise, E. J. Siochi and J. S. Harrison, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 1637–1646 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, Z. Ounaies, K. A. Watson, R. E. Crooks, J. Smith, Jr, S. E. Lowther, J. W. Connell, E. J. Siochi, J. S. Harrison and T. L. St Clair, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 364, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Casagrande, P. Imin, F. Y. Cheng, G. A. Botton, I. Zhitomirsky and A. Adronov, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2741–2749 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Boccaccini, J. Cho, J. A. Roether, B. J. C. Thomas, E. Jane Minay and M. S. P. Shaffer, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3149–3160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Grandfield, F. Sun, M. FitzPatrick, M. Cheong and I. Zhitomirsky, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 203, 1481–1487 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Quale and J. B. Talbot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, K25–K28 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vichchulada, Q. H. Zhang, A. Duncan and M. D. Lay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 467–473 CAS .
P. Vichchulada, Q. Zhang and M. D. Lay, Analyst, 2007, 132, 719 RSC .
P. Vichchulada, L. D. Lipscomb, Q. Zhang and M. D. Lay, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2189 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and Y. Zhang, Carbon, 2007, 45, 493–498 CrossRef CAS .
V. Krstic, G. S. Duesberg, J. Muster, M. Burghard and S. Roth, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2338–2340 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, I. Shimoyama, X. Sun, W.-S. Seo and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4890–4891 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giancane, A. Ruland, V. Sgobba, D. Manno, A. Serra, G. M. Farinola, O. H. Omar, D. M. Guldi and L. Valli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2481–2488 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Armitage, J. C. P. Gabriel and G. Gruner, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 3228–3230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, Y. Huang, N. Bu, X. Wang and Y. Xiong, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2010, 55, 3383–3407 CrossRef .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS .
H. Okimoto, T. Takenobu, K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata, H. Shimotani, H. Kataura and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3981–3986 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, M. O. Reese, B. L. Rupert, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, G. S. Duesberg and S. Roth, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Tenent, T. M. Barnes, J. D. Bergeson, A. J. Ferguson, B. To, L. M. Gedvilas, M. J. Heben and J. L. Blackburn, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3210–3216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Zavodchikova, 
            et al.
          , Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 085201 CrossRef .
D. Gonzalez, A. G. Nasibulin, S. D. Shandakov, H. Jiang, P. Queipo, A. S. Anisimov, T. Tsuneta and E. I. Kauppinen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5052–5057 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Nasibulin, S. D. Shandakov, A. S. Anisimov, D. Gonzalez, H. Jiang, M. Pudas, P. Queipo and E. I. Kauppinen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5762–5769 CAS .
L. Jin, C. Bower and O. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1197–1199 CrossRef CAS .
N. Akima, Y. Iwasa, S. Brown, A. M. Barbour, J. Cao, J. L. Musfeldt, H. Matsui, N. Toyota, M. Shiraishi, H. Shimoda and O. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1166–1169 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Dai, W. Li, Z. Wei and J. Jiang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 1644–1648 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Woo, C.-H. Lim, C.-W. Cho, B. Park, H. Ju, D.-H. Min, C.-J. Lee and S.-B. Lee, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1610–1613 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. L. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, J. Wilkinson, S. Banda, Z. Ounaies, K. E. Wise, G. Sauti, P. T. Lillehei and J. S. Harrison, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2006, 44, 1751–1762 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Steinert and D. R. Dean, Polymer, 2009, 50, 898–904 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2513–2517 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Parekh, G. Fanchini, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 121913 CrossRef .

          C. W. Mayer, US Pat., no.1043021,  1911.
T. Kitano, Y. Maeda and T. Akasaka, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3559–3565 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimura, H. Ago, M. Tobita, S. Ohshima, M. Kyotani and M. Yumura, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1380–1383 CrossRef CAS .
L. Valentini, S. B. Bon and J. M. Kenny, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2008, 293, 867–871 CrossRef CAS .
R. Radbeh, E. Parbaile, M. Chakaroun, B. Ratier, M. Aldissi and A. Moliton, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 1514–1519 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Chen, T. Saito, H. Yamada and K. Matsushige, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 3714–3716 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Grzegorczyk, T. J. Savenije, T. E. Dykstra, J. Piris, J. M. Schins and L. D.a. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5 Search PubMed .
A. J. Ferguson, J. L. Blackburn, J. M. Holt, N. Kopidakis, R. C. Tenent, T. M. Barnes, M. J. Heben and G. Rumbles, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2406–2411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanai and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 908–912 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ikeda, K. Nobusawa, T. Hamano and J. Kikuchi, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 4 Search PubMed .
E. Kymakis, P. Servati, P. Tzanetakis, E. Koudoumas, N. Kornilios, I. Rompogiannakis, Y. Franghiadakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 435702 CrossRef .
E. Kymakis, I. Alexandrou and G. A. J. Amaratunga, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1764–1768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, B. Nalini, Y. Kim and K. Hara, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 084314 CrossRef .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Dittmer, E. A. Marseglia and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502–063503 CrossRef .
E. Kymakis, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 1058 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lanzi, L. Paganin and D. Caretti, Polymer, 2008, 49, 4942–4948 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dissanayake and Z. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 286–290 CrossRef .
E. Maligaspe, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Hasobe, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8158–8164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Chen, S. A. Ntim and S. Mitra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 143303 CrossRef .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, S. Seki, Y. Matano, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Nakao, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1767–1770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly, S. Guillerez and B. Jousselme, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3363–3370 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhary, H. Lu, A. M. Müller, C. J. Bardeen and M. Ozkan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1973–1979 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Lim, H. J. Jeong, K. S. Kim, I. B. Lee, D. J. Bae and Y. H. Lee, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2801 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, L. B. Hu, J. Liu, L. Wang, T. J. Marks and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083306 CrossRef .
R. G. Gordon, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fortunato, D. Ginley, H. Hosono and D. C. Paine, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS .
J. van de Lagemaat, T. M. Barnes, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen, T. J. Coutts, C. Weeks, I. Levitsky, J. Peltola and P. Glatkowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233503 CrossRef .
N. Saran, K. Parikh, D.-S. Suh, E. Munoz, H. Kolla and S. K. Manohar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4462–4463 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Nguyen and S. A. de Vos, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 221, 330–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stadermann, S. J. Papadakis, M. R. Falvo, J. Novak, E. Snow, Q. Fu, J. Liu, Y. Fridman, J. J. Boland, R. Superfine and S. Washburn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 201402 CrossRef .
P. N. Nirmalraj, P. E. Lyons, S. De, J. N. Coleman and J. J. Boland, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3890–3895 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, P. J. King, P. E. Lyons, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7064–7072 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jackson, B. Domercq, R. Jain, B. Kippelen and S. Graham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS .
V. Scardaci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 023114 CrossRef .
R. A. Hatton, N. P. Blanchard, L. W. Tan, G. Latini, F. Cacialli and S. R. P. Silva, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 388–395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Feng, X. H. Ju, W. Feng, H. B. Zhang, Y. W. Cheng, J. Liu, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki and K. Yoshino, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123302 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. Yim, X. Wang, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Lee and J. C. deMello, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2310–2316 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Barnes, J. D. Bergeson, R. C. Tenent, B. A. Larsen, G. Teeter, K. M. Jones, J. L. Blackburn and J. Van De Lagemaat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243309 CrossRef .
T. P. Tyler, R. E. Brock, H. J. Karmel, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 785–791 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Liu, C. Gao and G. Chen, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2011, 2011, 1–5 CrossRef .
R. Ulbricht, S. B. Lee, X. M. Jiang, K. Inoue, M. Zhang, S. L. Fang, R. H. Baughman and A. A. Zakhidov, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 416–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berber, Y.-K. Kwon and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Fuhrer, J. Nygard, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y.-G. Yoon, M. S. C. Mazzoni, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2000, 288, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giordani, S. D. Bergin, V. Nicolosi, S. Lebedkin, M. M. Kappes, W. J. Blau and J. N. Coleman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15708–15718 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. B. Hu and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Gruner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. C. Veinot and T. J. Marks, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 632 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4389 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Shim and J. I. Jin, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2002, 1, 193–244 CrossRef .
L. B. Hu, G. Gruner, J. Gong, C. J. Kim and B. Hornbostel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 093124 CrossRef .
R. C. Y. King and F. Roussel, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 86, 159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pauluth and K. Tarumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1219 RSC .
M. Vaezzadeh, M. Saeedi, T. Barghi and M. Sadeghi, Chem. Cent. J., 2007, 1, 22 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Sebastiano Cataldo	Sebastiano Cataldo is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Palermo. He received a Master's Degree in Chemistry in 2003 and a PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2007 from the University of Catania. His research activity is set on the edge between surface science and nanotechnology. His main interests are studying the organization of materials (biological and organic) at surfaces and the engineering of thin films architectures down to the nano-scale for potential applications in the field of plastic electronics including organic solar cells.
Patrizio Salice	Patrizio Salice is a postdoctoral scientist at the Department of Chemical Sciences of the University of Padova. He defended his PhD thesis on the synthesis and characterization of photoactive theranostic nanoclinics under the supervision of Professor Giorgio A. Pagani at the University of Milano-Bicocca in 2009. During his PhD studies he also joined Professor Peter R. Ogilby's group at the University of Aarhus. His research interests are in the design and chemical manipulation of organic functional nanomaterials.
Enzo Menna	Enzo Menna received his PhD in Chemical Sciences in 1999. He is an Associate Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Padova, Department of Chemical Sciences. His current research activity is mainly focused on the synthesis of organic materials and nanomaterials with potential application in fields such as energy conversion and photonics. He is particularly involved in the synthesis of π-conjugated molecular structures and in the organic functionalization of carbon nanotubes, both at the outside (exohedral, covalent and non-covalent) and at the inside (encapsulation).
Bruno Pignataro	Bruno Pignataro, born in Bologna in 1972, is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received a degree in chemistry in 1995 and a PhD in materials science in 2000 at the University of Catania. His group research interests focus on the assembly of biological, organic and hybrid (organic/inorganic) materials at surfaces and on the development of electronic devices (transistors, photovoltaic cells, sensors/biosensors), including those related to plastic electronics.

Broader context
Organic solar cells achieved a lot of attention due to their potential efficiency/cost ratio competitiveness with respect to inorganic solar cells. Many materials and processing methods are actually under investigation in order to improve efficiency and reduce cost. Carbon nanostructures are very interesting and here we emphasize the versatility of carbon nanotubes, especially in combination with suitable electron donors. The recent progress in the separation of semiconducting single wall carbon nanotubes and the new derivatization techniques open interesting perspectives in this context. Applications may include both a niche market including low-power and short-term devices and a larger market including low-power, longer-term and portable devices.


 	Fig. 1  Density of state diagrams showing typical van Hove singularities and energy band gaps for a semi-conductive, semi-metallic and metallic SWNT. [Reprinted from ref. 22 with permission of the Royal Society and from ref. 23. Copyright 1996 by The American Physical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical absorption spectrum of a SWNT sample with an average diameter of 1.3 nm. The inset shows the same spectrum after subtraction of the surface π-plasmon. [Reprinted from ref. 38. Copyright 2002 by The American Physical Society.] (b) Corresponding transitions in the DOS diagram for spectra in (a) and (c) showing van Hove singularities and the levels/bands involved; (c) PLE map for a SWNT sample; peaks in the white oval relate to the v2–c2 absorptions and c1–v1 emissions [from ref. 39. Reprinted with permission from AAAS].	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical “Kataura plot” displaying the calculated energy separations between van Hove singularities ii (refer to Fig. 2b) for all (n,m) SWNTs with a diameter between 0.4 and 3.0 nm. Crosses and open circles indicate semiconductive and metallic nanotubes respectively. [Reprinted from ref. 46, with permission from Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Raman wide spectra for a single metallic and semiconductive SWNT. Radial Breathing Modes (RBM), D- G- and G′-bands are indicated. Features marked with asterisks refer to silicon substrate. [Reprinted from ref. 45, with permission from Elsevier.] (b) Raman spectra showing the low frequency RBM region for differently prepared SWNTs having different mean diameters. [Reprinted from ref. 42, with permission from Elsevier.] (c) Profiles of the high frequency Raman G-band features of semiconducting (left) and metallic (right) SWNTs. Frequencies and (n,m) structure are indicated. [Reprinted from ref. 46, with permission from Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Calculated reflection, transmittance, and absorption of SWNT thin films for a wide spectral range: from 400 nm up to 2 cm; (b) spectra comparison for various transparent conductive materials; (c) comparison of the reflection percentage between PET and PET supported CNTs and ITO films. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.]	 

 	Fig. 6  Resistance vs. length of SWNTs. All data are at room temperature. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Work functions for metallic and semiconducting SWNTs versus the reciprocal of diameter. Squares and dots indicate armchair and zigzag nanotube type respectively. Extrapolating at infinite diameter led to a work function of 4.84 eV for m-SWNTs and 4.73 eV for s-SWNTs; (b) work function of alkali-metal doped SWNTs versus dopant fraction (denoted as x, whereas M stands for Metal). [Reprinted from ref. 65. Copyright 2002 by The American Physical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 8  The purification of carbon nanotubes should begin with a controlled synthesis which affords fewer by-products (buckyballs, graphitic structures, metal clusters, …). These contaminants are removed by chemical processes which are selective for the reactivity of carbon nanotubes. Furthermore the distribution of CNTs could be narrowed with the help of physical purification processes (e.g., electrophoresis, ultracentrifugation).	 

 	Fig. 9  Pictorial representation of different approaches to the functionalization of CNTs: endohedral (encapsulation), exohedral covalent and non-covalent.	 

 	Fig. 10  General reaction scheme for the covalent functionalization of CNTs through 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides (a), addition of aryl diazonium derivatives (b) and amidation of oxidized CNTs (c).	 

 	Fig. 11  Computational model of a pyrene-C60 dyad paired with a SWNT. Non-covalent interactions between CNT and pyrene moiety have been characterized through photophysical and electrochemical investigations.32 [Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons.]	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation (bottom) of the encapsulation of a photoactive molecule (sexithienyl) in SWNTs that provides a hybrid “nanopeapod” featuring photoluminescence in the visible spectral range (top cartoon). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.]	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme for the blown bubble film deposition; the nanotube suspension (i) is blown by a nitrogen flow through a circular die to form a bubble (ii), then the film is transferred onto various substrates like crystalline wafers, flexible plastics or curved surfaces. Black stick-lines represent aligned nanotubes inside the bubble film. In the insets are reported a dark-field optical image (left, scale bars are 25 and 5 μm respectively) of a MWNT film and a photograph of the blown bubble during the deposition (right). [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: ref. 190, copyright 2007.] (b) Schematic depiction of the Electrophoretic Deposition method; the inset shows a scanning electron micrograph of a film obtained. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.] (c) Scheme for the laminar flow deposition of parallel and orthogonal aligned SWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.] (d) Schematic diagram for the Langmuir–Blodgett deposition of CNT thin films with different substrate orientations. [Reprinted from ref. 202. Copyright 2007 with permission from Elsevier.] (e) Schematic depiction showing the inkjet printing process. Drops are expelled by a pressure pulse generated by a piezo actuator. (f) Schematic drawing for ultrasonic spray deposition displaying carrier gas driving ultrasonically formed droplets on the substrate. [Reprinted from ref. 210. Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation for the vacuum filtration method (top) and transfer process of a SWNT network thin film from the anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) filter onto a substrate (middle). At the bottom, an optical image of the resulting flexible film. [Reprinted from ref. 220. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.] (b) Optical image (left) and scanning electron micrograph (right) of an MWNT film drawn from a nanotube forest. [From ref. 221. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.] (c) Scheme displaying the draw-down rod coating methods using a wire-wound Mayer coating rod. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.] (d) (left) Drawing of setup for the electric field assisted deposition of aligned nanotubes in a photo-polymerized matrix; (right) schematic depiction for the magnetic field (B) assisted deposition of aligned nanotubes onto a PET substrate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 222 (Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons) and from ref. 223 (Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier) respectively.]	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic showing the type-II band alignment between s-SWNT and P3HT. m-SWNTs are reported for comparison. HOMO and LUMO for all components are reported. The grey boxes represent the uncertainty on these values for P3HT. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 16  Graphic depiction of a (6,5) SWNT wound by a monolayer of rrP3HT. The carbon backbone is in red while the sulfur atoms are in blue. Additionally the molecular structure of P3HT is reported. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 17  Electronic band line-up of the P3HT:SWNTs. Energy is relative to vacuum level. The arrow indicates the up shift of the nanotube Fermi level. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 18  Charge induced (atomic units) in the electrostatic potential at the interface between P3HT and (10,2) s-SWNT:P3HT (left) and (12,3) m-SWNT (right) respectively. The contour plane approximately bisects the nanotubes. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 19  Energy levels diagram of several conjugated polymers and SWNTs (for these latter, energies are calculated by a tight-binding model around a work function of −4.5 eV). E1 and E2 levels refer respectively to E11 and E22 transitions in SWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 20  Current–voltage curve of solar cell with (stars) and without (squares) o-MWNTs dispersed inside the PTEBS donor layer. Inset reports a schematic band line-up diagram of device integrating o-MWNTs. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.]	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) BHJ solar cells are prepared positioning SWNTs at different strategic places; (b) J–V curves for OPV cells (structures from 1 to 5) under AM 1.5G illumination. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.]	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
