Megamerger of MOFs and g-C 3 N 4 for energy and environment applications: upgrading the framework stability and performance  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05662F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05662F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17883-17906Megamerger of MOFs and g-C3N4 for energy and environment applications: upgrading the framework stability and performance

        
          
            Gaoxia 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Danlian 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Lei
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sha 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rongzhong 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenjing 
            Xue
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yashi 
            Chen
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhihao 
            Li
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, China. E-mail: huangdanlian@hnu.edu.cn; chengmin@hnu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-731-88823701;   Tel: +86-731-88822754
bKey Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Hunan University), Ministry of Education, Changsha, Hunan 410082, China
Received 
      6th June 2020
    , Accepted 29th July 2020First published on 1st August 2020AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) possess large surface area, adjustable pore size and synthetic adaptability which make them promising candidates for diverse applications. However, the low stability and selectivity of pure MOFs are not the optimal configuration for practical applications. Studies have confirmed that the controllable integration of MOFs with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) not only improves the stability and conductivity of pure MOFs, but also unexpectedly yields new functionalities. These advantages allow the synthesized g-C3N4/MOF-based materials to be applicable to fields other than pure MOFs and have attracted widespread attention in recent years. Herein, the review aims to specifically group together the important reports focused on g-C3N4/MOF-based materials till now. The synthetic methods and applications of composite materials are studied and classified. Furthermore, the review also highlights the functionalities produced by the synergy of two interesting materials, and finally paints a picture of the future.Gaoxia ZhangGaoxia Zhang received her B.S. from Nanchang Hangkong University in 2018. Currently, she is a postgraduate student under the supervision of Prof. Danlian Huang at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, China. Her current research interest is related to the preparation of MOF-based materials and their relevant applications.Danlian HuangDanlian Huang received her PhD degree from Hunan University, China, in 2011. She is currently a professor at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional microbes and functional materials in environmental remediation.Min ChengMin Cheng received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng from Hunan University, China, in 2018. He is currently an associate professor at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His current research interest is related to the preparation of MOF-based materials and their relevant applications.Top (from left to right): Lei Lei; Sha Chen; Rongzhong Wang, Bottom (from left to right): Wenjing Xue; Yang Liu; Yashi Chen; Zhihao Li
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a group of two-or three-dimensional porous crystalline materials synthesized from the coordination of a metal ion or metal cluster and organic bridging ligands.1,2 Compared with other commonly used semiconductor catalysts, MOF-based materials have some unique advantages. Notably, both metal nodes and organic linkers of MOFs play important roles in photocatalytic reactions. It was suggested that the metal nodes and organic linkers can be considered as isolated semiconductor quantum dots and light absorption antennas, respectively, and the metal nodes can be directly excited upon light irradiation or activated by the organic linkers. In addition, due to the rich coordination chemistry of metal cations and availability of a large diversity of organic linkers, the light absorption properties of MOFs can be readily adjusted for efficient utilization of solar light via a judicious selection of metal ions and organic ligands.3–5 Moreover, they are relatively easy to synthesize, and therefore have been widely used in separation,6 gas storage,7 catalysis,8 sensors9 and drug delivery.10 What is even more interesting is that MOF-derived nanomaterials show good performance not only in photocatalysis, but also in electrochemical energy storage as well as conversion11,12 owing to their high electrical conductivity, inherited structural versatility, rich porosity and diverse chemical compositions.13,14 Today, MOF-based materials are being widely used in various fields and are making incredible progress that has driven the development of composites and their applications. Nevertheless, it cannot be ignored that the intrinsic weaknesses of MOF-based materials restrict their applications to a great extent. For example, the limited active sites and poor stability impede their development.15–17
In order to solve these problems, research work has focused on various strategies: post-synthetic modifications,18–20 connectivity functionalization,21–23 inorganic building unit connectivity and dimensionality,24–26 and construction of composite materials based on MOFs.26,27 In all strategies, the preparation of MOF-based composites using MOFs and other materials is easier to perform, combining the advantages of each component while reducing the shortcomings of each component, resulting in synergistic effects and new possibilities that the individual parts never get access to. Interestingly, the coupling of MOF-based photocatalysts with other catalysts enables them to be used as multifunctional catalysts for light induced organic conversion, which will be a promising development direction for the application of MOF-based composites in photocatalysis.28,29
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) materials have raised new application prospects due to their unique structure, plentiful surface active sites, and excellent electron mobility, and they have been proven to be dispersive guest materials and suitable carriers for charge carrier separation.30 Recently, many research studies have confirmed that the introduction of g-C3N4 into other materials can bring about amazing improvements in catalytic performance and stability.31,32 In this case, it is rational to think that MOFs and g-C3N4 composites possess extraordinary properties given that the parent materials are complementary. Naturally, the idea of combining MOFs with g-C3N4 emerged and quickly gained extensive attention. At present, the combination of MOFs and g-C3N4 has been used in many fields, such as CO2 capture, catalysis, batteries and so on. So far, only one research study has described the types of g-C3N4/MOF typical composite materials and their applications in photocatalysis.33 Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no reviews describing the different synthesis methods employed to fabricate such composites, the interactions that occur at the materials' interface that affect the properties of composites, and the applications of composites in electrocatalysis. At the same time, MOF-derived carbon and metal oxides have also attracted much attention, which are proved to be another feasible strategy to improve the performance of pure MOFs. Considering the prospects of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials, it is necessary to make a comprehensive and specific summary of these novel materials. In this paper, we outline the different synthetic strategies leading to the formation of composites and the characteristics of these systems, the novel functionalities resulting from the fusion of two interesting materials, the mechanisms involved in the materials' interface, and the application of g-C3N4/MOF-based composites in the energy and environment fields. Besides, this paper outlines the future developments of these new materials and existing problems to be overcome.
2. The synthetic strategies of g-C3N4/MOF composites
Currently, different synthesis strategies have been developed to manufacture g-C3N4/MOF-based materials. Different synthesis conditions may strongly influence the nature of the interaction between MOF-based materials and g-C3N4 as well as the properties of composite materials. Generally, g-C3N4/MOF composites are prepared by two methods, involving in situ growth and post-synthesis. In this section, the applicability of the different synthetic routes used and the characteristics of these systems will be discussed. Particular attention is paid to the effects on the material's properties, such as stability, electrical conductivity, and the like.
2.1. 
          In situ growth route
One-pot synthesis is an economical and environmentally friendly in situ growth method that allows the composites to be obtained directly from relatively simple and readily available raw materials without the need for separation and purification. One-pot synthesis is basically applicable to all types of MOF/g-C3N4 composites. In short, MOFs are added to the well-dispersed g-C3N4 and then the solution is heated under solvothermal or reflux conditions required for MOF synthesis. Based on this method, Gong and co-workers synthesized a composite of g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe) as shown in Fig. 1a.34 The authors found that introducing g-C3N4 nanosheets (g-C3N4 NSs) made the surface of the originally smooth MIL-101(Fe) rougher, which was due to the g-C3N4 NSs covering the MIL-101(Fe) particles (Fig. 1b–d).35 In addition, MIL-101(Fe) still retained its original octahedral shape after being modified by g-C3N4, indicating that the g-C3N4 NSs did not change its structure, and the XRD pattern also confirmed this (Fig. 1e). Moreover, the diffraction peak of g-C3N4 disappeared in the composite, mainly due to the low loading and small plane size of g-C3N4 NSs. Besides, the preparation of other different types of MOFs (NH2-MIL-88B, MIL-101(Fe) and UIO-66) with g-C3N4 by one-pot synthesis also indicated that the g-C3N4 did not affect the formation of MOF crystals.36,37 Interestingly, Wang et al. generated g-C3N4/MIL-125(Ti) composite materials through “one-pot synthesis”, but the corresponding XRD patterns showed that the growth of MIL-125(Ti) was affected by g-C3N4 blocks (Fig. 1f).38 The reason is that g-C3N4 and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid are both π-rich structures that exhibit a strong π–π interaction between them. In the case of g-C3N4 flakes, the 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker might bend abnormally, which could cause the TiO5(OH) paddle wheel to be severely distorted from an ideal octahedral grid. The MOF crystals crystallize in the body centered unit cell, rather than the symmetric primitive unit cell because of this distortion but this was the preferred orientation for the crystal growth. To better understand the effect of the introduction of g-C3N4 on MOF crystals, Lei et al. used “one-pot synthesis” to synthesize g-C3N4/MIL-88B(Fe) and carbon nitride nanosheet (CNNS)/MIL-88B(Fe) (CNNSs were obtained via liquid peeling of the bulk g-C3N4).39 After g-C3N4 was subjected to ultrasonic treatment, the functional groups of CNNSs increased and their size decreased, resulting in the coordination of the NH2-groups on the CNNSs with the iron sites on the MOF. Nevertheless, the untreated g-C3N4 functional group was an uncondensed amino group, which was thought to have less structural impact on the formation of MOF crystals.40 Therefore, the authors suggested that the treated g-C3N4 might affect the crystallization process of MOFs owing to its smaller size and more functional groups, while the effect of untreated g-C3N4 was negligible. The catalytic performance of the treated CNNS/MIL-88B(Fe) was significantly higher than that of g-C3N4/MIL-88B(Fe). To the best of our knowledge, this was the only article revealing the effects of g-C3N4 treatment on the formation of MOF crystals,39 but how the changes in crystal morphology affect the catalytic performance has not been further explained, and research in this field needs more attention.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe) composite; SEM images of (b) MIL-101(Fe) and (c) g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe); (d) TEM image of g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe); (e) XRD patterns of bulk g-C3N4, g-C3N4 NSs, MIL-101(Fe) and g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) XRD patterns of g-C3N4, MIL-125(Ti) and CMTi composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2015), Elsevier. 
Nonetheless, the formation of a large number of free MOF particles could cause sample heterogeneity because of the N-containing groups in g-C3N4 and the oxygen atoms of MOFs competing for binding with metal cations. In addition, this combination competition could also lead to an unsatisfactory density of g-C3N4/MOF composites, thereby reducing the synergy between MOFs and g-C3N4 and overall performance. Faced with this limitation, Lin et al. adopted “in situ deposition” to synthesize ZIF-8/CN (ZCN-x, x represents the weight content of CN) by first depositing Zn2+ on the modified g-C3N4 sample CN, and then adding ligands to react with the obtained Zn2+/CN (Fig. 2a).41 Theoretically, g-C3N4 nanosheets are an ideal place to accommodate metal cations, which could provide a mass of nucleation sites for the formation of ZIF-8 crystals, since their abundant N-containing groups and negative bands could trap and anchor Zn2+. As the amount of CN added increased, the deposition of ZIF-8 nanoparticles in the composite shifted from the surface of the CN to the internal micropores (Fig. 2b–g). Compared with the original polyhedral ZIF-8 nanoparticles, the average diameter of ZIF-8 nanoparticles in ZCN nanocomposites was significantly reduced, indicating the interface-confined effect of the CN material on the controlled growth of polyhedral ZIF-8 nanoparticles. The authors showed that the smaller particle sizes and more active sites significantly improved the catalytic performance of the samples.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of ZIF-8-modified rod-like g-C3N4 composites. SEM images of (b) ZIF-8, (c) ZCN100, (d) ZCN200, (e) ZCN400, (f) ZCN800, and (g) modified g-C3N4 sample CN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright (2018), Elsevier. 
Additionally, a few studies have adopted the method of “covalent pre-anchoring of ligands on carriers” to form g-C3N4/MOF composites. For example, a novel composite of CFB/NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (named CFBM) was formed combining NH2-MIL-125(Ti) with benzoic acid-functionalized g-C3N4 (CFB) through the “covalent bond” method and it was found that this pre-anchoring step had an important impact on the production of CFBM materials (Fig. 3a).42 When NH2-MIL-125(Ti) was used in combination with a small amount of CFB, the morphological changes of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) were not large (Fig. 3b and c), showing that NH2-MIL-125(Ti) had combined with a certain amount of g-C3N4via covalent bonds. When using more than 10 wt% CFB (Fig. 3d and e), the majority of CFB nanosheets covered the surface of NH2-MIL-125(Ti), which indicated that the number of CFB nanosheets in CFBM composites has a great impact on the generation of the final products. Interestingly, the functionalization of g-C3N4 is of huge interest for certain applications, as it could bring about stronger or even novel properties. It was observed that the 10CFBM catalyst formed by covalent bonds has better lifetime and stability than the 10% g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-125(Ti) catalyst formed through a simple physical mixing. Recently, it was reported that when the electron-deficient aromatic perylene diimide (PDI) was introduced into g-C3N4, the energy of the conduction band was prominently reduced. The obtained g-C3N4/PDI combined with NH2-MIL-53(Fe) via covalent bonds showed significantly improved catalytic performance and stability.43 However, it was unclear how morphological changes affect the properties of MOFs and the detailed mechanism of g-C3N4 template action.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of covalently linked CFBM composites. (I) g-C3N4 functionalized by benzoic acid (CFB) and (II) in situ growth of CFBM crystals. SEM images of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (b), 10CFBM (c) and 15CFBM (d); and TEM image of 10CFBM (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright (2018), Elsevier. 
2.2. Post-synthesis
The strategies mentioned above are somewhat in situ synthesis methods (assembly of MOFs on pre-synthesized g-C3N4). However, in some cases, g-C3N4 will inevitably react with the ligands of MOFs, which could cause the performance of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials to deteriorate or even destroy their structure. Therefore, post-synthesis is sometimes used to combine pre-synthesized MOFs with g-C3N4.
The most direct method is to directly mix pre-synthesized MOFs and g-C3N4 to form composites by mechanical processing. For instance, the “ball-milling” method was used to synthesize g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe)44 and MIL-100(Fe)/g-C3N4.45 In both cases, the authors found that the particle sizes of the samples were smaller after ball-milling treatment, and more active sites were exposed, which significantly improved the catalysis performance. Therefore, mechanical processing methods such as ball-milling and grinding could be employed to manipulate the structural properties of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials, which in turn affected the catalytic performance of porous solids.
The self-assembly method is a special direct mixing method that relies on electrostatic interactions (π–π stacking, hydrogen bonding, and other forces). When using this method to build g-C3N4/MOF-based materials, the various components will attract each other and eventually be integrated into a whole. For instance, Shi and co-workers spontaneously assembled UiO-66 with positive charge and CNNS nanoscales with negative charge, which resulted in the formation of UiO-66/CNNS composite materials via electrostatic interaction (as shown in Fig. 4a).46Fig. 4b shows that the edges of CNNSs were almost transparent, which indicated that they were ultra-thin, thereby facilitating electron transfer. In addition, the rough UiO-66 crystal surface (Fig. 4c) was favorable for better loading of CNNSs. Fig. 4d indicates that CNNSs were well coated on the surface of UiO-66 without aggregation. More importantly, a clear and coherent interface between the UiO-66 crystals and the CNNSs could be observed, suggesting that a nanojunction was generated in the UiO-66/CNNS composites, which effectively promoted the electron transfer of UiO-66 and CNNSs, thus effectively separating electrons and holes. Recently, Cao and co-workers used the same method to fabricate 2D–2D UNiMOF/g-C3N4 (UNG-x, where x represents the mass content of UNiMOF in composites) heterostructure catalysts (as shown in Fig. 4e) and further explored the forces between the two monomers.47 The authors pointed out that in addition to electrostatic attraction, there was also π–π stacking between the MOF and g-C3N4.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the UiO-66/CNNS heterogeneous photocatalyst. (b) TEM and HRTEM images of CNNSs; (c) TEM and HRTEM images of UiO-66. (d) TEM and HRTEM images of UiO-66/CNNS. The CNNS content in the UiO-66/CNNS composite is 10 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015), Wiley. (e) Diagram of the preparation of the UNG heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. 
However, some MOFs such as MIL-100(Fe) also display negative charge, which makes it difficult for them to combine with g-C3N4 because of the strong and mutual electrostatic repulsion. To overcome the above problems, Song and co-workers employed an “in situ chemical protonation” method (Fig. 5a) to fabricate a stable protonated g-C3N4 coated MIL100(Fe) (PCN/MIL), in which the protonated g-C3N4 (PCN) was obtained by stirring with concentrated HNO3 at 85 °C several times.48 The PCN powder was highly interconnected and had no obvious particle boundaries, showing that typical sol-derived morphologies could enormously reduce boundary defects, which greatly enhanced the contact between PCN and MIL-100(Fe) as well as promoting charge transfer (Fig. 5b and c).49 In addition, annealing the soft PCN gelled to MOFs could form a strong coating on the substrate with close contact. Consequently, the 23% PCN/MIL composite completely represented the typical morphologies of MIL-100(Fe) crystals (Fig. 5d and e).
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of PCN/MIL; SEM images of PCN (b and c) and 23% PCN/MIL (d and e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2018), Elsevier. 
Besides, the g-C3N4/MOF composites obtained through different strategies also differ in stability. Therefore, Wang et al. described three strategies including in situ solvothermal synthesis, physical mixing and electrostatic self-assembly for synthesizing NH2-UiO-66/g-C3N4 (NUZ/HGN-x or NUZ/BGN-x, where x is the weight ratio of GN, HGN is holey g-C3N4 and BGN is bulk g-C3N4).50 The authors pointed out that the composites synthesized by the in situ method displayed excellent stability compared with those synthesized by self-assembly and physical mixing, which was mainly due to the HGN-rich NHx bonds and Zr–O from NH2-UiO-66 forming stable NHx–Zr–O chemical bonds. Interestingly, the authors found that if the HGN was replaced with BGN, the opposite result was obtained. This may be attributed to the fact that the interface contact area was larger than that obtained with the in situ method when using the post-synthesis method. In the post-synthesis method, MOFs were well loaded on the surface of g-C3N4 by electrostatic self-assembly, while the in situ synthesis caused the random distribution of BGN and MOFs.
At present, two synthesis strategies are employed to prepare g-C3N4/MOF composites: (1) in situ formation of MOFs from the precursor of the prepared g-C3N4 (in situ growth route); (2) physical mixing such as electrostatic self-assembly, ball-milling or/and thermal annealing treatments toward the MOFs and g-C3N4 (post-synthesis). The former is a macro-mixing of the two components, while the latter is nano-mixing, providing improved carrier charges transfer. The in situ growth route is an economical and environmentally friendly method. This method is basically suitable for all types of g-C3N4/MOFs composites. The solvothermal method is the most common method in the in situ growth route, which can avoid the introduction of impurities and structural defects caused by high temperature or ball-milling. The synthesized nanomaterials possess the advantages of high purity and good grain development. Nevertheless, due to its long reaction time and some potential safety hazards, it is difficult to apply it to mass production. The post-synthesis method can effectively avoid the reaction of g-C3N4 with the ligand in the MOFs, so that the framework structure of the g-C3N4/MOFs composite can be maintained. The ball-milling method is the most direct method in post-synthesis. The particle size of the sample after ball milling is smaller, exposing more active sites, which significantly improves the catalytic performance. The electrostatic self-assembly method is simple to operate, the reaction conditions are easy to control, but some impurities inevitably appear, and the particles may grow and form aggregates. Thermal annealing has prominent strengths and weaknesses. Regarding the advantages, the time required for the reaction is short. Conversely, the reaction temperature is too high to prevent structural defects and guarantee the safety of the preparation process. This method has high flexibility and can effectively control the size and structure of nanomaterials. Therefore, it plays an important role in the synthesis of nanomaterials with special morphology. However, post-synthesis is not commonly employed to prepare g-C3N4/MOF composites. Although in theory the interaction between these two materials is weaker than direct metallic or covalent bonding in the in situ method, mixing the prepared g-C3N4 with MOFs seems to cause different types of arrangements within the two monomers. The comparison of these two synthetic methods should yield valuable information, so further research is needed.
3. Thermal treatment of g-C3N4/MOF composites
Pure MOFs that can be converted to metal oxides, metal/carbon hybrids and carbon materials under appropriate conditions through calcination and pyrolysis have been studied.51 For example, the pyrolysis of MOFs under an inert gas such as N2 or Ar could convert them into metal/carbon composites. Carbon materials could be obtained via further corroding the remaining metal species. Moreover, direct heat treatment of MOFs was carried out in air, and the metal oxides could be produced. The same concept can be applied to g-C3N4/MOF composites. However, the agglomeration of nanoparticles and the collapse of the MOF skeleton may seriously affect the morphology of the generated materials. Therefore, in the thermal treatment method, the g-C3N4/MOF composites are synthesized by using in situ or post-synthesis methods before performing pyrolysis. For instance, Gong et al. generated N-doped carbon (ZIF-NC) by thermal treatment of ZIF-8, and then formed ZIF-NC/g-C3N4 composites by “in situ synthesis”.52 With the loss of oxygen-containing groups and volatile metals within high-temperature treatment, the size of ZIF-NC had been reduced from 350 to 200 nm, but the structure had basically retained the original rhombic dodecahedron shape. Due to the layered porosity of ZIF-NC, excellent electrical conductivity and a mass of exposed active sites, the ZIF-NC/g-C3N4 composites not only exhibited enhanced charge separation attributed to g-C3N4, but also significantly accelerated the activation of the oxidant to generate highly active radical groups.
It is well known that the framework structures of materials have a great influence on performance. Therefore, Liu and co-workers thoroughly explored the effect of the introduction of g-C3N4 on the framework structures of MOFs.53 NH2-MIL-53(Fe)/g-C3N4 was formed through a “one-pot synthesis”, and then pyrolyzed under N2 into Fe@N/g-C3N4 (NMC). As shown in Fig. 6a, when no nitrogen source was added, the polyhedral shape of MIL-53(Fe) collapsed after pyrolysis. When MIL-53(Fe) modified with internal nitrogen source NH2 was introduced, although structural collapse was avoided, aggregation was still clearly visible (Fig. 6b). The introduction of an external nitrogen source (g-C3N4) not only effectively prevented aggregation during pyrolysis, but also notably improved the dispersion of nanoparticles (Fig. 6c). As shown in Fig. 6d, this was even more apparent when using both internal and external nitrogen sources. In general, the introduction of g-C3N4 provided an additional nitrogen source and played a vital role in the material's stability. Moreover, the introduction of an external nitrogen source facilitated the activation of oxides in advanced oxidation.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) FexC-650, (b) MC-10, (c) FexC CN-650 and (d) NMC-10. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. 
Transition metal–nitrogen-doped carbon (MNC) derived from pyrolyzing the composites of Fe or Co-containing precursors (MOFs) and nitrogen precursors can become a substitute for noble metals,54,55 which is of significant interest for electrochemical applications. It is important that the N species in the carbon material significantly affected the catalytic performance.56 Consequently, Gu et al. investigated the effect of calcination temperature (600, 700, 800, and 900 °C) on the content of N species in g-C3N4@NH2-MIL-101 composites.57 They showed that as the calcination temperature increased, the relative content of N1 (pyridinic N) gradually decreased, but the relative content of N3 (graphitic N) increased significantly. When the temperature was 700 °C, the content of electroactive N species of N1 and N3 could reach 82%. At this time, the catalytic performance was the best, which indicated that N1 and N3 were more conducive to enhancing the catalytic activity.
Additionally, MOFs can also be converted into metal phosphide/carbon composites through phosphorylation,58,59 in which MOFs were used as host matrices to anchor g-C3N4 and the synthesized MOF/g-C3N4 composites with tight contact, thus helping to improve the interfacial charge transfer.60,61 For catalysts to achieve high performance, the encapsulation of metal phosphides in carbon materials is a top priority. In consequence, Xu et al. designed a composite of C/g-C3N4 (Ni2P/Ni@C/g-C3N4) through pyrolysis and phosphorylation of Ni-MOF/g-C3N4 (as shown in Fig. 7a).62 They showed that the transition from amorphous carbon to graphitic carbon could be achieved by catalytic graphitization of Ni NPs, and catalytic graphitization of Ni NPs could be better achieved through controlling the annealing temperature. For the obtained Ni2P@AC/g-C3N4, no pyrolysis was observed and crystalline needles were anchored on amorphous carbon (Fig. 7b). When the annealing temperature was 450 (Fig. 7c) and 500 °C (Fig. 7d), much nano-tube carbon was observed to cover the surface of the composite, while carbon nanotubes with a length of about 100 nm were found on the surface of Ni2P@AC/g-C3N4-550 (Fig. 7e). When the pyrolysis temperature reached 600 °C (Fig. 7f), similar nanotube carbon was observed, but its length was greater than 100 nm. The spherical nanostructures consisted of Ni2P or Ni cores, which were uniformly dispersed in the composite and covered by a nano-tubular carbon shell with an interlayer distance of 0.34 nm and g-C3N4. Moreover, intimate contact was established between the carbon shell and g-C3N4, which facilitated rapid electron transfer.
 Fig. 7  (a) Process of the formation of Ni2P/Ni@C/g-C3N4 composites; SEM images of (b) Ni2P@AC/g-C3N4, and Ni2P/Ni@C/g-C3N4 composites annealed at (c) 450, (d) 500, (e) 550 and (f) 600 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. 
g-C3N4/MOF composites could be converted into various carbon materials through thermal treatment. Nevertheless, the microporous structures of their derivatives greatly hindered mass transfer and exposure of active sites, and were not conducive to volume changes and strain release. Therefore, further research is needed to overcome this problem. In addition, to further improve the performance of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials, the fine preparation and controllable preparation methods of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials needed to meet higher requirements, including achieving fine modification of morphology and chemical composition and introducing more active sites. In view of this, in-depth research studies need to focus on exploring innovative ways to form g-C3N4/MOF-based materials.
4. The importance of synergistic catalysis over g-C3N4/MOF-based materials
Pure MOFs have disadvantages such as poor stability, weak dispersion, and unfavorable configuration forms, which hinder their large-scale application. The combination of MOF-based and g-C3N4 materials overcomes the shortcomings and surprisingly yields many new features. Few literature studies have published special mentions of functionalities before this. Consequently, based on the discussion in Sections 2 and 3, we summarize the functionalities produced by the synergy (chemical or structural changes) of the components.
4.1. Enhanced properties
From a composite point of view, most g-C3N4 materials possess high thermal and chemical stability, and MOF/g-C3N4-based materials could form a whole through very intimate contact, inheriting these characteristics. In particular, the stability was improved due to the alternating structural chemistry generated by the recombination. It is understood that metal nodes in MOFs are considered to be hydrophilic and could react with water molecules.63,64 The oxygen atoms in the metal oxygen nodes could be replaced by the oxygen atom from a water molecule or combined with a hydrogen atom, which might result in the rupture of the original coordination bonds and even destruction of the structure of the MOFs. The hydrophobicity of g-C3N4 effectively cuts off contact between MOFs and water molecules; thus, MOF/g-C3N4-based materials significantly improve the moisture stability of MOFs. Li and co-workers prepared g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) (lp-x) and tested their morphology and catalytic properties after recycling.65 After four runs, the structure of the composite remained unchanged, and the degradation of pollutants did not decrease. Other studies have reported similar findings,43,53 suggesting that the introduced g-C3N4 significantly improved the moisture stability of MOFs. Moreover, covering the MOFs with a protonated g-C3N4 (PCN) coating could also enhance moisture stability, mainly because the production of the PCN coating could effectively prevent MOFs from being directly exposed to water.48
In addition to moisture stability, the relatively low thermal stability of MOFs is another important factor hindering their practical application. The preparation of MOFs was often accompanied by particle aggregation and framework collapse during the process of thermal treatment.66,67 Additionally, active metal ion leaching was found from MOF derivatives, which significantly reduced activation performance. g-C3N4 has been reported to play a vital role in the prevention of MOF pyrolysis (excellent support template).68 Liu et al. prepared NMC materials with high moisture stability and also excellent thermal stability.53 More importantly, g-C3N4 provided an additional N source, which not only improved the stability of phase composition and framework morphology in the formed composites, but also greatly enhanced the catalytic performance.
As is well known, the insulation properties of organic ligands in MOFs and the non-overlapping between the p and d orbitals of central metal ions cause MOFs to possess relatively lower electrical conductivity, which limits their full utilization in electric-related fields.69 Studies have confirmed that MOF-derived porous carbon materials have great potential as promising materials in electric-related fields.11,56,70 Nevertheless, some common disadvantages, such as the inevitable structural damage during the carbonization process and the dominant microporous characteristics inherent in MOF-derived materials, have greatly impeded the exposure and mass transfer of active sites, thus often resulting in poorer electrochemical performance. Fortunately, g-C3N4 was used as a suitable substrate for MOF loading and it acted as an additional carbon precursor offering plenty of meso/macropores, which facilitated the formation of carbon materials with ordered stacking and layered porous nanostructures. Meanwhile, use of g-C3N4 was accompanied by the generation of graphitic N during pyrolysis, which could significantly improve the electrical conductivity of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials.57,71
4.2. Template effects
Apart from enhancing the stability and conductivity of MOF-based materials, there were also new and interesting functionalities resulting from many other template effects caused by the introduction of g-C3N4 materials into MOF-based materials.
The introduced g-C3N4 would affect the crystallization process of MOFs and cause morphological changes in MOFs, which was mainly caused by the coordination of NH2-groups on g-C3N4 with metal sites on MOFs.38,39 However, the loading of the treated g-C3N4 was critical to the structure and morphology of the produced composites. Under appropriately low loadings, g-C3N4 could be used as a supporting material to change the coordination chemistry of MOFs, resulting in enhanced performance and new functionalities (stability and conductivity). The synergy between the two monomers had a positive impact on subsequent applications. And yet, when an excessive amount of g-C3N4 was incorporated, the number of functional groups could be greatly increased, and it exceeded the accessible sites where MOFs could react. As a result, some g-C3N4 aggregated and even formed a physical barrier, hindering crystallization process of MOFs, and caused the deformation of MOFs and even collapse of the framework.53 Some of the g-C3N4 aggregated and shielded the active sites of MOFs, both of which would have an adverse effect on subsequent applications.
In some cases, as the morphologies changed, the sizes of the crystals also became smaller. The introduced small g-C3N4 interfered with the crystallization of MOFs. In this process, metal ions were first combined with functional groups from g-C3N4, thereby reducing the number of free metal ions to generate further extended MOF crystals. In addition, the small g-C3N4 could also act as a terminator to a certain extent, thereby cutting off the relationship between isolated MOFs and preventing them from growing into large crystals. Thus, the sizes of composites were smaller than the sizes of the pure MOFs.38,72,73
As known to us, gas molecules react strongly with unsaturated metal sites within MOFs, which greatly improves the adsorption capacity of gases.74,75 However, these empty Lewis metal sites in pure MOFs are readily poisoned through excess organic linker coordination present in the pores.76 Fortunately, Liu et al. synthesized g-C3N4/ZIF-8 (TCNZ) composites via “in situ deposition” and studied the positive effect of reducing the pore size of the composite on unsaturated metal sites.77 An additional strength of the combination with g-C3N4 is that it protects unsaturated metal sites via blocking channels including via the steric hindrance effect and competitively occupying these sites, thereby increasing the adsorption of unsaturated sites and gases. Consequently, it reduces the toxic effects of unsaturated metal centers and makes them available for better interaction with adsorbent molecules. The protection of unsaturated sites has a positive impact on the increase of gas adsorption and enhancement of hydrogen storage capacity.77,78 It is worth mentioning that when the pores of MOFs are partially filled with g-C3N4, the size of the pores of MOFs could decrease.
5. Application of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials in photocatalysis
g-C3N4/MOF-based materials, as a novel type of composite photocatalyst, are widely used in photocatalysis due to their advantages of good light stability, strong light absorption capacity, and fast speed of photo-generated charge separation. Based on this, this section introduces the latest progress of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials for photocatalysis including applications in environmental remediation and energy production. In particular, the photocatalytic mechanisms are described in detail as well.
5.1. Environmental remediation

5.1.1. Removal of organic pollutants. 
Over the past few decades, many types of organic pollutants (e.g., pharmaceuticals, pesticides, dyes, etc.) have been used in agriculture and industry, and have caused potential harm to the environment and human health.79–82 Among them, the introduction of these organic pollutants into environmental water is a serious problem that has attracted the attention of many researchers.83–86 Photocatalysis has been recognized as an effective method for degrading organic pollutants.87–90 The mechanisms of photocatalytic removal of pollutants can be summarized as follows: the generated radicals have strong oxidizing properties, and can oxidize the pollutants into intermediates, harmless CO2 and H2O.91–94 In addition, g-C3N4/MOF-based materials have been introduced above to effectively mask the poor water stability of MOF materials. g-C3N4/MOF-based materials have been widely used as some of the most effective catalysts for removing these pollutants and purifying water systems.95–98
Zhang and co-workers employed the method of “in situ growth” to fabricate g-C3N4/UIO-66 nanohybrids (CNUO-x) for degrading Rhodamine B (RhB).37 The fabricated heterojunction photocatalyst exhibited high photocatalytic activity owing to the remarkable visible light response of g-C3N4, the excellent structural stability of UIO-66, and the synergistic effect of the two monomers. This work illustrates the photocatalytic mechanism of CNUO-1 to degrade RhB (Fig. 8a): (i) as the valence band (VB) value of UiO-66 is higher than the standard E0, the photo-generated holes occurring on the VB of UiO-66 oxidize H2O to generate ·OH; (ii) the photo-generated holes generated on the VB of g-C3N4 (−0.79 eV vs. NHE) can be directly transferred to the conduction band (CB) of UiO-66 (−0.53 eV vs. NHE), effectively suppressing the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, and thereby extending the lifetime of photo-generated carriers; and (iii) the photo-generated electrons on the CB of UiO-66 reduce O2 to ·O2−. The process of RhB degradation by radicals can be summarized as follows: RhB molecules adsorbed on the surface of CNUO-1 can be excited to form RhB* under visible light conditions, and the formed RhB* can be degraded by h+ and ·O2−. The electrons from RhB and g-C3N4 are transferred from the Zr–O cluster of UiO-66 to Zr4+, followed by reduction of Zr4+ to Zr3+. Meanwhile, Zr3+ can also be oxidized to Zr4+.99 Similar findings for degradation of organic pollutants by g-C3N4/MOF-based materials via photocatalysis have also been reported.38,48,100Fig. 8b summarizes the basic mechanism of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials as photocatalysts for degradation of organic pollutants in most cases, where h+ and ·O2− are the main potential substances for the removal of organic pollutants, involving the following reactions: g-C3N4/MOFs + hν → g-C3N4/MOFs (h+ + e−)(1) O2 + e− → ·O2−(2) ·O2− and h+ + pollutant → degradation products(3)
 Fig. 8  (a). A schematic illustration of oxidation of dye over the CNUO-1 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2018), Elsevier. (b) Mechanistic scheme of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants under visible light. 
During the photocatalytic of the pollutants, the adsorption of pollutant molecules is one of the important factors determining the degradation rate of organic pollutants. Panneri and co-workers proposed a photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline (TC) by g-C3N4/ZIF-8 composites (Fig. 9).100 The enhanced adsorption capacity was not only manifested in physical adsorption, but also in the conjugate of TC and g-C3N4. Aromatic molecules such as TC and RhB could be adsorbed on the surface of g-C3N4 by π–π interaction until an adsorption–desorption equilibrium was obtained.101 In addition, it has been reported that the rapid adsorption of contaminants facilitated their degradation at the catalyst surface.38
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustrating the mechanisms of adsorption and photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline by the C3N4–ZIF-8 (ZC) composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Likewise, photo-Fenton-like processes catalyzed by g-C3N4/MOF-based materials have also been considered to be an effective way to degrade organic pollutants.102,103 For instance, Li et al. successfully embedded g-C3N4 in NH2-MIL-88B through “in situ growth” to form a heterojunction for degradation of Methyl Blue (MB).104 There are two ways to generate ·OH via the lp-2/H2O2 system (as shown in Fig. 10a). (i) Direct Fenton-like activation of H2O2 (pathway 1). H2O2 attacks the Fe3+ in NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) to form Fe2+, and further activates H2O2 to produce ·OH.105 Fe species are involved in the Fe(II)–Fe(III)–Fe(II) cycle throughout the reaction. It is worth mentioning that even under dark conditions, lp-2/H2O2 and NH2-MIL-88B(Fe)/H2O2 systems could produce ·OH as well. (ii) Photo-generated Fenton-like activation of H2O2, which involves two different pathways (pathways 2 and 3). In pathway 2, the Fe–O cluster in NH2-MIL-88B absorbs visible light, causing it to be converted into an excited state, NH2-MIL-88B*.105,106 The photo-generated electrons in the organic linker are transferred to the Fe–O cluster, and Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+.107 Meanwhile, the photo-generated electrons on the CB can be captured and then activate H2O2 to generate ·OH through Fenton-like activation. In addition, modification of MIL-88B(Fe) by the NH2-group enhances visible light absorption through increasing ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT).108 Regarding pathway 3, g-C3N4 itself embedded in NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) is first excited as a photocatalyst, thus transferring photo-generated electrons from g-C3N4 to NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) to generate Fe2+, which further promotes Fenton-like activation of H2O2 in pathway (1). The proposed process of MB degradation by Ip-2/H2O2/vis is shown in Fig. 10b. Due to a well-matched heterostructure and close contact between g-C3N4 and NH2-MIL-88B, the photo-generated electrons in the CB of g-C3N4 can be transferred to the CB of NH2-MIL-88B. Besides, the photo-generated holes tended to migrate from the VB of NH2-MIL-88B to the VB of g-C3N4 at the interface, promoting charge carrier separation. The photo-generated electrons accumulated on the surface of NH2-MIL-88B accelerated the activation of H2O2 by Fe2+, resulting in the generation of ·OH.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of Fenton-like excitation of H2O2 for ·OH generation under visible light. (b) Mechanistic scheme of the lp-2 composite for the photocatalytic degradation of MB with H2O2 under visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright (2017), Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a possible photocatalytic mechanism of the CPM-2 composite under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. 
Apart from binary optical Fenton systems, ternary Fenton-like systems have also been extensively studied. For instance, the “in situ growth” method was employed to prepare g-C3N4/PDI@NH2-MIL-53(Fe) to degrade organic pollutants.43 During photocatalytic degradation (Fig. 10c), the redox potential of g-C3N4 increased after modification with PDI, which indicated that g-C3N4/PDI matched the band structure of NH2-MIL-53(Fe). This matching contributed to the efficient generation of a heterojunction, thereby further promoting the rapid transfer and separation of photo-generated electron and hole pairs. In addition to the generation of ternary materials with MOFs after PDI modification of g-C3N4, co-catalysts such as semiconductor photocatalysts BIOI,109 carbon nanodots (CDs),110 N–K2Ti4O9 (ref. 111) and noble metal Ag112 have been studied to help improve photocatalytic properties.
Compared to the photocatalysis in the absence of an oxidant, the mechanism of g-C3N4/MOF/H2O2 involved not only the process of electrons reacting with O2 to form ·O2−, but also the process by which H2O2 reacts with electrons to generate ·OH, where h+, ·O2− and ·OH are the main potential substances for removing organic pollutants (eqn (4)). H2O2 + e− → ·OH + OH−(4)
So far, sulfate radical (SO4˙−) based advanced oxidation processes (SR-AOPs) have received extensive attention because of their purification ability and adaptability.113,114 The combination of peroxymonosulfate (PMS) or persulfate (PS) with the catalyst is an effective means of producing sulfate radicals (SO4˙−).
MOF-derived carbon materials have been proven to be effective PMS activators.67,115 Moreover, the incorporation of N species into the carbon matrix could significantly improve its catalytic performance for PMS/PS activation.116 However, MOF-derived carbon materials often undergo severe particle aggregation and framework collapse in the process of pyrolysis. In addition, studies have shown that use of MOF-derived carbon materials was accompanied by the leaching of reactive ions,66,67 which not only reduced the performance for PMS/PS activation, but also caused potential harm to humans when toxic ions entered the environment. g-C3N4 was considered to be a good support template and played a vital role in preventing the accumulation of MOFs during pyrolysis.68,117 Therefore, Liu et al. used the “thermal treatment” method to calcine g-C3N4/NH2-MIL-53(Fe) powder at high temperature to form metal–nitrogen doped carbon (NMC).53 The introduced g-C3N4 enhanced the stability and specific surface area of the MOF-derived carbon materials, and the additional external N source provided by g-C3N4 was conducive to the activation of PMS/PS.116 Therefore, the synthetic NMC-50 material showed outstanding catalytic performance. The pathway for degradation of 4-aminobenzoic acid ethyl ether (ABEE) through CMN/PMS systems is divided into two parts (Fig. 11a). (i) Generation of 1O2: the CO groups in the NMC acted as effective activating PMS functional groups to form peroxide adducts via reacting with HSO5−.116 When the protonation treatment was carried out in the presence of OH−, the adducts were decomposed into a dioxirane intermediate by intramolecular nucleophilic displacement of the alkoxy oxygen of the O–O bond (HO–SO4−), which could further react with HSO5− to generate 1O2; and (ii) generation of SO4˙−, ·OH and ·O2−: doped N induced the transfer of electrons from adjacent carbon to nitrogen, resulting in the production of electron-rich sp2 sites in the graphite domains.118 During this process, the PMS was first closely attached to the surface of the N-doped carbon layer,119 with sp2-hybridized carbon as a good electron transfer carrier;120 then the transferred electrons reacted with PMS to generate SO4˙− and ·OH. On the one hand, because the quaternary-N possessed a stronger adsorption capacity for PMS than pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N,121 the quaternary-N may first undergo chemical adsorption of HSO5− and then donate an electron to destroy HO–SO4− to complete PMS activation. On the other hand, pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N acted as Lewis basic sites with lone pairs of electrons through transferring electrons to activate PMS to form SO4˙−.122 After that, the generated SO4˙− and ·OH were converted to 1O2 and ·O2−. In the end, the organic pollutants were degraded into CO2 and H2O by the generated reactive oxygen species (ROS).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for ABEE removal by NMC-50 activated PMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. (b) The basic mechanism of degradation of organic pollutants in the g-C3N4/MOFs-PMS/PS system under visible light. 
In addition, recent studies have shown that MOF-PMS/PS systems could effectively degrade contaminants from water with the help of visible light illumination. For instance, the g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe) composite was obtained by the “in situ method” for the degradation of bisphenol A (BPA).34 It was shown that under visible light irradiation, the g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe)/PS system showed significantly improved photocatalytic performance for degradation of BPA. In the same year, the team conducted another experiment using a Co-based MOF. The team used a simple “thermal treatment method” to synthesize ZIF-NC/g-C3N4.52Fig. 11b shows the basic mechanism of the g-C3N4/MOFs-PMS/PS system for the degradation of organic pollutants under visible light conditions. It can be divided into two parts: (i) the photo-generated electrons that accumulated on the surface of MOF-based materials accelerated the reaction with the PMS/PS to form SO4˙−; and (ii) the photo-generated electrons on MOFs migrated to the surface of g-C3N4 and underwent oxidation–reduction reaction with O2 to form ·O2−. These formed active radicals possessed strong oxidizing power and could degrade organic pollutants into H2O and CO2. At the same time, the holes that accumulated on the surface of g-C3N4 could directly degrade pollutants. It is noteworthy that SO4˙− dominated during the degradation of organic pollutants by g-C3N4/MOF/vis, involving the following reactions: HSO5− + e− → SO4˙− + OH−(5) S2O82− + e− → SO4˙− + SO42−(6) SO4˙− + OH− → ·OH + SO42−(7)


5.1.2. Cr(VI) reduction. 
In general, the types of pollutants in sewage are complex. In addition to organic pollutants, inorganic pollutants such as heavy metal ions are usually found in wastewater.123–125 As a common heavy metal ion in wastewater, Cr(VI) has adverse effects on human health and the environment.126–128 Fortunately, g-C3N4/MOF-based materials may reduce Cr(VI) to non-toxic Cr(III) via photocatalysis.
“One-pot synthesis” was employed by Huang et al. to fabricate g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe).129 The authors pointed out that enhanced electron transfer efficiency played an important role in increasing photocatalytic efficiency. Furthermore, when the scavengers were added to the solution, the reduction of Cr(VI) did not substantially change, indicating that Cr(VI) was directly reduced to Cr(III) by photo-generated electrons. In addition, Lei and co-workers prepared the CNNS/MIL-88B(Fe) composite through “one-pot synthesis”, and pointed out that the doped CNNSs could act as an acceptor for introducing the carrier, thereby effectively suppressing the recombination of electrons and holes; the photo-generated electrons have sufficient reducing power to reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(III).39
Very recently, the “ball-milling” method was employed to fabricate g-C3N4/MIL-100(Fe) (MG-x, x stands for the weight content of MIL-100(Fe)), which was another good photocatalyst for the Cr(VI) reduction.45 The effect of pH on the photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) was studied, and the results revealed that a relatively low pH value was beneficial to improve the activity of Cr(VI) reduction. The reasons were that Cr(VI) existed during the generation of Cr2O72−,130 and the majority of H+ further promoted the conformational change from Cr(VI) to Cr(III) under the acidic conditions. In contrast, under alkaline conditions, CrO42− was predominant, and a Cr(OH)3 precipitate was generated when the pH value was > 6, which would cover the active sites of MG-20%, resulting in a decrease in photocatalytic activity.131 The influence of scavengers on the Cr(VI) reduction was also studied. The experimental results showed that the added hole scavengers (citric acid and oxalic acid) could contribute to the photocatalytic Cr(VI) reduction activity of MG-20%, which was mainly attributed to the consumption of the photo-generated holes generated via the MG-20%.132 Consequently, more electrons could undergo redox reactions with Cr(VI) under acidic conditions. Besides, ethanol could also capture photo-generated holes and it was found that the reduction effect of Cr(VI) increased with the increase of ethanol concentration. But, the use of diclofenac sodium as a scavenger was not conducive to the reduction of Cr(VI) because it consumed ·OH rather than photo-generated holes. Liu and peers successfully prepared NH2-MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4 by “one-pot synthesis”, which possessed better light capture ability and stability.36 The experimental results also showed that acidic conditions and hole scavengers contribute to Cr(VI) reduction. The basic mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) is shown in Fig. 12, where the electron is the main potential substance for Cr(VI) reduction, involving the following reactions: Cr2O72− + 14H+ + 6e− → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O(8) Cr2O42− + 4H2O + 3e− → Cr(OH)3 + 5OH−(9)
 Fig. 12  The basic mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) in the g-C3N4/MOFs system under visible light. 

5.2. Energy production

5.2.1. Hydrogen production through water splitting. 
Industrial development and the rapid depletion of fossil fuels have caused a global energy crisis, which urgently requires us to find environmentally friendly and renewable energy resources.133–135 Molecular hydrogen (H2) is composed of the lightest element we know, as well as providing a high heat of combustion. Moreover, H2 fuels are environmentally friendly since the only product is pure water.136 Consequently, H2 is regarded as one of the greenest sustainable ways to address future energy and environmental crises.137 Photocatalytic water splitting has been proven to be an efficient method for H2 production since Fujishima and Honda first performed photocatalytic water splitting in 1972.138 g-C3N4/MOF-based materials possess excellent photocatalytic water splitting ability. Nonetheless, because of the high overpotential in H2 evolution, it was often necessary to introduce additional cocatalysts to reduce the overpotential to achieve H2 release.139 The whole process of water splitting was roughly composed of two half-reactions: oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
Wang et al. fabricated UIO-66/g-C3N4 (UG-x, x is the mass content of g-C3N4) via the “thermal treatment” method and loaded the noble metal Pt on g-C3N4 as a cocatalyst through photodeposition.140 The obtained UG-x exhibited high photocatalytic activity owing to the remarkable visible light response of g-C3N4 and the excellent stability of UIO-66. The H2 production rate of 4.11 × 10−6 M h−1 by the UG-50 sample was about 17 times higher than that of g-C3N4 (0.80 × 10 −6 M h−1). Furthermore, ascorbic acid was used as a scavenger to react with holes remaining in the surface of g-C3N4, thereby reducing the recombination of electrons and holes. Composite materials of g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe)/Pt141 and ZIF-8/g-C3N4/Pt41 have also been studied for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Since the photoreaction ability of ZIF-8 was lower than that of MIL-53(Fe), the yield and rate of ZIF-8/g-C3N4 were lower than those of g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe), but still higher than those of g-C3N4. However, because noble metals have a high price and low reserves, seeking for alternatives to noble metals or not using cocatalysts remains an ongoing task. Recent studies have shown that 2D nanosheets (UMOF) have the greatest advantage over 3D polymers and bulk 2D MOFs, that is, nano-thickness could significantly promote electron transfer, more exposed catalytically active surfaces could be effectively used with unsaturated metal sites142 to ensure optimal catalytic activity, and the preparation of surface atomic structures and bonds can be adjusted by simple manipulation.143 Therefore, Cao and co-workers successfully synthesized UNiMOF/g-C3N4 (UNG-x, x is the mass percentage of UNiMOF in composites) by the “self-assembly” method; the synthesized UNG-25 exhibited the highest catalytic activity with a photocatalytic rate of 20.03 μmol h −1 without using cocatalysts.47 The UNG-x samples exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity, which was attributed to the 2D/2D heterostructure, and the ultrathin structure of UNiMOF could shorten the transmission distance of the photoelectric carrier. In recent years, transition metal sulfides have generated increasing interest as promising cocatalysts for the formation of H2 because of their unique optical and electrical properties.144,145 More importantly, the free energy of adsorbed H2 on the surface of the transition metal sulfide was close to zero, which was beneficial for H2 formation and re-exposure of the active sites.144 Fu et al. successfully synthesized ZIF-67/g-C3N4 composites using the “self-assembly” method and then converted the composites into CoSx/g-C3N4 by the “in situ growth” method.146 The maximum H2 evolution rate of CoSx/g-C3N4 was 629 μmol g−1 h −1, which was 52 times higher than that of g-C3N4. In addition to CoSx promoting charge separation, the hollow structure of the CoSx polyhedron could also enhance photocatalytic performance through the following three points: (i) the hollow structure provided more active sites that could act as reduction reactions; (ii) the hollow structure increased the number of times light was reflected in the cavity, thus enhancing light collection; and (iii) black CoSx could absorb incident light including the infrared region. In addition, the surface temperature of the hollow CoSx was increased due to the photothermal effect, thereby contributing to mass diffusion/transfer and H2 desorption. The hollow polyhedron could effectively enhance H2 evolution. Therefore, more research should be focused on the construction of hollow structures.
Currently, the structure of the ternary photocatalytic system has also drawn widespread interest. More and more articles are devoted to improving photocatalytic performance and finding cocatalysts to replace noble metals, which are also top priorities in the ternary system. The high light collection and excellent electron transfer ability of carbon-based materials have attracted great attention in the field of photocatalysis. For example, CDs were incorporated into UiO-66-NH2/g-C3N4 composites to obtain CD@UiO-66-NH2/g-C3N4 materials.72 The results showed that 2.77 wt% CD@UiO-66-NH2/g-C3N4 composites showed the best photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (2.930 mmol g−1 h−1), which was 32.4 times, 38.6 times and 17.5 times higher than that of single component g-C3N4, UiO-66-NH2 and binary UiO-66-NH2/g-C3N4, respectively. In addition to doping carbon-based materials as cocatalysts into MOFs and g-C3N4, research has also focused on the derivatization of MOFs into carbon-based materials to enhance photocatalytic performance. For instance, Al-MOF-derived nanoporous carbon (NPC) and CdX were successfully doped into g-C3N4 through a “physical stirring method” to form CdX-gCN-NPC.147 The prepared CdX40-gCN-NPC5 composite exhibited an enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution capability of about 600 μmol g−1. In the CD@UiO-66-NH2/g-C3N4 and CdX-gCN-NPC ternary systems, CDs and CdX could be used as acceptors to efficiently receive photo-generated electrons gener.ated on the CB of g-C3N4, and further reduce H+ into H2.
Due to dye sensitization that could effectively enhance the visible light absorption capacity of wide band gap semiconductors, a large number of studies have used Eosin Y (EY) as a sensitizer in the catalytic process. Zhang and co-workers successfully prepared a g-C3N4@ZIF-67/NiSx composite by “in situ growth”.73 The photocatalytic H2 production performance of EY-sensitized g-C3N4@ZIF-67/NiSx was studied under visible light irradiation and TEOA acted as a sacrificial agent. The maximum H2 production of the g-C3N4@ZIF-67/(10% wt) NiSx photocatalyst within 5 h was 208 μmol which was 8.32 times that of g-C3N4. Compared with g-C3N4/MOF-cocatalysts (Fig. 13a), the photocatalytic mechanism of EY-sensitized g-C3N4@ZIF-67/NiSx systems displayed some differences in the photocatalytic mechanism of H2 evolution, mainly reflected in electron transport (Fig. 13b). EY firstly absorbed the energy of a photon and converted it into a singlet excited state (EY1*), which then transformed into a more stable triplet excited state (EY3*) by intersystem crossing (ISC) under visible light irradiation. EY3* was then quenched via TEOA and caused the generation of reduced EY˙− and oxidized donors. The EY˙− species reached the surface of ZIF-67, and transferred to g-C3N4, finally arriving at the NiSx reaction site, after which electrons at the NiSx reaction site participated in the reduction of protons to form H2. Simultaneously, the EY˙− molecules converted back to EY and thus the entire H2 evolution reaction was accomplished. In addition, Zhang et al. synthesized a NixMo1−xS2/MOF-5@g-C3N4 photocatalyst from a NiS2 and MoS2 modified g-C3N4/MOF-5 composite by a two-step “one-pot synthesis”, which generated 319 μmol of H2 within 5 h under visible light irradiation with EY as a sensitizer.148 In recent years, new progress has been made in the exploration of cocatalysts. The latest research has developed several earth-abundant catalysts such as transition metal phosphides and nickel-based cocatalysts. For instance, the synthesized CN/FeP polyhedron obtained through “in situ phosphating” of NH2-MIL-101(Fe)/Ni(OH)2 was used as a high-efficiency cocatalyst for enhancing the H2 evolution performance of EY-sensitized g-C3N4.149 The CN/FeNi7.47P/g-C3N4 exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity under EY sensitization, and its H2 evolution rate was 13.8 mmol g−1 h−1. In the same year, the team also prepared Ni2P/Ni NPs encapsulated in C/g-C3N4 hybrids fabricated through “pyrolysis and phosphorylation” of Ni-MOF/g-C3N4 for photocatalytic generation of H2.62 Under the same experimental conditions, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of Ni2P/Ni/C/g-C3N4-550 reached 18.04 mmol g−1 h −1. In the photocatalytic H2 production process, pH has a great influence on water splitting. Strong acid and alkali conditions were not conducive to photocatalytic H2 evolution.150–152 When the pH was higher than 10, the lower H+ concentration led to a lower photocatalytic thermodynamic driving force, and the electrostatic repulsion between the deprotonated EY and the negatively charged g-C3N4 increased. Decreasing the pH to 9 resulted in protonation of the sacrificial agent TEOA, resulting in failure of the electron donor, thereby reducing H2 production.
 Fig. 13  (a) The basic photocatalytic hydrogen evolution mechanism of g-C3N4/MOFs. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism over [g-C3N4@ZIF-67/(x% wt)NiSx]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. 
Water splitting requires an energy input to initiate the reaction (eqn (10)). Consequently, only photons with energy greater than or equal to the photocatalyst band gap can initiate the photocatalytic reactions. In summary, water splitting involves three reactions (eqn (10)–(12)).153 H2O (l) + 2h+ → ½O2 (g) + 2H+, ΔG0 = 237.2 kJ mol−1(10) H2O (l) + 2h+ → ½O2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e−, ΔE0 = +0.82 V(11) 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g), ΔE0 = −0.41 V(12)
Therefore, photocatalytic H2 production requires efficient photoelectron production. g-C3N4/MOF-based materials were applied for photocatalytic H2 evolution; the division of labor between monomers was clear. g-C3N4 was responsible for capturing photons in the visible region, and MOF was responsible for accelerating the separation and transmission of electrons. The use of a cocatalyst such as noble metal Pt promoted the separation of photo-generated charges and provided a reaction site as well as reducing the activation energy of H2 evolution, thereby improving H2 evolution efficiency. At present, some progress has been made in the search for alternatives to noble metals, such as carbon-based, Ni-based, S-based and other cocatalysts. It is worth noting that the ternary systems increased the decay path of the excited electrons and accelerated the separation rate of electrons and the release rate of H2. The basic photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism of g-C3N4/MOFs is shown in Fig. 13a. The photo-generated electrons formed by the CB of the g-C3N4/MOF-based composites were transferred to the surface of the cocatalyst and reacted with H+ to generate H2. Meanwhile, the remaining holes oxidized H2O to form O2 or were consumed by the hole scavenger upon light irradiation.


5.2.2. Carbon dioxide reduction. 
Accelerated consumption of fossil fuel resources has led to large amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission, causing undesirable environmental problems and energy crises. The ideal way to solve these two problems is to convert CO2 into a usable substance such as methane (CH4) or carbon monoxide (CO).108 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is widely regarded as a sustainable development strategy. The method can effectively utilize solar energy and realize the chemical storage of solar energy.154–156 The conversion efficiency of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 mainly depends on the lifetime of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, the separation efficiency of photo-generated carriers and the adsorption and activation of the CO2 molecule.157 MOFs possess large surface area, and the adjustable pore structure is favorable for gas adsorption.158 Consequently, MOFs are regarded as promising materials for CO2 capture and storage.159 Over the past few decades, MOF-based materials have been applied as photocatalysts to reduce CO2.160–163 Very recently, some reports have investigated the process of converting CO2 to CH4 and/or CO via using g-C3N4/MOF-based materials. Li and co-workers combined UIO-66 with CNNSs through the “self-assembly method”, and the synthesized UIO-66/CNNS composites exhibited selectivity to reduce CO2 to CO.46 This selectivity resulted from the activation site and electron separation rate of the reduction reactions. Under visible light conditions, the activated catalyst was formed after UiO-66 received photo-generated electrons transferred by CNNSs. Subsequently, the electrons from UiO-66 could reduce the adsorbed CO2 to CO, which was a critical step in the reduction of CO2. The CO yield reached 59.4 μmol g−1 using UIO-66/CNNS, more than 3 times that of CNNSs (17.1 μmol g−1) (Fig. 14a). Wang and co-workers modified UIO-66 with amino groups to obtain NH2-UIO-66 (NUZ), which was then loaded on holey g-C3N4 (HGN) through “in situ growth” formation of the NUZ/HGN-x composites (x represents the HGN weight ratio) due to the formation of NHx–Zr–O covalent bonds between NUZ nanocrystals and HGN, resulting in uniform dispersion as well as avoiding leaching of the NUZ, thereby exhibiting excellent stability during photocatalysis.50 The chemically charged interface charge transfer effect resulted from the formation of NHx–Zr–O, significantly promoting the separation and migration of carriers and improving photoactivity. Therefore, the NZU/HGN-35% composite showed the best CO2 reduction ability (31.6 μmol g−1 h−1), with a CO evolution rate more than 2 and 3 times higher than those of pure NUZ and HGN (Fig. 14b). This research provided strong support for the construction of composites with strong interactions. Moreover, Xu and co-workers successfully manufactured BIF-20@g-C3N4 composite materials through an “electrostatic self-assembly method”.78 Compared to g-C3N4 alone, BIF-20@g-C3N4 composites exhibited greatly enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity with a 9.7 times increase in CH4 release rate (15.524 μmol g−1 h −1) and 9.85 times improvement in CO evolution rate (53.869 μmol g−1 h −1) (Fig. 14c). Exposure of the B–H bond by BIF-20 in the composites produced highly efficient catalytically active sites, and enhanced the adsorption of CO2 at the reaction sites, thereby realizing the activation of the CO2 molecules. The photo-generated electrons on g-C3N4 inhibited the recombination of electron–hole pairs through migration to the B–H bond, thereby greatly enhancing the photocatalytic ability. This experiment provided important theoretical support for manufacturing efficient photocatalysts by implanting functional active sites into porous substrates. In the latter two examples, the g-C3N4/MOF composites were applied to reduce CO2 to CH4 and CO, and the yield of CO was much higher than that of CH4. The reason was that the conversion of CO2 to CO was a 2-electron process, while the conversion to CH4 was an 8-electron process. Therefore, it was easier to generate CO than to generate CH4.
 Fig. 14  (a) Time course of CO evolution over bulk CN, CNNS, UiO-66/bulk CN, and UiO-66/CNNS photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015), Wiley. (b) Time course of production evolution under different reaction conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 and CO production rate over HGN, NUZ, and NUZ/HGN-x photocatalysts under simulated solar irradiation for 12 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (d) The photocatalytic mechanism of CO2 reduction by g-C3N4/MOF composites. 
A possible mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 using g-C3N4/MOF composites is shown in Fig. 14d. Under visible light conditions, MOFs accepted photo-generated electrons transmitted by g-C3N4 to form an activated catalyst. Subsequently, the electrons in MOFs can reduce the adsorbed CO2. At the same time, TEOA acted as an electron donor to consume holes that remained in the VB of g-C3N4. The reduction process of CO2 involves the following reactions: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−, ΔE0 = −0.41 V(13) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O, ΔE0 = −0.53 V(14) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + H2O, ΔE0 = −0.24 V(15)

6. Application of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials in electrocatalysis
g-C3N4/MOF-based materials also display great potential in the field of electrochemistry owing to their high electrical conductivity, inherited structural versatility, rich porosity, and diverse chemical compositions. In this section, the latest progress in the application of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials in electrical related fields (chemical energy storage and conversion) is introduced. Additionally, the electrocatalytic mechanisms are described in detail.
6.1. ORR, OER and/or HER
The global increase in demand for energy generation and use of fossil fuels has a highly negative impact on the environment; environmentally friendly renewable energy techniques such as water splitting, metal–air batteries and fuel cells are expected to solve the current energy problems, have increasingly attracted researchers' attention. The electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), OER and HER have attracted much attention as important reactions in many high energy-conversion devices.164 Up to now, noble metal-based electrocatalysts (e.g. Pt, Pd, Au, etc.) have been commonly used as efficient electrocatalysts,165,166 but the high costs and susceptibility to corrosion of these noble metals have limited their widespread use.167,168 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop non-noble metal electrocatalysts, MNC catalysts, metal composites, etc. to replace noble metals.169–171 In particular, MNC catalysts have been considered to be one of the most promising alternatives for noble Pt-based catalysts due to their special structural characteristics of surface nitrogen and metal coordination.172,173 Currently, the direct pyrolysis of MOFs has been used as a novel strategy for preparing various MCN catalysts without additional carbon carriers.56 However, use of MOFs was often accompanied by agglomeration and collapse of pores during pyrolysis, resulting in poor electrocatalytic performance. Therefore, Gu et al. synthesized a high activity ORR electrocatalyst in the whole pH range using C3N4@NH2-MIL-101 as a precursor, and C3N4@NH2-MIL-101 could be easily converted into a rich Fe–N co-doped porous carbon skeleton via pyrolysis at 700 °C.57 The introduction of C3N4 into the composite not only overcame the collapse of the framework but also provided a rich source of N. The formed C3N4@NH2-MIL-101-700 composite materials possessed better methanol tolerance and higher stability than the commercial Pt/C catalyst no matter whether under alkaline, neutral or acidic conditions. Besides, the C3N4@NH2-MIL-101-700 composite materials showed an onset potential of 0.99 V and limiting current density of 6.44 mA cm−2 for the ORR in 0.1 M KOH, and the electrocatalyst showed a lower onset potential of 0.92 V in 0.5 M H2SO4 and a limiting current density of 5.83 mA cm−2.
2D porous carbon nanosheets have a tendency to expose more active sites to the reactants and reduce the diffusion resistance, which is beneficial for improving the utilization efficiency of the catalytic sites and increasing the power densities.142,174 Zheng and peers used 2D bimetallic Zn/Fe-MOF as a precursor and g-C3N4 as an N source/single Fe atom promoter, and successfully synthesized high single/paired Fe atom loading (3.89 wt%) and high N content (10.28 wt%) catalysts.175 It is noteworthy that the addition of g-C3N4 played a key role in the high loading of Fe single/paired atoms, and the 2D nanosheet structure gave the materials a high surface area and highly porous structure. Therefore, the prepared Fe/N-PCN composites displayed outstanding durability and activity towards the ORR in both alkaline and acidic media, with a half-wave potential of 0.86 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) under alkaline conditions, which was superior to that of commercial Pt/C (0.84 V (vs. RHE)), and a half-wave potential of 0.79 V (vs. RHE) in an acidic medium, close to that of commercial Pt/C. Recently, new progress has been made in the development of non-noble bifunctional catalysts having both HER and ORR catalytic properties. He and co-workers combined the high ORR ability of a Co-based MOF with the excellent HER catalytic activity of MoS2, as well as introducing nitrogen-rich g-C3N4 nanosheets to synthesise CoOx/mC@MoS2@g-C3N4 composites used as a new dual electrocatalysts for both the ORR and HER.176 The synergistic effect of different components endowed CoOx/mC@MoS2@g-C3N4 composites with dual electrocatalytic activity for the ORR and HER, and high catalytic efficiency. The developed CoOx/mC@MoS2@g-C3N4 composite showed an onset overpotential of 0.89 V and a Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1 in 0.1 M KOH for the ORR. In addition, the electrocatalyst has a relatively low onset potential of only 0.031 V and a Tafel slope of 66 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 for the HER.
6.2. Metal-ion/air batteries
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) as an advanced renewable power source have attracted the most attention because of their unique advantages such as high power and energy density, light weight, and long life as well as environmental friendliness.177–179 Nonetheless, due to the lower theoretical capacity of LIBs (372 mA h g−1), commercial graphite anodes are no longer able to meet the growing energy storage needs.180 Porous carbons have attracted widespread attention as an electrochemical anode owing to their outstanding electrical conductivity, excellent chemical stability, and controllable surface area as well as low cost.70 In addition, the doping of heteroatoms on the carbon matrix was an effective method for adjusting the electronic properties and electrical conductivity, which further promoted their application in the field of electrode materials.71,181 MOFs are excellent precursor materials for the preparation of porous carbon. However, use of MOFs is often accompanied by structural damage during the pyrolysis process and the dominant microporous characteristics inherent in MOF-derived products, resulting in poor electrochemical performance. Therefore, Tian et al. combined ZIFs with glucose modified g-C3N4 and then constructed N-doped hierarchical porous carbon nanoframes (N-HPCFs) by “in situ pyrolysis” transformation.182 The process of synthesizing N-HPCFs is shown in Fig. 15a. The excellent electrochemical performance of N-HPCFs was mainly reflected in higher capacity, excellent rate performance and good cycling stability (at a current density of 1 A g−1), the discharge capacity could still reach 651 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles with a high coulombic efficiency (CE) of 98%. This enhanced electrochemical performance could be attributed to the stable framework structure and highly developed ion and electron transport pathways. As shown in Fig. 15b, the g-C3N4@Glu composite-derived large-sized carbon nanoplatelet could not only keep the overall structure of the ZIFs stable, but also because of its unique hollow porous structure, it could help absorb Li+ from different directions and make it fully interact with the electrolyte. N-HPCFs had a hierarchical micro–mesoporous structure and relatively high specific surface area, which could effectively shorten the diffusion rate of ions and diffuse Li+ from external carbon to internal carbon, thereby succeeding in activating each section. These characteristics were conducive to achieving outstanding rate performance, while improving the rapid kinetic storage of reversible lithium. It is worth mentioning that the high N-doping level in N-HPCFs could significantly improve the insertion ability and conductivity of Li+ by providing more defects and accelerating electron transfer. Therefore, this article provided a new application for porous carbon nanoframes derived from ZIFs/g-C3N4-based materials and is expected to provide a basis for future research in the development of advanced carbon-based materials in energy storage and other fields.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of N-HPCFs. (b) Schematic illustration of the lithium-ion storage process of N-HPCFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright (2017), American Chemical Society. (c) A series of schematic diagrams for illustrating the synthesis of Co@NHCC and Co@NCPT samples. (d) A sketch showing the device structure of a rechargeable Zn–air battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. 
Rechargeable Zn–air batteries are another viable and promising electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology that has attracted the most attention due to the abundance of Zn element in the Earth, low production costs, and high theoretical energy density as well as low environmental impact.183 Rechargeable Zn–air batteries needed to perform the ORR during discharge, and the OER is the reverse process of the ORR on the same electrode during charging. But these two key steps are complicated and the charge transfer kinetics is quite sluggish. Therefore, highly efficient electrocatalysts are usually needed to ensure sufficient output power density for practical applications. Wu and co-workers loaded ZIF-67/SiO2 on g-C3N4, and then obtained N-rich hollow carbon cage composites with Co nanoparticles (Co@NHCC) by “thermal treatment”.184 In addition, a control sample, Co@NCPT, without SiO2 was prepared using the same method (Fig. 15c). The added SiO2 could effectively prevent the problems of low nitrogen content and low specific surface area caused by ZIF-67 collapsing and fusing together. The obtained Co@NHCC-800 sample had a high specific surface area of 910.71 m2 g−1 while that of Co@NCPT-800 was only 367.94 m2 g−1. The morphological advantage, coupled with the high content of atomically dispersed N and Co–Nx–C species, made Co@NHCC-800 a highly efficient electrocatalyst for the ORR and OER. In 0.1 M KOH, the half-wave potential for the ORR was +0.837 V and the required potential was only +1.512 V which was lower than that of the benchmark RuO2 to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in aqueous solution. Compared with commercial Pt/C catalysts, Co@NHCC-800 exhibited a higher open-circuit voltage (1.490 V) and discharge power density (248 mW cm−2) and a smaller charge–discharge voltage gap (only 0.100 V) (Fig. 15d). Moreover, the polyhedral morphology of the Co@NHCC-800 bifunctional electrocatalyst was basically unchanged after 12 h of charge–discharge cycling in a rechargeable Zn–air battery, indicating the high stability of the Co@NHCC-800 sample. These results not only highlighted the wide application potential of g-C3N4/MOF-derived carbon materials in electrocatalysis, but also provided effective methods for customizing the morphology of carbon nanomaterials to achieve more effective electrocatalysis.
7. Conclusions and prospects
g-C3N4/MOF-based composite materials combine the advantages of each component and reduce the disadvantages of each component, resulting in synergies and new possibilities for single components that could have otherwise never been used. The introduced g-C3N4 not only overcomes the inherent shortcomings of MOFs themselves but also brings novel functions such as the formation of new pores, protection of metal unsaturated sites and so on. Apart from the common applications in water purification, catalysis, and gas separation, due to its improved electrical properties, this new type of composite material can also be applied to certain electrochemical fields.
Although great progress has been made in materials based on g-C3N4/MOFs, there are still some difficulties that need to be overcome, so more in-depth study of composite technology is needed:
(1) The types of MOFs currently used are usually limited to MILs, ZIFs, and UIOs; other types of MOFs should be developed, which may cause the composite materials to have greater potential.
(2) The influence of the structure and properties of composite materials should be studied in depth. Structural changes often indicate improved performance. Therefore, an in-depth exploration of their relationship will help to better understand and use composite materials.
(3) MOFs have also been reported to be employed in multiple areas, such as drug delivery, supercapacitors and proton conduction, but have not been investigated with the new composite materials. Considering the improved properties of the composites, g-C3N4/MOF-based composites may also have unexpected properties in these traditional applications.
(4) Compared with pure materials, g-C3N4/MOF-based composites seem to be a universal platform with enhanced performance. But, their precise characterization, especially at the micro level, remains challenging. In order to better understand the interface microstructure of materials, auxiliary calculations, such as density functional theory (DFT), can be used to better reveal the effects of composition and structural modification, and the essence of synergy.
(5) The mechanisms of the photocatalytic H2 production systems should be studied in depth, including light collection, basic reactions of H2 generation and the electron transfer reactions between the g-C3N4/cocatalyst/MOF interface, which is essential to further improve the efficiency of H2 production.
(6) Although compared with commercial catalysts such as Pt and Ru, the use of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials has significantly reduced costs, but there is still an urgent need to optimize the synthesis process and achieve large-scale production with controlled costs.
Although some obstacles still need to be conquered, the enhanced properties that g-C3N4/MOF-based composite materials give to MOFs offer bright prospects for the large-scale application of MOFs. At the same time, this technology deserves further research and will achieve excellent achievements in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the Program for the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51879101, 51579098, 51779090, 51709101, 51521006, 51809090, and 51909084), the National Program for Support of Top-Notch Young Professionals of China (2014), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13R17), the Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (2018SK20410, 2017SK2243, and 2016RS3026), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (531119200086, 531118010114, 531107050978, 541109060031, and 531118010247), and the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province, China (2020JJ5055 and 2020JJ5069).
References
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1213–1214 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, G. Zhang, Y. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Liu and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17266–17271 RSC .
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T.-H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, C. Abney and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1248–1256 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Della Rocca, D. Liu and W. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 957–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y. Wang, H.-L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703663 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, X. Jiang, A. Yu, K. C.-W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604898 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, X. You, J. Cheng, H. Zheng and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 673–680 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800743 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Liu, D. Huang, M. Cheng, G. Zeng, C. Lai, C. Zhang, C. Zhou, W. Wang, D. Jiang, H. Wang and B. Shao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 388, 63–78 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1315–1329 RSC .
Y. Ye, W. Guo, L. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Song, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Xiang and B. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15604–15607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, D. Huang, P. Xu, X. Gong, W. Xue, L. Lei, R. Deng, J. Li and Z. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1024–1059 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1304–1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Devic, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, F. Salles, G. Maurin, B. Moulin, D. Heurtaux, G. Clet, A. Vimont, J.-M. Grenèche, B. L. Ouay, F. Moreau, E. Magnier, Y. Filinchuk, J. Marrot, J.-C. Lavalley, M. Daturi and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. McHugh, M. J. McPherson, L. J. McCormick, S. A. Morris, P. S. Wheatley, S. J. Teat, D. McKay, D. M. Dawson, C. E. F. Sansome, S. E. Ashbrook, C. A. Stone, M. W. Smith and R. E. Morris, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1096–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Guillerm, F. Ragon, M. Dan-Hardi, T. Devic, M. Vishnuvarthan, B. Campo, A. Vimont, G. Clet, Q. Yang, G. Maurin, G. Férey, A. Vittadini, S. Gross and C. Serre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9267–9271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, T. Yildirim and W. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 925–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bradshaw, A. Garai and J. Huo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2344–2381 RSC .
S. Li and F. Huo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7482–7501 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, Z. Li and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8134–8172 RSC .
X. Deng, M. Hao and Z. Li, Curr. Org. Chem., 2018, 22, 1825–1835 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, Z. Li, G. Zeng, C. Zhou, W. Xue, X. Gong, X. Yan, S. Chen, W. Wang and M. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 153–173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Huang, C. Zhou, W. Xue, L. Lei, R. Deng, Y. Yang, S. Chen, W. Wang and Z. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122657 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, P. Xu, R. Xiao, D. Huang, X. Chen, L. He, C. Zhou, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Wang and W. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118700 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, X.-H. Yi and P. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 24–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, B. Yang, H. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23703–23711 RSC .
W. Ma, D. Han, M. Zhou, H. Sun, L. Wang, X. Dong and L. Niu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3946–3951 RSC .
B. Liu, Y. Wu, X. Han, J. Lv, J. Zhang and H. Shi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 17591–17601 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, C. He, N. Liu, M. Wu and L. Tang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 99, 349–358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Wu, G. Zeng, X. Chen, L. Leng and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-D. Lei, Y.-C. Xue, W.-Q. Chen, L. Li, W.-H. Qiu, Y. Zhang and L. Tang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802045 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Hong, X. Y. Xia, Y. S. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
L. Tian, X. Yang, Q. Liu, F. Qu and H. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 455, 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, M.-F. Wu, Q.-J. Xing, F. Li, H. Liu, X.-B. Luo, J.-P. Zou, J.-M. Luo and A.-Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Fang, Z. Cao, N. Li, D. Chen, Q. Xu and J. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 150–162 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bai, J. Bi, J. Wu, H. Meng, Y. Xu, Y. Han and X. Zhang, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4597 CrossRef .
X. Du, X. Yi, P. Wang, J. Deng and C.-c. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 70–79 CrossRef .
L. Shi, T. Wang, H. Zhang, K. Chang and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5360–5367 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Deng, X. Liu, Z. Lin, X. Su and F. Yue, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2492–2499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, X. Zhang, H. Song, C. Chen, F. Han and C. Wen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 85–98 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6297–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Guo, Y. Zeng, H. Guo, S. Wan, M. Ou, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30673–30681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, X. Jiang, A. Yu, K. C. W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604898 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, X. Zhao, H. Zhang, B. Yang, K. Xiao, T. Guo, J. Zhang, H. Shao, Y. Wang and G. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, L. Liu, X. Tian, Y. Wang, R. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Song, B. Xu, W. Chu, F. Qi and A. Ikhlaq, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yasuda, A. Furuya, Y. Uchibori, J. Kim and K. Murakoshi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 738–744 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, L. Hu, J. Li and E. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14364–14370 RSC .
Y.-Z. Chen, C. Wang, Z.-Y. Wu, Y. Xiong, Q. Xu, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5010–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, L. Hu, J. Li and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35281–35288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Ma, L. Chai, L. Xu, Z. Zhu, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Carbon, 2019, 141, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Giannakoudakis, N. A. Travlou, J. Secor and T. J. Bandosz, Small, 2017, 13, 1601758 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Gao, C. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Qi and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10678–10679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4753–4757 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Pi, L. Wu, Q. Xia, J. Wu, Z. Li and J. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liang, C. Zhang, X. Duan, H. Sun, S. Liu, M. O. Tade and S. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2693–2701 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zeng, M. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. He, J. Chen and S. Song, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 396–404 RSC .
S. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Wang, T. Hayat, J. Li, X. Xu and X. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1179–1190 RSC .
A. A. Talin, A. Centrone, A. C. Ford, M. E. Foster, V. Stavila, P. Haney, R. A. Kinney, V. Szalai, F. El Gabaly, H. P. Yoon, F. Léonard and M. D. Allendorf, Science, 2014, 343, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, M. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7590–7598 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, H. Liang, K. Parvez, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Dong, X. J. Sun, D. D. Yang, J. L. Sheng, H. L. Tang, X. B. Meng and F. M. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11563–11569 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and Z. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18248–18263 CrossRef CAS .
M. Latroche, S. Surblé, C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, P. L. Llewellyn, J.-H. Lee, J.-S. Chang, S. H. Jhung and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8227–8231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bordiga, L. Regli, F. Bonino, E. Groppo, C. Lamberti, B. Xiao, P. S. Wheatley, R. E. Morris and A. Zecchina, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2676–2685 RSC .
P. B. Somayajulu Rallapalli, M. C. Raj, D. V. Patil, K. P. Prasanth, R. S. Somani and H. C. Bajaj, Int. J. Energy Res., 2013, 37, 746–753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, F. Chen, S. Li, X. Peng and Y. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Wei, H.-X. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Li, C. Li, J. Zhang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5333–5340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Vörösmarty, P. B. McIntyre, M. O. Gessner, D. Dudgeon, A. Prusevich, P. Green, S. Glidden, S. E. Bunn, C. A. Sullivan, C. R. Liermann and P. M. Davies, Nature, 2010, 467, 555–561 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zeng, M. Chen and Z. Zeng, Nature, 2013, 499, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, D. Huang, G. Zeng, X. Gong, W. Xue, J. Li, Y. Yang, C. Zhou, Z. Li, X. Yan, T. Li and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 1087–1100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Huang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, L. Qin, H. Wang, H. Yi, B. Li, S. Liu, M. Zhang, R. Deng, Y. Fu, L. Li, W. Xue and S. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5266–5302 RSC .
C. A. Martínez-Huitle and E. Brillas, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 87, 105–145 CrossRef .
W. Xue, D. Huang, X. Wen, S. Chen, M. Cheng, R. Deng, B. Li, Y. Yang and X. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 390, 122128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, D. Huang, G. Zeng, W. Xue, L. Lei, P. Xu, R. Deng, J. Li and M. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122840 CrossRef CAS .
R. Deng, D. Huang, G. Zeng, J. Wan, W. Xue, X. Wen, X. Liu, S. Chen, J. Li, C. Liu and Q. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 283, 277–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-Z. Wang, D.-L. Huang, Y.-G. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Lai, X. Wang, G.-M. Zeng, X.-M. Gong, A. Duan, Q. Zhang and P. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 380–403 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu and M. Long, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 103–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. Zeng, H. Zhong, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, M. Cheng, G. Liu, X. Yang and S. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 322, 394–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Cheng, Z. Liu, G. Zeng, H. Zhong, M. Chen, C. Zhou, W. Xiong, B. Shao and B. Song, Chemosphere, 2019, 236, 124387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Pignatello, E. Oliveros and A. MacKay, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 36, 1–84 CrossRef CAS .
E. Neyens and J. Baeyens, J. Hazard. Mater., 2003, 98, 33–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xue, Z. Peng, D. Huang, G. Zeng, X. Wen, R. Deng, Y. Yang and X. Yan, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 6340–6349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, Y. Liu, D. Huang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, J. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Zhou, L. Qin, W. Xiong, H. Yi and Y. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 865–876 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun and Z. Li, Chin. J. Chem., 2017, 35, 135–147 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang and Z. Li, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2017, 43, 5169–5186 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Liu, S. Ben Hammouda, B. Doshi, N. Guijarro, X. Min, C.-J. Tang, M. Sillanpaa, K. Sivula and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119033 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, J. Mao, Q. Guo, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2934–2961 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Liu, Y. Cui, X. Liang, C. Lei, S. Meng, Y. Ma, Z. Lei and Z. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 484–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panneri, M. Thomas, P. Ganguly, B. N. Nair, A. P. Mohamed, K. G. K. Warrier and U. S. Hareesh, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 2118–2128 RSC .
L. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Zou and X. Han, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 268, 216–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, C. Lai, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, L. Qin, L. Hu, C. Zhou and W. Xiong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 368, 80–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, C. Chen, F. E. Bedoya, G. H. Kelsall, D. Ohare and C. Petit, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1039 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Pi, L. Wu, Q. Xia, J. Wu, Z. Li and J. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ai, C. Zhang, L. Li and J. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 148–149, 191–200 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. M. Laurier, V. Frederik, A. Rob, D. E. Vos De, H. Johan and M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14488–14491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, T. Wang, H. Zhang, K. Chang, X. Meng, H. Liu and J. Ye, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 6 Search PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Fu, W. Liu, L. Ye, D. Wang, L. Yang, X. Fu and Z. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14279–14285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, S. Cui, J. Jin, C. Liu, S. Xu, C. Yao and Z. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 456, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Zhai, Y. Liang, Y. Li and J. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 274, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. T. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Wang, S. Li, H. Yang, X. Liu and F. Wei, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3364–3373 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, X. Xu, X. Liang, C. Lei, Y. Cui, W. Wu, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang and Z. Lei, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 42–54 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu and M. Long, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 103–117 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, W. Xu, S. Liu, X. Li, D. Huang, X. Tan and Y. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 577, 419–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Andrew Lin, F.-K. Hsu and W.-D. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9480–9490 RSC .
D. Li, X. Duan, H. Sun, J. Kang, H. Zhang, M. O. Tade and S. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 115, 649–658 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xue, D. Huang, J. Li, G. Zeng, R. Deng, Y. Yang, S. Chen, Z. Li, X. Gong and B. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1144–1157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, W.-D. Oh, Z.-T. Hu, Y.-M. Sun, R. D. Webster, S.-Z. Li and T.-T. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 243–257 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, W. Ma, Z. Ren, Y. Du, P. Xu and X. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 884–895 RSC .
M. Feng, F. Jin, X. Huang, K. Jia and X. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, Z. Ao, H. Sun, S. Indrawirawan, Y. Wang, J. Kang, F. Liang, Z. H. Zhu and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4169–4178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Frank, J. Zhang, R. Blume, R. Schlögl and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6913–6917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, X. Wang, A. Khan, P. Wang, Y. Liu, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 7290–7304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Huang, C. Lai, L. Qin, G. Zeng, P. Xu, B. Li, H. Yi and M. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900133 CrossRef PubMed .
R.-Z. Wang, D.-L. Huang, Y.-G. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Lai, G.-M. Zeng, M. Cheng, X.-M. Gong, J. Wan and H. Luo, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 261, 265–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Barakat, Arabian J. Chem., 2011, 4, 361–377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, D. Huang, P. Xu, W. Xue, L. Lei, M. Cheng, R. Wang, X. Liu and R. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2286–2322 RSC .
R. Deng, D. Huang, W. Xue, L. Lei, S. Chen, C. Zhou, X. Liu, X. Wen and B. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125396 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, N. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Wu and L. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 425, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wang, X. D. Du, J. Li, X. X. Guo, P. Wang and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 198–216 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. D. Dionysiou and A. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 53–63 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Xiao, S. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Cai, S. Luo and G. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, Z. Jin, H. Yang, G. Lu and Y. Bi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
L. Lei, D. Huang, C. Zhou, S. Chen, X. Yan, Z. Li and W. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 408, 213177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Huang, M. Cheng, Z. Liu, C. Lai, C. Zhang, C. Zhou, W. Xiong, L. Qin, B. Shao and Q. Liang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 409, 213220 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Fan, S. Yu, B. Hou and J. M. Kim, Isr. J. Chem., 2019, 59, 762–773 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, L. Gu, J. Zhou, X. Liu, F. Teng, C. Li, Y. Shen and Y. Yuan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500037 CrossRef .
C. Bai, J. Bi, J. Wu, H. Meng, Y. Xu, Y. Han and X. Zhang, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, 4597 CrossRef .
Z. Fang, B. Bueken, D. E. De Vos and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7234–7254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Hu, W. Tong, W. Yan, X. Lou, M. Shen and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29829–29838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang, X. Hai and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502555 CrossRef .
L. Lei, D. Huang, G. Zeng, M. Cheng, D. Jiang, C. Zhou, S. Chen and W. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 399, 213020 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, C. Bie, B. Cheng, C. Jiang and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2767–2779 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aleksandrzak, D. Baranowska, T. Kedzierski, K. Sielicki, S. Zhang, M. Biegun and E. Mijowska, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Jin, A. luan and G. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9914–9923 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Qi, C. Wang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Jin, H. Yuan, G. Wang and B. Ma, Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 532, 287–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and B. Ma, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13039–13050 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Zhang, Y.-Z. Lin, K. Wang and F.-T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28918–28927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 RSC .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Lai, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Qin, W. Xue, B. Song, S. Ye and H. Yi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 515, 232–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, D. He, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, B. Song, H. Yi, S. Ye and X. Ren, Small, 2020, 16, 2001634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-G. Cui, G.-Y. Zhang, T.-L. Hu and X.-H. Bu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 387, 79–120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, N.-Y. Huang, J.-Q. Shen, P.-Q. Liao, X.-M. Chen and J.-P. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 38–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
Y. Chen, D. Wang, X. Deng and Z. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4893–4904 RSC .
X. Deng, Z. Li and H. Garcia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11189–11209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, P. Deng, Q. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhou, K. Qi, H. Liu, H. S. Park and B. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12418–12423 RSC .
O. T. Qazvini and S. G. Telfer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12028–12034 RSC .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, X. Cao, F. Zhou, C.-H. Cui, W.-J. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1467–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xie, X. Ren, Q. Liu, G. Cui, R. Ge, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun, Q. Zhang and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1967–1970 RSC .
Z. Li, M. Shao, L. Zhou, R. Zhang, C. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2337–2344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, X. Du, C. Gibson, X. W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6226–6231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10102–10120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-J. Wei, G.-Q. Yu, Y. Naruta and J.-G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6659–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hijazi, T. Bourgeteau, R. Cornut, A. Morozan, A. Filoramo, J. Leroy, V. Derycke, B. Jousselme and S. Campidelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6348–6354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wan, A.-d. Tan, Z.-p. Yu, Z.-x. Liang, J.-h. Piao and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, S. Yu, X. Lu, W. Fan, B. Chi, Y. Ye, X. Shi, J. Zeng, X. Li and S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13878–13887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, B. Cui, J. Liu, M. Wang, Z. Zhang and H. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9257–9268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, S. Xin, S. Li, J. Zhu, X. Lü, Z. Cui, Q. Jia, J. Zhou, Y. Zhao and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9965–9968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Huang, L. Lei, R. Deng, S. Chen, Z. Li, C. Zhang, W. Wang and K. Wang, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 175–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, L. Yu, C.-Y. Wang, Z. Lin and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5184–5189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, J. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Li and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42845–42855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
J. Wu, L. Hu, N. Wang, Y. Li, D. Zhao, L. Li, X. Peng, Z. Cui, L.-J. Ma, Y. Tian and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Gaoxia Zhang	Gaoxia Zhang received her B.S. from Nanchang Hangkong University in 2018. Currently, she is a postgraduate student under the supervision of Prof. Danlian Huang at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, China. Her current research interest is related to the preparation of MOF-based materials and their relevant applications.
Danlian Huang	Danlian Huang received her PhD degree from Hunan University, China, in 2011. She is currently a professor at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional microbes and functional materials in environmental remediation.
Min Cheng	Min Cheng received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng from Hunan University, China, in 2018. He is currently an associate professor at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His current research interest is related to the preparation of MOF-based materials and their relevant applications.
Top (from left to right): Lei Lei; Sha Chen; Rongzhong Wang, Bottom (from left to right): Wenjing Xue; Yang Liu; Yashi Chen; Zhihao Li	

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe) composite; SEM images of (b) MIL-101(Fe) and (c) g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe); (d) TEM image of g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe); (e) XRD patterns of bulk g-C3N4, g-C3N4 NSs, MIL-101(Fe) and g-C3N4/MIL-101(Fe). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) XRD patterns of g-C3N4, MIL-125(Ti) and CMTi composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2015), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of ZIF-8-modified rod-like g-C3N4 composites. SEM images of (b) ZIF-8, (c) ZCN100, (d) ZCN200, (e) ZCN400, (f) ZCN800, and (g) modified g-C3N4 sample CN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright (2018), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of covalently linked CFBM composites. (I) g-C3N4 functionalized by benzoic acid (CFB) and (II) in situ growth of CFBM crystals. SEM images of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (b), 10CFBM (c) and 15CFBM (d); and TEM image of 10CFBM (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright (2018), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the UiO-66/CNNS heterogeneous photocatalyst. (b) TEM and HRTEM images of CNNSs; (c) TEM and HRTEM images of UiO-66. (d) TEM and HRTEM images of UiO-66/CNNS. The CNNS content in the UiO-66/CNNS composite is 10 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015), Wiley. (e) Diagram of the preparation of the UNG heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of PCN/MIL; SEM images of PCN (b and c) and 23% PCN/MIL (d and e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2018), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) FexC-650, (b) MC-10, (c) FexC CN-650 and (d) NMC-10. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2019), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Process of the formation of Ni2P/Ni@C/g-C3N4 composites; SEM images of (b) Ni2P@AC/g-C3N4, and Ni2P/Ni@C/g-C3N4 composites annealed at (c) 450, (d) 500, (e) 550 and (f) 600 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2019), Elsevier.	 
g-C3N4/MOFs + hν → g-C3N4/MOFs (h+ + e−)	(1)
O2 + e− → ·O2−	(2)
·O2− and h+ + pollutant → degradation products	(3)

 	Fig. 8  (a). A schematic illustration of oxidation of dye over the CNUO-1 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2018), Elsevier. (b) Mechanistic scheme of g-C3N4/MOF-based materials for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants under visible light.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustrating the mechanisms of adsorption and photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline by the C3N4–ZIF-8 (ZC) composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of Fenton-like excitation of H2O2 for ·OH generation under visible light. (b) Mechanistic scheme of the lp-2 composite for the photocatalytic degradation of MB with H2O2 under visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright (2017), Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a possible photocatalytic mechanism of the CPM-2 composite under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2019), Elsevier.	 
H2O2 + e− → ·OH + OH−	(4)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for ABEE removal by NMC-50 activated PMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2019), Elsevier. (b) The basic mechanism of degradation of organic pollutants in the g-C3N4/MOFs-PMS/PS system under visible light.	 
HSO5− + e− → SO4˙− + OH−	(5)
S2O82− + e− → SO4˙− + SO42−	(6)
SO4˙− + OH− → ·OH + SO42−	(7)
Cr2O72− + 14H+ + 6e− → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O	(8)
Cr2O42− + 4H2O + 3e− → Cr(OH)3 + 5OH−	(9)

 	Fig. 12  The basic mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) in the g-C3N4/MOFs system under visible light.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The basic photocatalytic hydrogen evolution mechanism of g-C3N4/MOFs. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism over [g-C3N4@ZIF-67/(x% wt)NiSx]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society.	 
H2O (l) + 2h+ → ½O2 (g) + 2H+, ΔG0 = 237.2 kJ mol−1	(10)
H2O (l) + 2h+ → ½O2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e−, ΔE0 = +0.82 V	(11)
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g), ΔE0 = −0.41 V	(12)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Time course of CO evolution over bulk CN, CNNS, UiO-66/bulk CN, and UiO-66/CNNS photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015), Wiley. (b) Time course of production evolution under different reaction conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 and CO production rate over HGN, NUZ, and NUZ/HGN-x photocatalysts under simulated solar irradiation for 12 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (d) The photocatalytic mechanism of CO2 reduction by g-C3N4/MOF composites.	 
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−, ΔE0 = −0.41 V	(13)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O, ΔE0 = −0.53 V	(14)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + H2O, ΔE0 = −0.24 V	(15)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of N-HPCFs. (b) Schematic illustration of the lithium-ion storage process of N-HPCFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright (2017), American Chemical Society. (c) A series of schematic diagrams for illustrating the synthesis of Co@NHCC and Co@NCPT samples. (d) A sketch showing the device structure of a rechargeable Zn–air battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright (2019), Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
