Correlating alkyl chain length with defect passivation efficacy in perovskite solar cells   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC01197E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC01197E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5006-5009Correlating alkyl chain length with defect passivation efficacy in perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Wenhuai 
            Feng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chengxi 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun-Xing 
            Zhong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Ding
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Wu-Qiang 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aMOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: wuwq36@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bNanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
cCenter for Excellence in Nanoscience (CAS), Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication (CAS), National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      17th February 2020
    , Accepted 25th March 2020First published on 25th March 2020AbstractWe, for the first time, correlated the alkyl chain length of amine molecules with the defect passivation efficacy, either on the surfaces or at grain boundaries of perovskite films. Blade-coated perovskite solar cells with long-chain amine passivation achieved an efficiency of 21.5%, accompanied by a small voltage loss of 0.35 V.
Over the past decade, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous research attention owing to the prominent optoelectronic properties of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite films, including their high absorption coefficients,1,2 high carrier mobilities,3 long carrier diffusion lengths4–6 and ease of solution-processing.7–11 The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been rapidly elevated to 25.2% owing to the intensive research efforts made in composition engineering, defect passivation and interface optimization.12 Defect passivation seems to be an eternal theme in demonstrating high-efficiency PSCs, mainly achieved by additive engineering or surface modification.13–18 Amine additives have been proven to be powerful passivation agents in perovskite ink formulation, which could passivate crystallographic defects at the perovskite grain surface via strong chemical interaction between under-coordinated Pb2+ ions and –NH2 tails.19 Apart from the widely-focused amino functional groups, the length of the linear alkyl chain core is also a critical factor determining the defect passivation efficacy depending on the anchoring position, thus being able to passivate the defects/trap states of different energy regions within perovskite films. It is believed that the moderate length of alkyl chains in amine molecules is beneficial to achieve an optimized interaction with perovskite films for a better defect passivation effect. However, there is still a lack of fundamental study about the correlation between alkyl chain length and defect passivation efficacy, which could provide an insightful perspective on achieving more rational molecular design of perovskite materials for enhanced optoelectronic performance.
In this work, we systematically investigated the roles of unilateral alkylamine additives (UAAs) with tunable alkyl-chain lengths in passivating defects at grain boundaries (GBs) and/or on the surfaces of perovskite films, which is beneficial to suppress non-radiative charge recombination for enhanced photovoltages (Voc) and fill factors (FFs) and thus enhanced power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in blade-coated PSCs. The Voc of the bladed PSCs with UAA passivation was enhanced to 1.16 V, corresponding to a very low Voc deficit of 0.35 V.
We tailored the perovskite ink formulation with a trace amount (0.025 wt%) of UAA molecules featuring a structure of “R-NH2”, namely, methylamine (MA), n-butylamine (BA), hexylamine (HA) and octylamine (OA). Fig. 1a shows the chemical structures of the different UAA molecules, which comprise a hydrophilic amino tail at the end and a hydrophobic alkyl chain core with one-, four-, six- or eight-carbons. The UAAs are all liquid at room temperature, but have different molecular weights, boiling points, and, most importantly, distinguished lengths of alkyl chains (Fig. 1a and Table S1, ESI†), which will influence the packing density and desorption energy of ligands anchored on the perovskite surface.20
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of UAA molecules. (b) Sketch showing the blade-coating process for fabricating a perovskite film. 
Triple-cation Cs0.05FA0.70MA0.25PbI3 (denoted CFM) perovskite films were prepared by blade-coating a UAA-modified perovskite ink over a pre-heated ITO glass substrate,8 as illustrated in Fig. 1b. The amine molecules have been commonly used as surface ligands to control the sizes of perovskite grains/crystals.19 We then investigated the influence of UAAs on tuning the morphologies of the resultant perovskite thin films. The pristine CFM perovskite film had relatively larger grain sizes and a rougher surface than other films modified with different UAAs (Fig. 2a and c). It is worth noting that the grain sizes of the UAA-modified perovskite films gradually decreased with increasing alkyl chain lengths of the UAA (Fig. 2b and d and Fig. S2, ESI†). We proposed the most plausible crystal growth mechanism of perovskite films with the assistance of short-chain or long-chain UAAs (Fig. 2e). The UAA molecules tend to interact with perovskite species and then self-anchor onto the surfaces of colloidal perovskite nuclei. In this case, the UAA molecules serve as surface ligands to suppress the perovskite crystal growth along the omnidirectional direction, which resulted in the reduction of grain sizes. Clearly, the long-chain UAA will result in more remarkable reduction of grain sizes than the short-chain counterpart. Owing to their large molecular size, the UAA molecules prefer to stay at the peripheries of the perovskite grains, either at GBs or on the film surfaces, with –NH2 terminal groups limited to interacting with under-coordinated Pb ions or occupying A-site vacancies that existed on the surfaces.19 Typically, the short-chain amines prefer to stay at GBs, while the long-chain amines tend to be spontaneously extruded from the perovskite crystals to the film surface. The UAA-modified perovskite surface is composed of densely packed ligands that are stabilized by van der Waals interactions between hydrophobic organic moieties of the UAA ligands or via strong chemical interaction between amino groups and perovskites, which could retain the UAA present in the resultant perovskite films even after thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min.19 In addition, the aforementioned van der Waals interactions become stronger with increasing alkyl-chain length, which indicates that the long-chain UAAs are more easily saturated at the GBs and then expelled to the film surface. The UAA modification also affects the crystal growth orientation of the resultant perovskite films. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns show continuously increased ratios of the peak of the (100) plane to the peaks of other crystal planes, such as the (110) plane and the (111) plane, upon increasing the length of the alkyl chain (Fig. S1, ESI†), suggesting that the long-chain UAA is beneficial to promote the crystal growth along the (100) direction, while simultaneously suppressing the growth of perovskite crystals along other randomly oriented directions.21 According to the theory of “Ostwald Ripening”, the growth of well-oriented grains normally consumes the neighboring randomly oriented grains.22 Owing to the strong van der Waals interactions between adjacent alkyl chain moieties, the densely-anchored long-chain UAA ligands on perovskite surfaces may force the crystals to grow in contact with each other more tightly, thus improving the compactness and smoothness of the bladed perovskite layer (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  Surface SEM images of the perovskite films modified without (a and c) or with (b and d) UAA molecules. (e) Schematic illustration of the crystal growth of perovskite films with the assistance of short-chain or long-chain amines. 
We fabricated inverted p–i–n PSCs with an ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Cu structure, where ITO is indium tin oxide, PTAA is poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] and BCP is bathocuproine (Fig. 3a, see details in the ESI†). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the best-performing PSCs based on CFM perovskite films modified without or with UAAs are shown in Fig. 3b, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The PSC based on the pristine CFM film showed a typical PCE of 18.4% with a short-circuit density (Jsc) of 22.0 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.08 V and a fill factor (FF) of 77.5%. Encouragingly, the PCEs of the UAA-modified PSCs continuously increased upon extension of alkyl chain length, accompanied by concurrent enhancement of both Voc (from 1.08 V to 1.16 V) and the FF (from 77.5% to 82.0%), although the Jsc improvement is quite minor. Specifically, a champion PCE of 21.5% was achieved for the PSC modified with the OA additive featuring the longest alkyl chain. And the OA-based device exhibited negligible J–V hysteresis when measured under a reverse or forward scanning direction (Fig. S3, ESI†). We attributed the origins of such progressively improved Voc and FF to the enhanced defect passivation efficacy induced by the UAAs with prolonged alkyl chain lengths.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of an inverted p–i–n device structure. (b) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on perovskite films modified with or without UAA molecules. (c) tDOS obtained from TAS measurements for PSCs with or without UAA modification. (d) Carrier recombination lifetimes measured by TPV. (e) Sketch showing the relationship between the alkyl chain length (ACL) of UAAs and defect passivation efficacy. 
To better elucidate the relationship between alkyl chain length and defect passivation efficacy, we carried out thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements to quantify the trap density of states (tDOS) and carrier recombination lifetimes for the PSCs modified without or with UAAs. Fig. 3c shows trap density profiles of the PSCs, deduced from the capacitance–frequency (C–f) plots. In general, the deeper trap region (0.40–0.55 eV) can be assigned to defects on the film surface, and the shallower trap region (0.30–0.40 eV) can be attributed to traps at GBs.23 As compared to the pristine PSC, the MA-modified device shows slightly smaller trap-state density in the energy region from 0.40 to 0.55 V. The BA-modified device also exhibited similar passivation efficacy in this deep-level energy region, while at the same time exhibiting a remarkably smaller trap-state density in the shallower energy region from 0.30 to 0.40 V, suggesting that the defects/trap states at GBs were effectively passivated upon BA-assisted GB functionalization. Interestingly, the devices modified with long-chain UAAs (i.e., HA and OA) had lower tDOS in the whole trap depth region, affirming that the UAA molecules with alkyl chains longer than 6 carbons have the capability to simultaneously passivate both the shallower traps at GBs and the deep-level defects on the film surface. The OA-passivated device shows a tDOS that is approximately one time smaller in the deeper energy region as compared to the pristine PSC, indicating more robust passivation efficacy on the perovskite film surface owing to the self-anchoring long-chain UAA monolayer. The TPV decay was performed by irradiating the open-circuit device under one sun and triggering a small transient photovoltaic signal with laser pulses (337 nm, 4 ns).24 The carrier recombination lifetime was 0.59 μs, 0.63 μs, 0.68 μs, 0.73 μs and 0.91 μs for the pristine and MA-, BA-, HA- and OA-based devices, respectively (Fig. 3d). Obviously, the UAA-modified devices exhibited prolonged carrier recombination lifetimes as compared to the control device, indicating that the charge carrier recombination was largely suppressed upon UAA-assisted GB and/or surface passivation. This result is in good accordance with the aforementioned reduction of trap-state densities in the UAA-passivated devices. One example of the effectiveness of UAA passivation is that the Voc of the bladed CFM (a bandgap of 1.51 eV)17 devices was enhanced to 1.16 V, corresponding to a very small Voc deficit of 0.35 V. Accordingly, we proposed a plausible modification mechanism that correlates the alkyl chain length with defect passivation efficacy, as shown in Fig. 3e. It is reported that introducing a considerable amount of short-chain amine into a 3D perovskite precursor results in the formation of a quasi-2D layered perovskite or a 2D/3D mixed perovskite, because it is quite easy for the short-chain amine to insert into spaces between inorganic [PbI6]4− matrix layers.25,26 In our work, adding a trace amount (0.025 wt%) of UAAs to perovskite ink still retains the 3D perovskite structure, rather than forming the aforementioned layered perovskites. Specifically, the short-chain amines with alkyl chains shorter than 6 carbons tend to anchor surround the GBs, which are believed to be the most vulnerable sites for incurring electron–hole recombination and film degradation. Such an in situ GB functionalization and passivation is beneficial to suppress the charge recombination and thus improve Voc. When the alkyl chain length is equal to or longer than 6 carbons, the GB passivation efficacy tends to be saturated, and in this case, most of the long-chain amine ligands prefer to be spontaneously repelled to the film surface for passivating the surface traps/vacancies and forming a thin insulating monolayer (quantum tunneling layer), which is able to effectively suppress the interfacial non-radiative charge-carrier recombination, retard the interfacial charge accumulation and facilitate interfacial charge transfer, and thus simultaneously improve both the Voc and FF in PSCs.
In summary, we have demonstrated that modulation of the alkyl chain lengths in amine additives is helpful to enhance the defect passivation efficacy at GBs and/or on the surfaces of perovskite films. The small grain sizes will not be detrimental to the device performance, as long as the defect states are well-passivated with the passivation agents. This study revealed the extended length of the alkyl chain in the amine additives is responsible for concurrent enhancement of both Voc and FF owing to the multi-dimensional defect passivation and interfacial modification for suppressed non-radiative charge carrier recombination. The surface-anchored ligand management strategy enabled blade-coated PSCs with PCEs up to 21.5%, accompanied by a very small Voc loss. This work provides an insightful perspective on controlling the distribution of surface-anchored ligands for healing the multiple types of ionic defects in perovskite grain surfaces and/or interfaces for more efficient PSCs. Studies on further optimization of the bulk organic moieties in other amine additives and their impacts on improving the efficiency and stability of PSCs are ongoing.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Thousand Youth Talents Plan of China.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Notes and references
J. T. Michael, M. Lee, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger and K. Katsiev, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1258–1259 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Lu, Y. Liu, T. Li and Z. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
K. Hwang, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O’Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. Ei-Sayed and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efciency-chart.20200208.pdf
        .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai and J. T.-W. Wang, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Jiang, M. Qin, J. Liu, L. Sun, F. Qin, L. Hu, S. Xiong, X. Jiang and F. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Zhou, G. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Tu, F. Z. Liu, L. Huang, A. M. C. Ng, A. B. Djurišić and Z. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803872 CrossRef .
S. Wu, Z. Li, J. Zhang, T. Liu, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4315–4318 RSC .
J. Duan, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 4421–4425 CrossRef .
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao, Z. Yuan, T. Borzda, A. Barker, E. Tyukalova, Z. Hu, M. Kawecki, H. Wang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, X. Shi, K. Uvdal, M. Fahlman, W. Zhang, M. Duchamp, J.-M. Liu, A. Pertrozza, J. Wang, L.-M. Liu, W. Huang and F. Gao, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, Z. Yang, P. N. Rudd, Y. Shao, X. Dai, H. Wei, J. Zhao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Y. Feng and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan, Z. Huang, K. Song, J. Liu, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, C. Zhou, Y. Lin, D. Xue, B. Chen, F. Gao, E. Sargent and O. Bakr,, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J.-H. Yun, M. Lyu, J. Kim, S. Lim, J. S. Yun, L. Wang and J. Seidel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14144–14151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, H. He, X. Zheng, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502087 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, W. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
H. Lin, C. Zhou, Y. Tian, T. Siegrist and B. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 54–62 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cc01197eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of UAA molecules. (b) Sketch showing the blade-coating process for fabricating a perovskite film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface SEM images of the perovskite films modified without (a and c) or with (b and d) UAA molecules. (e) Schematic illustration of the crystal growth of perovskite films with the assistance of short-chain or long-chain amines.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of an inverted p–i–n device structure. (b) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on perovskite films modified with or without UAA molecules. (c) tDOS obtained from TAS measurements for PSCs with or without UAA modification. (d) Carrier recombination lifetimes measured by TPV. (e) Sketch showing the relationship between the alkyl chain length (ACL) of UAAs and defect passivation efficacy.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cc01197e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
